

'The Tamer Tamed,' sequel to 'Taming of the Shrew' - both at Kennedy Center
The Associated Press
December 16, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 455 words
Byline: By CARL HARTMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Petruchio, who starved his spitfire bride into submission in Shakespeare's "The Taming of the Shrew," gets his comeuppance in the rarely performed sequel that debuts Wednesday at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
Britain's Royal Shakespeare Company is performing both plays during its current run. "The Taming of the Shrew" opened last weekend.
John Fletcher wrote "The Tamer Tamed" about 20 years after Shakespeare's work, while the older dramatist was alive and active. Many scholars believe they collaborated on two or three later plays but not on this one.
Director Gregory Doran uses the same actor - Jasper Britton - to play Petruchio and the same actress - Alexandra Gilbreath - to play the wife in both plays. There will be four days when one play can be seen in the afternoon and the other in the evening.
Though "The Tamer Tamed" is performed from time to time, this may be the first time in 370 years that a mainline theater has presented full performances of the two plays on the same run. The last that can be found in Britain was at the court of King Charles I in 1633, according to Gordon McMullan, an expert on the period at King's College, London. He advised the Royal Shakespeare Company before the twin productions opened.
For a time, Fletcher's play was more popular than Shakespeare's. In the 1700s "The Taming of the Shrew" began regaining its place, though it made many people uncomfortable. George Bernard Shaw, a critic as well as a playwright, disliked it intensely. Years later it became popular as a Cole Porter musical, "Kiss Me, Kate."
Shakespeare tells the story of a sharp-tongued young woman who trades insult for insult with Petruchio, a suitor her father approves and with whom she feels a certain affinity. He deliberately humiliates her by his fantastic clothes and bad behavior at the wedding. When they reach his home he keeps her from eating and sleeping by a series of ruses. She succumbs to his tactics and makes an abject speech, comparing disobedience to a husband to treason to one's country.
In Fletcher's play, Petruchio marries Maria after Kate's death. Maria begins by locking him out of the house on their wedding night and vowing never to have sex with her husband until "I have made him as easy as a child."
The Royal Shakespeare Company began pairing the two plays in March in Stratford upon Avon, Shakespeare's home town. The productions drew enthusiastic reviews from London critics.
"Alexandra Gilbreath, who glows with empowerment and humor as Maria, … is also a superb Kate," Charles Spencer wrote in The Telegraph. "In both plays, Jasper Britton plays Petruchio with terrific swagger and comic inventiveness."
On the Net:
Kennedy Center: http://kennedy-center.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX108-110
 Load-Date: December 17, 2003

 

End of Document
