

A French 'Non' on the EU constitution frightens leaders - but Europe frightens the French
The Associated Press
March 31, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 486 words
Byline: By ELAINE GANLEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




French leaders stung by signs of rising opposition to the European constitution embarked on an all-out drive to win over voters ahead of a national referendum that could derail hopes of building continental unity and ensuring France's voice in Europe.
Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin on Wednesday began a 20-stop campaign to urge his countrymen to back the charter in the May 29 referendum. The constitution must be approved by all 25 EU member states to take effect.
The rising tide in the 'no' camp underscores an identity crisis felt by many French over what it means to be a European at a time when mostly Muslim Turkey is at the door seeking entry to the EU.
In a speech heavy on symbolism and thin on substance, Raffarin told attendees at a dinner-debate in Lyon that France risks losing its hard-won role as an EU leader if voters reject the charter, arguing the forces of conservatism and "immobility" underpinned the 'no' campaign.
"Its stunning to see those who vote 'no' are discontent with Europe. By voting 'no' they will keep the very Europe that they are unhappy about," Raffarin said.
A 'no' vote in France - one of the six nations that formed the European Coal and Steel Community in the 1950s that evolved into today's EU - would be a surprise to many. Former French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing led the effort to draw up the constitution.
Some 'no' voters could want to send a message to the center-right government, whose cost-cutting initiatives and market-oriented reforms have stirred discontent among many in France. Others worry the country could be handing over too much power to Brussels.
With many in the center-right government on the defensive about what the constitution will mean to the French, Raffarin insisted, "I am convinced that Europe will protect France."
President Jacques Chirac, who has staked much personal prestige on seeing the constitution accepted, is soon to make his appeal to the French with a "strong message," government spokesman Jean-Francois Cope said Wednesday, without giving a date.
At last week's EU leaders' summit in Brussels, Chirac warned the French that voting down the constitution could deprive their nation of its leadership role in Europe.
Five polls this month have shown that the French were leaning toward rejecting the constitution in the referendum.
Polls show the constitution could face a difficult road to approval in several countries - particularly Britain - but a "no" vote in France could deliver a fatal blow.
That possibility was creating consternation for the EU leadership.
On Wednesday, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso called France "a great country that has made great contributions to Europe's course and without it Europe cannot move forward to new levels of integration."
"In Europe, France is an indispensable country," he said.
---
Associated Press writer Emmanuel Georges-Picot in Lyon contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: April 1, 2005

 

End of Document
