

A look at the International Criminal Court, the world's first permanent war crimes tribunal
April 11, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 342 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at the International Criminal Court, the world's first permanent war crimes tribunal, which will be headquartered in The Hague, Netherlands.
ESTABLISHMENT - The treaty to create the International Criminal Court was adopted in Rome on July 17, 1998. It needed ratification by 60 countries to bring it into force. On Thursday, 10 countries gave approval, bringing the total to 66. The United Nations announced the court will be officially established on July 1.
JURISDICTION - The court will step in only when countries are unwilling or unable to dispense justice themselves for the most serious crimes committed by individuals: genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and eventually crimes of aggression when parties agree to a definition. It will have jurisdiction only over crimes committed after the treaty enters into force. Cases can be referred to the court through a state that has ratified the treaty, the U.N. Security Council, or the court's prosecutor, who must get the approval of a three-judge panel.
COMPOSITION - The court will have a Presidency, an Appeals Division, a Trial Division, and a Pre-Trial Division. Eighteen judges will be elected by states that have ratified the treaty for nine year terms. The election is expected to take place in early 2003, and the court is expected to become operational soon afterwards.
U.S. POSITION - The United States was one of seven countries that voted against the Rome treaty in 1998. But then-U.S. President Bill Clinton signed it on Dec. 31, 2000, the deadline for signatures. Clinton did not submit the treaty for Senate ratification because of U.S. fears that American citizens would be subject to frivolous or politically motivated prosecutions. The United States campaigned unsuccessfully to exempt U.S. soldiers and officials from the court's jurisdiction. President George W. Bush has said he opposes ratification. His administration is currently reviewing its position on the court and is considering withdrawing the U.S. signature from the treaty, to reinforce its opposition.
 Load-Date: April 12, 2002

 

End of Document
