

A look at the U.N. war crimes tribunal in The Hague, Netherlands
June 29, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 451 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at the U.N. war crimes tribunal where former Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic is to be tried for crimes against humanity.
ORIGIN - The tribunal was established by the U.N. Security Council in 1993, the first international war crimes court since the military panels that convicted and hanged Nazi and Japanese leaders after World War II.
It is formally known as the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
Its annual U.N. budget has grown to $96,443,900, which does not include millions of dollars in voluntary contributions.
JURISDICTION - As the cumbersome title suggests, the tribunal may only rule on atrocities committed in Yugoslavia or its former republics. Major investigations have focused on the siege and shelling of Sarajevo by Bosnian Serb forces, the massacre of thousands of Muslim men and boys at the U.N. protected enclave of Srebrenica in 1995 and Serbia's offensive in Kosovo.
The tribunal only knows four punishable offenses: violations of the laws and customs of war, or war crimes; crimes against humanity; grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions; and genocide, the most serious crime.
COMPOSITION - Fourteen permanent judges are assigned to three three-member courts and one five-member appellate chamber. The courtrooms are located in converted conference rooms of a former Dutch insurance company building. Earlier this month, the United Nations appointed 27 part-time judges to help speed up handling of cases.
DETAINEES - The arrest of Milosevic brings to 39 the number of detainees in the three-story U.N. penitentiary. Other suspects in custody include former Bosnian Serb nationalist leaders Bljana Plavsic and Momcilo Krajisnik. U.N. detainees are kept in individual cells with a toilet, washing basin, shower, coffee maker and television set. Many of them pass their time exercising in the gym and taking arts and crafts courses.
INDICTED - Prosecutors have served around 100 indictments, mostly against ethnic Serbs. Key figures at large include former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and military chief Ratko Mladic.
CONVICTIONS - So far, 20 Bosnian Serbs, Muslims and Croats have been sentenced to prison terms of up to 45 years. The tribunal, like all U.N. courts, has no death penalty. Convicts serve their terms in European jails.
PRECEDENTS - A number of international legal precedents have been set at the tribunal. These include the first convictions for wartime sexual enslavement, and a ruling that international conventions against on atrocities apply not only to international wars, but also to civil conflicts.
 Load-Date: June 30, 2001

 

End of Document
