

A look at the U.N. war crimes tribunal in The Hague
February 12, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 325 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at the Yugoslav war crimes tribunal in The Hague, Netherlands, where former President Slobodan Milosevic went on trial Tuesday.
ESTABLISHMENT - The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia was established by the U.N. Security Council in 1993, the first international court since the military tribunal that judged Nazi and Japanese leaders after World War II.
Its annual U.N. budget last year was $96.4 million, not including millions in voluntary contributions.
JURISDICTION - The tribunal may rule on atrocities committed since 1991 in Yugoslavia or its former republics. Most defendants have been ethnic Serbs, but Muslims and Croats also have been indicted. In the Kosovo conflict, prosecutors investigated alleged war crimes by NATO forces during the 78-day bombing campaign in 1999, but no indictments were issued.
The tribunal recognizes four punishable offenses: violations of the laws and customs of war, crimes against humanity, grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions, and genocide.
COMPOSITION - Sixteen permanent judges are assigned to three-member courts and one five-member appellate chamber. To keep up with the case load, 27 short-term judges were appointed last year.
DETAINED - Including Milosevic, 44 detainees are being held in the three-story U.N. detention center, an annex of a Dutch prison in the suburb of Scheveningen. Six have been released until their trials. Inmates include Gen. Radislav Krstic, the only person convicted of genocide. He is appealing his conviction and 46-year sentence, the longest yet passed down by the court.
INDICTMENTS - Prosecutors have served more than 100 indictments. Key figures still at large include former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and military chief Ratko Mladic.
CONVICTIONS - Of the 31 men brought to trial, 26 have been convicted and five acquitted. The tribunal has a maximum life sentence and no death penalty. Convicts serve their sentences in European jails.
 Load-Date: February 13, 2002

 

End of Document
