

A party at the palace will celebrate Queen Elizabeth II's 50 years on the throne
March 13, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 346 words
Byline: By AUDREY WOODS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Queen Elizabeth II is having a little "do" to mark her 50 years on the British throne, and everyone's invited.
The place: Buckingham Palace and much of central London. The dates: June 1-4. Dress: comfortable shoes would be a good idea, and an umbrella, just in case.
There will be concerts, fireworks at Buckingham Palace and parades of all kinds on the big golden jubilee weekend in early June, organizers said Wednesday.
Two concerts - one classical and one pop - will be held on the palace lawn with such stars as Paul McCartney, Elton John and Kiri Te Kanawa. More than a million people have entered a ballot for the 12,000 free tickets for each concert.
Music will be a major feature of the weekend. A huge steel band and a 5,000-member gospel choir will be star attractions.
And to be sure that all the hundreds of thousands of expected guests get to see what's going on and hear the music, big TV screens will be positioned along The Mall outside the palace and in the surrounding parks.
A fireworks display with photo projections on the facade of Buckingham Palace will be held June 3 - the day of the palace pop concert - after the queen, accompanied by her husband, Prince Philip, lights a beacon. It will be one of more than 750 beacons to be lighted throughout Britain and the Commonwealth, and as far away as Antarctica.
On June 4, the royal couple, in a gold coach last used for the queen's silver jubilee, will go in ceremonial procession from Buckingham Palace to St. Paul's Cathedral for a service of thanksgiving.
There will be a Commonwealth parade with 4,000 dancers, a carnival parade with a Caribbean flavor and thousands of performers in colorful costumes; and a parade of floats symbolizing 50 years of British history - focusing on music, dance, food, transport and other images from the queen's reign.
As a finale, the Red Arrows aerobatic team and a Concorde supersonic jet will fly overhead.
The $7 million jubilee is being paid for by private contribution and fund-raising, organizers said.
On the Net:
http://www.goldenjubilee.gov.uk 
http://www.royal.gov.uk 
 Load-Date: March 14, 2002

 

End of Document
