

A yearlong celebration for the 200th anniversary of the Louisiana Purchase rolls on
The Associated Press
April 30, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 375 words
Byline: By JANET McCONNAUGHEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW ORLEANS
Body




Louisiana is having a birthday this year and everyone is welcome to see its birth certificate.
The 200-year-old handwritten document that transferred ownership of the vast Louisiana Territories from France to the United States went on display this month at the New Orleans Museum of Art.
Seeing it is "astonishing and wonderful," said Seth Reice, an ecology professor at the University of North Carolina who was vacationing in New Orleans. He compared it to viewing the Dead Sea Scrolls in Jerusalem.
The 200th anniversary of the treaty's drafting in English is Wednesday. It was signed May 2, 1803, in Paris, and a version in French was signed two weeks later.
Museums around the state have special exhibits open or planned for the yearlong celebration to mark the $15 million purchase of more than 800,000 square miles of territory - about four cents an acre.
The treaty was drafted by Robert Livingston, President Thomas Jefferson's minister to France, and Napoleon's Minister of the Treasury Francois Marquis de Barbe-Marbois.
The land would eventually be cut into all or part of fifteen American states: Louisiana, Arkansas, Missouri, Iowa, North Dakota, Texas, South Dakota, New Mexico, Nebraska, Kansas, Wyoming, Minnesota, Oklahoma, Colorado and Montana.
Symphonies, choruses, opera and theater companies have scheduled or have already given special Louisiana Purchase performances. Universities have lectures and symposia scheduled. Every one of the state's 64 parishes has planned some celebration.
The climax of Louisiana's yearlong celebration will come Dec. 20, the 200th anniversary on which the territory was officially transferred to the United States.
The New Orleans Museum of Art, the Old State Capitol Museum and the Historic New Orleans Collection all are showing original documents from the purchase. There are four original copies of the treaty - two in Louisiana for the celebration.
"You've seen on television many times when the president signs a bill and he's got a row of pens lined up. It was the same thing with the treaty. They wanted to make sure there were multiple signed copies for each government," said James Sefcik, curator of the Louisiana State Museum.
On the Net:
http://www.louisianapurchase2003.com 
http://www.noma.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WXS601-602

 

End of Document
