

After 60 years, can the U.N. "embody the high ideals of its founding"
The Associated Press
September 14, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 501 words
Byline: By NICK WADHAMS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




This week's summit marking the 60-year anniversary of the United Nations exposed a problem that's only gotten worse as the world body has aged and expanded to 191 members: Narrow national interests often stall U.N. reform and prevent action in times of crisis.
A quick read of the summit document that leaders will bless during the event made that clear.
While there were some modest gains, key elements that U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan had sought were left out. Disputes over nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament sank any mention of the issue. Rivalries between China and Japan, India and Pakistan, Germany and Italy, spoiled any chance to enlarge the Security Council.
Disputes between nations have led to some of the most embarrassing U.N. failures: the Security Council's refusal to help stop genocide in Rwanda in 1994, corruption and mismanagement in the oil-for-food program to help Iraq, and the inability to overhaul the Security Council itself.
President Bush alluded to those failures in a toast he gave to a lunch of world leaders.
"May the U.N. embody the high ideals of its founding in the years to come," Bush said, making it clear that he didn't think the U.N. was already living up to those ideals - which include maintaining international peace and security.
The weakness of the summit document was troublesome because Annan and others had believed there was no better time to reform the United Nations. He had called the summit two years ago, with member states divided over the Iraq war, hoping that the lessons learned from that event could help change the way the United Nations does business.
Further impetus came from a U.N.-backed probe that uncovered widespread corruption and wrongdoing in the Iraq oil-for-food program. That investigation, led by former U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker, recommended sweeping management reform that would, among other things, put more power in the hands of the secretary-general.
Yet the key reforms that Volcker sought weren't mentioned in the summit document.
Annan and many diplomats cast the summit document as a good first step, stressing that more was needed. But the United Nations has made good first steps for years, only to see major initiatives watered down or abandoned entirely.
The most contentious reforms mentioned in the summit document will have to pass through just that same place - the General Assembly.
It's the General Assembly, for example, that needed four years to pass a nonbinding resolution outlawing human cloning.
On Tuesday, Annan admitted as much himself, recalling how he was criticized in 1997 for not having enacted wide-ranging reform after just six weeks in office.
"The Russian ambassador said, 'But what are you complaining about? You've had more time than God."' Annan told reporters. "And I explained to him that God had one big advantage: He worked alone, without the General Assembly and the Security Council and the committees."
---
Nick Wadhams is a U.N. correspondent for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: September 15, 2005

 

End of Document
