

An Olympic dream: Attitude adjustment for the gloomy Greeks; A monthly look at Athens and the countdown to the Olympics
The Associated Press
January 14, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 767 words
Byline: By BRIAN MURPHY
Body



Associated Press Writer
 
ATHENS, Greece (AP) - As the Greeks prepare for the Olympic homecoming this year, they also have their own sideshow going on.
Call it the mind games.
The Olympics - for many Greeks - is deeply intertwined with the national dreams, insecurities and quirks that can make their ancient dramas look like tea parties.
Just about every official offers the same prediction: The Aug. 13-29 Summer Games will usher in a new age of a "strong and confident" Greece. It's been said so often, it's become a sort of Olympic slogan.
Anyone who disagrees is dismissed as a crackpot or obstacle to the so-called national interest. But there may be more to it than just grumbling. Evidence suggests that being glum is part of being Greek.
"We must look to the future, not the past," urged Premier Costas Simitis in a national address earlier this month. He used the adjectives "modern" and "strong" about two dozen times in a 20-minute speech.
For decades, Greece has struggled with an inferiority complex. By almost every measure for Western Europe - transportation, services, pollution, opportunities - Greece has been lagging. The stigma burrowed so deeply it became part of the language. Many Greeks refer to a trip to Paris or London as "going to Europe" even though Greek civilization is part of the continent's bedrock and it's been a European Union member for more than 20 years.
Who is to blame for the shortcomings?
"It's never us," said Dimitris Lollis, a taxi driver who works mostly with foreign visitors. "I tell my clients there are two phrases you will rarely hear in Greece: 'I'm sorry' and 'It's my fault."'
The traditional Greek character - influenced by Balkan and Levant attitudes - often sees plots brewing and conspiracies hatching. All are designed, they say, to keep the country from advancing.
There are many theories about the dark and suspicious Greek psyche.
Some believe it stems from the centuries under Ottoman rule, which kept Greece estranged from the Renaissance, Industrial Revolution and other major progressions before the 20th century. Others think it was brewed during the Cold War, when the country was treated as a pawn of Western powers. Or was it, as some contend, during the 1980s when many EU economies revved up and left Greece in the dust?
But there's one inescapable detail: The Greeks offer a far moodier and complex backdrop than the relentlessly peppy Australians four years ago.
A poll released this month by Gallup International found Greeks the world's second-most pessimistic nation. The gloomiest? Slovakia, where 50 percent of the people expect their fortunes to deteriorate in 2004, according to the survey of more than 65,000 people in 60 countries.
The Greeks were just a tad brighter: 46 percent predict this year will be worse than the last. Hong Kong was the place most inclined to see better days ahead and Americans came in fifth. No margin of error was given.
Greece "should be optimistic about hosting the Olympic Games this year (but) feels pessimistic," the survey's conclusion noted.
This is what Olympic planners and boosters keep saying, too.
They want people to perk up. They insist that staging successful games will help replace the country's self-doubt with a spirit of achievement. Chronic procrastination will be muscled out by a competitive agility, they promise.
"The Olympics will show the world a new face of Greece - a modern, confident Greece," said the chief Olympic organizer, Gianna Angelopoulos-Daskalaki.
Athens Mayor Dora Bakoyianni often says Athens is becoming a "modern, European capital" - indirectly acknowledging its obvious deficiencies.
"We are like the underdogs," she said at a Christmas season gathering. "We are like the middling runner who overtakes the pack and surprises the world and maybe even himself."
But there's that dour streak in the way again. Cartoonists and commentators find the Olympic feel-good message a tempting target.
One recent cartoon showed a worker still filling a swimming pool with a hose while the first Olympic diver waited on the platform.
"Government and Olympic officials have been referring to the ongoing Olympic projects as if they were a miracle detergent," read an editorial in the influential Kathimerini newspaper.
A joke circulating in Greece starts with the premier, Simitis, visiting Beijing to view rapidly advancing works for the 2008 Olympics.
"I'm impressed," Simitis says.
"Yes," replies his Chinese host. "We'll have everything ready by 2006."
"So will we," says Simitis.
On the Net:
Gallup International poll:
http://www.gallup-international.com/ContentFiles/eoy2003poll.asp 
 Load-Date: January 15, 2004

 

End of Document
