

As Kosovo, too, takes the euro, U.S and other peacekeepers help public with the change
December 29, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 619 words
Byline: By GARENTINA KRAJA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROGANE, Yugoslavia
Body




U.S. soldiers and other NATO-led peacekeepers - in Kosovo to prevent violence - have taken on an unusual new task: heading out on the worst roads into the most remote areas to spread the word about the new European currency, the euro.
Kosovo - still a province of Yugoslavia - isn't part of the European Union, but since 1999 it has depended on the German mark as its currency. So when the euro replaces the mark in Germany on Tuesday, it does the same in Kosovo.
The territory, which is run by international administrators since Yugoslav troops were forced out, is the first place to officially adopt the euro outside the 15-nation European Union. Twelve EU nations start using the currency Tuesday.
American, British, French and German soldiers - and others in the 39-nation peacekeeping force - are pitching in to inform Kosovars about the new currency and how to change their money.
"It's different," says Capt. Andrew Zacherl, 32, from Denver, at the idea of an American soldier "selling" the European currency here.
Soldiers of the 9th Psychological Operations Battalion, from Fort Bragg, N.C., have for weeks been defying some of Europe's worst winter weather, lugging euro pamphlets, euro calendars, wallet-size exchange rate cards and other paraphernalia linked to the currency changeover.
Normally the unit hands out fliers urging parents not to buy war toys for their kids or helps organize call-in radio shows - part of an effort to nudge majority ethnic Albanians and minority Serbs away from confrontation and toward cooperation.
The euro operation has "long term U.S. benefits," Zacherl said. "If Europe has a stable economy, that means the economy in the States will be stable."
After coming under U.N. and NATO control in June 1999, Kosovo's unstable Yugoslav dinar was replaced with the German mark to keep inflation in check. Even before that, the mark was king among most Kosovo residents. With the mark one of the currencies being displaced by the euro early next year, there is no other choice for Kosovo but to go along.
Like villagers elsewhere, locals in Rogane village, some 50 miles east of province's capital, Pristina, have for weeks been exposed to information preparing them for the changeover starting Jan. 1 and ending Feb. 28.
Peacekeepers have put up euro fact sheet posters, with euro-mark exchange rates and other information to remind people that the clock is ticking down on the Deutschmark. Radio messages and television spots with the same message are aired dozens of times a day.
Like members of the other euro nations, Kosovo residents will head to the bank to turn in their marks for the new currency. Many look forward to the change, hoping it will bring them closer to Europe's more prosperous economies.
Shaban Bajrami, a 28-year-old jewelry store owner, had kept his life savings buried in his garden for years. Now, he plans to open a bank account in euros.
"Finally I have the feeling that we are part of Europe," Bajrami said. "At least now we get to do business like they do."
Village teacher Gani Basha sounds a similar chord. "I'm excited," he said. "We are joining Europe."
Although Kosovo is traditionally a cash-based society, part of the euro campaign has focused on encouraging residents to deposit money long kept hidden at home. That has led to about 100,000 new bank accounts being opened in the last month alone, compared to 1,000 new accounts over all of the rest of 2001, says EU spokesman Mike Todd.
There are also hopes that a common currency will encourage European nations to invest in an economy shattered by years of political repression and months of war pitting forces loyal to former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic against ethnic Albanian guerrillas.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos PRI101-103
 Load-Date: December 30, 2001

 

End of Document
