

As the EU struggles to contain a crisis, many in the Balkans fear the door is shutting
The Associated Press
July 1, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 743 words
Byline: By WILLIAM J. KOLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SPLIT, Croatia
Body




In the shadows of a beautifully preserved Roman palace teeming with European tourists, a tattered poster depicts a general wanted on U.N. war crimes charges.
"Hero!" it declares, defying those who insist the fugitive must be captured before Croatia can make it into the rapidly expanding European Union.
The scene in this sun-kissed Adriatic seaport - well-off visitors sipping wine and snapping up souvenirs in a poor country with a turbulent past and an uncertain future - underscores the disconnect between the nations of the Balkans and the European Union they're struggling to join.
As the 25-nation bloc turns inward to deal with the crisis over its constitution, a bitter squabble over its budget, and jitters over mostly Muslim Turkey's quest for membership, debate is also growing over what to do with a rough neighborhood some call "Europe's ghetto."
Supporters of bringing Balkan nations into the bloc contend that it's the best way to ease the continent's biggest security headache, and insist the EU will never be complete without them.
Opponents counter that it makes no sense to absorb countries where indicted war crimes suspects can elude capture with impunity, and where economies are heavily dependent on foreign aid and tourism.
"They are isolated from their own dreams," former Italian premier Giuliano Amato said recently.
Caught in the middle are ordinary citizens like Paula Lalic, a Croat innkeeper who is tired of seeing her country of 4.5 million people pressured to change its ways for nearly a decade by a Europe that now appears to be withdrawing the carrot of membership.
"I'm not even sure what the point is any more," she said. "We have a beautiful country where everything works. They all come here to play. But if they don't want us, fine. Who needs them?"
Croatia had hoped to join in 2007 along with Bulgaria and Romania, but EU leaders have put membership talks on ice. Officially, the reason is Croatia's failure to capture Gen. Ante Gotovina, wanted since 1991 for wartime atrocities against Serbs.
But the backdrop is a growing sense that for problematic countries, the EU is closed, at least temporarily.
The recent French and Dutch rejections of the proposed EU constitution reflect a backlash since the bloc took in 10 mostly ex-communist newcomers last year. None of the 10 carries any war crimes baggage, and fears of an influx of poor, unskilled laborers from the east have so far proven unfounded. Yet the referendums were seen as popular revolts that laid bare frustrations over a union many are convinced is already too unwieldy.
And the estrangement seems mutual. Although the incentives for joining are numerous - lucrative subsidies, free trade and movement of workers and the promise of foreign investment - people from Split to Sarajevo are losing heart.
"People here are not interested in Europe very much. They are occupied by their own problems, like how to survive and feed their children," said Milorad Zivanovic, a professor of philosophy in Bosnia.
The risks for the EU of absorbing the former Yugoslavia, which descended into a decade of bloodletting in the 1990s, are enormous.
Nationalism, corruption, cronyism and racketeering are rampant. As recently as 2001, Macedonia - which hopes to open EU entry talks next year - nearly imploded in a rebellion of ethnic Albanian insurgents.
German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer has cautioned the EU not to abandon the region, citing "common strategic interests in preserving peace and stability."
On a recent visit to Kosovo, U.S. Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns echoed that view, saying the United States wants a Europe that is "united, secure and peaceful - and that can only happen if the Balkans are part of it."
But in countries that have worked hard to meet EU membership criteria of democracy, good governance and financial responsibility, many felt betrayed when Benita Ferrero-Waldner, a senior EU executive, called last month for an expansion slowdown because Europeans need "time to breathe."
In Croatia, enthusiasm for EU membership is giving way to a feeling that the Gotovina issue is a ruse to keep it out of the club.
"When Gotovina is extradited, those against us will think of something new to set us back," complained Mislav Racki, a law student in the capital, Zagreb.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Associated Press reporters Aida Cerkez-Robinson in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Snjezana Vukic in Croatia and Jovana Gec in Serbia-Montenegro contributed to this story.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY421
 Load-Date: July 7, 2005

 

End of Document
