

At the Movies: 'The Affair of the Necklace'
November 28, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 579 words
Byline: By ANTHONY BREZNICAN, AP Entertainment Writer
Body




The jewelry at the center of this political intrigue is a metaphor for a nation's corrupt and lazy aristocracy, who luxuriate through the toils of their people.
Based on a true story set in pre-Revolutionary France, "The Affair of the Necklace" is a clever con-artist tale about a scheme to steal an adornment that drapes the chest with hundreds of glittering diamonds.
An ensuing scandal humiliated the nobility and enflamed France's already restless commoners - Napoleon even credited it with helping push public outrage into violence.
The fact that a mere piece of gimcrackery helped cause the downfall of Marie Antoinette, Cardinal de Rohan of France and other assorted counts and countesses is testimony to their shallow grasp of leadership.
Director Charles Shyer keeps this irony at the center of his story and builds a web of treachery around it.
Oscar winner Hilary Swank plays Jeanne de la Motte Valois, an orphan trying to regain the fortune of her disgraced father. She befriends court gigolo Retaux de Villete (Simon Baker of TV's "The Guardian") who instructs her on the subtle arts of manipulation. They also fall in love, but this is an afterthought to their machinations.
Villete introduces her to Cardinal de Rohan, a hypocrite of the highest order, whose wealth and religious standing shield his deadly crimes and sexual deviancy.
Valois needs money, which Jonathan Pryce's Rohan has in excess. And Rohan, desperate to become France's prime minister, needs the approval of Antoinette, who despises him.
Valois tricks the cardinal into thinking she is a representative of the queen and can get him the appointment he desires - for a price.
But it's all an elaborate ruse designed to defraud Rohan, disgrace the queen and return Valois and her new lover to the wealth she deserved.
All such schemes eventually collapse, with betrayal stacked upon betrayal and greed overtaking rational human thought and compassion. When everything falls apart for Valois, she tells Villete, "I love you … that should have been enough," and she's right.
Shyer, best known for the Steve Martin "Father of the Bride" comedies, wisely prevents the opulence of his production from obscuring the cruelty at its heart. Although it looks like a stuffy costume drama, "The Affair of the Necklace" is really a movie about human jackals.
For instance, the delicately beautiful Joely Richardson plays the spoiled Antoinette, but her character's callous self-indulgence decays that surface appeal. The same goes for Pryce, whose apparent stateliness gives way to brutish venality.
Swank is adept at portraying fragility and strength simultaneously. Her heroine is constantly terrified that her lies will be revealed but she pushes on with fierce determination.
The film's only main flaw is giving Swank too many defiant speeches in which she explains triumphantly that she committed her crimes for honor. They infuse the climax with repetitive, eyeball-rolling melodrama.
"The Affair of the Necklace," a Warner Bros. release, is rated R for sexuality and violence. Running time: 120 minutes.
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY358
 Load-Date: November 29, 2001

 

End of Document
