

At the Movies: 'Kiss of the Dragon'
July 2, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 606 words
Byline: By DAVID GERMAIN, AP Movie Writer
Body




Want to see a thug get scalding irons pressed to his face, or another blown in half by a grenade in a laundry chute? Care to watch a prostitute head-butt another hooker, then get kicked around the pavement by her pimp? Interested in viewing a man killed with two chopsticks rammed into his throat?
Then "Kiss of the Dragon" is the film for you.
Jet Li has conscientiously warned parents to keep the youngsters out of his latest martial-arts thriller because its extreme violence is not "appropriate for children."
In the interests of inclusion, let's expand that injunction: Everyone should stay away from "Kiss of the Dragon."
This horrid movie revels in viciousness, serving up nothing more than crunching bones, oozing blood and any number of other savage unpleasantries.
Li plays martial-arts master Liu Jiuan, a Chinese agent sent to Paris to help corner a drug trafficker. Betrayed by a corrupt Parisian detective (Tcheky Karyo) and framed for murder, Liu ends up on the lam from the most bumbling French police force since Inspector Clouseau.
Sadly co-starring is Bridget Fonda, who used to have a career but lately has been stuck in bombs such as this or "Monkeybone." Fonda plays a hooker with a heart of gold and a head of air, a woman presenting the sunniest of dispositions despite a life of forced prostitution and drug abuse. Not to mention that she gets beat up a lot and her little daughter is being held hostage.
The premise, based on a story idea by Li, was sound enough. But plot absurdities abound in the screenplay by Robert Mark Kamen and Luc Besson, who also was a producer on the movie.
Early on, Liu has evidence that would easily clear him. Yet rather than rush to the Chinese embassy with his proof, a notion he hits on later when he realizes Fonda's character also can prove his innocence, Liu just waits around to see what might happen.
All that does happen is mindless carnage under the direction of Chris Nahon, a French commercial maker Besson tapped to make the movie.
The filmmakers apply token efforts to create mood and character interaction outside of the violence, but those attempts are shallow and amount to filler between the fight sequences. Everything about "Kiss of the Dragon" comes back to killing, and killing ugly.
There's death by giant hairpin. Death to innocent motorists indiscriminately gunned down by police. Death by tiny acupuncture needle that causes blood to pour from eyes, nose, mouth and ears, a method of dispatch that - like the entire movie - would be laughable if it were not so revolting.
The performances range from Li's listless stoicism to Karyo's grotesque ruthlessness, with Fonda's perkiness totally out of place.
"Kiss of the Dragon" has little of the balletic grace of higher-minded martial-arts flicks and none of the philosophical restraint inherent in these forms of combat. Instead, Li and company opt for a license to kick, punch, stab and gouge as lethally as possible.
The sad thought is that the filmmakers and distributor 20th Century Fox feel there's an audience for a movie this execrable. The sadder thought is: They may be right.
"Kiss of the Dragon" is rated R for strong violence, language, some sexuality and drug content. Running time: 98 minutes.
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY422
 Load-Date: July 3, 2001

 

End of Document
