

At the Movies: 'The Lady and the Duke'
May 9, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 597 words
Byline: By MATT WOLF, Associated Press Writer
Body




The French Revolution gets the personal touch in "The Lady and the Duke," an Eric Rohmer film revealing that the octogenarian French director of "Claire's Knee," "My Night at Maud's" and "Pauline at the Beach" hasn't lost his masterful touch.
For more than half a century, Rohmer has displayed singular gifts, putting human behavior under the microscope with the grace and finesse of a novelist like, say, Henry James.
It's somewhat surprising, then, to find his latest movie monitoring one of the cataclysmic moments in his country's history - the anti-royalist upheaval in the 1790s that saw the execution of Louis XVI and the reign of terror, however short-lived, of the ruthless Robespierre.
But far from fashioning his own sweeping "Les Miserables," Rohmer - with characteristic acuity - narrows the focus to Grace Elliott (Lucy Russell), the "lady" of the title and a Brit based in France who's confronted with various upheavals of her own.
Having been a mistress to the future George IV in her native Britain, Grace crossed the Channel in 1786. By the time the film begins four years later, she has also been the lover of the Duke of Orleans (Jean-Claude Dreyfus), Louis XVI's cousin, and is still enjoying a warm and affectionate friendship with the Duke that events of the time look destined to blow apart.
Philippe, the Duke, has voted for the death of the king much to the horror of the aristocratic Grace, whose pro-monarchical stance proves unyielding. What's more, she loves France and won't be shunted back to London.
While fears for her safety lead those around Grace to urge her home to Britain, she bravely forsakes her country estate to help smuggle to freedom the fugitive Marquis de Champcenetz (Leonard Cobiant).
The point is, far from sitting by as an idle spectator to history, Grace is determined to do her bit to shape it, which only intensifies her dismay at the growing bloodshed that at one point finds the head of a friend paraded through the streets on a stake.
As a result, it's a matter of when, not if, relations with the Duke will reach an impasse on the way to an inevitably fatal conclusion, at least as far as one of the two title characters is concerned.
Grace, for her part, is caught intriguingly in limbo, especially as played by Russell with dark, darting eyes and a quicksilver wit.
Speaking flawlessly accented French, English actress Russell deserves kudos - as does Rohmer's filmmaking technique. Rather than try any location filming in the French capital, the director moves his actors among an eye-opening array of deliberately artificial backdrops - scenes of Watteaulike beauty made possible by digital composition that allows the performers to move within the various tableaux.
Rohmer's approach rescues the characters from ever seeming like stock historical personages busily striking attitudes on overly dressed sets.
Instead, "The Lady and the Duke," for all its artifice, seems absolutely up-to-the-minute, as does the sensibility of a senior filmmaker who - based on this movie - is forever young.
"The Lady and the Duke," a Sony Picture Classics Release, is rated PG-13 for some violent images. Running time: 125 minutes. Three-and-a-half stars (out of four).
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY690; AP Graphic AISLE SEAT
 Load-Date: May 10, 2002

 

End of Document
