

At the Movies: 'The Cuckoo'
The Associated Press
July 9, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 667 words
Byline: By SHEILA NORMAN-CULP, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




For most of us, the Tower of Babel exists only in the Bible. For Russian director Alexander Rogozhkin, it permeates everyday life, as people talk but do not connect, or connect without talking.
Rogozhkin creates his own Babel in "The Cuckoo," a difficult but ultimately rewarding art flick about three forgotten people - a Sami from Lapland, a Finn and a Russian - stranded together in northern Finland as World War II lurches to a close.
It takes enormous imagination to make a movie in which all three characters speak nothing but their native tongues, trying, often in vain, to make themselves understood. As the movie unfolds, the contrasts between what each person is saying and what the others think he or she said grows wider and even more comical - deftly underlining Rogozhkin's point about the fragility of all human communication.
Finnish sniper Veiko (Ville Haapasalo) has angered comrades with his pacifist bent, so they bind him up and leave him behind in a German uniform, raw meat for the advancing Russian troops. Those troops include Ivan (Victor Bychkov), a Russian captain being held prisoner for "anti-Soviet correspondence" - writing poems at night to ease the strain of war.
Both manage to elude their captors and arrive at the remote home of a Sami reindeer farmer, Anni (Anni-Kristiina Juuso), whose husband was conscripted into the Finnish army four years ago and has not been heard from since.
Ivan arrives near death and Veiko is half-starved, so the practical Anni marshals her subsistence-farmer resources and gets to work healing them both.
The phrase "art film" has developed a bad rap in the last few years, conjuring up images of pretentious, unfathomable drivel, preferably French. But "The Cuckoo" is an art film in all the best senses.
It unfolds slowly, allowing the camera to linger on the textures of a life close to the land. Soup bowls have deep ridges from the knives that carved them. Blankets are shaped from animal skins. Reindeer milk is thick and creamy - a must for those who need every calorie they can get.
At the same time, this simple rural existence has all the same emotional baggage of modern urban life: jealousy, longing, disappointment, misunderstanding, stubbornness and prejudice - and yes, kindness and generosity too.
Juuso, a native Sami actress, effortlessly captures a woman devoid of guile, a woman whose prolonged cries of sexual bliss could make the most sophisticated audience blush.
Haapasalo's Veiko starts off as little more than a beefy army grunt but ends up revealing a first-rate mind consumed with questions of philosophy. Bychkov, who has appeared in several of Rogozhkin's films, is a Russian Willy Loman, cast aside by the same army that has stolen his best years.
The film has snared its share of prizes - including best director, best actor and best film debut (Juuso) at the Moscow International Film Festival and best film at the Saint Petersburg film festival - but it really is only for the artistically adventurous.
The first third is difficult for Americans to follow - who is fighting whom? - unless you happen to be an expert on World War II uniforms. The ending is also a tad too pat, a happily-ever-after tucked onto an otherwise strikingly original film.
Still, Rogozhkin's daring "Tower of Babel" concept is sure to resonate with those brave enough to test the waters. Is anybody really listening? Well, yes and no.
Released by Sony Pictures Classics, "The Cuckoo" runs 104 minutes and is rated PG-13 for sexual content and violence. In Russian, Finnish and Sami with English subtitles. Three stars out of four.
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY682; AP Graphic AISLE SEAT
 Load-Date: July 10, 2003

 

End of Document
