

Athens' neglect gives new meaning to mean streets; A monthly observation on the city and the countdown.
The Associated Press
November 14, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 456 words
Byline: By BRIAN MURPHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATHENS, Greece
Body




A leap. A nimble sidestep. Then a tendon-bending combination: shimmy, dodge and finally a graceful flit over a teetering board.
A new exhibition sport may await visitors to the Athens Olympics: sidewalk gymnastics.
In many parts of the Greek capital - including the tourist zones - stepping onto the curb is entering hostile terrain. Concrete slabs laid decades ago are now often buckled and cracked. Wobbly or uneven metal covers for utilities lurk in random clusters. Fissures and holes await to snag heels or twist ankles.
And that's just around the city's landmark Syndagma Square near the parliament and the best hotels.
The sidewalks on less prestigious streets can be downright treacherous - from planks and other makeshift crossings to illegally parked scooters and cars. One shopkeeper near the Monastaraki shopping zone uses a sidewalk hole as a personal abyss to empty his dust pan.
"That's how you can tell an Athenian from a visitor. The outsiders try to deal with the sidewalks. We locals just walk in the street," said Voula Mandilis, a longtime resident of Athens' overcrowded Pangrati neighborhood near the marble stadium that hosted the first modern Olympiad in 1896.
City leaders are making a belated run to reverse decades of public works neglect. Sidewalks are high on the list. Mayor Dora Bakoyianni promises at least 145 miles of new roads and walkways with access for the disabled.
"This is a lot of work," she said. "It's going to be a winter of hassles for Athenians."
Some areas revamped in recent years, such as a pedestrian mall around the base of the Acropolis, are lovely additions. But there's less than nine months until the opening ceremony. Keeping the mayor's goal of repairing a major stretch of sidewalks - equivalent to more than three marathon routes - is a staggering and stressful proposition.
Athens residents are already near the boiling point. A blitz of long-postponed works have roads torn up, redirected or closed. Daily life has gone from typically inconvenient to supremely infuriating. Road rage has become a favorite topic of columnists and talk shows.
And don't get anyone started on potholes.
"Every time the issue comes up the switchboard is overloaded … People send in photographs of holes in the road," said Aris Stathakis, a prominent Greek road safety expert who hosts a radio show.
The sidewalks can look positively inviting compared with the cluster bomb look of some Athens roads, particularly side streets.
In January, a car was swallowed by a 52-foot-deep hole that suddenly opened up on a busy road. A truck loaded with gravel to fill the hole fell in, too.
A month later, the government set up a hot line to report potholes. It was temporarily suspended after being deluged with calls.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo ATH105 of Nov. 13; AP Graphic
 Load-Date: November 15, 2003

 

End of Document
