

Athens tries to clean up its act; A weekly look at the push to prepare Athens for the Olympics
The Associated Press
April 30, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 410 words
Byline: By LISA ORKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATHENS, Greece
Body




Preparing Athens' sports venues for the Olympics is hard enough. Keeping the city clean is another test.
Officials are levying fines and launching public appeals against some of the city's most obvious eyesores: litter and graffiti. Even the Greek habit of flicking cigarettes onto the sidewalk now carries a price: a $24 ticket per butt.
The campaign, "Clean Alliance," is the latest in a series of measures to try to improve the look and manners of the city in the last few months before the Aug. 13-29 games.
"We must have our best face on display for the biggest ever event to occur in our city: the Olympic Games," Athens Mayor Dora Bakoyianni said. "We can use this event as a way to change our attitudes and our quality of life."
Authorities have targeted unruly roads by cracking down on people who park cars on sidewalks, fining motorcyclists who drive without helmets, and planning etiquette classes for taxi drivers.
Flowers and trees are being planted around the city, and Athenians living downtown were encouraged to paint their buildings.
Until now, there has been little precedence for busting those who dirty the city. Now, fines for graffiti - which can be found nearly everywhere in Athens - go up to $9,520 for spray painting an archaeological monument. Throwing hospital waste in municipal garbage receptacles can cost the culprit $10,710.
"We think cleanliness only has to do with our homes, so we can throw things outside. We think any solution has to come from the government," said Nikos Haralambidis, a spokesman for Greenpeace in Greece.
Garbage collection is a problem in this city of more than 4 million. Athens has just one landfill, poor recycling facilities and is often hit by trash hauler strikes.
The city is spending $42 million on 235 new trucks and cleaning vehicles, 5,000 garbage receptacles and 500 extra municipal workers for the summer (municipal police will hand out fines).
"Our hope is to clean our Athens, and we want to believe this will happen," said Christos Tendomas, deputy mayor in charge of city cleanliness. "Because we love Athens."
Tendomas acknowledged it's impossible catch all litterers. But he hopes the campaign will convince Athenians to help keep their city clean.
While new rules might be ignored after a while, Haralambidis said the Olympics could prompt new city pride.
"Maybe Athenians will care more about getting the city cleaner for the Olympics," Haralambidis said, "and not so much because of the fines."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY156-159
 Load-Date: May 1, 2004

 

End of Document
