

Behind the scenes with the Romanovs
The Associated Press
May 27, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 736 words
Byline: By DEBORAH BAKER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANTA FE, N.M.
Body




The handsome, bearded young man in the outsized oil painting stands tall in his blue military uniform, sword hanging at his side. He looks - well, royal.
Meet Nicholas II, last czar of Russia, subject of a new show that offers a glimpse of the Romanov royal family as they relaxed. "Nicholas and Alexandra: At Home With the Last Tsar and His Family" opens Saturday at the state-run Museum of Fine Arts.
"This is a very personal exhibition," Marilyn Pfeifer Swezey, the curator who selected the more than 250 items, said.
While much has been done on the royal couple, "no one has ever done an exhibition that's gone behind the scenes, behind the official facade of the Russian imperial court, to take a look at their family life, how they really lived in the Alexander Palace," Swezey said.
The palace near St. Petersburg was the favorite residence of the czar and czarina and their five children, who were exiled to Siberia in 1917 during the revolution and murdered there the following year.
The show features black and white images from the family photo albums: Nicholas canoeing, his son Alexei at his desk with his tutor, the Grand Duchess Olga on her 16th birthday, the empress aboard the imperial yacht with her panoramic camera.
There are even home movies, mostly footage of the children taken by the czar, an avid photographer.
The items on display - cigarette cases, clothing, cuff links, chintz samples - were culled from five museums in Russia and from private collections.
The Santa Fe showing is the world premiere of the exhibit, which runs through Sept. 5 before traveling to Cincinnati and Newark, N.J., before being disassembled next year.
"It is a very unique exhibition," said Alexander Potemkin, executive director of the American-Russian Cultural Cooperation Foundation, which organized it. Potemkin said that the show draws from collections in both Russia and the United States.
"Even Russians would be unable to see everything here assembled in one place," Potemkin said.
After 1918, the family wing of the palace was open as a museum, with everything exactly as it was when the Romanovs lived there, according to Swezey. With the advance of German troops in 1941, the family's furnishings and possessions were hurriedly removed.
"We have brought together these things that have been scattered all over Russia since 1941," Swezey said.
The groupings in the exhibition represent the rooms in the private quarters of the Alexander Palace, including the Mauve Room. (The czarina helped popularize the silvery shade of purple.)
"This was the empress's retreat. It was her room," Swezey said. "Here the family would gather daily. Here she'd play the piano. The children would come; the czar would come for tea."
Items from the room include an ivory-colored Hepplewhite desk with a brown leather top that was made just after their marriage in 1895, and salvaged from a trench where it had been discarded in 1941.
The Mauve Room also contained another highlight of the exhibit: the Faberge "Lilies of the Valley Basket" made of gold, silver, pearls, diamond and nephrite that was a favorite of the empress.
Alexei's silver cloth and gold brocade christening gown is on display; so is Alexandra's batiste and satin apron with a deep pocket across the front.
"She used to sell her own embroidery and handiwork at charity bazaars, and the proceeds she collected were put in this apron," Swezey explained.
There is also a lace coverlet used on the Romanovs' bed, which was actually twin beds pushed together.
"Unlike many royal couples, they slept together," the curator said.
And there are toys and letters and Christmas cards and journals and books and watercolors and poems from the children to their mother.
Larisa Gordon, who is from Stavropol and now lives in Santa Fe, was a translator for the Russian museum curators who helped set up the exhibit. She said it was an honor to be involved.
"This is our culture. … I'm kind of like touching history a little bit here," said Gordon, a pianist who teaches Russian classical music and works as a skin care therapist.
Museum of Fine Arts Director Marsha Bol said she hopes the unusual exhibit will draw tens of thousands of visitors this summer.
"That's part of what I think is so much fun. … Things that belonged to monarchs are not a part of our history, so they're kind of foreign, and certainly exotic to us," Bol said.
---
On the Net:
Museum of Fine Arts: www.mfasantafe.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo
 Load-Date: May 28, 2004

 

End of Document
