

Blair favors a referendum on the euro before the next election, confidante says
The Associated Press
April 14, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 400 words
Byline: By ED JOHNSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Cajoling a reluctant Britain into the eurozone is a key goal of Prime Minister Tony Blair's premiership and he will push for a referendum on entry before the next election, a former Cabinet minister and confidante said.
The Treasury, which will give its verdict in June on British membership in the European common currency, declined to comment Monday. It insists that a decision will be based on five "economic tests" of whether the euro would be good for Britain.
Peter Mandelson, one of the key modernizers of the Labor Party and a close friend of the prime minister, said a central plank of Blair's time in office is to place Britain "at the heart of Europe."
"I believe that he considers that Britain will lose a significant growth potential, we will miss out economically, primarily, but also politically, if we remain outside the euro indefinitely," Mandelson told British Broadcasting Corp. radio Sunday. "And therefore I think his instinct will be to go for a referendum in this Parliament."
Blair's government says Britain will join the 12-nation eurozone only if the economic conditions are right and a reluctant public supports the decision in a referendum.
Treasury chief Gordon Brown is reportedly more cautious than Blair about membership. Several newspapers, including The Financial Times, reported Monday that Brown wants to rule out a referendum during the government's current term, which can run until 2006. Newspapers speculated Brown's June verdict would be "no, not yet."
Mandelson urged Brown not to overemphasize the risks of entry.
"I think that it would be a shame, and I suspect that this is his (Blair's) view too, if the assessment that is being carried out were to emphasize the risks of going in without adequately giving weight and an equal weight to the costs of staying out," the former Northern Ireland minister said.
Before Blair calls a referendum, however, he must swing public opinion. According to a poll published Sunday, 68 percent of Britons would vote against joining the euro and only 23 percent would back entry.
The diplomatic spat between Britain and France and Germany over the war in Iraq has also affected Britons' perceptions of their place in Europe, the ICM poll for the anti-euro No campaign indicated. Thirty-five percent of respondents said the wrangling over the U.S.-led war had made them more skeptical about closer political and economic integration.

 

End of Document
