

Book describes the demise of the Kursk
The Associated Press
February 14, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 439 words
Byline: By NORMAN N. BROWN, For AP Weekly Features
Body




"Cry From the Deep: The Submarine Disaster That Riveted the World and Put the New Russia to the Ultimate Test." By Ramsey Flynn. HarperCollins. 282 Pages. $25.95.
---
In "Cry From the Deep," Ramsey Flynn offers an interesting and well-written book about the sinking of the Russian submarine Kursk in the Barents Sea during naval maneuvers in August 2000.
The loss of the ship was caused by the internal explosion of an experimental torpedo, which set off other similar weapons aboard ship. The entire bow section of the gigantic submarine was destroyed, but the midships and stern compartments initially remained watertight, sparing 23 of the submarine's 118-man crew from immediate death.
The Kursk was a twin-hulled behemoth of 14,700 tons, powered by two nuclear reactors and capable of carrying 28 torpedoes and 24 cruise missiles. It sank 380 feet to the flat ocean bed.
The explosions were heard aboard other Russian ships participating in the exercise, and aboard two U.S. Navy subs that were covertly monitoring it. The detonations were so powerful that several seismic observatories in northern Europe believed they were strong earthquakes.
If the Russian navy had immediately investigated the cause of the explosions and determined it to have been from within the sub, at least some of the survivors trapped aboard might have been rescued. "Cry From the Deep" details how naval authorities, both afloat and ashore, procrastinated and released no information public, and later improvised and lied about the accident.
The U.S., British and Norwegian governments soon surmised what had happened but were reluctant to offer aid until it was asked for - which did not occur until many days later - because they did not want it known that they had been spying.
Eventually, divers reached the sunken ship and examined it from the outside. By then, the interior had been flooded and everyone aboard had perished. The Kursk was raised and towed to port in October 2001.
The crew's remains were given heroic and honored burial. The families of the 23 men trapped aft wondered how long they had lived before succumbing and what their chances of survival might have been if rescue efforts had been started immediately.
Flynn approaches the story from a close-up and immediate perspective: He interviewed relatives of the crews of the Kursk and other Russian submariners, and naval officers in Russia, the United States, Norway and Great Britain.
He closes with reflections on the immediate effects the Kursk tragedy had on the Russian people, their everyday lives, and their attitudes toward the government and the post-Soviet military establishment.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY632-NY633
 Load-Date: February 15, 2005

 

End of Document
