

Changes dateline from CHAMPAGNE-MOUTON; After 20 years on the run, Ira Einhorn is put on flight to the United States
July 19, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 656 words
Byline: By NANAHO SAWANO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




After two decades on the run, convicted murderer Ira Einhorn was handed over to U.S. officials Friday and flown to Pennsylvania for a new trial in the 1977 bludgeoning death of his girlfriend.
"He's in the air," said Linda Vizi, an FBI spokeswoman in Philadelphia.
The charter plane carrying Einhorn, 61, left Paris' Charles de Gaulle airport at 1:25 a.m. (7:25 p.m. EDT). Police said it was expected scheduled to arrive at Philadelphia International Airport at 2 a.m. EDT.
Philadelphia police spokesman Jim Pauley said U.S. marshals would take Einhorn into custody at the airport and transport him to a federal detention center. From there, police accompanied by a SWAT team would take him to a state prison, he said.
The extradition ended 20 years of flight for Einhorn, a former anti-war activist and counterculture figure who was convicted in absentia in the death of Holly Maddux. A 1998 Pennsylvania law provided for a retrial.
The victim's family applauded his extradition.
"When we see him in handcuffs in the custody of an American citizen, we will be really happy," said Holly Maddux's sister Meg Wakeman, a Seattle-based nurse who was in Washington, D.C., for the introduction of a proposed extradition enforcement bill.
Einhorn's legal arsenal was exhausted earlier in the day, when the European Court of Human Rights dropped a request it made a week earlier for a delay in the extradition.
Einhorn had slit his throat when he lost his last French appeal. But he was not seriously injured, and the European court said Thursday in its decision that Einhorn was fit to travel. It also said U.S. officials had provided sufficient assurances that he would not face the death penalty.
France quickly decided to go ahead with the extradition.
Police led Einhorn from his home in the southwestern village of Champagne-Mouton and bundled him into an unmarked gray Peugeot. Seated in the back, he waved to his tearful wife, Annika, who leaned on a defense lawyer for support. The convoy left under heavy guard.
The Foreign Ministry issued a statement shortly before Einhorn's flight left, saying the government decided to extradite him because U.S. authorities had agreed to grant him a second trial. France does not extradite foreign nationals based on trials in absentia.
The European court in Strasbourg, in a move that confused lawyers, said it would consider Einhorn's case in September - but also said that did not affect the extradition.
Moments after the court's ruling, Einhorn emerged from his converted-windmill home with his wife. "I'm innocent," he declared. "I will be happy to go to the U.S. if the court gives me a new trial."
U.S. officials promised that Einhorn would not be eligible for the death penalty in his new trial because capital punishment was not legal in Pennsylvania when Maddux was killed. European Union countries generally refuse to extradite suspects who face the death penalty.
Maddux's battered corpse was found stuffed in a trunk inside a closet of the Philadelphia apartment the couple shared.
Einhorn denies killing her and has said he was framed by the CIA.
He fled the United States in 1981, shortly before he was to stand trial for the murder. He lived in England, Ireland and Sweden under pseudonyms before he was arrested in France in 1997.
In Philadelphia, a former city district attorney's office investigator who helped track down Einhorn called Thursday's developments "a victory for justice."
"I think it shows clearly that his arguments had no merit," Richard DiBenedetto said. "He was given a full trial, and in addition to that he is going to be given a full trial again. I don't think there's a case in the history of crime where one defendant has gotten so many breaks."
Einhorn threw a party at his house Wednesday night, describing it in an interview with The Associated Press as a "Last Supper" and a birthday party for his wife. Guests chatted and sipped wine from plastic cups late into the night.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos EIN104-107
 Load-Date: July 20, 2001

 

End of Document
