

China hunts international events from the famous to the obscure
December 4, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 732 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER BODEEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIJING
Body




Flag-waving crowds roared with joy. Fireworks crackled across the sky. Newspapers proclaimed "Victory for China." The president declared benefits for the "peace and progress of mankind."
The cause of the fuss? Shanghai was picked Tuesday to hold a World's Fair - an event whose luster is much diminished from decades ago, and that the previous host country, Germany, derided as a colossal waste of money.
But for the Chinese, it was another victory in a campaign to land international events as status symbols, ranging from the Olympics to more obscure gatherings of accountants, academics and badminton fanciers.
Beijing treats each as a shining symbol of world respect, proof that after a century of foreign domination and decades of communist isolation, it is once again a great nation.
"China's national strength has been growing year by year, and we are willing to play a greater role on the world stage," Foreign Ministry spokesman Liu Jianchao said of the World's Fair bid.
China's biggest trophy so far is the 2008 Summer Olympics, awarded to the capital, Beijing, last year. The campaign was suffused with propaganda, but when the announcement came, millions of Chinese poured into the streets in a genuinely spontaneous celebration.
Even less prominent gatherings are no less precious.
The southwestern city of Kunming still talks up the World Horticulture Fair held there in 1999. President Jiang Zemin attended the opening of this year's World Congress of Mathematicians in Beijing and helped to present the Fields Medal - the math equivalent of the Nobel Prize. Premier Zhu Rongji addressed the World Congress of Accountants in Hong Kong last month.
Sports is a major source of events. In the past four months, China held the world championships for table tennis and women's basketball. Next year: the woman's soccer World Cup.
In some cases, China's interest has saved the day for events that seemed doomed.
Organizers of the Badminton World Championships held this year in China said they were considering calling it off for lack of interest when the southern city of Guangzhou offered itself as a site.
Observers say hosting such events is, ultimately, about restoring China to its former glory.
"I think much of the explanation can be found in the old late 19th century, early 20th century idea of the country and its people once again occupying its rightful - and prominent - place in the world community of nations," said Michael Schoenhals, a Chinese historian at Lund University in Sweden.
China's pitch usually focuses on its sheer size - something it says will broaden the impact of any event. And with an ancient culture and an economy growing by 8 percent a year, China says it has the right and the means to be host.
Playing to foreign unease about China's growth, communist authorities hint that such events will promote their integration into international society.
"From the point of view of the rest of the world … events like this are obviously good because they create incentives for maintaining moderate foreign policy," said Daniel Lynch of the University of Southern California's School of International Relations.
Chinese leaders describe winning bids as a solemn trust.
"I am convinced that the World Exposition in Shanghai in 2010 will … contribute to the peace and progress of mankind," Jiang said in a thank-you letter after the announcement of Shanghai's win by World's Fair organizers.
That's lofty praise for an event that German organizers said lost $990 million when it was held in Hanover in 2000.
But events can get a boost from China's enthusiasm.
International Olympic Committee inspectors visiting Beijing this week expressed delight at the speed and scale of the preparations. It's a welcome contrast to reports of delays and problems in Athens, site of the 2004 Summer Games.
Shanghai's promoters say their World's Fair will attract 70 million visitors. The city has pledged to improve airports, highways, rail lines - the sort of massive investment in infrastructure that China relies on to drive its economy amid high unemployment.
If the enthusiasm can be sustained over the next eight years, the fair will no doubt benefit from strong public support.
The official Xinhua News Agency reported a "fervor," claiming 86 percent of Shanghainese surveyed knew of the bid and even more - 90 percent - backed it.
Late Tuesday night in Shanghai, crowds partied for hours.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo BEJ801
 Load-Date: December 5, 2002

 

End of Document
