

Churchill's secret war bunker opened to the public for the first time
April 16, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 286 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




A secret bunker built as a last redoubt for Winston Churchill if the Nazis invaded Britain was opened to the public on Tuesday for the first time.
The reinforced concrete bunker, codenamed "Paddock," was built in the north London suburb of Neasden to house the top government leaders and some 200 other officials.
It lies 40 feet underground and can only be reached by two small entrances.
The bunker was so secret that in his memoirs Churchill only described it as "near Hampstead," and even King George VI was not told its exact location.
Churchill was said to hate Paddock and only used it once, for a trial run.
"On September 29 (1940) I prescribed a dress rehearsal so that everybody should know what to do if it got too hot. I think it important that Paddock should be broken in (tried out)," he wrote.
Paddock is a larger version of the famous Cabinet War Rooms, a bunker in central London from where Churchill directed Britain's war effort. The rooms are a major tourist attraction.
The Neasden bunker was shut after the war and houses were built on the ground above. The housing association that owns the property has decided to open up the bunker for a few days each year, although they are interested in developing the property as an attraction if backers can be found.
Maria Michael, marketing manager for Network Housing Group, said the bunker was attracting strong interest.
"People are very interested in the history, particularly local residents," she said. "They just can't believe it when they see this huge complex beneath them that they didn't even know was there."
Mayur Jobanputra, a visitor to the bunker, said it was a fascinating place. "You could smell the history down there, a really musty, damp smell."
 Load-Date: April 17, 2002

 

End of Document
