

COUNTDOWN TO ATHENS: Olympic officials try to tame Greek cigarette-loving ways; A bimonthly look at Athens and the countdown to the Olympics
The Associated Press
May 13, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 745 words
Byline: By BRIAN MURPHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATHENS, Greece
Body




There will be more than the Olympic flame lighting up in Athens.
The sporting world's biggest roadshow is coming to one of the smoking world's biggest redoubts.
Greeks are among the most die-hard smokers - with studies suggesting at least 40-45 percent of the adult population is regularly puffing away. In some age categories, including 25 to 34, it rises to about 60 percent.
Cabbies do it. So do bank tellers, shopkeepers and even traffic police and lawmakers during public appearances. In the traditional tavernas - the mainstay of Greek cuisine - finding a true no-smoking section can be about as difficult as getting a side order of sushi. Many times, it's nothing more than a few tables sitting alongside smokers.
"It's tragic," said Irene Pina, a therapist at an Athens clinic that uses herbs and electromagnetic scans on smokers seeking to quit. "We're unbelievable."
And unbelievably difficult to rein in.
Efforts to impose smoking restrictions have met with spotty success. Greeks generally heed no-smoking rules in the subway and international airport. But it's still a smoker's paradise in most eateries, hotel lobbies and other public spaces despite laws requiring separate space for those without the habit.
Greece's former health minister - and smoker - Alekos Papadopoulos knew it would be an uphill struggle when he pressed for the anti-smoking measures in 2002. "Greeks," he said, "are defined by an internal sense of anarchy."
Then he quickly added: "But they also have a strong sense of fairness."
This is what Olympic organizers hope to stir.
They have appealed to Greeks to try to offer a less smoky reception for visitors to the Aug. 13-29 games. No one is demanding American-style blanket restrictions. But Greeks have been urged to establish no-smoking zones, respect rules and think twice about lighting up. Etiquette classes planned for taxi drivers will include a stern warning to keep butts in the packs while on the road.
"We want to show the healthy side of Greek society," said chief organizer Gianna Angelopoulos-Daskalaki.
There's not a lot to work with, according to statistics.
Besides smoking, European Union reports consistently list Greece as among the bloc's most overweight and least exercise-conscious. It's a well-documented trend around the Mediterranean. Many people, especially youngsters, have been abandoning the traditional staples of fish, grains and vegetables for calorie-laden processed food and burgers.
The love affair with cigarettes is where Greece really stands out.
A European Commission study, published in November, noted that Greece is "by far the country with the heaviest" consumption with an average of 23.38 cigarettes per day. The No. 2 spot was Belgium at an average of 18.41 cigarettes a day.
And among Europe's top smoking nations, Greece has another distinction: the only place where the percentage of smokers has increased since 1995.
"We are killing ourselves with bad habits," said Dimitris Trihopoulos, a University of Athens professor who released a study on Greek smoking and eating trends just this week.
The Olympics is even making some concessions to the cigarette-loving hosts.
Smoking is not permitted in the stands and other common zones, but most venues will have smoking areas. That's looser than the Sydney Games four years ago, when smoking was totally banned at indoor venues and most outdoor stadiums.
There is simply less of a smoking lobby in Australia. About 25 percent of Australian adults smoke - slightly higher than the U.S. average of about 23 percent.
"I smoke because I like it," said 38-year-old Julia Esabaliti in downtown Athens.
"We are Greeks and Greeks smoke," said Takis Kouris, a semiretired office worker. "It's part of Greece."
Many tobacco ads have come down in central Athens due to regulations for the Olympic cleanup and government anti-smoking campaigns. But that doesn't mean companies have given up.
At a main Athens subway station, decorated with posters of some former Greek Olympic athletes, young women recently handed out free samples of a new brand of cigarettes.
"It seems very odd to be in a place where everyone is smoking," said Ingrid Hansen, a tourist from Denmark. "It seems to go against the whole sporting culture of the Olympics."
Wait until Beijing in 2008.
China has 350 million smokers - one-third of the world's total.
On the Net:
American Lung Association: http://www.lungusa.org 
British Medical Association site on worldwide smoking: http://www.tobaccofactfile.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos ATH109-10 of May 13; AP Graphic GREECE SMOKERS
 Load-Date: May 17, 2004

 

End of Document
