

Divers work in rough seas to prepare for the lifting of the Kursk nuclear submarine
September 25, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 355 words
Byline: By VLADIMIR ISACHENKOV, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




An international team of divers was continuing preparations Tuesday to lift the sunken Kursk nuclear submarine, while a barge to hoist it to the surface was waiting out a storm near the Barents Sea coast.
Divers worked slowly in rough seas to clear precut holes through which lifting cables will be run, Russian Northern Fleet spokesman Capt. Vladimir Navrotsky said.
The Kursk exploded and sank in the Barents Sea in August 2000 during maneuvers, killings its entire crew of 118. Russian officials want to raise the submarine to eliminate any potential threat to the environment from its twin nuclear reactors and try to solve the mystery of its sinking.
"There is hope that the divers will complete their work by early Wednesday," Navrotsky said in remarks broadcast by Russian television.
Weather is forecast to calm Wednesday, allowing the Giant 4 barge to anchor itself over the submarine, Navrotsky said, which is on the sea floor at a depth of 356 feet.
After the barge anchors, divers will plug cables into the holes in the Kursk's hull. The lifting itself will require calm weather and last about 12 hours.
The lifting, originally set for Sept. 15, has been repeatedly postponed because of high seas and technical problems. Russian officials said Monday they hoped the Kursk would be lifted Saturday.
But a representative of the Dutch consortium Mammoet-Smit International consortium contracted by the government to raise the submarine, Vyacheslav Zakharov, said Tuesday it was likely to be pushed back to between Sept. 30 and Oct. 2, according to the ITAR-Tass news agency.
Aboard the Russian Navy's flagship Peter the Great, which is at the salvage site, an Orthodox priest prayed for the lifting effort to succeed, ITAR-Tass said.
Once lifted, the Kursk will be towed to a dry dock near the Russian port of Murmansk where the Navy will remove the crew remains and the submarine's 22 Granite cruise missiles. The consortium has cut off the submarine's mangled forward section, which officials feared might contain unexploded torpedoes and jeopardize the lifting.
The Russian Navy plans to lift some fragments of the bow next year.
 Load-Date: September 26, 2001

 

End of Document
