

East Timorese seek to forget the violence of the past and build a new nation
May 18, 2002, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 445 words
Byline: By DAVID LONGSTREATH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIQUICA, East Timor
Body




The scar is the first thing you notice about Jose Nunnes Serrau, a jagged line stretching from the back of his neck to the middle of his cheek.
It's a reminder that he was lucky to survive a drunken rampage by pro-Indonesia militiamen in March 1999 as East Timor prepared for a U.N. independence referendum.
More than 2,000 people had sought shelter at the Roman Catholic Church in Liquica, trying to escape the violence sweeping across the territory. More than 40 were hacked to death that steamy tropical afternoon, human rights activists say, killings for which no one has been punished.
"I feel (a need for) revenge," Serrau says. "But I obey the law as set down by East Timor's new leaders."
As East Timor gains its formal independence Monday, Serrau lives peacefully in Liquica trying to forget the past. The town's streets are filled with armed men again, but this time they are United Nations peacekeepers from Portugal and other nations.
During four centuries of Portuguese colonialism, three years of Japanese occupation and 24 years of Indonesian rule, East Timor has been a bloody battleground.
One of the worst massacres occurred in November 1991 when Indonesian soldiers open fired on a peaceful demonstration near the Santa Cruz cemetery in Dili, the capital. More than 271 people are known to have died and 270 disappeared. The killings were filmed by foreign journalists and shown to the world.
When the East Timorese approved independence on Aug. 31, 1999, violence worsened. Indonesian troops and militias went on a monthlong rampage, destroying most of Dili, killing hundreds of people and herding more than 250,000 refugees into West Timor before Australian-led peacekeepers arrived to restore calm.
The United Nations soon took over administration of the territory to prepare it for independence, holding elections for a constitutional assembly and most recently for a president.
Since U.N. intervention, the half-island nation has been transformed into a land of calm, but it faces a difficult and uncertain future. Unemployment is estimated at 70 percent, and the country will almost certainly be heavily dependent on foreign aid for many years.
Many East Timorese also fear that once they are on their own, old grudges and political rivalries will soon dominate the political scene. Newly elected President Xanana Gusmao will face a parliament led by his opponents.
For Serrau, however, there is hope that East Timor's long years of violence will remain a thing of the past.
Looking down at a clump of wilted flowers marking the spot of the Liquica massacre, Serrau stares, then says: "This is a historical place for East Timor. Without it we could not be free."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo package NY308-315 of May 13 by David Longstreath
 Load-Date: May 19, 2002

 

End of Document
