

Entertainment Briefs; Contains items on the British Museum, Atlanta Ballet, 'Lupin the Third.'
May 29, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 622 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LONDON (AP) - The British Museum said it's considering a claim that four of its old master drawings were stolen from a Jewish family in Czechoslovakia after the Nazis invaded the country 63 years ago.
The claim is the most significant since the British government set up a panel last year to investigate allegations by former owners, or their families, that works of art in private collections were stolen by the Germans.
A family wishing to remain anonymous has asked for the four works, said to have been stolen between 1935 and 1945 from a renowned prewar collection of old master drawings owned by Dr. Arthur Feldmann.
After the Nazi invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1939, the collector and his family were persecuted and the collection's 750 drawings were seized, officials say. Now, descendants of the family are pursuing their claim through the Commission for Looted Art in Europe.
The four works are reported to be worth hundreds of thousands of dollars. Ranging from the 15th to the 18th centuries, they are Niccolo dell'Abbate's "Holy Family," Martin Johann Schmidt's "Madonna and Child," "Saint Dorothy and the Christ Child" by a follower of Martin Schongauer, and a Nicholas Blakey design for a book illustration.
Three of the drawings were bought on behalf of the British Museum at a sale at Sotheby's in London in 1946. The fourth came through a bequest.
The museum can keep the works, give them up, or pay compensation.
"We have every sympathy for the family, and we will be giving this matter our urgent attention," director Robert Anderson said Monday. "Our own research and inquiries will take some weeks, and we will make a further announcement in due course."
On the Net:
The British Museum Web site: http://www.thebritishmuseum.ac.uk/index.html 
ATLANTA (AP) - The Atlanta Ballet has delayed plans for a "Gone With the Wind" ballet because of fund-raising problems.
The ballet secured rights to the work two years ago and planned to stage a new ballet in 2005 for its 75th anniversary.
But board members decided the company would not be able to raise the $1 million needed to create a full-scale ballet during a budget crunch.
Incoming board chairman Sam Moss said recently it was "not judicious" to proceed with an expensive dance work.
Artistic director John McFall had been expected to create the piece, based on Margaret Mitchell's Civil War-era novel, but said it was "certainly being shelved."
"Fund raising is down, and we just felt this was prudent," he said. "I'm reticent to take a stab when we can address this again."
Atlanta Ballet Web site: http://www.atlantaballet.com/ 
TOKYO (AP) - "Lupin the Third," the campy 1971 Japanese cartoon featuring a French gentleman burglar, is headed for North America.
Japan's TMS Entertainment has agreed to sell the U.S. and Canadian broadcasting rights to the animated TV series to Long Beach, Calif.-based Pioneer Entertainment, TMS spokesman Katsuki Masai said Tuesday.
Masai declined to disclose financial details of the 7-year contract. TMS expects to earn about $112 million from product sales and ticket revenues of a movie, he said.
Lupin, supposedly the grandson of Arsene Lupin featured in French writer Maurice Leblanc's 1907 book, is the leader of a band of thieves whose bank robberies and jewelry heists worldwide have made them wanted criminals.
They are often thwarted by Lupin's streak of morality and a double-crossing sidekick.
TMS has made 228 Lupin episodes since the series debuted in Japan. Although a video movie was released in the United States in 1992, the TV series so far has only been distributed in Europe.
A lack of interest among adult audiences and concerns that parents would object to violence in the cartoon held up the North American release, Masai said.
 Load-Date: May 30, 2002

 

End of Document
