

Entertainment Briefs; Contains items on the Winter Garden Theatre, Museum of Rome, Los Angeles Museum of the Holocaust.
May 7, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 759 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK (AP) - Not only was there a Ford in Broadway's future, it appears there's a Cadillac, too.
Broadway's historic Winter Garden Theatre, home to hits such as "Cats," "Mame," "Funny Girl," "Wonderful Town" and its present tenant, "Mamma Mia!" will be renamed the Cadillac Winter Garden Theatre, according to an agreement announced Monday by the Shubert Organization, which owns the theater, and General Motors, which makes the luxury automobiles.
"The Cadillac Winter Garden Theatre is the perfect platform to optimize Cadillac's brand image," Rich Sheridan, a Cadillac regional marketing manager, said in a statement.
Terms of the multiyear agreement between GM and the Shubert Organization, Broadway's biggest landlord, were not disclosed. Installation of new marquees for the theater, at Broadway and 50th Street, will begin sometime this summer.
Renaming theaters is nothing new on Broadway, although many are named after theater people, such as Richard Rodgers, Neil Simon, Helen Hayes and even critics such as Brooks Atkinson and Walter Kerr. But that has been changing.
When two old theaters on 42nd Street were combined into one by Canadian impresario Garth Drabinsky, they were re-christened the Ford Center for the Performing Arts. And the Roundabout Theatre Company has a deal for its home on the same street. The venerable Selwyn Theatre was renamed the American Airlines Theatre as part of a 10-year, $8.5 million deal between the nonprofit theater company and the airline.
ROME (AP) - The Museum of Rome, housed in the magnificent Palazzo Braschi, reopened to the public after a 15-year, $8 million renovation.
Thousands of people lined up for hours over the weekend to be the first to see the new museum, which overlooks the Eternal City's Piazza Navona and its Bernini fountains.
The museum's collection of 400 paintings and sculptures dating from 1600-1800 includes portraits of popes, views of Rome, and portraits and interiors of wealthy Roman families, including some by artists such as Antonio Canova.
A highlight is a reconstruction of a room from the Palazzo Torlonia, which once stood in downtown Rome's Piazza Venezia.
The palazzo, owned by the wealthy Torlonia banking family, was demolished in 1902 and most of its paintings were sold on the open market. But the Rome city government saved some of the interior decorations by 18th-century artists such as Filippo Bigioli, Berthel Thorwaldsen and Francesco Podesta.
Palazzo Braschi itself is an 18th-century palace built by Pope Pio VI. It features a large marble staircase and rooms richly decorated in Egyptian, Chinese and neo-Gothic styles.
Before being acquired for the Museum of Rome in 1950, the palazzo was used as a Fascist headquarters in the 1930s, and after World War II, the building temporarily housed 300 homeless families.
In 1987, fire officials declared it unsafe and closed it.
Security and bureaucratic problems delayed the museum's reopening, museum director Maria Elisa Tittoni said Sunday.
Half the palace has been restored; the other half is expected to be completed in four years.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The nation's oldest memorial honoring victims of the Holocaust could shut down by the end of the year.
The operating budget of the Los Angeles Museum of the Holocaust has been cut in half, and volunteers and part-time employees who run it have been told it could be closed if new financing isn't found.
"Our rent is paid until December," said museum director Rachel Jagoda. "If we can't raise our rent for next year - $90,000 - we're gone."
Holocaust survivors established the museum in 1961 as the Martyrs Memorial Museum. Its artifacts, photographs and exhibits trace the plight of Jews who were seized and persecuted by Nazis during the war.
But since 1993, the modest museum has been overshadowed by the bigger and wealthier Museum of Tolerance, run by the Simon Wiesenthal Center.
While the well-promoted museum offers interactive and electronic exhibits and charges admission, the Museum of the Holocaust is free and relies on traditional glass-case displays, photographic blowups and models.
The Museum of the Holocaust has been kept afloat by the Los Angeles Jewish Federation, which is facing its own financial problems as it begins an emergency $10 million fund-raising campaign to help Israel.
The museum's operating budget was cut from $120,000 last year to $60,000. In contrast, it was allocated $189,000 in 1999-2000, according to its operators.
On the Net:
Los Angeles Museum of the Holocaust Web site: http://www.jewishla.org/html/l.a.-holocaust-museum.htm 
 Load-Date: May 8, 2002

 

End of Document
