

Entertainment Briefs; Contains items on 'Harry Potter' and 'The Lord of the Rings'; Cleveland Film Commission.
July 30, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 488 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LONDON (AP) - The number of British parents reading to their children has more than doubled in the last two years, owing to the success of books such as "Harry Potter" and "The Lord of the Rings," a survey said.
Ninety percent of those polled said they regularly read to their son or daughter, compared with 40 percent when the same question was asked in 2000. The survey results were published Friday.
The energy firm Powergen, which commissioned both surveys, attributed the change to the appeal such books have to children and adults.
This year's poll of 1,000 parents with one or more children under age 10 found that 94 percent of mothers said they regularly read their youngsters a story, compared with 86 percent of fathers.
Psychologist Aric Sigman said fantasies such as "The Lord of the Rings" and the "Harry Potter" series appeal to both children and adults, and also promote bonding between them by raising issues of mutual concern for them to discuss.
"This sharing of ideas and opinions is critical to the emotional and creative development of children," Sigman said.
Other popular books that parents were reading to their children in Britain included "Alice in Wonderland" by Lewis Carroll, "Artemis Fowl" by Eoin Colfer and Philip Pullman's "The Amber Spyglass."
The Powergen company sponsors a campaign called "Little Book Corners" in which well-known authors read stories to children in local libraries.
The poll's margin of error, and the date it was conducted, were not available.
CLEVELAND - How do you persuade Hollywood executives, who think of the Midwest as having little more than factories and farms, to come to Ohio to make movies?
That's the challenge for Chris Carmody, who heads the Greater Cleveland Media Development Corp. - better known as the Cleveland Film Commission.
Carmody admits it's a tough sell. A complicated permit system at City Hall hampers efforts, as does the fact that Toronto - only five hours north of Cleveland - offers competitive tax rebates and a low exchange rate that cuts cost.
But perhaps most difficult is the fact that Cleveland doesn't register on most studios' radar screens.
"In L.A., there's a sense that the Midwest, except for Chicago, is a factory surrounded by cornfields," he said. "The question we hear most often is: 'Is there a body of water near Cleveland?"' (The answer: Lake Erie.)
Since the commission was founded in 1998, direct expenditures by media production companies have grown from $1.74 million to $10 million in 2001.
Last year was a big year, with local shoots of Warner Bros.' "Welcome to Collinwood," Fox Searchlight's "The Antwone Fisher Story" and Good Machine's "American Splendor," based on Cleveland writer Harvey Pekar's comic books.
This year, films shot in the area include part of Paramount's "Against the Ropes," starring Meg Ryan, and Tag Entertainment's "Miracle Dogs." Including commercials and TV productions, 45 projects were shot in the area.
 Load-Date: July 31, 2002

 

End of Document
