

Exhibit explores the little-known majesty of Prague in the Middle Ages
The Associated Press
September 20, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 587 words
Byline: By DEEPTI HAJELA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




There was Rome, there was Paris - and then there was Prague.
With a vibrant culture of patronage for the arts, the first university founded in central Europe, and grand architecture like Karlstejn Castle with its chapel walls covered in semiprecious jasper, Prague, Czech Republic, during the 14th and 15th centuries was a jewel of a city, the seat of the Holy Roman Empire.
But it's a history that has been unappreciated, as 20th-century politics of Cold War and Communism kept most Westerners out of the area, the curator of a new show says.
The exhibition hopes to change that oversight, by exposing viewers to sculptures, statues, manuscripts and other artifacts that highlight just how cosmopolitan and sophisticated the area was. "Prague, The Crown of Bohemia, 1347-1437" opened Tuesday the Metropolitan Museum of Art and runs through Jan. 3 before traveling to Prague in February.
"I think there are great moments in our artistic heritage that we can still learn about, and this is one that hasn't been a focus before and it's way past time it should be," said curator Barbara Drake Boehm. "These are some of the great artistic treasures of Europe."
The timeline of the show focuses on the reigns of three men: Charles IV and his sons who ruled after him - Wenceslas IV and Sigismund. Charles, raised in Paris and connected to the royal courts of Europe through family ties, became king of Bohemia in 1347 and holy Roman emperor in 1355. Wenceslas ruled from his father's death in 1378 until 1419, and Sigismund from 1419 to 1437. Bohemia covered parts of what is modern-day Czech Republic, Poland and Germany, while the boundaries of the Holy Roman Empire extended even farther.
It was Charles who was determined to turn his birthplace into a city to rival the likes of Rome and Paris, Boehm said, rebuilding the royal castle and overseeing the continued building of the Saint Vitus Cathedral. In the castle, he had a chapel dedicated to the Holy Cross, where he kept his royal treasure. The walls of the chapel were covered in Bohemian jasper, with inclusions of amethyst and rock crystal. He was a generous benefactor of the cathedral, increasing its treasury to include sacred vessels and holy relics placed in containers of gold and gems.
"He did city planning, he laid out a new town, he thought about the size of the market," Boehm said. "There was a real conscious thinking through of what ought to happen in order to make a great cultural center."
The exhibition, created over five years, features about 200 items brought together from public and private collections in over a dozen countries, including the Vatican.
Organized both thematically and roughly chronologically, it showcases a dazzling array of artifacts - including illuminated manuscripts, gem-encrusted reliquaries, jewelry, bowls carved out of semiprecious stone, imposing statues from the Old Town Bridge, paintings, and sculptures. There's a cross, almost three feet high, made out of rock crystal and gilded silver, that dates back to before 1355; a tiny bowl, in the shape of a four-leaf clover, carved entirely out of amethyst; and a statue of a king on his throne, shaped out of walrus ivory, both from the second half of the 14th century.
Many have rarely been seen in public, even the items from the Saint Vitus Cathedral in the Czech Republic, Boehm said.
"They're not on public display," she said. "They don't have currently a means of exhibiting them on a full-time basis."
---
On the Net:
Metropolitan Museum of Art: http://www.metmuseum.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYR105-107
 Load-Date: September 21, 2005

 

End of Document
