

EXPLORING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY; Peeling away the radical image of the anti-globalization movement
June 10, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 1043 words
Byline: By MALCOLM FOSTER, Associated Press Writer
Body




The images seem to depict a ragtag bunch of rabble-rousers: Masked protesters toss rocks and bottles through clouds of tear gas, smash store fronts and wrestle with riot police. Globalization is their enemy.
But peel away the street images, and a more textured view emerges. The protesters are largely peaceful, organized and - beneath all the noise - confident they are changing the way the global economy is run.
Anti-globalizers range from Drop the Debt, a London-based group that pushes rich nations to forgive Third World debt, to mainstream environmentalists like the Sierra Club. Some sound extremist but aren't: Attac, in Europe, favors a tax on speculative cross-border investments to help fight poverty.
They vie for attention at summits of the World Trade Organization, International Monetary Fund and World Bank, institutions they claim widen the gap between rich and poor. Yet much of the coverage is grabbed by fringe groups, threatening to blur a central theme: reining in global corporations from exploiting workers, the poor and the environment.
The disparity of messages and methods will be on vivid display during President Bush's visit to Europe, starting Tuesday. Demonstrations are planned in Madrid, Spain, and expected to grow to 25,000 activists by Thursday in Gothenburg, Sweden, ahead of a European Union summit.
Critics claim the message is muddled, a cacophony of angry voices.
"It's easy to know what they're against, but it's hard to know what they stand for," says Caroline Anstey, spokeswoman for the Washington-based World Bank, which lends money to poor nations for development projects.
The groups disagree - and try to distance themselves from less orderly players.
"Of course we want the violence to stop," says Maude Barlow of the Council on Canadians, which protested talks in Quebec City in April to establish a trade zone stretching across the Western Hemisphere.
"We tell people, 'It may be only two dozen of you out of thousands, but that is what is shown over and over on TV."'
After all, they feel they have an urgent message: Globalization is moving in a troubling direction. Huge corporations, driven by greed, have gained tremendous control over our lives. They need to be held accountable.
Activists view the IMF, WTO and World Bank as enforcing this system through their loans and trade rules, and argue they need to be dramatically reformed - or abolished altogether.
Anger over this reached a boiling point in December 1999 in Seattle, where protesters swarmed into the streets and shut down a key WTO meeting. "Black Bloc" anarchists broke store windows and sprayed graffiti on buildings, actions condemned by most other activists.
"We want to get rid of capitalism, and we're showing that," says Chuck Munson, with Anti-Capitalists Convergence, a Washington-based anarchist group that plans to protest IMF and World Bank meetings this fall.
But nonviolent methods are more common.
Members of Direct Action Network, a loose network of smaller groups across North America, use chains to lock themselves to each other or link arms to block access to meetings. Others roam the streets hoisting 15-foot puppets, like a WTO "octopus" with tentacles holding signs that read "deforestation" or "farmers' rights."
The Ruckus Society of Oakland, Calif., runs camps to train young protesters in body blockades and "urban climbing" - scaling buildings and bridges to hang banners or block ports.
More moderate is Attac, which pushes for a 0.05 percent tax on financial speculation to slow the boom-and-bust monetary flows that can hurt small economies and to raise $100 billion to redistribute to impoverished nations. Attac members in Sweden were meeting daily with police in Goteborg to try to keep Bush's visit peaceful.
Mainstream organizations often work behind the scenes, and claim the biggest successes.
Through lobbying and petitions, Drop the Debt's predecessor, Jubilee 2000, secured a promise from major nations to cancel $100 billion in debt to developing countries. So far, $40 billion has been forgiven, and Drop the Debt is making sure the rest is delivered.
A top Sierra Club goal is to defeat legislation that would cede trade authority to the White House, a move that could overrule existing environmental laws. Congress has killed the bill twice.
Oxfam, an international relief and development group, and others pressured pharmaceutical companies to cut AIDS drugs prices in Africa.
Then there are the think tanks, including the International Forum on Globalization in San Francisco and Focus on the Global South in Bangkok, Thailand, which provide economic research and the intellectual backbone of the movement.
Despite differences, groups on both sides of the Atlantic are remarkably coordinated - almost entirely through the Internet. E-mail and Web postings are vital to networking and sharing information. Most groups operate on shoestrings, so can't "summit-hop" outside their region.
Skeptics say the movement will peter out, overwhelmed by the power of global capitalism. "It's like trying to stop a steamroller with a pebble," says Peter Waddington, a professor at Britain's Reading University who specializes in protest politics.
At the very least, activists have created public debate, and world bodies are taking notice. The World Bank canceled its meeting later this month in Barcelona, Spain, for fear of protests, and the WTO meets next November in remote Qatar.
What is more important, they're talking about reform. The IMF, for one, created an office last year to assess the impact of its loan programs on local communities.
But whether change comes from within or from outside pressure depends on who's talking.
"We have to make sure globalization works for the poor," says Anstey of the World Bank, which meets regularly with the more mainstream protest groups. "Our intention is to have dialogue, but it's impossible to do that with those who want to abolish you."
On the Web:
Ruckus Society: http://www.ruckus.org 
Attac: http://www.attac.org 
Focus on the Global South: http://focusweb.org 
World Trade Organization: http://www.wto.org 
World Bank: http://www.worldbank.org 
International Monetary Fund: http://www.imf.org 
---
 
EDITOR'S NOTE: AP correspondent Burt Herman in Berlin contributed to this report.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY196-198; Graphic GLOBAL LOGO
 Load-Date: June 11, 2001

 

End of Document
