

France will get the G8 glory and Switzerland, the protests
The Associated Press
May 24, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 647 words
Byline: By ALEXANDER G. HIGGINS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NYON, Switzerland
Body




France will get the glory of welcoming world leaders to the spa of Evian while neighboring Switzerland will get the dirty task of confronting violent demonstrations by anti-globalization protesters.
By choosing Evian for the June 1-3 summit, President Jacques Chirac picked a spot easy to defend against angry demonstrators. It is protected on one side by some of the highest peaks in the Alps and on the other by 7.5 mile-wide Lake Geneva.
Still, it is not as remote as Kananaskis, Alberta, where last year's summit was completely out of reach of demonstrators.
"The magnificent trick the French have pulled off is to host the G8 conference - and export the damage to Switzerland," said Dr. Pierre-Yves Michellod, a Swiss dentist in Nyon, a picturesque town facing Evian across Lake Geneva.
The leaders will land at Geneva's international airport and helicopter to Evian. But their many aides will have to leave the airport by road where demonstrators have vowed to stop them.
A French innovation is holding the summit on an international border, using Swiss facilities, including hotels in Lausanne and Geneva to accommodate many of the spillover guests.
The guests include 12 leaders from Africa, Latin America and Asia who will meet on the sidelines with the G8 leaders and stay in Lausanne.
So where are the anti-G8 demonstrators likely to run amok? In Geneva and Lausanne, and possibly elsewhere along the 60 miles of Swiss shoreline.
French security using heavy armor has begun imposing tight rings around Evian. Surface-to-air missile batteries and radar warning systems will keep unauthorized aircraft from venturing near. Private boats also are barred from the security area.
Smaller border crossings between France and Switzerland have been closed. Barbed-wire barricades have sprung up around security zones in Lausanne and Geneva.
Up to 300,000 demonstrators are expected for a mass march in Geneva June 1. Most of them pledge to be peaceful.
Taking a page from Swiss national day celebrations, protesters plan a series of bonfires and concerts around the shoreline on the eve of the summit to underscore their presence.
Micheline Spoerri, the Geneva government official in charge of police, noted that only 70,000 took part in demonstrations during the G8 summit in Genoa, Italy, which resulted in the fatal police shooting of an anti-globalization activist two years ago.
In all about 15,000 French and Swiss police, soldiers, and emergency workers are providing security on both sides of the border. The Swiss alone are mobilizing at least 6,000 police. The Swiss Cabinet has agreed to receive up to 1,000 extra police officers from Germany to help handle the protesters.
"The security plan seems to me completely inadequate," said Josef Zisyadis, a left-wing politician. He noted that police failed to control 500 demonstrators in Lausanne on May 1, resulting in broken windows and other damage at a luxury hotel and shops.
Besides protecting the airport and business district, Geneva authorities aim to keep protesters away from the city's international quarter, home to the European headquarters of the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, and foreign embassies.
Swiss authorities have been taking an optimistic view of the planned protests, even providing well-equipped campsites for visitors, saying the demonstrations are a democratic right.
"It is a major opportunity for many citizens to express opinions which differ from those championed at the Evian meeting," said a government statement.
But the government, with an eye to small groups of troublemakers who have turned demonstrations violent, said it must be prepared "to deal with situations which could get out of hand."
Many businesses and offices plan to be closed during the summit.
"I'm not so concerned about the demonstrations," said Michellod, the Nyon dentist. "I close at 5 p.m. Friday - and I'm out of here!"
 Graphic



 
AP Photos FRA502-504, LAU105

 

End of Document
