

Freeze has Argentines crying all the way to the bank
December 11, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 859 words
Byline: By TONY SMITH, AP Business Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




Lining up with about 100 other disgruntled Argentines outside a bank on downtown Lavalle Street, Pedro Silva wants to open a bank account. Big deal? It is these days.
Their patience and confidence in the government of President Fernando de la Rua drained by a withering four-year recession, Argentines are trying to get around recently imposed withdrawal limits on their accounts by opening new ones.
Others, who fear the government will ultimately confiscate their savings to buoy its own accounts, prefer investing in big-ticket items like cars and apartments. Some try smuggling what's left of their savings out of the country.
"We're here to try open two more accounts, but I don't even know if it's worth it," said Silva, a 45-year-old doctor, who joined the line at Banco Sudameris with his wife, Beatriz. "This is like communism - suddenly we are not the owners of our own money."
A run on banks that peaked Nov. 30, when depositors pulled $2 billion from the financial system in one day, pushed the cash-strapped government to slap $1,000-a-month cash withdrawal limits on Argentina's 18 million bank accounts.
As part of its campaign to keep cash in the banking system, the government also is requiring that other kinds of payments be made by check, bank transfer, debit or credit card. Workers, for instance, can no longer simply bring a paycheck to the bank and cash it. They must deposit it in an account first, then draw it out.
"Now there's a lack of cash, it's like a war economy," said Silva. "None of my patients can pay."
"The chain of payments has been broken," agreed Beatriz. "There are millions of people forced to resort to bartering - an old sweater, anything, for goods just to survive."
Hundreds of thousands of Argentines are opening bank accounts for the first time. Others, like Silva, anxious to get at their savings, are opening new accounts, transferring cash from their other accounts and yanking it.
According to the Central Bank, about 3.6 million new accounts have been opened since Monday, Dec. 3, the day the capital controls kicked in.
Banco Frances - controlled by Spain's Banco Bilbao e Vizcaya Argentaria - alone opened more than 4,700 new accounts that Monday, more than 15,000 Tuesday and nearly 20,000 on Friday. Telephone and Internet banking transactions quadrupled in the week.
Spotting an opportunity to grab market share, Banco Itau Buen Ayre, a Brazilian bank, launched an ad campaign for a "90-day no bank charges" campaign. It put extra staff at ATMs to help first-time users.
Anxious to staunch cash bleeding from multiple accounts, the Central Bank on Tuesday was considering whether to limit the number of accounts to one per person.
"There will be no dollarization, no devaluation and no confiscation of deposits," said government spokesman Juan Pablo Baylac after a cabinet meeting Tuesday.
Even so, Roberto Feletti, president of Banco Ciudad, told local news agency Noticias Argentinas that it would be "very difficult for banks to detect if depositors are opening more than one account," because potential clients can use various types of identity documents.
Decades of economic disorder and uncertainty have honed Argentines' skill in finding ingenious ways to protect their money from devaluation, inflation and tax collection.
During the hyperinflationary 1980s, people would stock up with months' supplies of basic goods, virtually transforming their kitchens into warehouses. The lucky few with spare cash would convert their savings into dollars, at favorable black market rates, of course.
Now, with fears of devaluation or outright confiscation of savings growing, such talents are making a comeback.
Topping the list are large-ticket investments, such as apartments and autos.
FIRA, the local real estate agents association reported an upturn in the number of weekend visits to show houses, while car dealers associations said sales have risen between 10 and 15 percent since Dec. 3.
"We're seeing more people, especially 50- or 60-year-olds with savings, who want to buy cars," said Cristian Cifarelli, sales supervisor at a downtown Buenos Aires Ford dealer. "They're basically afraid that the government is going to turn their silver into worthless paper."
Others prefer to smuggle their savings out of the country, even though in exchange offices across the border in Uruguay or Brazil, Argentines must take as much as a 50 percent hit on the one-to-one peso-dollar exchange rate they have gotten used to at home.
Government capital controls also limit to $10,000 the amount of cash traveling Argentines can take abroad.
According to the respected Buenos Aires daily La Nacion, a number of "specialized agencies" have sprouted up in border regions. They hire unemployed workers to cross into Uruguay carrying amounts below the limit.
In addition to staunching the outflows, the government hopes to boost much-needed tax revenue by forcing Argentines who evade taxes or work in the informal economy onto the books.
"I don't know if it will plug the hole," said John Welch, chief Latin American economist at Barclays Capital in New York. "It will put an extra burden on people subsisting in the informal economy."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BAI103-104
 Load-Date: December 12, 2001

 

End of Document
