

French elections underscore the continent's steady shift to the right
April 24, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 861 words
Byline: By WILLIAM J. KOLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIENNA, Austria
Body




Austria for the Austrians. France for the French. Holland and Denmark without Muslims or mosques.
The surprise resurgence of extreme nationalist Jean-Marie Le Pen in France's first round of presidential elections is just the latest example of the far right gaining ground in Europe.
From Austria, home to far-right politician Joerg Haider and the anti-immigration Freedom Party, to the Netherlands - where rightist Pim Fortuyn has a foothold among the famously tolerant Dutch - extremist politicians are winning votes by tapping working-class fears that foreigners are stealing jobs and a way of life.
"I feel like I'm being taken hostage," said Wolfgang Seidler, 53, a Vienna businessman and political moderate who's bewildered at the shift. "We're in a new millennium, and yet we're going back to the 19th century."
Some say Europeans are receptive to harsh anti-foreigner rhetoric because rapid globalization has made them feel like they've lost control of their lives. Others contend the traditionally centrist political establishment has brought the far right into play by losing touch with citizens' daily struggles.
That, they say, has created fertile ground for ultraconservatives like Le Pen and his potent "France for the French" nationalism or Mogens Glistrup, founder of Denmark's extremist Progress Party, who wants to expel all Muslims.
"There's a deep, widespread and genuine concern over issues of personal and national identity," said Simon Serfaty of the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies.
"There are multiple forces that challenge these nations and their citizens: too many immigrants, the European Union, the intrusion of American culture," he said Tuesday. "People see it as a kind of invisible invasion. They have no way out, and the hard right is rooted in that."
In the congested Netherlands, where roughly 2 million of the 16 million inhabitants are not native Dutch, it's become almost taboo to discuss sensitive issues such as immigration and a spike in street crime many quietly blame on young toughs from Morocco and Suriname.
By contrast, those issues are the party platform for Fortuyn and the Leefbaar Nederland (Livable Netherlands) party, which has 19 percent support heading into May elections. Though many Dutch bristle when Fortuyn calls Islam a "backward culture," they also have harsh words for a government perceived as paralyzed by political correctness.
"If someone wants to discuss these matters, they're called racist," said Joost Schutten, a politically moderate Dutch engineer. "Because the government is not taking action, people get angry. By ignoring the issues, the government is moving people to the right."
It's not a new trend. Le Pen's National Front has been a political fixture in France for three decades, and Haider's Freedom Party was around long before it became part of Austria's coalition government in 2000.
Although Haider no longer leads the party, and its support has dwindled from 27 percent to about 16 percent, he remains governor of the province of Carinthia and continues to push for a pan-European network of right-wing politicians.
"It's not about an organization. It's about people who want to change course, and there are a lot of people involved in this mission," Haider told the Austrian daily Der Standard in an interview published Tuesday.
The phenomenon has a dark side: Leaders of the World Jewish Congress called an emergency meeting this week in Brussels, Belgium, to assess a troubling trend of anti-Semitic attacks across Europe.
Synagogues, Jewish schools and cemeteries have been targeted in recent weeks. Although many of the suspects are Arab youths of North African origin apparently protesting Israel's offensive in Palestinian areas, rightist extremists are blamed for others.
Some say it's no coincidence that most of the incidents have happened in France, where Le Pen once called Nazi gas chambers a detail of history, and in Belgium, home to the far-right and staunchly anti-immigrant Vlaams Blok (Flemish Bloc) party.
On Tuesday, the Vienna-based European Monitoring Center on Racism and Xenophobia appealed to leaders "to be more active in countering the racist threat" from right-wing parties.
Europe's far right, however, shows no signs of weakening.
In Italy, Silvio Berlusconi presides over a conservative coalition that includes the fiercely rightist Northern League, which wants jobless immigrants deported. In Germany, Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder is working to outlaw the National Democratic Party, which is accused of stirring up skinhead violence and neo-Nazi ideology.
As the European Union expands to take in the formerly communist countries of Eastern Europe, where extremism flourishes, the right's more sinister side could grow.
Hungary, a front-runner for EU membership, has a small but boisterous far-right party. So does Romania, where ultranationalist leader Corneliu Vadim Tudor speaks out harshly against Jews and Gypsies.
Even so, Europeans "shouldn't panic too quickly," Serfaty said.
"We're not about to relive the 1930s in Europe," he said. "Europe has never been more democratic, never more prosperous, never more secure than it is today."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo VIE501
 Load-Date: April 25, 2002

 

End of Document
