

From Pinochet's jails to the threshold of power - the woman who may be Chile's next president
The Associated Press
December 10, 2005, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 502 words
Byline: By EDUARDO GALLARDO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANTIAGO, Chile
Body




The life of Michelle Bachelet, the front-runner in Chile's presidential election Sunday, has been tied to the military in both good times and bad.
As the daughter of an air force general, she grew up in what Chileans call "the military family." She says her father was tortured to death in prison when the "family" split; he had opposed the bloody military coup in 1973 that brought Gen. Augusto Pinochet to power.
Now, 15 years after democracy was restored, Chile may become the fourth Latin American country with an elected woman president. But winning over the conservative military establishment was never easy, as 54-year-old Bachelet candidly concedes.
"I was a woman, a divorcee, a socialist, an agnostic … all possible sins together," she recently told reporters.
Still, she has broad support - 38 percent in recent polls in the four-way race - in part because she's seen as a bridge over the political chasm left by Pinochet's dictatorship. Her nearest opponent is multimillionaire businessman Sebastian Pinera, a center-right politician with 22 percent.
When her father, Gen. Alberto Bachelet, was arrested on the day of the coup she was a 22-year-old medical student. She and her mother also were rounded up, blindfolded, beaten and denied food for five days while their cellmates were raped - an ordeal she doesn't want to talk about except to say she and her mother were "physically mistreated."
Their connections enabled them to leave the country. After five years of exile in Australia and then communist East Germany, Bachelet returned to Chile, working underground with other leftist exiles and quietly advancing in the Socialist Party. She became a well-known figure in the center-left coalition that has ruled since democratic elections were restored in 1990.
If elected president, she's expected to maintain the free-market policies that have made Chile's economy one of the most successful in Latin America, but wants to develop a pension system that will narrow the gap between rich and poor.
President Ricardo Lagos made her the country's first female defense minister. In college she had been a star student of military affairs, and as defense minister she managed to charm brass and ranks alike, responding to generals' salutes by kissing them on the cheek, and clambering onto a tank during war games.
She is widely credited with helping to overcome mistrust between the military and the civilian government that was spawned by the coup of 1973.
"I harbor no rancor because I have a politician's understanding of why those things happened," she once said.
Bachelet has three children from two men, the first of whom she married while in exile in East Germany. Divorce is a touchy issue in Catholic Chile, and she refuses to discuss her marital status, saying it's a private matter.
She insists she's "just another Chilean woman who works, cares for her house. I take my daughter to school every day, go to the supermarket."
But also, "I am a woman with a calling for social struggle and public service."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY428-429
 Load-Date: December 11, 2005

 

End of Document
