

Government offers aid for cleanup as arrests continue in Genoa; Residents venture back into the scene of the mayhem
July 23, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 609 words
Byline: By FRANCES D'EMILIO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GENOA, Italy
Body




Downtown Genoa returned to life Monday after five days of lockdown, even as police arrested more protesters in connection with violence outside a weekend summit. The Italian government promised millions for the cleanup here.
At least 30 suspects were picked up in a series of raids in Genoa; they included Italians as well as people from Germany, Austria, Canada and Lithuania.
Authorities described them as members of the black-hooded anarchist groups that fought with riot police Friday and Saturday, smashing windows, throwing rocks and firebombs, and torching cars and trash bins.
The violence continued abroad. Arsonists in Athens attacked an office building Monday in apparent retribution for police tactics during the summit of industrialized nations.
In an anonymous telephone call to a newspaper, a group calling itself the Group of Carlo Giuliani, after the protester shot dead by police Friday, claimed responsibility. The office that was attacked conducts European research, and police said they did not know why it was targeted with homemade firebombs. No injuries were reported.
Two days of clashes in Genoa left entire neighborhoods of the northern port city in shambles, and the Italian government announced Monday it would give the city $6.7 million to help mop up.
Early estimates put the damage at about $45 million.
Italy's opposition leader, Francesco Rutelli, called for the resignation of the interior minister, Claudio Scajola, for his deployment of police. In a Cabinet meeting Monday, the government said it was "fully supportive" of Scajola and police forces.
The extraordinary security in place for the summit dismantled, streets once deserted filled with pedestrians taking advantage of a beautiful summer day. Nowhere within the once-secured central city's cobblestone streets and alleys was there evidence of the damage wrought outside the region in violent protests during the summit's first two days.
Outside that security zone, through middle-class neighborhoods, a different picture emerged.
Banks stood gutted. Charred hulks of cars lined the streets. Even the business of cleaning up became difficult: City sanitation officials counted 214 trash bins set ablaze or otherwise destroyed in clashes between rampaging anarchists and thousands of riot police.
"I have a big pain in the gut," said Maurizio Alloi, looking around after he pulled out money from an automatic teller machine inside a bank, its windows shattered by stones and sledgehammers a few blocks from the square where a protester was shot and killed Friday by police.
Alloi was lucky. His bank's ATM was inside the branch. Across a wide swath of the city outside the high-security, fenced-off "red zone," sidewalk ATMs one after the other were ripped out by protesters.
About a dozen car dealerships or motorbike stores were wrecked, and many bus stop shelters and phone booths were trashed. In one booth, near the city's seaside, people could still use the phone if they didn't mind standing in ankle-deep glass shards.
A good part of Genoa seemed to regret that the city played host to the summit.
"They closed the 'red zone' and gave the rest of the city to the protesters like meat to a dog," said Gianni Guarnieri, walking with his son, Luca, on a boulevard where car dealerships and banks were smashed.
Their early afternoon stroll was their first inspection after clashes Friday and Saturday that left much of Genoa under clouds of smoke from police tear gas and firebombs made by protesters.
"We were holed up in our house," said the elder Guarnieri.
On the Net:
Genoa Social Forum: http://www.genoa-g8.org 
Genoa summit site: http://www.genoa-g8.it/eng/index.html 
 Load-Date: July 24, 2001

 

End of Document
