

Greek-Americans step to the plate with U.S. baseball bounced from Olympics; A monthly observation on the city and the countdown to the games.
The Associated Press
December 11, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 799 words
Byline: By BRIAN MURPHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATHENS, Greece
Body




Sure, they can turn a double play. But can they handle a difficult Greek verb?
On the Olympic baseball diamonds in Athens, the "home" team will be far from home - anchored by a group of Americans with ancestral ties to the land of Homer and carrying newly minted Greek citizenship.
Some know only a few Greek words, and many just hum their way through the national anthem.
But what started out as an Olympic novelty for Greece has taken on deeper dimensions.
The Greek team will carry the pride of America's homegrown sport because Mexico knocked the U.S. team out of the Olympic qualifying tournament last month with a 2-1 stunner.
As Olympic hosts, Greece automatically qualifies, although the number of baseball-following Greeks could fit in a dugout.
The United States had been favorites to repeat as Olympic champions behind the possible pitching of Hall of Fame shoo-in Roger Clemens. Suddenly, however, Greece's crew of baseball imports has a credible shot at a medal.
That could be good for the struggle to keep baseball an Olympic sport.
The International Olympic Committee plans to review the status of baseball, softball and modern pentathlon after the Aug. 13-29 Athens Games. It's possible some could get bumped from Beijing in 2008 as part of IOC efforts to hold down costs.
IOC president Jacques Rogge said factors such as television ratings and the number of spectators in Athens will be taken into account.
"Well, we're not feeling extra pressure beyond just doing our best to represent Greece," said team manager Rob Derksen, a Milwaukee Brewers pitching prospect in the 1980s who never made the big leagues but went on to a peripatetic coaching career that included Australia and Guam's underdog shot for the Sydney Games.
"We would have been the Jamaican bobsledders of Sydney if we made it," he mused.
Derksen - who has no Greek roots - considers the surprise toppling of the U.S. team "a positive thing."
"It shows that this isn't just an American game, but a world game," said Derksen, of Hales Corners, Wisc. "The IOC should celebrate this, not worry about it."
The quest to fashion a Greek baseball team began in the late 1990s from the ground up - literally. The only field was a rock-strewn sandlot left by U.S. servicemen. But the effort caught the attention of some influential supporters.
Peter Angelos, the Greek-American owner of the Baltimore Orioles, was an early backer. So was the U.S. ambassador at the time, Nicholas Burns, a loyal citizen of the Red Sox Nation. Major League Baseball donated equipment and experts.
Greece helped by waiving the mandatory military service for athletes granted citizenship for the games.
Derksen said he fielded hundreds of calls from Greek-American prospects when he began recruiting in 2001.
The team is now a core of more than a dozen Greek-American players following tryouts last month in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. Derksen plans a trip to Greece to hunt for some Greek-born players.
It will be a tough roster to crack. There is already some serious talent with major league credits.
Infielder Aaron Miles - last season's International League rookie of the year with Triple-A Charlotte - made his major league debut Sept. 11 and hit .333 with two RBIs in eight games for the Chicago White Sox. The switch-hitter, whose grandmother was born in Greece, was traded this month to the Colorado Rockies.
"I think my relatives are from Sparta. My dad always tells me that I had a little warrior in me," Miles said.
Erik Pappas, a 37-year-old whose three-year major league career included stints with Chicago Cubs and the St. Louis Cardinals, is now the catcher for the Greek team.
"You think, 'Wow, this is where my heritage began, this is where my heritage comes from.' It certainly makes it special because this is where the Olympics began," said Pappas, whose grandfather was born in Greece.
Peter Soteropoulos wore the Greek uniform in July for the European Championships. But he still hasn't been to Greece, the birthplace of his father.
"It's nice to be part of the evolution of baseball in Greece," said Soteropoulos, a southpaw pitcher from the University of Connecticut who was drafted by the Cardinals this year.
It may also be a chance to pick up a few words.
"He can't speak Greek, but that's my fault," said his father, George.
But what about Greeks learning the nuances of the sacrifice fly or full count?
"We don't expect miracles," Derksen said. "But maybe we can stir some interest for the future of the sport in Greece."
Greek softball will also be a mostly American affair.
This month, the coaches will start whittling down the roster and pick the final team in July. In September, the current 17-member Greek softball team was shown. Just two players were born in Greece.
---
Associated Press writer Stephanie V. Siek contributed to this report.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo planned
 Load-Date: December 12, 2003

 

End of Document
