

Haiti's becomes the most populous and impoverished member of the Caribbean Community
July 6, 2002, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 560 words
Byline: By BERT WILKINSON
Body



Associated Press Writer
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP)- Haiti was admitted as the 15th member of the Caribbean Community, becoming the most populous and poverty-stricken state in the trading bloc, as it wrapped up a summit that was marred early on by violence.
Haiti's acceptance was aimed at bolstering opportunities for regional manufacturers, but some critics have questioned how much trade can be done with country where residents have an average income of just $400 a year.
Members like the Bahamas and Barbados have an average annual income near $10,000. The community's 14 other member states have a population of 6.5 million.
"I have been saying all along that people should understand that Haiti has 8 million people and their buying power would be enormous both now and in the future. We should take advantage of this," Secretary-General Edwin Carrington told The Associated Press this week.
Prime Minister P.J. Patterson of Jamaica had pushed for Haiti's provisional membership in 1997, reassuring leaders who the consequences of welcoming the Caribbean's most politically and economically troubled nation.
St. Lucian Foreign Minister Julian Hunte, the community's point man on Haiti, said Friday that Haiti's membership was long overdue but cautioned the country that suffered nearly 200 years of dictatorship has a long way to go since democracy and the rule of law have never been entrenched.
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's government would need help dealing with precarious national security and in collecting thousands of illegal weapons in the hands of government and opposition partisans, he said.
Friday night the leaders said Guyana's President Jagdeo Bharrat will visit Haiti later this year to welcome it to the bloc and explain the benefits of membership.
As the three-day summit was opening Wednesday, violence broke out in Georgetown during a confrontation between police and opposition protesters. Police fired on a group that broke away from a march involving thousands and forced open a gate to enter the yard of the president's office.
Two died and at least 12 were treated for gunshot wounds, hospital officials said.
Friday night the summit condemned the violence, saying, "The heads of government reiterated their condemnation of any attempt to use extraconstitutional and illegal means aimed at removing democratically elected governments from office."
Earlier Friday, 13 presidents and prime ministers at the summit asked the region's development bank to raise $100 million to help finance a new regional supreme court to replace Britain's Privy Council. The court is expected to open next year.
The Privy Council has long been the court of last resort for several former British Caribbean islands. But some Caribbean governments have complained that the council has tried to cripple their efforts to enforce the death penalty, which is illegal in Britain.
Also Friday, Trinidad and Tobago received the community's backing to bid to be the permanent headquarters of the Free Trade Area of the Americas over Panama, where the temporary head office is presently.
The support means that Trinidad would have at least 14 votes at the Organization of American States, since member Montserrat is a British colony with no vote in the forum.
Trinidad's Prime Minister Patrick Manning said he is confident of getting the 18 votes needed in the 34-nation bloc.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: July 7, 2002

 

End of Document
