

Independence the real issue behind the scenes in Saturday's Kosovo elections
November 14, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 614 words
Byline: By GARENTINA KRAJA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PRISTINA, Yugoslavia
Body




Independence isn't on the ballot for Saturday's elections in Kosovo, but it's very much on the minds of ethnic Albanians like Zeqir Azemi.
Voters in the first province-wide elections will choose legislators to govern them alongside the U.N. administrators and NATO-led peacekeepers who have run Kosovo since 1999, when the West broke former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's grip on the province.
But for many, dreams of sovereignty and an end to Kosovo's political limbo have overshadowed the business at hand: electing a 120-seat national assembly that in turn will choose a president and form a provincial government.
"We argue over who is more capable to make independence a reality," said Azemi, sipping coffee with friends in a cafe in Pristina, the provincial capital.
"Independence is what we really care about," he said.
Security will be tight in the province of 2 million, where ethnic Albanians vastly outnumber the Serbs they once battled. Last year's Western-sponsored municipal elections were marred by politically motivated attacks and intimidation.
Although there have been only minor incidents in a campaign that has included 328 rallies attended by tens of thousands, the 38,000 NATO-led peacekeepers based in Kosovo will increase patrols. At least 7,000 local and international police officers also will be on duty election day, patrolling and guarding 1,600 polling stations.
"We do not expect any widespread disturbance, but we have to have contingency plans," said Derek Chapell, spokesman for U.N police in Kosovo. "Quick response teams and special crowd control units, should there be a need, will be deployed all around."
Despite assurances of safe and secure elections - and the setting aside of 10 assembly seats for Serbs and 10 for other minorities - many Serbs remain disillusioned, distrustful and apathetic about their future as an often-persecuted minority in a province they view as the heart of Serbia.
About 200,000 Serbs and other non-Albanians have fled since 1999, fearing revenge attacks for Milosevic's crackdown that claimed the lives of up to 10,000 ethnic Albanians.
Dozens of Serbs were killed; about 1,300 remain missing. Many of the estimated 100,000 still here see the elections as pointless.
"Albanians were boycotting Serbian elections for 10 years and they achieved what they wanted. Why should I take part now in their elections?" asked Branko Miletic, a 49-year-old exiled Serb who said ethnic Albanians burned down his home in southern Kosovo after he fled in 1999.
International officials are walking a tightrope.
Hans Haekkerup, chief U.N. administrator in the province, has tried to mollify both Serbs and ethnic Albanians by saying independence is not on the ballot - but also suggesting Kosovo's future status remains open.
That has satisfied no one. Apparently fearing that Serbia was again gaining a foothold in Kosovo, ethnic Albanians condemned the recent agreement with Yugoslav leaders giving security guarantees to Serbs in exchange for their participation in the voting.
Independence is the talk of the town in Pristina's bars and cafes, where ethnic Albanians bemoan daily power cuts, double-digit unemployment and an economy kept alive only by international aid.
Many Kosovo Albanians realize prosperity is far away and are skeptical of vague pledges by the main ethnic Albanian parties: the Democratic League of Kosovo, the Democratic Party of Kosovo and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo.
"I am not sure if they will live up to their promises, but I have to place my hope somewhere," Gani Fazlija, 54, a municipal worker and father of eight said while gathering leaves on Pristina's main street.
"I have to feed my children."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY192-193
 Load-Date: November 15, 2001

 

End of Document
