

International relief effort overlooking the other side of the stricken island
The Associated Press
January 21, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 685 words
Byline: By EDWARD HARRIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LHOKSEUMAWE, Indonesia
Body




Abdul Hafid holds a nearly empty begging bowl at his improvised roadblock, demanding money from trucks ferrying food, medicine and other relief supplies toward western Aceh, the region that suffered the worst damage in the tsunami.
The western coast of Indonesia's Sumatra island took the full force of the Dec. 26 earthquake and tsunami. But Hafid, 13, and the few aid workers in the province's east say the humanitarian effort is overlooking the other side of the island.
"We're suffering, too," Hafid said at one of a dozen beggar-manned checkpoints on the 150-mile-long route between the provincial capital of Banda Aceh and the region's second city, Lhokseumawe. "The help we're getting is not enough."
While the tsunami rushed deep inland along the western beaches, the bow-shaped island's northern tip refracted the high waters, residents say. The wave swept down the eastern shore at an oblique angle, washing only 500 yards onto shore.
But life here was centered on the sea's edge, since mist-shrouded mountains rise up only miles from the coast. Whole villages are missing, replaced by dozens of government-run tent cities housing tens of thousands of survivors.
Still, with so much destruction in Banda Aceh - and government restrictions on the travel of aid groups - fewer relief workers have ventured here.
"My impression is that this side is less taken care of," said Tse Tsz Wah, of the French medical aid group Doctors Without Borders.
"Over there, you see so many aid organizations. Here, we're ourselves and the Red Cross," said the 33-year-old from Hong Kong, who was inoculating children against measles.
Survivors on the east coast suffer from diarrhea, infected wounds, and illnesses such as malaria, Tse said.
"Most of the injuries here are from the earthquake," Tse said.
Along mountain stretches of the Banda Aceh-Lhokseumawe road, brick houses lay in rubble from the quake. Most of the power and telephone-line pylons remained standing, although some have fallen over.
Brick retaining walls holding back Aceh's terraced fields have collapsed, spilling crops down embankments. Coastal rice paddies are under mud and debris, and fishing boats lie marooned on the sand.
Residents who lived through earlier earthquakes but remained ignorant of the mechanics of tsunami now say they live in terror of the constant aftershocks in their geologically active region.
"I thought it was just another earthquake. I never thought of a tsunami," said Azhar, a 24-year-old bus-ticket seller who goes by a single name. "Now, I'm afraid of another earthquake, because that will mean another tsunami."
The tsunami ravaged coastlines across 11 countries in southern Asia and as far as eastern Africa. Reported deaths by government agencies in the affected countries range from 157,000 to 220,000. The varying tallies reflect discrepancies in accounting for the missing. Most of Indonesia's tsunami dead and homeless are on Aceh's west coast.
Teku Nadirsyah, a local official helping feed and house about 27,000 homeless survivors, said his people need tons of rice, although no one is in danger of extreme hunger.
All beds at Lhokseumawe's two main hospitals are full, doctors say, and tests for diagnosing fever and other diseases are running low, along with antibiotics. Pneumonia and tetanus have stricken many who didn't have quick access to clean water, they say.
Feeling ignored, some residents are endeavoring to help themselves - like Hafid, who stands on the roadside with his black plastic bucket. Only one truck carrying aid northward has stopped to give money, he says: 5,000 rupiah, or 50 cents.
Mohamed Ibrahim is stopping vehicles, like Hafid, with a school chair pushed over on the two-lane road's median and rocks scattered around.
"I'm asking for donations for the refugees. They have food, but it's only enough for one day and there's no fish," said the 35-year-old fisherman who lost his boat and home in the disaster. "We need medicine and we're drinking dirty water."
"I heard the news that Banda Aceh is very badly hit. But we're hurting, too," he said. "And we're not getting enough attention here."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XSP109-110
 Load-Date: January 22, 2005

 

End of Document
