

Iraq and Kuwait resume talks over the fate of people missing since the 1990-91 Persian Gulf crisis
The Associated Press
January 8, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 322 words
Byline: By SHAFIKA MATTAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan
Body




After a break of four years, Iraqi and Kuwaiti officials resumed talks Wednesday on the fate of more than 600 people who disappeared during the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait in 1990-91.
The talks in the Jordanian capital were chaired by the International Committee of the Red Cross and attended by Saudi officials. Saudi Arabia, the ICRC, the United States, France and Britain are members of the international commission set up in 1991 to look into the fate of people missing from the Gulf crisis.
Iraq withdrew from the negotiations in January 1999. It objected to the presence of Americans at the talks and said the commission was not applying pressure on the Kuwaitis to account for missing Iraqis.
Kuwait says the Baghdad government must account for more than 600 Kuwaitis and other nationals who disappeared in the emirate during the Iraqi occupation.
Iraq insists it is holding no such detainees. In recent years, Iraq has accused Kuwait of failing to account for more than 1,000 Iraqis who disappeared during the Gulf crisis. Kuwait's government says it cannot be held to account for people who disappeared during the Iraqi occupation.
Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990. It was forced out at the end of February 1991 by a coalition of forces led by the United States.
Iraqi and Kuwaiti delegates refused to talk to reporters before beginning their closed door session Wednesday.
During a break in the early afternoon, ICRC spokesman Mueen Qassis said the proceedings were "so far, so good." The meeting was scheduled to last for one day.
Iraq's decision to resume negotiations reflects the more co-operative attitude it has taken toward the United Nations since it came under increased pressure over its weapons of mass destruction program late last year.
Last month, Iraq said it would allow the U.N. special envoy, Yuli Vorontsov, to visit Baghdad for talks on the missing people. For nearly two years, Baghdad had refused to meet him.

 

End of Document
