

Is it the end of the road for France's tree-lined drives?
August 18, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 660 words
Byline: By JOCELYN GECKER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Rural France has long been known for the towering, arching trees that line country roads, providing shade, beauty and dappled light for those driving through villages and scenic farmland.
But in recent months the trees have become the center of a controversy pitting road safety advocates, who want them chopped down, against conservationists, who say they are national treasures.
Trees were to blame for 799 road deaths last year, the Transport Ministry says, or 10 percent of all fatal traffic accidents on French roads.
Now the debate has taken a decisive turn: The man in charge of France's trees has declared them a public danger.
"I love the forest. I love strolling in it. I love planting trees," Agriculture Minister Jean Glavany said. "But I also know what is dangerous to human life and the remedies to preserve it."
"We must not hesitate to cut down the trees when it is necessary. We can always replant elsewhere," Glavany said in a written statement published recently in Le Figaro newspaper.
His comments came in response to the death of a 21-year-old motorcyclist, whose July collision prompted an uproar in the southwestern Hautes-Pyrenees region, which is also the minister's constituency.
In the meantime, chainsaw-wielding residents have taken matters into their own hands. Striking in the middle of the night, the assailants have left their marks on 168 trees near the youth's crash site, sawing deep gashes through their thick trunks.
The trees were severed so deeply that "a strong wind could have knocked them down," said Alain Tastet, director of road management for the Hautes-Pyrenees. Road maintenance crews were quickly dispatched to fell the trees.
Jacques Bernes, president of a local road-safety group called S.O.S. Routes, says the "commandos" are performing a public service.
"I say 'bravo.' We should encourage them to continue," said Bernes, whose group is based in the Gers region next to Hautes-Pyrenees and has lobbied for nearly a decade to have roadside trees removed.
He argues that while the trees might not be the sole cause of fatal road accidents, they are "the aggravating factor."
He calculates that most of the region's trees - mainly plane trees - stand about three feet from the road and are spaced 30 feet apart. If a driver drifts outside the white lines going 50 mph, "that's a wall of wood," he says. "And it's not the tree that explodes."
The trees' most famous victim was the writer Albert Camus, who crashed while heading north to Paris in 1960.
They have even spawned at least one postwar joke. (Why did the French plant so many trees along their roads? So the Germans could march in the shade.)
For many who drive the tree-lined roads, the thought of denuding them is unimaginable.
"It's part of their national heritage," said Jean Dorderes, of the town of Vic-en-Bigorre in the Hautes-Pyrenees. "If there's an accident, it's not the tree's fault."
Conservationists agree. Chantal Fauche, president of the Association for the Defense of Trees in the Gers, says the answer is not to cut down the trees but to address the causes of the crashes: speeding, drunk driving and fatigue.
"You don't cut down trees because a driver had three glasses of wine before getting behind the wheel," she said.
The majestic roadside trees have been a cherished part of France's landscape for centuries, and they are rapidly vanishing. By the end of the 19th century, France had as many as 3 million "arbres d'alignement." After two World Wars, road-widening programs and anti-tree campaigns, there are 400,000 left.
Fauche says more effective alternatives would be to replant the trees farther from the road, place barriers in front of them, and raise awareness through public campaigns.
But these things take time, and that's a problem, Fauche said. In the Gers, some 20,000 plane trees have been cut down in the past two decades and only 25,000 remain.
"At this rate, there will come a time when we won't have any trees left," Fauche said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo PAR101
 Load-Date: August 19, 2001

 

End of Document
