

Jefferson, Napoleon and a jazz trumpeter - the 200th anniversary of the Louisiana Purchase
April 11, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 396 words
Byline: By CARL HARTMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Jefferson, Emperor Napoleon I and Irvin Mayfield showed up Thursday at the French Embassy - Jefferson and Napoleon in costume and Mayfield, a New Orleans jazz trumpeter, at the head of a conga line.
The occasion was to commemorate the coming 200th anniversary of the Louisiana Purchase, the Jeffersonian land grab that almost doubled the size of the United States at a cost of $15 million to the cash-strapped French ruler.
The Jefferson and Napoleon depicters joined in the conga line with other guests and reporters and 86-year-old Lindy Boggs, a former Democratic member of the House.
The actual anniversary will be celebrated next year by an exhibit at the New Orleans Museum of Art. "Jefferson's America and Napoleon's France" will run from April 11 to Aug. 31, 2003, and include the official French and American copies of the agreement signed by the two heads of state.
Jefferson was impersonated Thursday by Bill Barker, who has Jefferson's height, slender build and reddish blond hair. Stocky Mark Schneider did Napoleon, complete with cocked hat, white uniform and gold epaulets. Both are actors in the continuous historical portrayals at colonial Williamsburg, Va.
John Bullard, director of the New Orleans museum, said there was no plan for the exhibit to travel, although a French-American museum outside Paris and museums in Philadelphia and some of a dozen states formed in whole or in part from the purchase.
The 1803 purchase covered 828,000 square miles from the Gulf of Mexico to the Canadian border. The $15 million amounted to about 4 cents an acre.
"It was the greatest peacetime transfer of territory in history," Bullard said.
Organizers of the exhibit said French authorities showed little interest, possibly a reflection of the widespread opinion that Napoleon made a bad deal. He was known to have considered canceling his offer as Jefferson dithered about the constitutionality of buying the land, but the third president accepted before Napoleon backed out.
The impersonators made jokes about Napoleon's mindset during a news conference dialogue. Schneider's Napoleon referred stubbornly to the transaction as a "treaty," while Barker's Jefferson insisted on the word "purchase."
He told his adversary he bought the land with the help of a loan from a bank in Britain, whose forces eventually vanquished Napoleon 12 years later at Waterloo, Belgium.
 Load-Date: April 12, 2002

 

End of Document
