

Key developments in Iraq since the beginning of the war
The Associated Press
April 8, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1041 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Major events in Iraq since beginning of war:
March 19-20 - U.S. forces launch overnight airstrikes at sites near Baghdad where Saddam Hussein and top aides are thought to be sleeping. Ground war begins in afternoon near Kuwaiti border.
April 9 - Jubilant crowds greet U.S. troops in Baghdad, go on looting rampages, topple 40-foot statue of Saddam.
April 18 - First video and audio recordings by Saddam surface.
May 1 - President Bush, speaking on aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln, declares "major combat operations in Iraq have ended."
May 12 - L. Paul Bremer, longtime State Department official, replaces Retired Lt. Gen. Jay Garner as head of interim administration.
July 13 - U.S.-appointed 25-member national governing council of prominent Iraqis from diverse political and religious backgrounds takes office.
July 22 - Qusai Hussein, Saddam's son and heir apparent, reported killed along with older brother Odai in gunbattle with U.S. troops.
Aug. 7 - Bomb explodes outside the Jordanian Embassy, throwing cars onto rooftops and killing 19 people.
Aug. 19 - Truck bomb hits U.N. headquarters in Baghdad, killing 22, including top envoy Sergio Vieira de Mello. U.N. mission quits Iraq.
Aug. 29 - Car bomb explodes at Iraq's holiest shrine during Friday prayers, killing top Shiite cleric, Ayatollah Mohammed Baqir al-Hakim.
Sept. 3 - Military control of huge swath of Iraq handed over to Polish forces; members of Iraq's new Cabinet sworn in.
Oct. 27 - Four suicide bombers target Red Cross headquarters and four Iraqi police stations in Baghdad, killing 40.
Nov. 12 - Suicide bomber attacks headquarters of Italy's paramilitary police in southern city of Nasiriyah, killing more than 30.
Nov. 15 - Bremer and Iraqi Governing Council agree on plan to transfer power to provisional Iraqi government on July 1, 2004.
Nov. 27 - Bush pays a surprise 2 1/2 hour Thanksgiving visit to U.S. troops at Baghdad International Airport.
Dec. 13 - Saddam captured at 8:30 p.m. hiding in "spider hole" in Adwar, 10 miles south of Tikrit.
2004
Jan. 28 - British Prime Minister Tony Blair, dogged by failure to find weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, cleared of wrongdoing in suicide of British weapons inspector David Kelly.
Feb. 1 - Twin suicide bombers kill 109 at two Kurdish party offices in northern city of Irbil.
Feb. 2-3 - Bush and British government order separate investigations into intelligence failures in Iraq.
Feb. 10 - Truck bomb explodes outside police station in Iskandariyah, 30 miles south of Baghdad, killing 53.
Feb. 11 - Car bomb blows up in crowd of Iraqis waiting outside army recruiting center in Baghdad, killing 47.
March 2 - Series of coordinated blasts kill 181 people at shrines in Karbala and Baghdad as thousands of Shiite Muslim pilgrims gather for a religious festival.
March 8 - Iraqi Governing Council signs interim constitution for the country.
March 10 - Gunmen disguised as police kill two American coalition officials and their Iraqi translator south of Baghdad after stopping their car at a roadblock. The Americans were the first U.S. civilians from the occupation authority to be killed in Iraq.
March 12 - A roadside bomb kills two American soldiers and wounds three in Tikrit.
March 15 - Three American civilians are killed and two wounded in a drive-by shooting in the northern city of Mosul. They all worked for a non-governmental organization.
March 17 - A powerful car bomb destroys the five-story Mount Lebanon Hotel killing 7 and wounding 35.
March 20 - The first anniversary of the start of the war in Iraq. Two mortar rounds land in the headquarters of the U.S.-led coalition and a third strikes nearby killing two Iraqi civilians and wounding 10. About 130 Japanese troops enter Iraq to join a humanitarian mission in the southern city of Samawah. Tokyo has committed 1,000 military personnel to the reconstruction, their largest foreign military deployment since World War II.
March 22 - A car bomb explodes near a U.S. Air Force base north of Baghdad killing two Iraqi civilians and wounding 25 others. Two explosions in Basra wound 13 British soldiers. Two Finnish businessmen are shot and killed in Baghdad.
March 26 - Insurgents bomb an oil well in northern Iraq, sparking a 24-hour fire. In Fallujah, a U.S. Marine and an ABC freelance cameraman are killed during a firefight between American troops and Iraqi insurgents. Violence across Iraq leaves 18 others dead.
March 28 - The newspaper Al-Hawza is closed by the U.S. for allegedly inciting violence against coalition troops. The paper is owned by radical Shiite Muslim cleric Muqtada al-Sadr. The closure sparks large demonstrations outside the U.S. headquarters in Baghdad. In Mosul, gunmen attempt to assassinate Iraq's minister of public works, Nisreen Berwari, killing two in her convoy. She is unharmed.
March 31 - Gunmen in Fallujah attack cars carrying four American contractors. They are killed and their vehicles set on fire. Angry crowds drag the bodies through the streets, dismember and mutilate the corpses. In the same province, a bomb explodes under a U.S. military vehicle killing five soldiers.
April 3 - In a pre-dawn raid at his home in Najaf, Spanish forces arrest a senior aide to radical Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, prompting thousands to take to the streets.
April 4 - Clashes between rioters and troops in several cities kill at least 52 Iraqis, nine U.S. troops and one Salvadoran soldier.
April 5 - An Iraqi judge issues an arrest warrant for radical Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr for the slaying of another Shiite leader shortly after the U.S.-led invasion of the country. U.S. troops seal off the volatile city of Fallujah where gunfire and shelling are heard late into the night.
April 6 - Italian troops and Iraqi insurgents clash in the southern city of Nasiriyah, killing at least 15 Iraqis and wounding 35. In Amarah, followers of al-Sadr clash with British troops - 15 Iraqis die and eight are wounded. In Fallujah, U.S. planes firing rockets destroy four houses in two neighborhoods killing 26 Iraqis and wounded 30 others.
April 7 - In Ramadi, 12 Marines battling Suni insurgents are killed in two battles. U.S. Marines in a fierce battle in Fallujah fired rockets that hit a mosque and witnesses say as many as 40 people were killed.
 Load-Date: April 9, 2004

 

End of Document
