

Leaders set the European Union on the road to major expansion in coming years
December 15, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 622 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRUSSELS, Belgium
Body




The leaders of the 15 European Union nations set the EU on the path to expansion Saturday, pledging to make it a more open, efficient organization as it pushes eastward in the coming years.
To prevent the EU from becoming unwieldy when it nearly doubles its membership beginning in 2004, the leaders set guidelines for a convention that will gather next year to reform the union's administrative rules and define it - either as a tight-knit organization with strong central power or a limited, looser grouping.
Citizens in the EU want "more results, better responses to practical issues and not a European superstate or European institutions inveigling their way into every nook and cranny of life," the leaders said in the Laeken Declaration, named after the Brussels suburb where their two-day summit was held.
"There are weaknesses in the EU that must be eliminated," said Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt of Belgium, the current EU president and summit host. "It will be a process of one year of fundamental debate."
The EU leaders had lunch with the heads of the 13 candidates for membership and issued a statement saying negotiations with ten of them - Slovenia, Hungary, Estonia, Malta, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Poland, Slovakia, Latvia, and Lithuania - should be wrapped up next year, enabling them to join Jan. 1, 2004 after approval by EU member parliaments.
Bulgaria and Romania are not expected to join for at least three years after the others, and Turkey, which has serious economic and human rights problems, has not yet begun negotiations for membership.
The EU leaders named former French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing to head the debate at the convention, which is set to start March 1 and hammer out proposals to be considered in 2004.
More than 100 representatives of governments, the European Parliament, national legislatures and the candidate countries - excluding Turkey - will participate.
In the past decade, EU governments have consistently failed to agree on durable reforms amid discord over how much authority the organization should have and how much should be left to each nation.
Germany, Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands want to give more muscle to the EU's executive arm, the European Commission. Britain, France, Denmark and Sweden have strong reservations about giving the EU more powers at the expense of national governments.
The leaders also gave military clout to their common foreign policy Saturday by declaring operational their nascent European rapid-reaction corps. Though it won't meet its goal of being able to deploy 60,000 troops until 2003, the EU wanted to show it has progressed beyond the theoretical stage.
The EU says it can now field a small force on humanitarian or peacekeeping missions for a limited time. It set aside Greek objections to an agreement with NATO that would allow the EU automatic access to NATO assets such as planning, intelligence, communications and transport, hoping those objections can be overcome in the coming weeks.
The summit ended on a sour note when the leaders were unable to agree on which countries should play host to a number of new EU agencies.
As the leaders met in Belgian King Albert II's palace in Laeken, police detained 39 protesters in the Brussels area. Ten of them, all from Britain, were detained near the city's landmark Grand Place square and charged with possession of ingredients for Molotov cocktails, police said. The others could face charges in damages to a bank and cars parked nearby.
Demonstrations Thursday and Friday drew more than 90,000 protesters, and police estimated 2,100 protesters took part in three different demonstrations Saturday. The protesters took aim at world trade, unemployment and the war in Afghanistan.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos ABRU104-105,108,114
 Load-Date: December 16, 2001

 

End of Document
