

Lech Walesa recalls how pope emboldened Poles by urging them to dare to 'change the face of the Earth'
The Associated Press
April 3, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 392 words
Byline: By KATARZYNA MALA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WARSAW, Poland
Body




As Lech Walesa and his trade union activists sought to throw off Communism 36 years ago, newly elected pope John Paul II visited his homeland and told fellow Poles to dare to "change the face of the Earth."
"We had no strength, no great will, I had only 10 people who were willing to work along with me and fight for freedom in a nation of 40 million," Walesa told the Associated Press in a telephone interview Sunday.
Then, Walesa said, the pope made his legendary 1979 trip to Warsaw and celebrated a Mass that drew a million people in a capital then behind the Iron Curtain.
"The entire world was looking at Poland and saying, 'Such a communist country but everyone is going to see the pope,"' Walesa recalled.
"The Holy Father told us: 'Don't be afraid, change the face of the Earth, be strong believers.' Then all of a sudden people thought about his words and woke up. They regained the will for action.
"If this had not occurred, communism would have fallen, but in some 50, 60 years. Communism did not fall because of the words, but the words helped. As it is said, 'First there was the Word and then it became flesh."'
Though John Paul did not urge an open uprising against Poland's atheist government, anti-communist groups like Walesa's used his call to "change the face of the Earth" as a rallying cry as they used strikes and other protests against the regime.
Pressure built until strikes in Gdansk in late 1988 forced the government into bargaining with the opposition in February 1989. The crumbling of party authority gathered speed and spread to Czechoslovakia, Hungary, East Germany, Romania and Bulgaria.
"It's hard to image that Poland's road … could be as it is today without the pope," Bronislaw Geremek, a former foreign minister and a leading Solidarity activist, told the AP. "Thanks to him we were the first communist nation which showed the world how to free itself from that system."
Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a Solidarity activist and Poland's first democratically elected prime minister after 1989, said John Paul "raised the dignity of many religious and political issues within the modern world."
Walesa, 61, said he needed time to come to grips with John Paul's death.
"I am most grateful that I lived in the same era as the pope and that fate included me in the work that he did, most of all that I got to know this great person," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo of April 2: WAR156; NYP214
 Load-Date: April 4, 2005

 

End of Document
