

Man in the News: As he did on the track, Sebastian Coe comes from behind for Olympic victory
The Associated Press
July 7, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 704 words
Byline: By JOHN PYE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: SINGAPORE
Body




Sebastian Coe received an overwhelming vote of disapproval from the people of Falmouth in the last election he took part in.
Coe, then a member of Parliament for the Cornish fishing port, was ousted in a huge swing against his Conservative Party in 1997.
The electorate was global this time, and Coe, British Prime Minister Tony Blair - whose Labor party put him out of office - and the London bid team combined to win it by a 50-54 margin Wednesday. The members of the International Olympic Committee awarded London the 2012 Summer Games over Paris in one of the tightest and most prestigious contests in IOC history, and Coe's work as the bid leader was a major reason.
The former Olympic champion was asked to compare winning the bid with his two gold-medal performances in the 1980s.
"It's almost entirely on a different planet," Coe said after a pause.
Coe and his colleagues delivered the youth of Britain a chance to compete in the Olympics at home, something he's sure will inspire a new generation of athletes.
"It's something I spent most of my working life trying to do something about," he said.
The London delegation came to Singapore as the lead challenger to favored Paris, in a strong field of candidates that included New York, Madrid and Moscow.
Even when he was bunkered down in an old army fortress last week near Singapore's business district, at a time when Paris was the favorite in betting odds, Coe still thought he had a better shot at winning than he did the last time he stood for election.
"This is different. This is very winnable," he said. "Last time, the people spoke and I was out - boy, did they speak!"
Coe obviously listened, and learned about how to read an electorate.
It was Britain's fourth bid for the Olympics since it hosted the 1948 Games.
Coe based the London campaign on an appeal to youth. He tried to sway voters with recollections of how his career was inspired by watching, on a black-and-white TV, two people from his hometown compete at the 1968 Olympics.
He didn't discuss his Olympic victories, each coming after he'd been defeated in 800-meter races he'd been favored to win, or of his long-running duels with fellow Briton Steve Ovett that spanned the 1970s and 80s.
It helped that his back-to-back 1,500-meter triumphs at Moscow in 1980 and Los Angeles in 1984 - when he timed his late kicks to perfection - earned him admiration and many friends in the Olympic movement.
Chief among those were IOC president Jacques Rogge, and Juan Antonio Samaranch Jr., the son of the former IOC president and one of the key players in Madrid's bid team.
Ever the diplomat, Coe made an alliance with Blair, ensuring the British government was right behind the bid. He also co-opted England soccer captain David Beckham and a host of Olympic champions.
And he brought them all to Singapore, convincing Blair that his presence was needed to swing votes before the prime minister jetted off to Scotland to host the G-8 summit.
Samaranch said Coe and Blair made a difference to London's bid.
"If your prime minister was here meeting with members, and he's been very successful in that effort, it's saying he has great faith in Sebastian Coe is a great organizer," Samaranch said. "I really admire Sebastian Coe."
Samaranch said the reason for his admiration was clear.
"You remember him running the 1,500? I don't have to say any more, that's inspirational enough," he said. "He is the epitome of Olympism."
Australian IOC member John Coates, who helped Sydney land the 2000 Games, said Coe presided over an excellent technical bid.
But "the presentation certainly helped in the second and third preferences - they had a very good story," he said. "That's important."
Rogge recalled his first meeting with Coe, near the door of a restaurant at the 1980 Moscow Olympics, after Coe had won his first gold medal.
"I didn't know Seb personally, he didn't know me but someone introduced us and we started chatting," Rogge said at a news conference with the London team. "And Seb, we couldn't have believed at that time that 25 years later we would sign the host city contract."
Rogge will get to see plenty more of Coe. The British government has confirmed Coe will lead the organizing committee for the 2012 Games.
 Load-Date: July 8, 2005

 

End of Document
