

Mayhem reigned in Milosevic's hide-out before his arrest; EDITOR'S NOTE - AP's chief correspondent in Belgrade covered Slobodan Milosevic's arrest from the first hours of the armed
April 1, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 939 words
Body




---
By DUSAN STOJANOVIC
Associated Press Writer
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia (AP) - Slobodan Milosevic counted his bullets and weighed his options.
Outside the cavernous villa where he had barricaded himself along with dozens of armed bodyguards, riot police pulled woolen masks over their faces and prepared for a new assault. Inside, government negotiators worked to persuade him to give himself up and avoid a bloody confrontation.
As the pressure mounted, Milosevic brandished the pistol he always carried with him, at one point reportedly threatening to kill himself, his wife and daughter. When he finally caved and was led away, shots rang out behind him, hitting no one. It was his daughter, gun in hand.
"Considering how many armed people he had in the house, it could have been blood bath if the security troops attacked," said Goran Vesic, a ranking police official.
---
Milosevic had time to prepare for his last stand. Though ousted in October, he was relatively free until Friday, even as investigations gathered steam on charges of abuse of power, corruption and other crimes during his 13-year tenure.
Despite constant police surveillance of his upscale villa, he went where he wanted, at least within Belgrade, attending meetings of his Socialist Party and lunching with comrades.
The trap snapped shut Friday evening. Black police jeeps moved up to the cast-iron back gate filled with plainclothes special police, some of them former top members of Milosevic's loyal paramilitary. But this time, they were on the other side.
An assault by masked agents followed early Saturday, repelled by wildly firing loyalists grouped around their former leader.
Pacing the chilly halls of the sprawling modernistic villa, Milosevic considered his options: stand firm at the cost of injury or death - or surrender and start a process that ultimately could lead to trial by the U.N. war crimes court in The Hague, Netherlands, for Kosovo atrocities.
"I have 25 bullets," witnesses heard Milosevic mutter as he sprawled on the white living-room sofa and cradled his chrome-plated Crvena Zastava pistol. "Twenty are for the assailants - the rest for my family and me."
Yugoslavia's top police chief, Zoran Zivkovic, braced for the worst.
"I thought Milosevic would act irrationally, like he did throughout his rule," he said. "I'm happy that this time I was wrong."
---
Heavily sedated by tranquilizers and whiskey, Milosevic was white-faced and shaking. Puffing on a Cuban cigar, he tried to comfort his wife, Mirjana Markovic, and crying daughter, Marija, both in a state of shock. Also in the house was the wife of their troublesome son, Marko, who fled to Russia soon after the Oct. 5 uprising, and Milosevic's 2-year-old grandson.
Regrouping after beating back the police assault, Milosevic's guards took up strategic positions on the roof and in the yard of the round mansion built in 1978 for the late Yugoslav Communist dictator Josip Broz Tito. They were armed with rocket launchers, sniper rifles, submachine guns and hand grenades.
As the pressure built, they made wild plans - like breaking into the thick-walled metal vaults holding valuables Tito received during his reign, including Soviet dictator Josef Stalin's diamond-encrusted ceremonial saber.
They weren't after the loot. Because a warren of tunnels from the vaults lead to the now-closed 25th of May Museum for Tito, they planned to use the passages as escape routes in case of renewed police attack.
But the vaults' thick doors withstood their gunfire.
The gunmen were under the command of Milosevic's troubled daughter, Marija, 32, and his loyalist-turned-bodyguard, Sinisa Vucinic. They thought Milosevic would rather die than surrender.
---
In the end, it was just another case of dramatic brinkmanship by the man whose career was defined by going to the limit, surviving and coming back for more.
Before dawn Sunday, Milosevic, sleepless and fragile, suddenly changed his mind after hours of badgering by his Socialist Party ally, Branislav Ivkovic, and government negotiator Cedomir Jovanovic. Jovanovic promised a fair trial and better-than-average prison conditions if Milosevic would end the standoff without a fight.
"OK, I'll go," Milosevic said win a calm voice. It was 3 a.m., an hour past the deadline the government had quietly set for his surrender.
His wife and daughter burst into tears. Grabbing her own gun, a small Colt tucked in her bra, Marija screamed at three masked police officers to back off as they took her father by his arms and hustled him outside to a parked Audi with tinted windows.
Leading the arrest operation and a convoy of four cars that drove Milosevic to Belgrade's drab Central Prison was "Legija," - Legion in Serbian - commander of the elite Red Berets who spread fear and terror in non-Serbs during Milosevic's rule. His role in the final demise of Milosevic was fitting for a man who ruled by the sword.
Shaking and swaying, Marija squeezed off five shots toward a police officer as the motorcade sped off, kicking up gravel. She missed.
---
Milosevic, without handcuffs, was led into Belgrade's Central Prison past chestnut trees popping their first buds. After fingerprinting and mug shots, he was examined by a prison doctor who diagnosed high blood pressure.
He was led into a solitary prison cell with iron doors and a small window on the first floor - a special treat for a special prisoner. Most other inmates are confined to three dank and gloomy underground floors.
"When Milosevic understood that he has no options and that we would arrest him at any price, he in the end made a reasonable decision," said Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo BEL217
 Load-Date: April 2, 2001

 

End of Document
