

Mrs. Bush celebrates the written word at the National Book Festival
The Associated Press
October 4, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 475 words
Byline: By JESSE J. HOLLAND, Associated Press Writer
Body




WASHINGTON (AP) - Reading and sharing stories brings out the best in people, first lady Laura Bush told authors, readers and prose lovers gathered Saturday for her weekend book festival aimed at celebrating the written word.
"Today, we celebrate our freedom and the power of books to bring us together," the president's wife said as she officially opened the third annual National Book Festival with an opening ceremony in the East Room of the White House.
The festival, a daylong event on the National Mall, brings authors, poets and book lovers to the capital to talk about their love of the written word, which brings out "the best in all of us," Mrs. Bush said.
Characterized as "first reader of our land" by Librarian of Congress James H. Billington, Mrs. Bush, a former librarian and teacher, praised American authors for their "tales of mystery, history and heroism."
"By reading together and sharing stories, we become part of the fabric of the American community," Mrs. Bush said.
She just returned from a book festival in Russia with Lyudmila Putin, wife of President Vladimir Putin of Russia. Motivated after attending Mrs. Bush's book festival last year, the Russian first lady organized her own festival in Moscow.
"A good book is like an unreachable itch: You just can't leave it alone," Mrs. Bush said.
In honor of Mrs. Bush's promotion of reading, National Basketball Association Hall of Famer Bob Lanier also presented her with a red, white and blue USA Basketball team jersey with "Laura Bush" on the back. "We're all all-stars in this room. Reading all-stars," said Lanier, who has written several books and helps run the NBA's youth reading programs.
Library of Congress officials said they expect as many as 60,000 people to attend the festival on a gray, cloudy day in the nation's capital.
The festival, modeled after those Mrs. Bush started in Texas when her husband was governor, features more than 80 authors, illustrators, poets and storytellers who share their works.
"Stories beckon us to toss all the cares in the world - work, even sleep - to read and discover," she said at the Library of Congress, repository of 126 million books, recordings, photographs, maps, manuscripts and more.
Novelist Tom Clancy, Cherokee storyteller Gayle Ross, nonfiction author and novelist Stephen L. Carter, CBS newsman Bob Schieffer and actress Julie Andrews, who writes children's books, joined Mrs. Bush in launching the festival.
At the Friday event, the first lady Mrs. Bush recited a poem she said President Bush greeted her with when she returned recently from France, where President Jacques Chirac had kissed her hand twice. It read in part:
"Roses are red/Violets are blue/Oh my, lump in the bed/How I've missed you."
"Roses are redder/bluer am I/Seeing you kissed by that charming French guy."
On the Net:
Library of Congress: http://www.loc.gov 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos GH101-102, EJV101
 Load-Date: October 5, 2003

 

End of Document
