

Names In The Game the NBA's all-interview team and the Atlanta Braves.
May 23, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 754 words
Dateline: TORONTO
Body




David Wells doesn't expect a warm welcome when he returns to Toronto.
Wells will start at SkyDome for the first time Wednesday since being traded to the Chicago White Sox on Jan. 14 for injured pitcher Mike Sirotka, outfielder Brian Simmons and reliever Kevin Beirne.
"There will be a bunch of screaming meemies shouting things out at me, but I expect it," Wells told two Chicago reporters late Monday.
"It's my atmosphere," he said. "That just builds up my energy. You never know exactly what's going to happen."
Wells insulted the Blue Jays organization before the trade and said Toronto fans "stink" for booing the club when its playoff chase ended.
"There are some good fans here, but there are some real bad fans here," Wells said. "It was the bad fans who were being heard."
Wells didn't have any kind words for Blue Jays general manager Gord Ash either.
"I did a lot for this organization when I was here," Wells said. "(Ash) said they were going to get some help (before last summer's trade deadline) and they didn't.
"When I said a few things about it, they got (ticked) off."
---
MONTE CARLO, Monaco (AP) - Tiger Woods won Sportsman of the Year at the 2001 Laureus World Sports Awards.
Woods, who has won the last four major golf titles, beat British Olympic rowing champion Steve Redgrave, Formula One driver Michael Schumacher, and swimmers Ian Thorpe and Pieter van den Hoogenband for the title.
Woods also won the inaugural award last year.
The Laureus world sports academy presented the awards, which honor the most distinguished athletes in a variety of disciplines, at a star-studded ceremony in Monaco. Among the guests were Michael Douglas, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Monica Bellucci and Prince Albert of Monaco.
The fledgling Laureus Group, which gives money to sports programs that promote social change, is composed of 40 former sports greats, including Michael Jordan, Pele, Edwin Moses, Martina Navratilova and Mark Spitz.
---
KANSAS CITY, Kan. (AP) - Judging by the Kansas City Sports Commission's packed luncheon, NASCAR will be bigger in the area than the Chiefs, the Royals and George Brett's Baseball Hall of Fame induction celebration.
Almost 1,000 people, paying $65 a ticket, squeezed themselves into a garage on the infield of the new Kansas Speedway to have lunch with some of the sport's biggest stars on Tuesday.
"There is a vacuum in the Heartland for this sport and NASCAR," said Kevin Gray, executive director of the sports commission. "This is a great turnout. A lot of people are very enthused."
For years, the commission has sponsored kickoff luncheons for the Chiefs, Royals, and college basketball and football seasons. It staged a big event two years ago to mark Brett's induction into the Hall. The most any of those events ever drew was about 600 people.
"This was almost double anything we'd drawn before," Gray said. "If we'd had a bigger facility we could have sold more."
The Speedway, which will host about four major events each year including the Winston Cup series in September, will have a tremendous affect on the economy.
"The economic level for the area will be about $300 million a year," said Gray. "The Royals and Chiefs combined are about $256 million (a year)."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Karl Malone of the Utah Jazz was selected to the NBA's all-interview team for the 12th consecutive season.
Joining Malone on the team are Chris Webber of the Sacramento Kings, Kevin Garnett of the Minnesota Timberwolves, Ray Allen of the Milwaukee Bucks and Avery Johnson of the San Antonio Spurs.
The first-team, all-interview coach is the Bucks' George Karl, an eight-time selection.
The voting panel consisted of sports writers and broadcasters who regularly cover the NBA.
---
SAN FRANCISCO DE MACORIS, Dominican Republic (AP) - The Atlanta Braves opened a new sports complex in the Dominican Republic with the aim of training players for their major league club.
The Las Caobas academy has four professional-style stadiums, a modern hotel and a huge observation tower to help Braves officials monitor the players' performance.
The president of the club, Stan Kasten, and the vice president and general manager, John Schuerholz, attended the opening in San Francisco de Macoris, located 85 miles north of Santo Domingo.
Schuerholz said the team had chosen the Caribbean country as its center of operations in Latin America. The Los Angeles Dodgers, Oakland Athletics and Arizona Diamondbacks also have similar facilities in the Dominican Republic, but officials said the Braves complex is larger and more modern.
 Load-Date: May 24, 2001

 

End of Document
