

New York City officials and architects fine-tuning the plan for the World Trade Center site
The Associated Press
August 1, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 408 words
Byline: By KAREN MATTHEWS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




City officials and architects were fine-tuning the plan for the World Trade Center site, with a renowned Spanish architect picked to design the transit hub and a discussion emerging over where the 1,776-foot memorial tower should stand.
Architect Santiago Calatrava was selected Thursday to design a rebuilt transit complex at the site, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey announced.
The agency's board voted to begin negotiations with Calatrava and the engineering firms DMJM + Harris and STV Group, Inc. to collaborate on the project with Daniel Libeskind, who designed the conceptual plan for the site.
Also Thursday, Deputy Mayor Daniel Doctoroff said in a letter to Port Authority executive director Joseph Seymour that Libeskind's tower should remain at the northwest corner of the trade center site.
The letter appeared to put City Hall in conflict with Larry Silverstein, the private developer who holds the lease. Doctoroff's comments were a response to Silverstein's stated desire to move the 1,776-foot tower from the spot designated by Libeskind.
Doctoroff, who was out of town, did not attend Thursday's meeting. Gerald McKelvey, a spokesman for Silverstein, said "we have not seen the letter and we have no comment."
Doctoroff said placing the tower on West Street, as Libeskind envisioned, will allow the building not to be "hemmed in by nearby buildings." Silverstein would like the tower moved closer to the transit hub.
Silverstein's hand-picked architect, David Childs, was given the lead role in developing the tower, according to an agreement reached this month. He will work in collaboration with Libeskind.
In his letter, Doctoroff also said the 16-acre site cannot accommodate the 10 million square feet of office space sought by Silverstein.
"Placing 10 million square feet of office space on the site destroys the possibility of achieving important goals, including creating bright, open streets with lively pedestrian activity and creating a grand point of arrival for Lower Manhattan," he said.
A native of Spain, Calatrava has designed numerous bridges, terminals and public buildings, including the Bridge of Europe, in Orleans, France; the City of Arts and Sciences Complex in Valencia, Spain; and the Oriente railway station in Lisbon, Portugal.
His first building in the United States was an addition to the Milwaukee Art Museum, which opened in 2001.
On the Net:
Santiago Calatrava's Web site: http://www.calatrava.com 
 Load-Date: August 2, 2003

 

End of Document
