

New law of succession in Monaco keeps the crown in the family
May 15, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 447 words
Byline: By PAMELA SAMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Royal-watchers take heart: the principality of Monaco has changed its succession law, a move that keeps the jet-setting Grimaldi family on the throne even if Crown Prince Albert never has children.
An amendment to Monaco's constitution that was quietly enacted by the 18-member Parliament last month allows power to pass from a reigning prince who has no descendants to his siblings, a palace spokesman said Wednesday.
The palace contends the amendment, enacted on April 2, was made to return to tradition and clarify the succession system - even though reigning Prince Rainier has already named Albert as his successor.
"We are coming back to a situation that was in place for 700 years, from the beginning of the monarchy until 1918," when the tradition was interrupted as a result of World War I, palace spokesman Armand Deus said.
Deus denied suggestions that the change was put in place to ensure the House of Grimaldi keeps control of the glitzy principality after Albert - a 43-year-old bachelor - ascends to the throne if he remains childless.
Under the old constitution, ascension was restricted to a monarch's children. Now, however, Albert's sisters - Princesses Caroline and Stephanie and their children - can succeed Albert if he dies without heirs.
The change does not affect Monaco's relationship with its neighbor, France. A 1918 treaty required Monaco to fall under French protection if the throne became vacant. But officials of France and Monaco say the treaty was changed to remove any language that would have subjected Monaco to French rule.
One of Europe's oldest royal families, the Grimaldis have also been one its most adored - ever since Rainier's fairy-tale wedding to American movie star Grace Kelly in 1956. Princess Grace died in a car accident in 1982.
Recently, Rainier - who has ruled for 53 years - has been dogged by health problems. On Tuesday, he was hospitalized for tests after suffering from fatigue and bronchitis.
He has hinted he would like to hand power over to Albert. Two years ago, Rainier said in a newspaper interview that Albert needed to have an heir before he could take the throne.
"I do not want to hang onto my function for life. Prince Albert has all the qualities to become one day the next sovereign prince. But, beforehand, I would like him to have an heir because that is essential for the future of the principality and of our family," Rainier was quoted as saying in the French daily Le Figaro.
Monaco, smaller than New York's Central Park, was once a sleepy resort favored by European royalty. Now, it is a popular tax haven with celebrities, bankers and sports figures. Monaco's laws guarantee anonymity in banking transactions.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos PAR115
 Load-Date: May 16, 2002

 

End of Document
