

Norman Granz, who helped bring jazz to the public and equality to the business, dies at 83
November 24, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 295 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Impresario Norman Granz, who helped make jazz more accessible to the public while making the music business fairer to black performers, has died in Geneva, Switzerland, of complications from cancer. He was 83.
Granz died Thursday, said Virginia Wicks, a Los Angeles publicist with a long association with Granz.
Granz owned four labels - Clef, Norgran, Verve and Pablo - and at one time or another recorded most of the major names in jazz, including Louis Armstrong, Count Basie, Duke Ellington, Ella Fitzgerald, Dizzy Gillespie, Billie Holiday, Charlie Parker and Oscar Peterson.
Many historians credit him with bringing top jazz performers in integrated bands into venues across the country through a series called Jazz at the Philharmonic.
Decades before the peak of the civil rights movement, Granz's efforts helped end a system in which white performers generally earned far more than blacks. He insisted on equality in pay, dining and accommodations for his musicians.
In 1947, he told Down Beat magazine that he lost $100,000, then a sizable sum, by turning down bookings in segregated concert halls.
"He held the U.S. accountable for the notion of freedom, and he did this years before Jackie Robinson broke the color barrier in baseball," said Tad Hershorn, an archivist at the Institute of Jazz Studies at Rutgers University.
"Time and time again, Norman stated that his three goals were to promote integration, present good jazz and to show that good money could be made from promoting good jazz. He succeeded in all three," Hershorn said.
Granz, a Los Angeles native of Ukrainian-Jewish ancestry, made a fortune from the music he grew to love as a young man. In addition to recording jazz artists, he managed some, including Fitzgerald.
He is survived by his wife, Greta.
 Load-Date: November 25, 2001

 

End of Document
