

Northern Ireland's unlikely peace dealers: the demagogue Paisley, the IRA strategist Adams
The Associated Press
December 2, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 822 words
Byline: By SHAWN POGATCHNIK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BELFAST, Northern Ireland
Body




When Gerry Adams and the Rev. Ian Paisley first clashed, Northern Ireland was marching toward chaos.
In 1964, Paisley led protests against the display of an Irish flag at the Sinn Fein office in Belfast - the first major street confrontation between the British Protestants who controlled Northern Ireland and the Catholics who dreamed of breaking Britain's grip.
Adams was in the crowd of impressionable Catholic teens who watched police twice smash down the office doors to remove the flag.
Forty years later Adams, 56, and Paisley, 78, hold the key to peace in Northern Ireland. And in a reflection of the deep bitterness here it is considered remarkable that they're finally negotiating openly - if still not face-to-face - about sharing power as the 1998 Good Friday accord envisioned.
Both have traveled from the fringes of politics to command majorities within their communities. They also both are blamed - despite their denials - for fueling violence that has claimed 3,600 lives.
This week, Sinn Fein leader Adams and Democratic Unionist leader Paisley have shuttled between Belfast and London for talks with British Prime Minister Tony Blair, who thinks the IRA is on the verge of disarming and disbanding as a key part of an emerging deal that has been years in the making. Success or failure is expected to be announced within days.
Adams was a Catholic west Belfast teen in the mid-1960s when he joined the IRA. The illegal group and its Sinn Fein political front were a barely noticed, underground club consumed with utopian notions of uniting Catholics and Protestants in Marxist revolution.
Paisley, son of a Baptist minister and a preacher himself since 16, was running the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster, which denounced Catholicism and any bridging of Northern Ireland's religious divide.
The dominant Protestant churches considered Paisley an offensive crank, and he was kicked out of Northern Ireland's major fraternal group, the Orange Order. But with his towering physical presence, caustic wit and rare gift for bombastic oratory, Paisley stood out in any crowd.
From the pulpit and street corner, his sermons inspired a generation of anti-Catholic paramilitary groups that were ultimately responsible for nearly 1,000 killings.
In August 1969, Belfast and Northern Ireland's second city, Londonderry, exploded in riots. Britain deployed its army as would-be peacekeepers and erected a barbed-wire "peace line" on an ethnically cleansed new front line in west Belfast. Both moves were supposed to be temporary.
Today that line stands 30 feet high, extends for miles and has been joined by more than 20 smaller "peace lines" across Belfast.
The paths taken by Adams and Paisley help to explain why sectarian divisions have grown so entrenched.
The IRA, seeking to abolish Northern Ireland, began bombing businesses and killing police officers in 1970, then British troops in 1971. Soon its list of so-called "legitimate targets" was stretched to include much of civilian life in Northern Ireland and England.
By 1972, Northern Ireland's deadliest year, Adams, then just 23, was considered so important to the IRA that he was freed from prison and flown by the Royal Air Force to London for the IRA's first negotiations.
When Britain failed to meet its demands, the IRA responded with Bloody Friday: More than 20 no-warning bombs across Belfast within an hour that killed nine people and wounded scores.
Paisley, now undisputed champion of the Protestant mob, launched the Democratic Unionists to rival the more flexible Ulster Unionists - the party instrumental in founding Northern Ireland as a Protestant-majority territory in 1921.
When moderate Protestants and Catholics created Northern Ireland's first power-sharing government in 1974, the IRA kept mounting attacks and Paisley's camp directed strikes and street blockades that brought Northern Ireland to a standstill. Power-sharing collapsed.
Adams, in jail for most of the mid-1970s, eventually concluded that the IRA couldn't win without embracing electoral politics. In the 1980s, he outmaneuvered older die-hards within Sinn Fein, building it into a real party that contested elections. He persuaded majorities on the IRA's seven-man command to back cease-fires in 1994 and 1997. That helped Sinn Fein win a role in talks on Northern Ireland's future.
Paisley withdrew his party from negotiations as soon as Sinn Fein arrived.
But both parties fought the elections that followed the Good Friday pact and won enough votes to merit two posts each in the 12-member administration established in 1999.
The coalition never worked properly and collapsed two years ago. And a legislative election last year confirmed the public's increasing divisions, with the Democratic Unionists and Sinn Fein becoming the biggest factions on either side.
The stage was set for this year's glacially slow courtship between two men who, because Paisley still refuses, have yet to converse.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos LJDM107
 Load-Date: December 3, 2004

 

End of Document
