

One month after the Kursk was raised, cause of the Russian nuclear sub's sinking remains a mystery
November 10, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 739 words
Byline: By VLADIMIR ISACHENKOV, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




A month after the charred and mangled Kursk nuclear submarine was hoisted from an Arctic seabed, investigators still cannot pinpoint the cause of the catastrophe but say new evidence shows the crew struggled for life, donning oxygen masks and unrolling fire hoses to fight a blaze that reached more than 14,000 degrees.
The submarine's hulk was hoisted from the Barents Sea floor Oct. 8 and brought to a dry dock near Murmansk more than a year after it exploded and sank during naval maneuvers, killing all 118 aboard. Investigators have pulled 56 bodies from the vessel since it was raised. Twelve others were removed by divers last year.
Investigators discovered more bodies in the stern sections than expected, indicating some sailors from the forward compartments managed to race backward in the two minutes and 15 seconds that separated two blasts that crippled and sank the Kursk.
Prosecutor General Vladimir Ustinov said the second explosion sent a huge fireball through the Kursk's hull, raising the temperature inside to 14,432 degrees and pulverizing all crew in the forward sections.
"What happened inside these compartments was hell," Ustinov said.
At least 23 sailors survived the explosions, according to letters found in the wreck, which described their agony in the pitch-dark, near-freezing sections of the stricken craft.
Investigators who retrieved the bodies said some seamen put on oxygen masks and unfolded fire hoses in a desperate attempt to fight the blaze ignited by the explosions.
Ustinov said that within eight hours of the blasts, the entire submarine was flooded by water seeping in through cracks in the hull. However, most men in the stern died earlier of carbon monoxide fumes from the fire.
The main ship log and any notes left by Capt. Gennady Lyachin and other senior officers in the control room disappeared in the fireball.
"We see absolutely nothing new inside the submarine now," said Deputy Prime Minister Ilya Klebanov, who is in charge of the Kursk probe in the Russian Cabinet. He said everything inside the submarine was simulated early last year.
Officials have said for months that the Aug. 12, 2000, disaster was triggered by the explosion of a practice torpedo that led to the detonation of combat torpedoes in the bow.
But they are still unable to settle on one of three possible causes of the initial explosion - an internal flaw in the practice torpedo or perhaps a collision with another vessel or a World War II mine.
"There is no answer today," Klebanov said in the interview posted on Russia's official Web site about the Kursk.
The Kursk's twin nuclear reactors have remained safely shut down and no radiation leaks have been reported. Specialists have retrieved 16 of the submarine's 22 Granit supersonic cruise missiles, and the navy is planning to cut out the remaining six.
The disfigured torpedo section, which could contain a key to the cause of the disaster, was sawed off and left on the seabed out of fear it could break off during the salvage operation and destabilize the lifting. The navy plans to raise some of its fragments next year.
Immediately after the disaster, Russian admirals insisted that the most likely cause was a collision with a Western submarine, which allegedly was stalking the Kursk in a Cold War-style cat-and-mouse game. Both the United States and Britain had their submarines in the Barents Sea, but both countries have denied any involvement in the catastrophe.
The collision theory was ridiculed by many specialists, who pointed out that a foreign submarine wouldn't have been able to limp away from a collision with the much heavier, 18,000-ton Kursk, one of the world's largest submarines.
When Russian television first showed the Kursk remains in dock, much attention was focused on a dent clearly visible on its forward part. But prosecutors quickly ruled out that it was a mark left by a collision. Klebanov said it could have been caused by the vacuum effect from explosions inside.
Most experts agree that a torpedo malfunction was the most plausible cause of the disaster. The torpedo was propelled by highly volatile hydrogen peroxide, which in case of a leak could have caused a powerful explosion of the kind that shattered the Kursk.
A leak of hydrogen peroxide from a burst pipe caused the 1955 sinking of the British submarine HMS Sidon, in which 13 men died. Britain stopped using the chemical after the accident, but Russia continued to use it.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY190
 Load-Date: November 11, 2001

 

End of Document
