

Out of a clear blue sky: Watching the aircraft - and the anti-aircraft fire
October 6, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 425 words
Byline: By AMIR SHAH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KABUL, Afghanistan
Body




They didn't run in panic; they have grown accustomed to this sort of thing. Instead, Kabul residents gazed skyward - bearded men, young boys, women in veils, watching the airplane and the attempts to shoot it down.
When an airplane streaked across the blue sky above the Afghan capital on Saturday afternoon - airspace long since shut down by the ruling Taliban - many residents thought it was an American plane heralding the start of war. Another war.
"We have seen so much fighting, now no one is afraid of death," said Najibullah, a mechanic who uses only one name, watching the scene unfold with his three young children.
"Nobody is afraid of the bombing," he said. "Who cares about the attack?"
It wasn't an attack, but it was mysterious. While the airplane appeared to be a military reconnaissance craft, there was no definitive indication of where it came from or what it was doing.
For many Afghans, war is the rule and peace the exception. It takes more than a plane flying over to genuinely unnerve people - especially in Kabul, whose buildings are pocked with ample evidence of previous wars.
During a thunderous 25-minute barrage of anti-aircraft fire, hardly anyone was seen running in panic or trying to duck for cover. Instead, residents streamed into the streets and onto rooftops to watch.
Thousands of feet above them, they saw a tiny metallic pinpoint of white - the airplane, leaving a contrail behind it.
Taliban soldiers fired with anti-aircraft guns from three or four positions. But the slow-moving plane, which they later claimed was on a spying mission, was beyond their reach.
Minutes later, the Taliban also fired two decades-old British-made missile, which also missed the target. The missiles were given to Afghan guerrillas in early 1980s when they were battling Soviet troops in one of the hottest parts of the Cold War.
"We have seen so many Russian planes - now it is an American," said Bara Allayia, a shopkeeper, laughing as he watched the sky. "I must say, it seems a beautiful plane."
Last month, the Taliban said they shot down a spy plane over northern Afghanistan. The United States acknowledged it had lost contact with an unmanned reconnaissance plane but said it had no reason to believe it was shot down.
Soon after Saturday's plane disappeared from view, people went back to what they were doing, discussing the prospects of U.S. strikes and the possible Taliban response.
Within hours, life had returned to normal - or what passes for normal in Kabul, the capital of what is now the most isolated country in the world.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo KAB101;LON121
 Load-Date: October 7, 2001

 

End of Document
