

Outside the law in the contract cleaning trade
The Associated Press
October 30, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 520 words
Byline: By ADAM GELLER, AP Business Writer
Body




When investigators in north Florida began tracking six men wanted for recruiting and employing illegal workers on contract cleaning crews, at first they could find just two.
Then they found a third, Petr Pospisil - shot to death, a single bullet through the head, his body buried in the woods across the state line in Alabama.
The case, which culminated with a murder trial in August in Pensacola, Fla., is one of four in the past few years that highlight the widespread, sometimes shady practice of funneling eastern Europeans and other foreigners without working papers into cleaning jobs at U.S. retailers, hotels and restaurants.
The practice won wide attention with last week's arrest of 245 allegedly illegal workers at 58 Wal-Mart stores. But it was not the retailer's first experience with such trouble.
Last week's crackdown is linked to a previous case, rooted in Pennsylvania and implicating a web of two dozen connected firms with contracts to clean more than 80 Wal-Mart stores.
Other such cases:
- In Jacksonville, Fla., two men pleaded guilty last year to illegally employing foreign workers, most of them Czech, to clean hotels, restaurants and discount stores including Wal-Marts. The men, Ivo Bukovcak and Jiri Gruner, negotiated with clients to supply cleaning workers for $7.50 or $8 an hour, then paid the workers $5.50 an hour.
Investigators' search for four other men led them to an American computer programmer, who in turn showed them where to find Pospisil's body.
In a trial that concluded in August in Pensacola, the programmer, Matthew McKinney, who worked for Pospisil, was convicted of second-degree murder. McKinney insisted during the trial that the murder was committed by Vladimir Janko, one of the other men wanted by investigators in Jacksonville.
Janko, who has apparently fled the country, was angry at Pospisil for taking $90,000 in cleaning profits, McKinney told investigators. He is awaiting sentencing.
- In Norfolk, Va., a Slovak national, Lubomir Chocholak, pleaded guilty in January to aiding in the forgery of immigration documents, in another case alleging the recruitment of eastern Europeans to work illegally cleaning Wal-Mart, Target and other stores.
Chocholak and his cleaning business were part of a ring that enlisted Czechs, Slovaks, Russians and Poles, setting each of them up as a subcontractor so that no one technically worked for anyone else, according to court records and people familiar with the case.
"Based on what I know of Chocholak's case, I can't imagine that some of the employers didn't have their suspicions," said Larry Shelton, a public defender in Norfolk who represented Chocholak in the case.
Chocholak was sentenced to 27 months in prison but given credit for time served.
- In a case now drawing to a close in Chicago, Algimantas Kondratravicius, a Lithuanian citizen, has pleaded guilty to conspiring to recruit workers from eastern Europe to employ them illegally, cleaning Wal-Mart stores in Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Missouri and Ohio. Kondratravicius is scheduled to be sentenced in January.
His attorney, T. Edward Page, declined to comment on the case.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo planned
 Load-Date: October 31, 2003

 

End of Document
