

PART III: The latest week of the war, day by day
The Associated Press
April 11, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 912 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Body




A day-by-day look at key developments around the world during the latest week of the Iraq war:
---
SUNDAY, April 6:
The palace guard was now the U.S. Marines.
Southeast of Baghdad, Marines seized one of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's palaces on a very productive day for U.S.-led forces. They poked through remnants of a Republican Guard headquarters and searched a suspected terrorist training camp, finding the shell of a passenger jet that Iraqi defectors have alleged was used as a classroom for hijacking practice.
At the liberated Baghdad International Airport, a U.S. military plane landed - evidence that the allies were ready to put the facility to use. U.S. airstrikes targeted the Basra residence of Saddam's notorious lieutenant Ali Hassan al-Majid, aka "Chemical Ali," who reportedly once ordered a chemical weapons attack on Kurds.
The Pentagon identified eight dead soldiers found during the rescue of POW Jessica Lynch as members of her ambushed convoy. They include the first combat death of an American woman in the war - Army Pfc. Lori Piestewa.
---
MONDAY, April 7:
The bombs were enormous - four 2,000-pounders, targeting Saddam Hussein and his two sons.
A lone B-1B bomber executed the strike on a posh Baghdad neighborhood where top Iraqi leaders were believed meeting. The bombs left an enormous crater and a still unanswered question: Were Saddam and his sons dead or alive?
In Northern Ireland, President Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair met for the third time in a month. The topic: postwar rebuilding in Iraq.
Iraqi prisoners of war were placed inside a hastily erected pen on the grounds of the bombed-out, blue-and-gold domed New Presidential Palace.
As Marines surged across a bridge into Baghdad, opening the way for thousands more from the southeast, Iraqi Information Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf again held a news conference to deny the obvious. "There is no presence of American infidels" in Baghdad, he insisted.
---
TUESDAY, April 8:
The war's death toll added three more journalists, victims of U.S. fire.
Two cameramen were killed when an American tank fired a round into the Palestine Hotel, headquarters for hundreds of journalists. And the Arab television network al-Jazeera said a U.S. warplane attacked its office on the banks of the Tigris River, killing a reporter.
In both cases, U.S. officials insisted they were returning hostile fire from the journalistic bases.
On the military side, U.S. forces in downtown Baghdad crushed an Iraqi counterattack and seized a military airport. Iraqi fighters were routed from a Republican Guard headquarters. And Army units discovered a cave turned into a luxury condominium, complete with white marble floors, 10-foot ceilings and fluorescent lighting.
There was still no word from Saddam.
---
WEDNESDAY, April 9:
Before Baghdad fell, a towering statue of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein tumbled first.
Although there was still fierce fighting in Baghdad, sections of the ancient capital controlled by coalition forces were filled with dancing, celebrating Iraqis. In the most symbolic incident, locals and Marines pulled down a 40-foot statue of Saddam. Later, its head was dragged by jubilant Iraqis through the streets of Baghdad.
The war, said Vice President Dick Cheney, was "one of the most extraordinary military campaigns" ever conducted. The advance of U.S. troops into Baghdad within three weeks proved early criticism of the war's plans was misguided, he said.
U.S. military spokesmen said the Saddam regime was no longer in control of the capital - and it seemed no one else was, either. Iraqi looters used pickup trucks and wheelbarrows to haul off everything from refrigerators to flower pots from government ministries, police stations and state companies.
"The game is over," said Iraq's U.N. ambassador, Mohammed Al-Douri.
Coalition forces still anticipated resistance in northern cities still under government control, including Saddam's hometown of Tikrit.
---
THURSDAY, April 10:
A suicide bomber attacked Marines in Baghdad, while a homicidal crowd hacked two Shiite Muslim clerics to death in Najaf.
One of the clerics was Haider al-Kadar, a widely hated loyalist of Saddam. The other was Abdul Majid al-Khoei, a returned Iraqi exile in the country for a week. They were brought together in a spirit of reconciliation, and killed during a melee at the shrine of imam Ali, one of Shiite Islam's holiest sites.
At another mosque in northern Baghdad, Iraqi fighters skirmished for hours with Marines, killing one American and wounding 22. A suicide attacker detonated explosives at a U.S. checkpoint in central Baghdad, wounding four Marines.
President Bush said in a televised address to Iraqis, "Your nation will soon be free." Iraqi looters helped themselves to everything from horses to mattresses to appliances.
---
FRIDAY, April 11:
"The Saddam regime has ended."
So said the top U.S. commander, Gen. Tommy Franks, in a step toward a formal victory proclamation in the war. At the White House, spokesman Ari Fleischer added: "The regime is gone."
Gone, too, was the Iraqi 5th Corps from the northern city of Mosul. The fighters "just melted into the population," said Lt. Col. Robert Waltemeyer, commander of a Special Forces unit. U.S. soldiers and their Kurdish allies took Mosul, the third-largest city in Iraq, without any bloodshed.
Saddam's hometown of Tikrit was the last major holdout city.
In Baghdad, Marines tried to curb the looting frenzy by enforcing a dusk-to-dawn curfew.

 

End of Document
