

Part I: Prom night for the children of soldiers: music and dancing in the shadow of war
The Associated Press
June 26, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1889 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - This is the first installment of a three-part narrative on the final week of school, from prom to commencement, for seniors at a Department of Defense high school where more than half the members of their class have an Army parent deployed in Iraq.
 
By CHELSEA J. CARTER
AP National Writer
WUERZBURG, Germany (AP) - The prom theme is Shakespeare's "A Midsummer Night's Dream," and the decorating committee has done the best it could to create a world of fantasy and magic out of fake ivy and tinsel.
It doesn't look too military, Jessica Branch says as she sweeps into the ballroom in her burgundy gown.
Except for the MP standing guard outside. And the blood, bayonets and bodies in the life-size wall mural of the Battle of Cantigny in the lobby. And the fact that the seniors must enter this teenage rite of passage under an arch bearing the inscription: "Through these doors pass America's soldiers who bear the legacy of the Big Red One."
It is senior week for these children of the U.S. Army's 1st Infantry Division, their final seven days at Wuerzburg American High School in the heart of Germany.
As the couples dance to the music of 50 Cent and Nelly, the parents watching over them are mostly mothers. Many hold digital cameras to capture the moment - and to e-mail it later to Iraq.
Among the Department of Defense's 112 schools for military dependents in Europe, Wuerzburg has the largest number of parents deployed in Iraq. More than half of the 89 seniors have at least one parent serving in a place where rocket-propelled grenade attacks and car bombings are daily risks. Many parents have been away, in Kosovo, Turkey and now Iraq, for 24 of the last 30 months.
So many missed moments.
Jessica scans the crowd as couples swirl through the ballroom. There's her best friend, Jeremy Rowley, a cross-country runner and aspiring journalist, moving across the dance floor. Jessica is happy for him. She knows he has something extra to be excited about.
"Dad's here!" Jeremy crowed earlier. "He can tie my tie!"
In telephone calls and e-mail messages from the desert, Chief Warrant Officer Rod Rowley had repeatedly told his son it was unlikely he would make it home for this special week.
But a few days before the prom, Jeremy returned from school with his brother and found his mother waiting for them in the house.
"Drop your book bag now," she said. "What's that mess in the backyard?" She gave them that look.
What did we do? Jeremy wondered, his mind racing, trying to come up with an excuse for whatever was back there. He opened the back door and found his father waiting.
Stunned, the first words out of his mouth were: "What are you doing here?" Then they embraced - the kind of hug you don't want to let go of.
Jessica, who lives a few doors down, was in on the surprise. She's the do-it-all girl, varsity basketball player, always upbeat, looking out for everybody else.
Now, standing across the ballroom in the gown her father helped her pick out months ago, she's thrilled for Jeremy. And she looks happy, even though her own father is not here. He's still in Iraq. She understands, she says. She's OK with it.
But deep down, she really isn't.
And she's not alone.
Deployment is a reality running through the high school careers of these American students living on a military base far from home. Senior year, corresponding with the fighting in Iraq, has been the hardest. More than a dozen soldiers of 1st Infantry Division have been killed in Iraq this year alone. One of them was the father of a schoolmate, a Wuerzburg high school freshman.
This is the story of their final seven days of high school, beginning with the prom and ending with graduation. It is a week of ups and downs, of hopes and fears and uncertainties - including whether Dad or Mom will make it home to see them cross the stage to get a diploma.
---
The storybook 13th century castle overlooking Wuerzburg, a hilly town of 130,000 people, is the traditional site of the school year's final dance. But for the past two years, security rules have kept all school events on post. So, the seniors dance in the Cantigny Club, named for a fierce World War I battle depicted in the mural.
Jessica surveys the ballroom and spots two more friends, Marq Phillips and Reiner Bretch, sitting with their dates at a table drinking punch from clear plastic cups.
Reiner is a serious boy with plans to follow his father into the military. Marq is the jokester, the one who demands attention from students and teachers alike. Reiner's father is home on leave, and so is Marq's stepfather. But Marq's mother is still in Iraq.
The music changes tempo to a slower tune as a teacher picks up a microphone and asks couples to line up to promenade - that walk across the dance floor in front of the student body and parents to show off their clothing and their dates.
In the back of the ballroom, Jeremy's parents holds hands as they watch their oldest son. Rod Rowley is here on a 14-day leave.
The division's commanders promised to return as many parents as possible for graduation, but with so many of the seniors having a deployed parent, units would be dangerously short-handed if all were granted R-and-R at the same time.
So, Jeremy's father has been ordered to return to Iraq the day before graduation.
Jessica stands by the stage at the front of the ballroom, listening to a band play old school rock 'n' roll. She loves the live music. Other's don't. They flee the dance floor until the DJ returns to spin pulsing dance tunes.
It's a typical high school dance debate - hip-hop vs. rock.
Last year, at the junior-senior prom, the live band played for just a half hour, Jessica says. This year, it gets to play several sets.
There are a lot of differences this year.
Last year, Jessica's father chaperoned the dance. Last year, the man she calls "Daddy-O" was there when she came down the steps from her room to show off her dress. This year, well …
She smooths her floor-length gown with fitted bodice. "He was actually there when I was picking out my dress," Jessica says, smiling at the memory.
It was last November, shortly after the deployment orders were announced. She had narrowed it down to two dresses, and asked her father for his opinion.
In January, her father, Command Sgt. Maj. Carlton Branch, was deployed with the division's advance team, ahead of other soldiers. It was a hard moment, one she shouldered alone, somehow unable to share it with her friends.
"What was I going to say? 'My dad already left?"' she says.
Jessica appears older than her years, matured in part by the responsibility of being the daughter of a soldier charged with the care of men under his command. Like father, like daughter, Jessica plays caretaker among her friends, listening to their complaints about boys, girls, school, tests and, of course, the deployment. Like her father, she's even going into the military; she's earned a four-year Air Force ROTC scholarship to the University of Maryland.
Like her father, she doesn't complain.
"Everybody is going through the same thing," she says. "This is his job. He's been doing it for the past 26 years."
The sounds of John Mayer's "Wonderland" drift out of the ballroom to a small patio where Jessica and her boyfriend sit.
"I'm happy for Jeremy. I know how much he missed his dad," she says.
She isn't willing to admit it - yet - but she has a secret wish for the same surprise.
---
Jeremy has his own secret wish, though he won't say it out loud until the next day, after the baccalaureate, the church service of gratitude for the seniors' accomplishments.
Afterward, Jeremy and his father will go to a Chinese restaurant where menus are in German. Over beef fried rice and sweet-and-sour pork, they'll talk about the future, near-term and longer.
The 40-year-old father has never asked for any special consideration during his two-decade-long military career. But this time, he's struggling.
Just one more day of leave would allow him to attend his son's graduation. So many moments, big and small, have already been missed. And after all, his son is going away soon, to Marshall University in Huntington, W.Va.
But he knows that an extra day for him means another soldier must wait to go home.
"The civilian Rod Rowley, the dad in me, wants to be here," he'll say. "The soldier part of me says don't even ask."
The father will watch the son for a moment, then lean toward him and whisper:
"What do you think? Should I ask?"
Jeremy, his arms encircling his plate, will keep staring at his food as he answers.
"Yes."
---
As the prom winds down, Marq and Reiner are making plans for an unsanctioned after-dance party at a local nightclub where the admission age is 18.
They fell into an easy friendship at the beginning of the school year. Reiner was new to school and spoke German. Marq wanted to learn. They also both drove, an oddity among American teens in Germany where the minimum age to drive is 17 and is a costly undertaking unless you already have a stateside license.
Reiner and his parents have become a second family of sorts for Marq, whose grandmother is living with him while his mother and stepfather serve on separate bases in Iraq. Reiner's father returned the morning of prom and will be able to stay through graduation. Marq's stepfather also has leave, but, like Jeremy's dad, must return the day before graduation. Marq's mother, Capt. Adena Weiser, will not make it back from Iraq in time.
Marq's parents both left on the same day in early February. He drove his mother to report at the post gym. It was a hurried goodbye, a quick hug, because he had to get to work. But half an hour into his shift at a post store that sells entertainment equipment, reality hit. Marq walked out and drove back to the gym.
"I wanted to see her again. I wanted to say goodbye again," he says. "I really didn't know about Iraq, what it was about. I did my research after they left."
He also learned more about their jobs - which he calls "the thing that scares me most." His mother sometimes drives in convoys, and his stepfather has flown in Blackhawk helicopters.
Marq follows the war news in Stars and Stripes, a newspaper published for the troops. Every day, he reads the box listing the war's human toll.
---
With so many parents away, Wuerzburg principal Walt Seely has been paternal, proud and watchful all year. He's doing it again on prom night, surveying the pageant from a couch just off the ballroom.
It's what principals at high schools back in the States do. But he has concerns unlike theirs.
They do not have to give emotional support to a student body whose mothers and fathers are fighting on the front lines. And they don't have to tell students, as he has done, that a parent of one of their own will never come home.
Amid the prom's fun and frolic, the crepe paper and wafting corsages, the principal looks at his charges and smiles. But he cannot put aside his fears.
"I just pray," he whispers, "we don't have any deaths this week."
---
TO BE CONTINUED
 
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - To report this story, National Writer Chelsea J. Carter spent 10 days in Germany, conducting interviews at the school, homes and other locations with students, families, teachers, administrators, Department of Defense Dependents Schools officials and military personnel. The students and their families also provided personal correspondence about the school year.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY455-459. of June 17; AP Graphic WUERZBURG GERMANY
 Load-Date: June 27, 2004

 

End of Document
