

Plan to bring the volatile Balkans into the EU ignites hope and skepticism
The Associated Press
June 18, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 814 words
Byline: By WILLIAM J. KOLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BELGRADE, Serbia-Montenegro
Body




Srdjan Bosnjak has a small life, but his dreams are big.
Bosnjak, 29, barely gets by hawking CDs at a flea market, but he dares to believe the unimaginable: that this turbulent corner of the Balkans could join the European Union within a decade.
"Hope dies last," he said. "It will happen one day. I believe times will be better in the future."
Holding out the promise of prosperity to a region still bruised by war and steeped in ethnic strife, EU leaders at a summit opening Thursday in Greece will take up an ambitious plan to give the volatile Balkans a road map to membership - perhaps as early as 2010. By that time, the EU already will have grown from 15 nations to about 25.
The risks of absorbing the former Yugoslavia and neighboring Albania into the EU are enormous.
Nationalism abounds. Tens of thousands of American and European peacekeepers remain stationed across the region. Corruption, cronyism and racketeering are a way of life. Indicted war criminals are hailed as heroes. Human rights and the rule of law are patchy, and entire economies are in a shambles.
But Greece, which holds the EU's rotating presidency, sees a bigger threat on its doorstep if the Balkans are shut out of the rapidly expanding club. The rationale is simple, if startling: Eliminate the continent's biggest security liability by offering it a future in the family.
"If we are really serious about talking about this part of Europe becoming at some point full members, we need to begin preparing them for accession," said Greek Foreign Minister George Papandreou, whose government wants to pump more EU aid into the region to help its emerging democracies get ready.
Balkan leaders, more accustomed to being bullied and scorned by an impatient West, scarcely know what to make of it all.
"We're going to board a crowded bus to Europe, with some people saying, 'No more room!,"' Goran Svilanovic, Serbia's foreign minister, told The Associated Press in an interview.
"But our people are dreaming of a better life," he said. "The EU is not going to be complete until the Balkans are in. This offers us a totally new perspective."
The promise of eventual EU membership is heady stuff in Serbia, whose reformist prime minister, Zoran Djindjic, was assassinated in March in a plot allegedly hatched by rivals with links to organized crime.
It's no less enticing to the other ex-Yugoslav republics EU leaders are reaching out to: Macedonia, which erupted in civil war just two years ago; Bosnia, which has been under international administration since its devastating 1992-95 conflict; and Croatia, which formally applied for membership in February and hopes to join along with Romania and Bulgaria in 2007.
From Skopje to Sarajevo, there is a mixture of hope, skepticism and disbelief on the streets.
People are struggling to grasp the notion that a region still deep in a funk after a dozen years of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's ruinous rule could get such an unthinkable boost - or that their aggravating waits for visas in long lines outside EU embassies could end, for many the chief perk of membership.
"I don't expect anything from Europe," said Igor Popovski, 32, an electrician in Macedonia. "We are still an island on the continent, and Europe treats us as second-class citizens."
Like many Bosnians, 29-year-old student Drazen Pandza eagerly looks forward to EU membership but thinks "it won't happen in the near future" for the war-wrecked country still struggling to tamp down ethnic rivalries.
Hopes are higher in Croatia, which resents being lumped together with the other ex-Yugoslav republics and is racing to qualify for membership just four years from now.
The country's pro-Western leadership has stepped up appeals to Serb refugees who fled a 1995 government counteroffensive to return. It has intensified its cooperation with the U.N. war crimes tribunal in The Hague, Netherlands, angering war veterans and others who view some fugitive suspects as patriots.
The road to the EU is fraught with far more obstacles in Serbia and Montenegro, a loose alliance which replaced the last of Yugoslavia this year.
Both republics are likely to vote on a final breakup in three years, preoccupying leaders still rebuilding from the 1990s wars and struggling to stamp out rampant crime and 50 percent joblessness.
They also must settle the final status of Kosovo, which has been run by the United Nations and NATO since Milosevic's brutal 1998-99 crackdown on the independence-minded ethnic Albanians who dominate the province.
Only this month did Serbia lift long-standing visa requirements for Americans and most Europeans.
Miroljub Labus, a leading politician and economist, thinks the EU preparations will test the republic's resolve to break with its bellicose history.
"There's a battle between new and old Serbia," he said, "between looking to the future and looking back to the past."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY112

 

End of Document
