

Poles commemorate the 65th anniversary of the massacre at Katyn Forest - Correction Appended
The Associated Press

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 424 words
Byline: By ELA KASPRZYCKA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WARSAW, Poland
Body




Poles on Saturday attended a Mass, sang patriotic songs and lay flowers on a monument to more than 21,000 military officers and intellectuals massacred by Soviet agents in Katyn Forest, marking the day 65 years ago that dictator Josef Stalin ordered the killings.
Along with the homage at Warsaw's St. Ann's Church, the Katyn Committee, an organization of relatives of those killed in Katyn Forest in western Russia and at other sites in 1940, demanded more Russian attention to the massacre.
A recent Russian investigation failed to produce any new names of surviving perpetrators among the secret police force that carried out the killing, largely by shots to the back of the head, over several nights.
"We are calling on the authorities of the Russian Federation to reveal the names of those who were responsible for the genocide in the spring of 1940," said Stefan Melak, the head of the group. "We are calling on Russian authorities to accept this crime as genocide," Melak said.
"Katyn will always remain a symbol of a death sentence passed on Poland," he said.
Krystyna Balcer, a 62-year-old retiree whose uncle was killed in Katyn, remained angry about the massacre and the Soviet invasion of Poland prior to World War II, carried out under a secret agreement between Stalin and Nazi leader Adolf Hitler.
"They betrayed us - they stuck a knife in our backs," she said of the Soviets invading Poland from the east in 1939, 17 days after Germans entered from the west. The massacre "was unimaginable cruelty, it was genocide."
The March 5, 1940, order for the massacre was signed by Stalin among others. Soviet agents shot 21,768 Polish military officers, intellectuals and priests who had been taken prisoner during the invasion.
Historians in Poland believe Stalin was seeking to liquidate Poland's elite to prevent the rebirth of a sovereign Polish state.
The massacre is still an irritant to relations between Poland and Russia. Polish war crimes prosecutors opened their own investigation into the massacre in December.
Until the fall of communism in 1989, any mention of the massacre was forbidden in Poland. The following year, the Soviet government accepted responsibility for the murders, but refused to refer to them as a genocide attempt, calling it a war crime on which the statute of limitations has passed.
The slaughter became known to the world when 4,100 bodies were discovered by German forces in 1943 after they overran the area near the Russian city of Smolensk, and the event was widely broadcast by the Nazi propaganda machine.
Correction



In a March 5 story about a 1940 massacre of Polish officers and intellectuals by Soviet agents in Katyn Forest, The Associated Press stated erroneously that the Soviet Union invaded Poland prior to World War II. The Soviets entered Poland on Sept. 17, 1939, after Nazi Germany began the war by invading Poland on Sept. 1. Correction-Date: March 8, 2005, Tuesday
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XCS150-152
 Load-Date: March 6, 2005

 

End of Document
