

Powell confers with Musharraf as the Bush administration turns up the heat on Pakistan to curb extremists
May 23, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 720 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Bush administration turned up the heat Thursday on Pakistan to curb Islamic militants and said it understood India's frustration and anger over continuing terror attacks.
Still, "rather than being the solution, military action in this crisis would create even greater problems," Philip Reeker, a State Department spokesman, said as the administration focused its diplomacy on trying to avert a war over Kashmir.
With tensions high, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said the two nuclear-armed countries could go to war if the situation got out of hand. Appearing on CNN's "Wolf Blitzer Reports," he said "millions of people could die in the event that there was a nuclear exchange between those two countries."
Rumsfeld also noted that there are hundreds of U.S. troops in Pakistan.
Secretary of State Colin Powell spoke to Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf twice by telephone from Germany, where he accompanied President Bush on a visit. Powell also conferred three times by telephone with the British Foreign Secretary, Jack Straw, in an effort to coordinate policy, and planned to talk to Indian officials on Friday.
Straw is due in the region next week. Powell's deputy, Richard Armitage, will head for the area June 4, Reeker said.
"It's important for India and Pakistan to resume a productive dialogue over the issues that divide them, and that includes Kashmir," Reeker said. "An important component to this process is an end to infiltration into Kashmir, and as we've done before, we call upon Pakistan to do all it can to achieve this objective."
With India and Pakistan on war footing, the administration is seeking an end to shelling in the disputed territory and urging Pakistan to curb the influx of Islamic militants into Kashmir.
"We understand India's frustrations and anger over continued terrorist actions, but would reiterate that, rather than being the solution, military action in this crisis would create even greater problems," Reeker said.
"We've been very involved, in terms of the situation in South Asia," he said. "We've talked about our concerns about the potential for conflict between India and Pakistan and about the danger of that conflict spiraling out of control.
"Once again, I would reiterate that it's vital for all sides in Kashmir to exercise restraint to reduce violence," he said.
Traveling in Europe with President Bush, national security assistant Condoleezza Rice telephoned her Indian and Pakistani counterparts Thursday, as she had Wednesday, to urge calm.
A senior White House official said the calls by Powell and Rice yielded some positive signs. But the official, speaking on condition of anonymity, declined to be specific.
At a news conference in Berlin, Bush said he and German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder spent a lot of time in their meeting Thursday discussing the India-Pakistan situation.
Schroeder said he and Bush agreed "that we have to do whatever we can to bring a peaceful solution to this conflict. I mean, we must make sure that no further escalation happens over there."
Rumsfeld said the tensions between India and Pakistan were drawing Pakistani soldiers away from the border with Afghanistan, where they were guarding against the influx of al-Qaida fighters.
"It's unfortunate," he said. "It is a very porous border. It really permits people, the al-Qaida and Taliban, to move across and that's unhelpful to us."
The Pentagon said in a statement that the United States and India had agreed to accelerate military cooperation and planned to conduct more joint exercises.
The statement was issued after three days of talks with Indian defense officials.
A senior State Department official on Wednesday said the administration was holding intensive talks with both sides in an effort to defuse tensions, but declined to reveal its suggestions for prying the 750,000 Indian and Pakistani soldiers apart.
The official, who held a briefing on condition of anonymity, said the State Department had not concluded whether Musharraf's pledge to oppose terror had slowed the flow of militants into Kashmir.
Nor would Reeker make a public assessment on Thursday. But Reeker said Musharraf had made clear in public statements "his vision for Pakistan and the need to end extremism and not to allow an extremist minority in Pakistan to lead the country down the wrong path."
 Load-Date: May 24, 2002

 

End of Document
