

Praying to Allah, opening wallets or hitting the Web, the world stands up to be counted in U.S. presidential vote
The Associated Press
October 20, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 973 words
Byline: By JOHN LEICESTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




At crunch time in U.S. presidential elections, the perennial swing state of Ohio gets plenty of attention, blitzed by the candidates and their volunteers. But this time, Ohioans are also being courted from some unusual, far-flung places.
From the west African desert nation of Mauritania, an illiterate 78-year-old woman has been bombarding her nephew in Cincinnati with phone calls urging him to spread the word that Americans shouldn't vote for George Bush. Khadijeto Mint Vall prays five times a day for the president's defeat. "Allah the powerful must get rid of Bush," she said as she shopped at a dusty market in the capital Nouakchott for vegetables, dates and milk.
And in a similar vein from a decidedly different quarter, a left-leaning British newspaper recently hit its readers with a clarion call: "You might help decide who takes up residence in the White House" - and encouraged them to lobby voters in Ohio.
They have no vote on Nov. 2, but non-Americans the world over are going to unprecedented lengths to influence the outcome of what some say is the most important U.S. presidential race of their lifetime.
Much of the reason is Bush himself. Even before the Iraq war, his resistance to the Kyoto Protocol on climate control and the international war crimes court was costing him friends abroad. By invading Iraq without United Nations' approval, the 43rd president has for many people become the avatar of a disturbing new image: The world's sole superpower run amok.
But although a slew of opinion polls show that if the world could vote John Kerry would win in a landslide, Bush has his overseas campaigners, too.
Take Ronie Berggren and Erik Bylund, two Swedes who saved up this summer and autumn to fund a trip through Pennsylvania and Ohio to drum up support for Bush.
"Bush's politics are great," said Berggren, 25, in a telephone interview from Washington, D.C., where he and Bylund were visiting a Republican volunteer before hitting the two swing states.
"Terrorists must be fought because it's the only way to defend democracy in the long run," added Berggren, who with Bylund founded a Web-based initiative, the Atlantic Conservative Alliance, at http://www.acalliance.net/. "We want to show the Americans that they do not stand alone in this fight."
It isn't just ordinary people around the world who are getting pumped up about the election. Some foreign leaders have been showing an unusual willingness to indicate their preference.
Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, a key Bush friend, sent his chief of staff, Valentino Valentini, to attend the Republican National Convention in New York.
Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi, who has a close relationship with Bush and deployed 550 troops to southern Iraq on a humanitarian mission, made no secret of his support for the president.
"I don't want to interfere in another country's election, but I'm close to Bush so I'd like him to do well," Koizumi told reporters. Opposition lawmakers immediately accused him of jeopardizing relations with Kerry.
And on Monday, Russian President Vladimir Putin waded in, saying terrorists are aiming to derail Bush's chances.
"International terrorism has as its goal to prevent the election of President Bush to a second term," he said. "If they achieve that goal, then that will give international terrorism a new impulse."
Increasingly, the Internet has been giving people around the world a louder voice - offering sites at which surfers can cast a mock vote - and a means to act, as did the Guardian newspaper of Britain with its Ohio initiative.
Choi Dae-hoon - part of a Web-based anti-Bush campaign in South Korea - said his group has been asking South Koreans to write to relatives in the United States urging them not to vote for Bush. "Elect a madman, you get madness," says their Web site, www.worldngo.net/antibush. 
A four-week Internet poll by Malaysiakini, the best-known independent news Web site in Malaysia, resulted in 60.59 percent of the 7,991 votes for Kerry, 27.69 for Bush and 11.71 for independent Ralph Nader.
Eric Ossemig, 38, an ex-Army soldier from Flagstaff, Ariz., who has lived in the Southeast Asian country for 14 years, had promised to cast his real-life ballot according to the outcome.
"It will be my honor to vote on your behalf," he said.
In a medieval village perched on a hill in the Italian region of Tuscany, a group of writers, artists and professors are organizing their own mock U.S. elections on Oct. 31.
They announced the initiative in a news release titled: "Are we all Americans? The first American elections for non-Americans."
The pitch is a nod to the headline of an editorial that appeared the day after 9/11 in the daily Corriere della Sera: "We are all Americans."
By the logic of that phrase, said screenwriter Michele Cogo, "Why shouldn't the Italians vote for the elections, too?"
"The planet's destiny is decided in large part by America," he said.
Then there's the Guardian, reaching out to voters in Ohio's Clark County - a swing county in a swing state.
In the campaign launched Oct. 13, the newspaper told readers they could log onto its Web site, put in an e-mail address and receive the name and address of an unaffiliated voter taken from the electoral roll.
Some Guardian readers have expressed concern that the campaign could backfire. If replies American voters have sent to The Guardian are any indication, they may have a point.
"Hey England, Scotland and Wales, mind your own business," an American wrote in a letter published on the newspaper's Web site. "We don't need weenie-spined Limeys meddling in our presidential election."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Associated Press writers Ahmed Mohamed in Nouakchott, Matteo Cruccu and Victor Simpson in Rome, Doug Mellgren in Oslo, Kenji Hall in Tokyo and Hawon Jung and Sang-Hun Choe in Seoul contributed to this report.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY386-388, OHSPR389 of Oct. 20; AP Graphic WORLD VOTES of Oct. 20
 Load-Date: October 26, 2004

 

End of Document
