

Prosecutor says dents in the hull of the submarine Kursk are not sign of collision
November 1, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 281 words
Byline: By VLADIMIR ISACHENKOV, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




The dents that have puzzled investigators examining the wreck of the nuclear submarine Kursk were not caused by a collision with another submarine, a senior prosecutor said Thursday.
However, it is still possible a collision caused the two explosions that sank the Kursk, said Yuri Yakovlev, first deputy chief military prosecutor.
"It's wrong to say that the dents resulted from a collision which led to the catastrophe," he said, according to the Interfax news agency.
He did not say what could have caused the dents, but Russia's deputy prime minister said Wednesday they could be due to the submarine hitting the seabed or to a vacuum effect caused by the blasts.
The Kursk sank in the Barents Sea during a naval exercise on Aug. 12, 2000, killing the entire crew of 118. The wreck was raised from the seabed and brought to dry dock last week, enabling the navy to recover 53 bodies in addition to the 12 retrieved by divers from the wreck last fall.
Meanwhile, the navy has unloaded 14 of the Kursk's 22 Granit cruise missiles, including six on Thursday from starboard side. Eight others were removed from port side. So far the navy has been was unable to retrieve three other missiles from port side because of their sensitive location near the damaged bow.
Navy officials have said they may have to cut the massive weapons from the Kursk together with their containers if they can't be lifted out by crane.
Officials say the first of two explosions in the Kursk's bow was caused by a practice torpedo, but they disagree on what triggered it. Most experts suspect an internal malfunction. Russian investigators have not ruled out a World War II mine or a collision with a foreign submarine.
 Load-Date: November 2, 2001

 

End of Document
