

Protests over welfare cuts snarl St. Petersburg for second day, as the movement among Russia's elderly spreads across the nation
The Associated Press
January 16, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 759 words
Byline: By IRINA TITOVA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST.PETERSBURG, Russia
Body




Pensioners and veterans angered over the cutoff of welfare benefits clogged streets and paralyzed traffic in St. Petersburg, hometown to President Vladimir Putin, for a second day Sunday and the street demonstrations spread to other Russian cities.
Top government officials sought to shift the blame by accusing regional leaders of botching the management of new social programs, under which benefits such as free medicine and public transportation were replaced by a monthly government stipend.
Though St. Petersburg authorities promised to restore some benefits after 10,000 people jammed the center of Russia's second-largest city on Saturday, demonstrators returned Sunday to rally on Nevsky Prospect, again snarling traffic in the center of the city.
"Hitler stole our childhood, and Putin stole our declining years," declared a banner held aloft by one the aging protesters.
Others waved red flags, beat spoons against saucepans and chanted slogans calling for Putin to step down. "We are here to demand the right to life," said Zhanna Filonova, 61. A large contingent of police stood by, but did not intervene.
Since the new social benefits program went into effect Jan. 1, the protests have spread to several cities cities across Russia's 11 time zones. Retirees were in the streets of Volga River-city of Samara for a fifth day Sunday, and a rally in the southern city of Stavropol drew up to 5,000 people.
Many of the elderly, already complaining the are treated like second-class citizens, consider the changes a final insult as they struggle to survive on meager pensions in inflationary and capitalist Russia. Those affected by the new program lived most of their lives under a craddle-to-grave welfare system until the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
"Prices keep rising, and now they have canceled our benefits," said Yevgeniya Sidorova, 70. "Putin and his government want us to lie down and wait for death to come."
Alexander Zukov, the first deputy prime minister, and Boris Gryzlov, the parliament speaker, appeared on state-controlled Rossiya television late Sunday to defend the social reform bill and blamed provincial authorities. "It's quite natural that people are angry," Zhukov said.
But protesters say new monthly payments of about $10 are worth far less than the lost benefits, leaving the elderly to choose between food, transport and medicine.
"It's an outrage," said Nina Kuzmina, 65. "The government must step down and face justice."
Galina Tolmacheva, 67, said the benefit cuts amounted to "the second siege" of the city, referring to the 900-day Nazi siege of Leningrad, as St. Petersburg was known, during the World War II that killed more than half a million residents.
Many pledged to keep protesting until benefits were restored and pensions were increased. An average monthly pension is now worth about $80.
Several small orange tents went up at the rally in St. Petersburg. Orange was the symbolic color of the campaign run by Ukrainian President-elect Viktor Yushchenko whose backers occupied central Kiev for weeks and won a court decision to hold a new vote that was won by their candidate.
"These tents are a symbol of the fight for democracy, the unity of the people like in Ukraine," Alexander Bogdanov said.
Youth activists joined the mix Sunday. "We came here because the government humiliated senior citizens," said Semyon Borzenko, a member of a socialist youth group.
Police in St. Petersburg engaged in friendly conversation with the protesters. The police and military lost similar welfare benefits at the start of the year.
The rallies across Russian cities, many of which involved blockades of key highways, have put new pressure on Putin, who has seen little public opposition or protest in his tenure.
The rising tide of discontent prompted the authorities in many regions to restore some benefits. St. Petersburg Gov. Valentina Matviyenko went on the city television station late Saturday to promise subsidized passes for public transportation.
Observers have said the protests would likely intensify when people start receiving January utility bills, which also will increase significantly absent government subsidies.
The Kremlin has described the social reform as a long-overdue effort to streamline and modernize the economy, but many commentators predict now that Putin may respond to the crisis by making his government the scapegoat and firing his ministers.
Lyubov Sliska, a senior member of the pro-Kremlin United Russia party that dominates the parliament, has said that the entire Cabinet could be ousted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos MOSB106.
 Load-Date: January 17, 2005

 

End of Document
