

Rare documents from the Nuremberg Nazi trials after WWII are posted on the Internet
January 10, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 608 words
Byline: By SHEILA HOTCHKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TRENTON, N.J.
Body




A long-buried document published Thursday by an online college law journal details how investigators in the Nuremberg trials struggled to prove Nazi leaders planned to eliminate Christianity and convert its followers to an Aryan philosophy.
The 108-page document was among a collection of notes, transcripts and photos kept by Gen. William J. Donovan, a leading investigator at the International Military Tribunal in Nuremberg, Germany, in the late 1940s.
The collection had been gathering dust in Donovan's law firm before another attorney bought it and turned it over to Cornell University's rare book collection. Now, the Rutgers Journal of Law and Religion is posting the documents online.
The document released Thursday describes how investigators at Nuremberg concluded that the Nazis planned to infiltrate churches and discredited, jailed and occasionally murdered Christian leaders.
According to the document, Nazi leaders sought "a complete extirpation of Christianity and the substitution of a purely racial religion tailored to fit the needs of National Socialist policy."
"National Socialism by its very nature was hostile to Christianity and the Christian churches," it says.
While the document offers insight into how prosecutors reached their conclusions in the 1945-1949 trials, scholars said the Nazi plan itself was not surprising.
But over time, they said, the law journal could give a detailed, behind-the-scenes look at the trials of Nazi war criminals.
Donovan's complete 148-volume collection is "almost like a secret history that has come out," said Michael Salter, a law professor from the University of Central Lancashire in Preston, England.
"There's some material there which Donovan should basically have never taken away from the Nuremberg trials," Salter said.
The cache includes transcripts in German and English as well as background memoranda and evidentiary analyses of the defendants. Some are marked "top secret."
The transcripts are not unique, but Donovan supplemented his set of trial-related documents with original photos, letters, sketches, handwritten notes and additional evidence.
"It's the supporting documentation that's harder to find," said Betsy Pittman, archivist at the University of Connecticut, which has its own set of Nuremberg papers.
When Donovan left Germany, he took the documents, had them bound in blue leather and kept them in his New York law office. The papers gathered dust for decades after his 1959 death, until another lawyer recognized their importance.
When the firm closed in 1998, attorney Henry H. Korn bought the volumes and handed them off to his alma mater, Cornell University. Since then, scholars have visited Cornell's rare books room to flip through the brittle pages, but the Donovan collection has not been widely available.
Rutgers worked out a deal with Cornell to publish the papers in the online law journal.
"Up until now, it would have taken a lot of work to get a lot of this information," said Julie Seltzer Mandel, editor of the law journal's Nuremberg project.
The project had added significance for Mandel, a third-year law student who has edited Rutgers' Nuremberg project since March. Her 80-year-old grandmother survived the Auschwitz death camp.
"For as long as I can remember, the importance has been on remembrance and making sure the story is told accurately so history won't repeat itself," said Mandel, 29, of Berlin Borough.
She said her grandmother "feels anything I can do to get the story out there and keep it in people's attention is working toward that goal: in essence, another victory."
On the Net:
Journal of Law and Religion: http://www.lawandreligion.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo TN301
 Load-Date: January 11, 2002

 

End of Document
