

Rave parties: a release for the young and a headache for the government
August 7, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 721 words
Byline: By JAMEY KEATEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PAULE, France
Body




To the young, they are free-for-alls of drug-induced revelry and thumping techno beats in the bucolic French countryside. To President Jacques Chirac, they are a growing problem.
Rave parties, Dionysian fests involving abundant marijuana, heroin, cocaine and especially the designer drug Ecstasy, have been around for about a decade in Europe. But now, with five rave-related deaths reported in a year and increasing property damage, they are drawing the attention of France's political establishment.
Some of the secretly organized parties draw tens of thousands from across Europe. Others are small regional affairs. But they all feature drugs, techno music and the open air.
Elsewhere in Europe, there are larger, much more organized and urban rave parties, such as Berlin's Love Parade, which drew at least 800,000 last month, and Zurich's Lake Parade, which drew 750,000. In France, typical raves take place in rural areas. News travels by word of mouth, and authorities are almost never forewarned.
Since July 2000, at least five people have died in connection with rave parties in France - two of drug overdoses, one who fell off a roof, one who fell into frigid water and one in a drug-related shooting. Last month, two women were raped at a rave in eastern France.
The political battle over the raves began in April when conservative lawmaker Thierry Mariani introduced a bill requiring organizers to give notice to authorities. Many ravers protested, saying spontaneity is an essential element.
Socialist Prime Minister Lionel Jospin was unable to convince the leftist majority in the National Assembly to back the bill, which died last month.
But Chirac revived the issue, using his traditional July 14 television interview to say a new law might be needed - although he hoped it wouldn't be necessary.
Chirac cited raves that have caused damage to property, disturbed rural residents and led to injuries "without the least person held responsible."
Mariani estimates that in the first six months of the year, more than 730 rave parties were held across France.
Last month, some 30,000 people, mostly in their 20s, traveled by car, camper, van or hitchhiking to a grass field near this Breton village. Many came from hundreds of miles away, including some from Britain.
The aim, said many, was to reaffirm their freedom, escape a world gone too commercial and flee a nightclub scene that has become stale or too expensive.
"We're young, we just want to party," said Noemie Dubourdieu, 21, of nearby Blougouvelin.
In France, raves are known both as "teknivals" - a fusion of techno and festival - and "free parties," in a reference to liberty and the fact that it costs nothing to attend.
The Paule rave drew people from a large nearby music festival and snowballed into a four-day, round-the-clock affair in a mud-covered pasture.
Attendees, many with pierced noses, dreadlocks and trendy hooded jackets, found out where to go by word of mouth. Many were angry that the government would consider clamping down on them.
"What makes them flip out is that they don't control us," said Fleur Dupleich, 23, a film student in Paris.
Residents were divided about the invasion. One man, who refused to give his name, stomped through the field with tears in his eyes, complaining about the mess and loud music. Others were more tolerant.
"They're not harming anybody," said Jean-Paul Bozec, 50, from the nearby town of Blouray. "Still, we would much rather coordinate with the organizers. We just don't know who they are."
There were no serious injuries. A Red Cross tent treated 670 people for cuts, minor burns, or the effects of partying too hard.
While several ecologically-minded ravers led a nonstop cleanup effort at Paule, trash was spread all over. Regional official Jacques Garau said 200 tons of garbage were cleared - mainly bottles, cans and food wrappers.
The Paule rave "was a real problem, like all raves," he said. "People entered by force, tore up fenceposts and ruined the field. It was a difficult sanitary situation."
But ultimately, it's the drugs that make raves what they are. Some are concerned about the implications.
"It's too bad. Some of these people are starting to use heroin at 17 or 18 years old," said Guillaume Blin, 23, who said he was one of the few ravers not to use drugs. "They aren't going to go far in life."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos PAR101-103
 Load-Date: August 8, 2001

 

End of Document
