

Returning space station residents dazzled by all the green of Earth - and all the people
August 23, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 601 words
Byline: By MARCIA DUNN, AP Aerospace Writer
Dateline: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla.
Body




The first thing returning space station residents Jim Voss and Yuri Usachev noticed about Earth - besides the pull of gravity - was all the green.
Their crewmate, Susan Helms, noticed all the people.
"I haven't been around this many people for a long time," she said Wednesday night, several hours after landing aboard space shuttle Discovery.
The three spent nearly six months aboard the international space station, and even though they were weak and wobbly from so much time in weightlessness, they managed to walk off the shuttle.
Helms said she felt as though she weighed 500 pounds when she first stood up. But she was anxious to get out of Discovery and shunned the stretcher that was there for her, just in case.
Usachev took it a little slower, accepting help from his flight surgeon.
"No reason to rush," said the Russian cosmonaut, who commanded the space station's second crew. "Long flight is serious stuff."
Usachev enjoyed seeing all the trees and grass, while Voss admired the bushes along the landing strip as they were driven to the Kennedy Space Center crew quarters for a reunion with their families.
"It was very striking seeing something that green which I've not seen for many months," Voss said. "That was my first impression that I was back on Earth - other than feeling very heavy."
Hours later, Voss was still tired. "I feel like I've run a marathon almost," said Voss, the oldest of the crew at 52.
Their homecoming was delayed 1 1/2 hours by dark clouds and rain near the landing strip. When Mission Control finally gave Discovery clearance to land, the three former space station residents cheered so loudly that the four other crew members, seated upstairs, could hear them without the intercom.
The mid-afternoon landing ended a 167-day mission for Usachev, Helms and Voss, just 21 days shy of NASA's space endurance record. They circled Earth about 2,600 times and logged 70 million miles since March.
Voss was greeted by his wife and weeping 21-year-old daughter.
"I was surprised that she was a little bit emotional about my return. But I was, too," he said.
Usachev was met by his wife and 12-year-old daughter, Helms by her parents.
The three former space station residents face at least six weeks of medical tests and rehabilitation. They had to endure the first round of tests before they could satisfy their cravings - a salad for Helms, hamburger for Voss, and steak and "real" cheese for Usachev. Voss was the only one without much of an appetite.
Despite daily exercise in orbit, their muscles and bones were weakened by weightlessness and their immune systems were depressed. Yet they seemed surprisingly fit to shuttle astronaut Daniel Barry, a specialist in rehabilitation medicine.
"It was obvious to me how much time and effort they have put into staying in shape," Barry said. "By their appearance coming off the orbiter, that is going to pay off big time."
During its 12-day flight, Discovery also delivered a fresh crew to the space station: American commander Frank Culbertson and two Russians, Vladimir Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin. They will remain on the space station until December. NASA's next shuttle flight, by Endeavour, will be their ride home.
Usachev, Helms and Voss took delivery of a robot arm and an air lock during their mission and overcame repeated computer problems. They also entertained the world's first paying space tourist, California millionaire Dennis Tito, a highlight for Usachev.
"I'm just happy, I think it's very good mission," Usachev said, then quickly corrected himself. "It was, unfortunately, now."
On the Net:
NASA: http://spaceflight.nasa.gov 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos KSC105, KSC115
 Load-Date: August 24, 2001

 

End of Document
