

Rules for the conclave that elects the next pope
The Associated Press
April 13, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 384 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A summary of rules the late John Paul II set for the conclave that will elect the next pope beginning Monday:
---
WHO VOTES
Only cardinals under age 80, of whom 115 are expected to attend. The dean of the College of Cardinals, currently Germany's Joseph Ratzinger, presides.
Electors vow total secrecy and promise to oppose interference by secular authorities or any others. They are forbidden to make any "pact, agreement, promise or other commitment" to win votes for or against a candidate. They must not be swayed "by friendship or aversion," media suggestions, force, "fear or the pursuit of popularity."
---
SUPPORT CREW
Aides will be available, as well as doctors, cooks, housekeepers and priests to hear confessions. All are also sworn to secrecy.
Two technicians will check the environs for recording or transmission devices. The cardinals have no access to periodicals or broadcasts and are forbidden to communicate with the outside world other than by the smoke they send up to indicate if they have a winner.
Electors reside throughout the conclave in the new Domus Sanctae Marthae, a residence far more comfortable that the former Apostolic Palace cells.
---
VOTING RULES
Voting occurs in the Sistine Chapel by secret ballot. In early rounds, a two-thirds majority is required for victory.
One ballot may be held the first day. Thereafter, two ballots in immediate succession without discussion occur each morning, and two each afternoon.
Each elector carries his ballot to the chapel altar. Three "infirmarii" cardinals collect ballots from any electors in the Domus too sick to visit the chapel. Three "scrutineers" do the counting. After balloting, the ballots and any notes are burned.
If no one is elected after three days, voting pauses for up to one day. After seven more ballots, there's another pause, then seven ballots and another pause, then seven ballots. At this point if there's still no winner, a simple majority of cardinals may agree to elect the pope by a simple majority.
---
NEW POPE
When a winner emerges, he is asked whether he accepts. (John Paul's decree beseeches the winner not to refuse the office "for fear of its weight.") The new pontiff then announces his papal name and electors make an act of homage.
Finally, the pope blesses the crowd from the balcony of St. Peter's Basilica.
 Load-Date: April 14, 2005

 

End of Document
