

Rules for the conclave that elects the next pope
The Associated Press
April 11, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 425 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A summary of rules the late John Paul II set for the conclave that will elect the next pope beginning Monday:
---
WHO VOTES
-Cardinals under age 80 participate with 115 expected to attend the conclave. The dean of the College of Cardinals, currently Germany's Joseph Ratzinger, presides.
Electors vow total secrecy and promise to oppose interference by secular authorities or "any group of people or individuals." They are forbidden from making any "pact, agreement, promise or other commitment" to win votes for or against a candidate. They must not be swayed "by friendship or aversion," media suggestions, force, "fear or the pursuit of popularity."
---
SUPPORT CREW
-The conclave will have a support staff (seven aides, two physicians, priests to hear confessions, cooks, housekeepers), also sworn to "observe absolute and perpetual secrecy" about all matters regarding the election.
Two technicians will check the environs to prevent recording or transmission devices. The cardinals are forbidden all communication with the outside world by letter, conversation, telephone or radio and have no access to periodicals or broadcasts.
Electors reside throughout the conclave in the new Domus Sanctae Marthae, a residence far more comfortable that the former Apostolic Palace cells.
---
VOTING RULES
-Voting occurs in the Sistine Chapel by secret ballot. In early rounds, a two-thirds majority is required for victory, or two-thirds plus one if the total isn't divisible into three equal parts.
One ballot may be held the first day. Thereafter, two ballots in immediate succession without discussion occur each morning, and two each afternoon.
Each elector carries his ballot to the chapel altar. Three "infirmarii" cardinals collect ballots from any electors in the Domus too sick to visit the chapel. Three "scrutineers" do the counting. After balloting, the ballots and any notes are burned.
If no one is elected after three days, voting pauses for up to one day. After seven more ballots, there's another pause, then seven ballots and another pause, then seven ballots. At this point if there's still no winner, a simple majority of cardinals may agree to elect the first man who reaches a simple majority thereafter.
---
NEW POPE
-When a winner emerges, he is formally asked whether he accepts (John Paul's decree beseeches the winner "not to refuse, for fear of its weight, the office"). He is asked to announce his papal name. Electors make an act of homage to their new pontiff.
The pope imparts his blessing to the crowd from the balcony of St. Peter's Basilica.
 Load-Date: April 12, 2005

 

End of Document
