

Russians to mark 10-year anniversary of the beginning of the end of USSR
August 18, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 498 words
Byline: By JIM HEINTZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Ten years after the abortive coup that dealt a mortal blow to the Soviet Union, Russians gather Sunday to celebrate or lament and to reflect on the past decade that brought them freedoms many longed for and sufferings most weren't prepared for.
The largest assembly is likely to be outside the Russian White House, where an anxious crowd watched Boris Yeltsin clamber atop a tank to denounce the putsch a few hours after state media announced that Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev had been placed under house arrest at his summer house by hard-liners opposed to his reform attempts.
The dramatic move by Yeltsin, at that time the president of the Russian Federation, one of the USSR's 15 republics, was a galvanizing moment. By the time the sun set Aug. 19, 1991, tens of thousands of people had answered his call to resistance, building barricades around the building, which was where the Russian parliament met.
Two days later, the tanks withdrew, the coup plotters fled and Gorbachev returned to Moscow. But although he retained his office, his political and moral authority had dissolved. The Soviet republics, already straining at the leash of Kremlin control, lunged harder for independence. On Dec. 25, 1991, Gorbachev signed the Soviet Union out of existence.
Another rally is expected at Pushkin Square, but this one honoring the coup plotters.
Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the nationalist firebrand who is to speak at the square, wishes the coup would have succeeded but welcomes the collapse of Communism.
"One should have gotten rid of the Communist Party, given up the unproductive Communist ideology, but preserved the country's territory, its army and the KGB," he told the Interfax news agency Friday.
The collapse of the Soviet Union was an exhilarating and wrenching experience for its 290 million people. Some have thrived with the new opportunities, but others saw their jobs disappear, their savings become near-worthless in economic crises and their pensions and salaries go unpaid for months on end.
Many throughout the former USSR are still reeling from the past decade's troubles. Few commemorations of the coup were planned outside Moscow.
Even in the capital, ground zero of the events, there was little sense on Saturday of the approaching anniversary. Muscovites desert the city in huge numbers on summer weekends, and the usually noisy and crowded capital had an air of lazy relaxation.
The newspaper Izvestia, once the government's main newspaper, marked the anniversary with a satire: The front page of its second section was a fantasy of what the paper might have looked like if the coup had succeeded.
"Informational Report on the Jubilee Session of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR," read the banner headline, harking back to the turgid and opaque verbiage that characterized Soviet media.
Another satirical story reported about a space mission headed by "Commander Shamil Basayev" - known in the real world as one of Chechnya's most notorious rebel warlords.
 Load-Date: August 19, 2001

 

End of Document
