

Rwandans relive the horror of the 1994 genocide in feature film about the slaughter
March 24, 2002, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 421 words
Byline: By RODRIQUE NGOWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIGALI, Rwanda
Body




Eight years after hundreds of thousands of people were slaughtered in a wave of violence that swept their small central African nation, Rwandans gathered Sunday for the premiere of "100 Days," the first feature film about the 1994 genocide.
People in the audience gasped and wept - some quietly, others openly sobbing - as they watched the movie, set during 100 days of massacres in which half a million minority Tutsis and politically moderate Hutus were killed by gangs, militia and army troops from the Hutu majority.
"The film has stirred some powerful emotions as I remembered what I saw happening here during the genocide," said Claude Musabe, a Hutu businessman who watched the premiere. "It is a depiction of the darkest hours in Rwanda's history."
For Sylvia Barakagwira, whose husband was hacked to death by militiamen, the film brought only sorrow.
"So very sad," she said though tears.
The $1.5 million production centers on two young lovers whose lives and dreams are shattered by the slaughter. Nick Hughes, who directed the film and wrote the script, described it as muted testimony of the survivors.
"What inspired me to make the film was really the fact that I was here during the genocide," said Hughes, who covered the blood bath as a free-lance TV cameraman. "I worked on documentaries on every aspect of the genocide."
The British-born Hughes, 40, had covered violent events all over Africa, but he said none had affected him like the Rwanda genocide.
"I felt a feature-length film would reach a wider audience that may not necessarily watch a documentary," he said.
"100 Days" has been shown in Toronto, Canada; Milan, Italy; Los Angeles and Palm Springs, Calif.; London; Gothenburg, Sweden; Cape Town, South Africa; and Dhaka, Bangladesh.
The film avoids graphic depiction of the massacres, in which victims were chased into maize fields and banana plantations and hacked to death by machete-wielding militiamen bent on ethnic extermination.
"I absolutely underplayed the horror of the genocide and concentrated on the humanity of Rwandans because I wanted the audience to see them - both killers and victims - as human beings," said Hughes, whose videotape of attackers men beating a woman and her daughter pleading for their lives was broadcast all over the world in 1994.
Teaming up with Rwandan co-producer Eric Kabera, Hughes and Vivid Features, his Kenya-based media company, hired a handful of professional Kenyan actors and a mostly inexperienced Rwandan cast and crew and filmed the movie in western Rwanda.
 Load-Date: March 25, 2002

 

End of Document
