

S.D. Air Force base that played a major role in the Cold War is on the Pentagon's hit list
The Associated Press
May 13, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 575 words
Byline: By CHET BROKAW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ELLSWORTH AIR FORCE BASE, S.D.
Body




During the Cold War, Ellsworth Air Force Base was well-positioned to protect America against Soviet attack and bring doomsday to the Kremlin.
Situated on the South Dakota prairie, it provided missiles and long-range nuclear bombers with a direct route to Russia by way of the North Pole. And the base was so far inland that it had cover against submarine and other sea attacks.
Now, more than a decade after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War, Ellsworth turned up Friday on the list of military installations that the Pentagon proposes to close.
"We had missiles. We had bombers standing alert," said Lt. Col. Clete Knaub. But the end of the Cold War "has brought about these dramatic changes. And you simply don't need all these bases."
Community leaders who spent 10 years and $2 million to save Ellsworth from an earlier round of closings were shocked at Friday's news. They vowed to keep the base open.
"This is the first inning of an extra-inning game," said Pat McElgunn of the Rapid City Area Chamber of Commerce. But Ellsworth supporters were also prepared to find other uses for the base if it closes. "We can always recover," McElgunn said.
Before any changes happen, a base closing commission reviews the plan. Then it needs congressional and White House approval. Ellsworth could close between 2007 and 2011 if the Pentagon recommendation becomes final. The one-time cost to shut down the base would be $299 million, but the savings would be $316 million in the first year, said Col. Joseph D. Brown, commander of the 28th Bomb Wing at Ellsworth.
Ellsworth is the second-largest employer in South Dakota, not counting state government, with 3,852 military and civilian workers. An Air Force study last year estimated that the base contributes up to 2 percent of the state's annual gross product.
The announcement was a setback for Sen. John Thune. The Republican defeated Democratic leader Tom Daschle by campaigning on his close ties to the White House.
At the end of the heated campaign last fall, Daschle used Ellsworth as an example of his clout in Washington, claiming he kept the base off the list during the last round of closings. Thune's campaign countered that Daschle's role as leader of President Bush's opposition would be a liability during the base closing process.
On Friday, Thune said: "I will help lead the fight in the Senate" to delay this round of base closings.
Ellsworth was a major part of America's nuclear deterrent. It became home to many of the nation's B-52 nuclear bombers and held control over 150 intercontinental ballistic missiles scattered in underground silos. For a time during the Cold War, some of those B-52s were kept in the air around the clock, awaiting orders.
The last B-52 left Ellsworth in 1986, and the base's sole mission became maintaining a fleet of B-1B bombers that arrived in 1987. Its missile silos were deactivated after the Cold War. In 1991, all of the nation's bombers stopped carrying nuclear weapons.
Pentagon officials proposed closing Ellsworth, home to roughly half the nation's fleet of B-1B long-range bombers, and combining that fleet with bombers at Dyess Air Force Base in Texas.
Glenn Goehring, who works for a company that makes and installs marble bathtubs, said residents have grown so accustomed to Ellsworth that they rarely think of the destructive power it holds.
"Growing up here, you kind of have blinders on," he said. "You forget what it's here for."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos SD102-103
 Load-Date: May 14, 2005

 

End of Document
