

Scores mark the one month anniversary of the death of protester killed in Genoa
August 20, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 562 words
Dateline: GENOA, Italy
Body




Genoa's new police superintendent embraced the father of a protester killed during the Group of Eight riots as Italians marked the one-month anniversary of the death with peaceful memorials and demonstrations Monday.
The encounter occurred in the Genoa square where 23-year-old Carlo Giuliani was shot and killed by a police officer as he tried to rush a Carabinieri jeep with a fire extinguisher July 20, the first day of the riots.
The square was covered Monday with flowers, notes, cigarettes, T-shirts and bottles of beer brought by friends, residents and protesters to mark the anniversary of Giuliani's death - the first in two years of anti-globalization protests.
The crowds for the most part respected the wishes of the family for a quiet day of remembrance. Some walked by the piazza and shook hands with the victim's father, Giuliano Giuliani. Others said a prayer at the gate of a church overlooking the square, which has been covered with condolence notes for the past month.
Among those paying their respects was Oscar Fioriolli, Genoa's new police superintendent, who embraced the elder Giuliani, saying: "I am here as a citizen."
"Let's try to build on this together," Fioriolli was quoted as saying by Italian news agencies.
Fioriolli was assigned to the job after Genoa's superintendent and two other senior law enforcement officials were removed from their posts in the aftermath of the riots, which did millions of dollars in damage to Genoa and badly hurt Italy's image abroad.
When a friend of the slain protester asked Fioriolli if a new relationship between police and protesters could be born, he responded: "On my part, this new rapport must occur; there's no other way - as long as everyone respects nonviolence."
Giuliani's father didn't comment after his brief encounter with Fioriolli, but said he was pleased by Monday's turnout at the piazza.
"I am here with (Carlo) and among his friends, and for me that's everything," he said.
Across town, the Genoa Social Forum, an umbrella organization of anti-globalization groups, organized a sit-in in front of a Genoa jail where some protesters arrested during the summit are still being detained.
Hundreds of people gathered for peaceful demonstrations in cities across the country, including Naples, Milan, Turin and Rome, where participants laid a marble plaque with Giuliani's name on it in a square in the Trastevere neighborhood. In Sant'Angelo a Scala, a village a few miles east of Naples where anti-globalization groups have been meeting, a priest celebrated a Mass in memory of Giuliani.
In Berlin, about 30 demonstrators demanded the release of Germans still being held in Italy.
Protesters also took to the streets in three cities in Swizerland to protest the violence in Italy. About 300 demonstrated in Basel, clashing briefly with police. Smaller gatherings occurred in Lucerne and Bern.
An estimated 100,000 protesters massed in Genoa for the July 20-22 summit to champion a variety of causes, from debt relief to the environment. A small core of them turned violent, setting cars and buildings ablaze and clashing with police.
In comments published Sunday, the police officer accused of killing Giuliani, 21-year-old Mario Placanica, said he felt sick about what happened.
"I'm sorry, I couldn't do anything else," he said. "If I could have had the choice and avoided what happened, I would have."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo GVA103<d
 Load-Date: August 21, 2001

 

End of Document
