

Shhhh! Don't mention that pesky missile defense thing; the Bush-Putin show is on the air
November 16, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 569 words
Byline: By SANDRA SOBIERAJ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CRAWFORD, Texas
Body




They flattered each other. They poked each other with wisecracks. They patted each other on the back, shared knowing winks.
When President Bush and Russian President Vladimir Putin did their side-by-side question-and-answer routine Thursday at Crawford High School, it was, as one TV correspondent observed, a schtick worthy of Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis.
We'll take questions now, Bush told students.
Putin, reaching his hand to the nape of Bush's neck, inserted himself between Bush and the microphone. "No math questions," the Russian intoned.
"Good idea," replied Bush.
So it went for 52 minutes on stage in the school gymnasium.
It was the closing act of their three days of talks, and both men made the most of the opportunity to showcase the leaps and bounds they'd made in drawing the United States and Russia closer.
Such an emphasis served to draw attention away from their failure at this summit to agree on missile defense, cynics might say. But Bush and Putin were having too much fun Thursday to indulge cynicism.
When a student named Sean brought up their stubborn differences on Bush's plan for a U.S. anti-missile shield, Bush teasingly barked, "Are you with the national press corps?"
When high school senior Danny White questioned the technicalities of their agreement to reduce nuclear stockpiles - Would they simply take warheads off "alert" status or actually take them apart and destroy them? - Putin wondered aloud if he wasn't really at NASA.
Outside, a cold rainstorm thundered, making the show inside feel that much rosier.
Bush called Putin a friend and Russia a "strong partner." Putin saluted his counterpart as "a man who does what he says."
At one point, while Bush chuckled at the lectern, Putin leaned into him, laying one hand on Bush's right arm, the other on his back - the pose of intimates.
Putin charmed the small-town audience, telling them that Russians back home know more about Texas than any other American state - "except maybe for Alaska, which we sold to you."
Putin called his barbecue dinner at Bush's ranch on Wednesday night "a masterpiece of cooking." He and his wife, Lyudmila, had spent the night in the guesthouse, just a breezeway away from the Bushes' own bedroom. And they alone shared breakfast Thursday morning with Bush and his wife, Laura.
"On our way here, we didn't expect at all that things would be so warm and homey as they were," Putin said.
"You only invite your friends into your house," explained Bush. "Occasionally, you let a salesman in, or two."
Two who share a sarcastic sort of wit, the presidents parried over when they might meet again.
Bush suggested Putin return to Crawford - for a jog - in scorching, dusty August. "And maybe you'd like to go to Siberia in the winter," Putin retorted.
But seriously, folks, "My promise is I will not terrorize your president with such low temperatures," Putin said.
The missile-defense snag aside, Bush compared his relationship with Putin to a child's love for his mother.
"You probably don't agree with your mother on every issue. You still love her, though, don't you?" Bush asked a 12th-grader who questioned how this summit, their fourth meeting, had brought him closer to Putin.
"Well, even though we don't agree on every issue," Bush continued, "I still respect him and like him as a person."
On the Net: Transcript of Bush-Putin school assembly: http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2001/11/20011115-4.html 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XAZ102, DSM103, XCAR102,105,107
 Load-Date: November 17, 2001

 

End of Document
