

Sitcom set in pub in rural Romania teaches farmers the ways of the European Union
The Associated Press
August 7, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 530 words
Byline: By ALISON MUTLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUCHAREST, Romania
Body




A sitcom set in a rural Romanian pub has become an overnight hit - a sort of "Cheers" in the countryside - teaching farmers how to use bar codes, slaughter pigs humanely and breed goats the European Union way.
In "The Winding Road to Europe," villagers belly up to the bar in the fictional La Europa pub and swap stories about how joining the EU will change their lives. As much public service announcement as entertainment, the show has tapped into a curious audience anxious about the changes ahead.
"Our characters laugh at themselves," said Gabriel Giurgiu, the show's project manager. "They admit they are uneducated."
Romania hopes to join by 2007, and polls show more than two in three people in the countryside support EU membership. The problem is, few have a clear concept of how the nation of 22 million must prepare to join.
Enter the European Union's Romania office, which has funded 12 15-minute episodes of "Winding Road" at $16,800 each.
The show's characters are based on what locals consider classic archetypes of rural Romania: the skeptic, the youth who yearns to move to the city, the matriarch, the entrepreneur and the resigned drunkard.
Some are identified by profession, like "the Press" - the village gossip - or "the Professor," who survived the coming of capitalism by setting up a snail farm. He explains what a laptop is, how the Internet works, and spouts phrases like "European norms and regulations" while holding forth on the pre-slaughter anesthetizing of pigs.
One of the four episodes aired so far explains how sheep, pigs, and goats may no longer be bred at will but must comply with European "breeding norms." Bonguta, the matronly owner of the bar, urges people to get used to the new ways - warning that otherwise, "at Christmas we'll be eating yogurt and mashed beans."
It's a bit of a hard sell in the verdant, mountainous Romanian countryside, a place of ramshackle villages and sprawling farms where nature is usually allowed to take its own course in such matters.
Another episode discusses packing vegetables for sale at the supermarket.
"I'll give you a bar code so big you won't be able to carry it!" one villager quips upon learning of the inventory-tracking device.
The show, produced by state television, airs Sundays around noon, when rural Romanians traditionally settle down to watch television before lunch.
"People are always talking about integration into the European Union when they leave church," said Vasile Fizesan, an Orthodox priest from Floresti, a village in the northeastern region of Transylvania. "Lots of people watch the show in this village."
Whether it's making even more people sanguine about the EU is another matter. There are fears, Fizesan said, of "disaffected farmers coming to the cities" after EU agricultural rules take effect.
He said some traditions like slitting pigs' throats and letting them bleed to death are part of Romanian culture. "The sacrifice of pigs is a special ritual that is almost religious," he said.
But his 26-year-old son, Titus, said it's time for change, and the show has given Romanians a good start.
"Pigs should be electrocuted," he said, "so they aren't screaming all over the place."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo XVG102
 Load-Date: August 8, 2004

 

End of Document
