

Some of the victims of the terrorist attacks
October 15, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 431 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Some of those confirmed dead or reported dead in the terrorist attacks Sept. 11:
 
CHRISTIAN ADAMS, 37, of Biebelsheim, Germany, flew to the United States for two vintage German wine tastings. He was coming from the first tasting when his plane, United Flight 93 was hijacked. He was a sales manager for the German Wine Fund of Biebelsheim. Adams and his wife's family owned a small winery, which colleagues say made it difficult for Adams to make the trip because it was nearing winemaking season in Germany. Adams also is survived by his two children.
SPC. CRAIG AMUNDSON, 28, of Fort Belvoir, Va. worked as a multimedia illustrator for the deputy chief of staff of personnel at the Pentagon. When the airplanes crashed into the World Trade Center, his wife, Amber, became concerned and called her husband at the Pentagon and he said "Honey, don't worry, I'm in the safest place in the world." His aunt, Mary McAfoos, said Craig Amundson loved working with computers and adored his family so much he recently turned down a promotion because it would have separated him from his family for a while. He also is survived by two young children.
 
CHRISTOPHER S. CRAMER, 34, Manahawkin, N.J., loved Jimmy Buffet. "He (Buffet) sings about sitting in the islands, sailing, having a good time and toasting the better things in life. He was (Christopher's) idol," said Cramer's brother Walter. Christopher Cramer was at work at the World Trade Center when it was attacked. He was assistant vice president for tax operations at Fiduciary Trust Co. He is survived by his parents and siblings.
 
MICHAEL BRADLEY FINNEGAN, 37, of Basking Ridge, N.J., was videotaped days before the terrorist attacks escorting his daughter to her first day in kindergarten. "As she started to turn around, her father hugged her and said 'I love you,' his eyes filling with tears. The camera caught it all," said Finnegan's sister, Katherine Finnegan. Michael Finnegan was a currency broker with Cantor Fitzgerald on the 105th floor of the World Trade Center's North Tower. He spent his free time with his family, teaching his children to swim and golf.
 
KEVIN YORK, 41, of Princeton, N.J., was the first in his family to attend college. He graduated from Stockton State College and later became a senior vice president at EuroBrokers Inc. York's father was in the Air Force and York spent much of his childhood traveling. He married his high school sweetheart, Chiemi Brindle, and they had two sons. "They made a great couple," said York's friend, Paul Kost. "He put his family by far above every other thing in his life."
 Load-Date: October 16, 2001

 

End of Document
