

Some of the victims of the terrorist attacks
October 30, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 432 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Some of those confirmed dead, reported dead or missing in the terrorist attacks Sept. 11:
 
MICHAEL D'AURIA, 25, of Great Kills, N.Y., got to live his boyhood dream even if only for nine weeks. D'Auria longed for years to become a firefighter. He reached his goal this year and was on the job just nine weeks when he responded to the World Trade Center attacks. Before he joined the department, D'Auria attended culinary school and became a gourmet chef, cooking at various eateries in Brooklyn, Manhattan and Staten Island. A fellow firefighter said D'Auria's skills did not go unnoticed at the firehouse: "When we saw Mike's name on the board, we knew we were going to eat good that night."
NOEL J. FOSTER, 40, of Bridgewater, N.J., a vice president for Aon Corp., had just celebrated his 10th wedding anniversary with his wife, Nancy. His youngest child, Nicole, had just started kindergarten and the family had bought a house. "They were at a perfect time in their life," said his wife's sister, Peggy Oblack. Foster tried to help a colleague with a broken leg get down 99 flights of stairs after the World Trade Center was attacked. That didn't surprise his mother, Marion. "That's just the way he was," she said.
PATRICIA ANN PUMA, 33, of New York, an administrator with Julien J. Studley Inc., frantically called her husband from the 86th floor of one of the World Trade Center's towers to say a fireball had come up the elevator shaft and a wall had collapsed. She was trapped along with a broker from the company. When her husband, Kevin Puma, tried to call his wife back, the phone lines were down. "I just wanted to hear her voice," he said. "I wanted to be there in Manhattan to pick her up after all this so she wouldn't have to take the ferry and train home."
NORMAN ROSSINOW, 39, of Cedar Grove, N.J., a senior vice president for Aon Corp., called his wife, Susan, to tell him he was OK after the first attack on the World Trade Center. She wanted him to leave the building, but he was reluctant. "If you tell me you love me, I'll come home," he told her.
WILLIE Q. TROY, 51, of Aberdeen Proving Ground, Md., was a Department of Defense program analyst who worked at the Pentagon. He and his wife of 30 years, Judy, returned to the mainland United States last fall after more than two decades of working for the military and living in Germany, Panama and Puerto Rico. "We wanted to come home," Judy Troy said. Willie Troy enlisted in the Army in 1970 and served in Vietnam. The injuries he suffered in the war worsened over time and he retired as a disabled veteran after 15 1/2 years.
 Load-Date: October 31, 2001

 

End of Document
