

Storms force Russians to suspend operation to raise the Kursk from the Barents Sea
August 24, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 300 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Storms have forced the Russians to temporarily suspend the operation to raise the Kursk nuclear submarine from the floor of the Barents Sea, but the work was still expected to be completed on schedule, officials said Friday.
The 18,000-ton vessel sank during naval exercises Aug. 12 last year, killing the entire 118-member crew. It is to be brought to the surface Sept. 15 by steel cables connected to 26 computer-controlled hydraulic lifting devices, anchored to a giant barge.
But winds of up to 45 mph and high waves were rocking the Norwegian diving support ship Mayo, which is serving as a base for the salvage operation in the Barents Sea, and Vice Adm. Michail Motsak decided late Thursday to halt work until the situation was calmer, a spokesman said.
"Divers' work was temporarily halted because of the weather," Northern Fleet spokesman Igor Bobenko told reporters. "The list of Mayo vessel now exceeds four degrees and this is already dangerous for the helicopters landing aboard the vessel."
An international team of divers has so far made 16 of 26 holes in the Kursk's double hull. Once that is completed, they will prepare to sever the submarine's mangled fore section, which is to be left behind when the Kursk is lifted - for fear it could contain unexploded torpedoes.
After the Kursk's bow is sawed off, the divers will attach steel cables. Towing the submarine to harbor is expected to take up to two weeks, depending on the weather.
Russian officials, who hope a close look at the submarine will shed light on the cause of the disaster and comfort family members of the victims, said they still planned to complete the operation on schedule.
"The deadline for the operation will not change," Ilya Klebanov, a deputy prime minister, was quoted as saying by the Russian news agency Interfax.
 Load-Date: August 25, 2001

 

End of Document
