

Swans up! The queen's minions prowl the River Thames, marking her majesty's swans
July 19, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 735 words
Byline: By SUE LEEMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MARLOW, England
Body




"Swans up!"
The man in the scarlet jacket and sea captain's hat decorated with a large white feather maneuvers his small flotilla of rowboats around a family of swans bobbing on the River Thames.
The struggling, fluffy gray cygnets who are caught, weighed and ringed don't know it, but this man is on royal business.
It's swan-upping time again.
Five times a year, David Barber - known officially as Her Majesty's Swan Marker - boards a skiff with a royal flag on its prow and sets off to count his royal employer's swans.
Since the 12th century, when roast swan was considered a delicacy, the British monarch has held the right to all the mute swans on Britain's inland waterways - with the title Seigneur of the Swans - and royal officials have gone "swan-upping," catching the graceful creatures by lifting them out of the water.
Today, swans are no longer eaten in large numbers and upping swans has become more of a ceremonial census. Queen Elizabeth II only claims swan rights on a verdant, winding 80-mile stretch of the Thames west of Windsor Castle, her weekend home.
"It's an ancient tradition, but today's swan-upping is largely concerned with conservation," said Barber.
"The information we collect shows the changes in the river's environment and enables us to protect the birds better."
Since the 16th century, the monarch has shared the right to swans with the Worshipful Company of Vintners and the Worshipful Company of Dyers, two of the many ancient trade associations still based in the City of London financial center. It's not clear why these two companies were chosen, because the records were destroyed in the Fire of London in 1666.
So, when Barber takes to the water for five days in the third week of July, he is accompanied by members of the two companies, in their own skiffs.
There is a carnival air as the teams take off in six small boats decked with flowers and flags showing their allegiance; they are cheered as they pass through locks and small crowds gather wherever they stop.
The queen's team wear red, the vintners white and the dyers blue jerseys and white trousers.
As the sweating rowers pass beneath the round stone towers of Windsor Castle, they stand to attention and hold their oars aloft in salute to the queen.
When a family of birds is spotted, they are surrounded and hands reach out to catch them by the throat. Adults' wings and legs are tied together; a leg tie is sufficient for the cygnets.
On the river bank, the parents' beaks are examined to establish ownership. In the past, notches were clipped out of their beaks, but today numbered leg rings are used.
The cygnets are divided on a roughly equal basis, and marked accordingly. Initially, a notch is clipped in their webbed feet, but this is later replaced with a ring.
Scientists at Oxford University accompany the swan-uppers to check the health of the birds and weigh them.
"One of the things we have learned from this is that swans don't necessarily mate for life," said Oxford zoologist Robin McCleery, as he weighed a cygnet in a makeshift sling suspended from a wire coat hanger. "They sometimes move on to another partner, even while the present one is still alive and breeding."
Bill Colley, Swan Marker of the Worshipful Company of Vintners, who proudly wears the vintners' badge featuring three wine barrels, said in the 1950s the Thames was very dirty and there were only a few hundred swans on this stretch of the river.
"Today, there are more than 1,000, largely because the river is cleaner and fishermen have been banned from using lead weights," he said.
"A swan has no teeth; behind its gullet there is a grinding machine which grinds the lead up so finely that it can circulate in the swan's blood stream. The birds were dying by the hundred."
Barber said bird numbers are down slightly this year after flooding caused many swans to build their nests higher than usual, which left them vulnerable to predators like dogs and foxes.
"We have also had youngsters stoning swans," he said. The queen can choose to prosecute the perpetrators "for damaging Crown property."
Dyer Fred Reed, 77, recalls once finding a swan with a crossbow bolt through its wing, which was full of pus and bleeding. "Luckily, it survived."
He jests that after 55 years of swan-upping, "I'm just getting used to it.
"What do I find so magical? I don't know. But it is nice to think you are doing something people were doing centuries ago."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY191-193
 Load-Date: July 20, 2001

 

End of Document
