

The case against Moussaoui: He acted like the 9-11 hijackers
The Associated Press
April 21, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 696 words
Byline: By MICHAEL J. SNIFFEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




As Zacarias Moussaoui prepares to enter the first guilty plea in this country to crimes related to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the 36-year-old Frenchman's role in the 2001 assault on the World Trade Center and Pentagon remains in dispute.
Moussaoui was behind bars in Minnesota the day of the attack - arrested a month earlier for overstaying his visa, after employees of a flight school near Minneapolis became suspicious of him.
The government charges he was part of a broad al-Qaida plot against the United States that included the Sept. 11 aircraft crashes. It charged six counts of conspiracy: to commit terrorist acts transcending national boundaries, to pirate aircraft, to destroy aircraft, to use weapons of mass destruction, to murder federal employees, and to destroy property.
He has tried to plead guilty before, but Judge Leonie Brinkema wouldn't accept the plea earlier. It remains to be seen what precisely this volatile defendant is willing to admit now.
Previously, Moussaoui acknowledged he is an al-Qaida member and pledged allegiance to its leader, Osama bin Laden. But he has consistently denied involvement in the Sept. 11 plot, asserting he was to be part of a later operation outside the United States.
As he put it in one of his many ungrammatical motions, this from 2003: "The record can show that I constantly rejected any participation in 9/11. Instead as I said in open court, I was part of a different operation, with different al-Qaida member and target." He said al-Qaida likes to vary its targets and predicted an attack on Europe was "coming soon."
The Sept. 11 commission concluded that purported Sept. 11 mastermind Khalid Shaikh Mohammed considered replacing the pilot of the plane that crashed in Pennsylvania with Moussaoui. Now in custody, Mohammed, however, has told interrogators that Moussaoui actually was being considered for a second wave of attacks still in early planning.
The government's indictment lays out a case based on allegations Moussaoui was in contact with and funded by al-Qaida plotters and made the same preparations as the 19 hijackers.
According to the indictment:
In April 1998, Moussaoui was at the al-Qaida-affiliated Khalden training camp in Afghanistan.
On Sept. 29, 2000, Moussaoui contacted Airman Flight School in Norman, Okla., through a Malaysian e-mail account.
The next month, he received a letter from Infocus Tech, a Malaysian company, naming him as a marketing consultant for the United States, United Kingdom and Europe at $2,500 a month.
On Feb. 23, 2001, Moussaoui flew from London to Chicago. On Feb. 26, he deposited $32,000 cash in a Norman bank.
From that day through May 29, he attended classes at the Airman Flight School.
On May 23, 2001, Moussaoui e-mailed the Pan Am International Flight Academy in Miami.
On June 20, 2001, Moussaoui purchased flight deck videos for two Boeing 747 jetliner models from the same Ohio pilot store from which some 9/11 hijackers had purchased the same videos.
On July 10 or 11, Moussaoui used a credit card to pay Pan Am International Flight Academy for a simulator course in commercial flight training.
Between July 29 and Aug. 4, 2001, he used public phones in Norman to call a number in Duesseldorf, Germany.
On Aug. 1 and 3, purported Sept. 11 operations chief Ramzi Binalshibh wired $14,000 from Duesseldorf and Hamburg, Germany, to Moussaoui in Norman.
On Aug. 3, 2001, Moussaoui bought two knives in Norman.
On Aug. 10 and 11, he was driven to Minnesota and paid $6,800 cash on Aug. 13 to Pan Am International. He trained Aug. 13 and 15 at that company's Minneapolis facility on its Boeing 747 Model 400 simulator.
On Aug. 16, federal agents found Moussaoui had two knives, binoculars, 747 flight manuals, flight simulator programs, a paper referring to a handheld Global Positioning System receiver, a notebook containing two German telephone numbers and the "Ahad Sabet" alias used by Binalshibh, and a hand-held aviation radio.
In late August, one of the 9/11 hijackers purchased global positioning equipment and cockpit schematics for a Boeing 757. On Sept. 11, the hijackers had handwritten final instructions for a martyrdom operation on an airplane using knives.
 Load-Date: April 22, 2005

 

End of Document
