

The wars are long over, but the hunt for American missing goes on
The Associated Press
October 19, 2003, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 825 words
Byline: By STEVE GUTTERMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




The call came from Kazakhstan: An American who fought in Vietnam had been sighted. For members of a U.S.-Russian commission trying to determine the fate of missing servicemen, it was a tantalizing suggestion that an American had been taken to the Soviet Union from Vietnam decades earlier and was still in the area - still alive.
No such luck. The investigator sent from Moscow found that the man indeed was an American and had been a door gunner in Vietnam - but he was not missing.
"He was just an American who happened to be a Vietnam vet who was working in Kazakhstan," said James Shonborn, deputy chief of the office at the U.S. Embassy here. "But you don't know until you get there."
The work is painstaking and the disappointments many, but 12 years after it was set up following the Soviet collapse, the U.S.-Russia Joint Commission on POW-MIAs is still following leads in an exhaustive effort to track down U.S. servicemen missing from World War II, Korea, Vietnam and the Cold War. None has been found alive.
"We haven't given up hope that there may be some live Americans somewhere," Jerry D. Jennings, the U.S. deputy assistant secretary of defense in charge of the worldwide search, said in Moscow last month.
In the former Soviet Union, the work has led to the identification of the remains or a determination of the fate of 25 Americans - 17 killed when their C-130 Hercules spy plane was shot down over Armenia in 1958, one whose reconnaissance aircraft was downed off Russia's eastern coast in 1952 and seven whose Navy bomber crashed on the Kamchatka Peninsula in 1944.
The team has also helped clarify - if not pin down conclusively - what happened to more than 200 missing U.S. servicemen.
"If an aircraft was witnessed by a Soviet air defender in Korea, and the aircraft exploded in midair and there were no chutes - if we can provide that information to the family, that's a lot more than the telegram they probably got," Shonborn said. "That's what it's all about - if you can provide that scrap of information to the next of kin."
For Shonborn and his colleagues at the Joint Commission Support Directorate's Moscow office, the job mixes the drudgery of peering at papers with the sometimes rugged business of traveling across the former Soviet Union by plane, train and automobile - even, on one journey into Siberia's roadless reaches, by raft.
"A lot of it is putting on old rubber boots and getting on a train," said Yuri Boguslavsky, the American who heads the Moscow office.
The purpose can be to seek graves or crash sites, or to talk to people - former prison camp inmates or war veterans - who claim to have seen Americans or might have information about them.
Shonborn says the openness of most Russians surprises him. "I mean, what would happen if a Russian officer showed up on the doorstep of some guy in Des Moines, Iowa, and said, 'I want to talk to you about what you did during a secret operation,"' he said.
But with World War II and the Cold War receding into the past, the interviews have become a race against time.
"These folks are passing away," Boguslavsky said. "And when they die, the information goes with them."
As living sources die out, Russia's archives have become increasingly significant.
Since 1997, the commission's U.S. side has had access to declassified portions of the Korean War-era files at the Russian Defense Ministry's central archives, and a Russian team has been combing classified Vietnam-era military archives and relaying potentially useful references to the Americans.
The joint commission also investigates the fate of missing Soviet and Russian servicemen.
The information the U.S. side has provided includes information about Cold War incidents such as plane crashes and submarine losses in the 1960s - as well as news of World War II losses, such as death certificates of four Soviet airmen killed in training in North Carolina, and about MiG warplanes captured by American forces during the Korean War.
The United States has also provided Russia with technology to help identify remains of servicemen killed in Chechnya.
But a question that haunts relatives of the American missing remains unanswered: Were any taken to the Soviet Union?
A hint emerged when researchers found a brief memoir written by the Russian historian Dmitry Volkogonov before his death in 1995, in which he said he had discovered in Russian archives a Vietnam-era document assigning the KGB the task of "delivering knowledgeable Americans to the USSR for intelligence purposes."
Russian officials say there was no such directive and that they are convinced such transfers did not take place.
U.S. officials say there is no concrete evidence of it, but that they don't have access to enough information - such as KGB files - to rule it out.
"If we were absolutely sure that everything we're being told is 100 percent, that it never occurred, we wouldn't be pursuing this line of questioning. But we are," Boguslavsky said.
 Load-Date: October 20, 2003

 

End of Document
