

The opening round weakens Taliban's grip, but where are the terrorists?
October 13, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 721 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Last Sunday - football time in America, 9 p.m. in Kabul - U.S. bombs and missiles began to fall on Afghanistan, some with words of remembrance or indignation scribbled in chalk.
The spelling on one bomb was a bit off but the message was clear enough: "Highjack this."
A week later, a country that Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said was largely rubble even before the United States attacked is more so. To what effect remains to be seen.
The United States and its foes are engaged in a monumental exercise of hide-and-seek in a nation almost the size of Texas, stuffed with mountains like the Rockies.
So far the effort has not yielded Osama bin Laden or his band of terrorists, as far as Americans know. President Bush claimed, "We got them on the run," but said he did not know if bin Laden was dead or alive.
For all its ferocity, the campaign amounts to less than what the United States and its allies delivered in the opening rounds over Yugoslavia in 1999 and Iraq in 1991.
About 90 sorties were flown in the first four days over Afghanistan, nearly half by heavy bombers. There were 10 times more flights in the same period over Serbia and Kosovo, and 50 times more over Iraq.
Much of the bombardment has come from aircraft carriers hundreds of miles from landlocked Afghanistan.
Many Navy aircraft need midair refueling several times on one trip, and pilots on the carrier USS Enterprise say they have spent eight hours in the air on missions that took less than two over Yugoslavia. Bombers have flown above the reach of most anti-aircraft fire and the soldier-borne surface-to-air missiles that Afghans have - or had - in ready supply.
With no U.S. or British combat planes lost so far, Rumsfeld said the strikes had weakened the Taliban military and damaged its air defenses; disrupted Taliban communications "somewhat"; and "worked over a number, if not all, of their terrorist training camps."
Nonetheless, he said, "Threats clearly still exist."
Rumsfeld described various aspects of the enemy as "weakened somewhat." How that happened:
-Oct. 7, U.S. and British forces launched cruise-missile and bombing strikes under the cover of darkness, pounding air defenses and command centers.
-Monday, an additional heavy round of nighttime raids went after terrorist camps, early warning radars, anti-aircraft guns, airfields and Taliban aircraft on the ground. Four U.N. contract employees near a targeted radio transmission tower and munitions dumps were killed.
-Tuesday, the United States proclaimed virtual command of the sky over Afghanistan and struck in daylight for the first time. Six targets, including airfields and anti-aircraft missile encampments near the capital of Kabul, were targeted. The Pentagon said 80 percent of targets so far had been damaged or destroyed, a claim that could not be independently verified.
-Wednesday, narrowing their focus to underground command centers, aircraft dropped 5,000-pound, laser-guided "bunker-buster" bombs. U.S. officials said Taliban troops were bombed. The Taliban said at least 200 people were killed when missiles struck the village of Karam; the claim could not be independently verified.
-Thursday, the first daylight raid on Kabul took place. In all, U.S. forces struck six areas that included garrisons, motor vehicles and ordnance depots.
-Friday, bombs fell before dawn north of Kabul, near the front line of the struggle between Taliban soldiers and opposition forces. Long-range bombers took a break on the Muslim holy day.
-Saturday, strikes blasted an area around Kabul's airport, and the Pentagon admitted one bomb had missed its target and hit a civilian area nearby. A Taliban official said the airport for the southern city of Kandahar, the regime's stronghold, was hit, and the private Afghan Islamic Press reported attacks against a military base outside Kandahar.
Michael O'Hanlon, military expert at the Brookings Institution, said it may be possible for opposition forces, with the cover of U.S. planes, to take Kabul and other centers soon.
But in going after bin Laden and his terrorist network - the core goal in responding to the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States - O'Hanlon said, "there's no sign of any progress."
"That's not surprising," he said. "That takes luck, it takes patience. That may take more than a year or two. That may never work."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos KAB102, XMJ104 of Oct. 13; XENT201, XMJ104 of Oct. 12
 Load-Date: October 14, 2001

 

End of Document
