

The day after the attacks, anger and calls for retaliation from across the country
September 12, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 677 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




OFFICIALS/EXPERTS:
 
"The deliberate and deadly attacks, which were carried out yesterday against our country, were more than acts of terror. They were acts of war." - President Bush.
 
"This is the worst intelligence screwup in my lifetime. This is the worst intelligence screwup in our country's history." - Rep. Dana Rohrabacher, R-Calif., senior member of House International Relations Committee.
"The plane that hit the Pentagon may have been headed for the White House." - said Sean McCormack, spokesman for National Security Council.
 
"Make no mistake about it, your armed forces are ready." - Gen. Henry H. Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
 
"America should move aggressively to retaliate. Our governments must do everything possible to protect our citizens." - former President Ford.
 
"We all agree that this attack is not only an attack on America, but on the free and democratic world." - British Prime Minster Tony Blair.
 
"We will rid this world of the stench of your existence. There is no such thing as a measured response to this horrific attack. This act of war will be avenged." - Rep. Shelley Berkley, D-Nev., on terrorists.
 
"They do not know America and they do not know Americans. They think freedom is our vulnerability. It is our strength." House Minority Leader Richard Gephardt, D-Mo.
 
"We're not going to allow these cowards stop New York from being the greatest city in the world, because it is." - New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
 
"Both the economy and the stock market have been on a high wire and it's kind of like these terrorists have cut the wire." - Sung Won Sohn, chief economist of Wells Fargo Bank.
 
"This will be a monumental struggle of good versus evil. But good will prevail." - President Bush.
 
WITNESSES/RESCUERS:
"I know we're all going to die - there's three of us who are going to do something about it." Thomas Burnett to his wife, moments before his United Airlines jet crashed southeast of Pittsburgh.
 
"I've called every hospital imaginable in New York and New Jersey. He's not on any list. I call all these emergency numbers. They promise to call you back; no one calls you back." - Susan Carroll, 43, of West Hempstead, N.Y., about her missing son, Kevin Colbert, 25.
 
"It is unimaginable, devastating, unspeakable carnage … To say it looks like a war zone and to tell you about bodies lying in the street and blood and steel beams blocking roads would not begin to describe what it's like. It's horrible." - New York firefighter Scott O'Grady.
 
"I must have come across body parts by the thousands." - Angelo Otchy, a mortgage broker who came with a National Guard unit from Dover, N.J., to dig through debris in New York.
 
"I didn't recognize my wife of 31 years. … I saw a person who looked like a mummy." - Michael Kurtz, whose wife, Louise Kurtz, was starting her second day of work as an Army accountant at the Pentagon and suffered burns to about 70 percent of her body.
 
GENERAL REACTION:
"Everyone is hungry to do any little piece of anything to help." - Anne Lee, who used her four-hour wait in a Charleston, S.C., blood donor line to collect about $3,000 to aid victims.
 
"This wasn't an act of God. This was an act of the devil. It's what man's ego does," - James Thomas of Detroit.
 
"As Muslims we do not condone violence. What has happened has happened to members of our human family." - Dr. Irfan Haq of the Sacramento Area League of Associated Muslims.
 
"I think we ought to find out who did this and blow them into oblivion." - Army veteran Jack Chapman, 64, of Adel, Iowa.
 
"People are afraid. Maybe you will be asleep and then suddenly the rockets from America will come." - carpenter Zurmai Khan in Kabul, Afghanistan.
 
"Our freedom has been put in jeopardy, and I want to be someone who helps defend that." - Josh Gipe, 24, who filled out paperwork Wednesday at an Army recruiting office in Atlanta.
 
"To not become like the enemy we despise, that's part of the challenge now; to not become consumed by hatred." - the Rev. Dexter McNamara, director of the Interfaith Service Bureau of Sacramento.
 Load-Date: September 13, 2001

 

End of Document
