

The sound of the runways: DJs are designers' secret weapons
The Associated Press
September 26, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 545 words
Byline: By ERIN HANAFY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Fashion shows are, obviously, about clothes. And models. And celebrities in the front row. But style doesn't begin and end with visuals: The unsung hero of any fashion show is the music.
Models stalk the catwalk to the unceasing, pounding beat of techno or house music, a cacophony of impersonal, studied cool. But getting that intimidating drumbeat just right for 10 minutes is much more complicated that you'd think. In fact, it's a full-time job.
"Most people, when they start out, they think it's just about the beat," says Wilson Chan, also known as Mr. Wilson DJ, a New Yorker who has manned the booth for such designers as Gucci, Heatherette, Peter Som, Derek Lam and Yves Saint Laurent.
"As I've kind of matured and grown up I've realized you can use any kind of music that works with the clothing and it's not about stomping to the beat. It's more about a referential experience," says Chan, who samples everyone from Franz Ferdinand and Interpol to Dolly Parton and Bette Midler.
Parisian Frederic Sanchez, who was the DJ for Anna Sui, Marc Jacobs and Calvin Klein this season, says New York runway shows have a very different feel from the shows in Europe, and the music reflects that.
"Maybe in Europe it's more intellectual. In New York it's more going with the idea of the city, with the energy," he says. "We work on the music when they're working on the styling, they're working on the hair and the makeup. That's what's very interesting. It's like you create an energy."
Sanchez doesn't only do fashion shows; his music mixes are heard in sound installations and works with other artists on video and multimedia installations. He says he likes to be unpredictable. "I started to do some weird mixes - Missy Elliott with Nirvana or with Metallica or some weird thing like Coldplay with Christina Aguilera, very strange things. We experience that a lot at Marc Jacobs. Beyonce with Metallica," Sanchez says.
Every Fashion Week has certain recurring themes that almost every designer seems to touch on - handicrafts, chiffon and white for spring 2006, for example - and the music is no different. After a week's worth of shows, certain songs emerge as the sounds of the season.
"For some reason last year it was LCD Soundsystem and the Chemical Brothers that I heard in so many shows, and I used them, too, in some of my shows. A year before it went the other way with Beyonce's 'Crazy In Love' in four different shows," says Javier Peral, a Spanish lawyer whose new career is as one of New York's busiest DJs, working with Oscar de la Renta, Carolina Herrara, Ralph Lauren, Vera Wang and Kenneth Cole.
But while fashion is all about what's new and modern, fashion's music often is nostalgic.
Sanchez says Roxy Music, David Bowie and the Rolling Stones enjoy a decades-long mutual love affair with fashion for decades.
Designer Jacobs put the Penn State Blue Band on his runway earlier this month. They played Nirvana's "Smells Like Teen Spirit."
Nothing is off limits when you're trying to cook up a mix, according to Peral.
Country might become more popular with the current cowboy-boots-with-everything look. "I've even heard Christopher Cross sometimes, some really wacky stuff," he says. "But if it's done with the right mind and the right sort of irony, it works."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY641-NY642
 Load-Date: September 27, 2005

 

End of Document
