

The floods are gone, but the Czech capital remains in a funk
October 7, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 716 words
Byline: By WILLIAM J. KOLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PRAGUE, Czech Republic
Body




It's a Czech superstition - if the bell in the cathedral at Prague's medieval castle breaks, the country is in for a run of bad luck.
This past summer, the clapper broke off and plunged down the bell tower of the city's storied St. Vitus Cathedral. Within weeks the heavens unleashed the worst flooding in nearly two centuries.
Though the waters have since receded from one of Europe's most enchanting capitals, the misfortune keeps mounting. The clapper has been fixed, but don't ask for whom the bell tolls. It tolls for the Czechs, a proud and usually carefree people now mired in a deep funk.
The Hilton just reopened after being shuttered for weeks for flood repairs; the Intercontinental won't be back in business until next month, and the Four Seasons is closed for the rest of the year. The usual crowds of tourists have thinned, and the worst pollution since the collapse of communism a dozen years ago has fouled the nation's rivers and its mood.
Most of the subway system is still idled. Dozens of roads are blocked and a cab ride that normally takes five minutes can run to 30 minutes or longer.
"It must be better in Costa Rica! It must be better in Costa Rica!" a man in a leather jacket and designer jeans angrily declaimed to the sky as he made his way through the city center on a recent weekday.
August's flooding ravaged much of the Czech Republic, killing at least 16 people, leaving thousands homeless and inflicting $3 billion worth of damage.
Prague was especially hard-hit; although the rain-swollen Vltava River spared the quaint Old Town and its treasures, it submerged some neighborhoods under nearly 10 feet of water.
In the Karlin district, entire city blocks are uninhabitable and plastered with mud and sand. St. Cyril Church is closed, and streets are littered with waterlogged carpets and household bric-a-brac. Sodden ancient bricks crumble to the touch. The smell of gas from ruptured pipes hangs in the air.
"Life will return to normal. But who knows when?" said Ladislav Novak, 54.
His third-floor Karlin apartment was spared flood damage, but the waters have knocked out the heating system, leaving him only sweaters and a wool cap to fend off the early autumn chill.
At an elementary school two doors down, a sign warns parents that although classes will resume on schedule in October, children won't be served lunch because the cafeteria is swamped.
Tourists still flock to Prague's cafes, art galleries and monuments. But tourism is down 50 percent - in an economy that depends heavily on more than 100 million foreign visitors a year.
"The situation is getting better day by day, and we can see more and more tourists coming, but we have to tell our visitors the truth," said Vaclav Novotny, who heads Prague's travel information bureau.
The truth is that parts of Prague just don't look right: Beneath the famed Charles Bridge, the Vltava runs like a thick stew.
They don't always smell right, either: Every toilet flush in the capital of 1 million goes straight into the Vltava because the floodwaters knocked out the city's main water treatment plant, along with dozens of others nationwide. Prague residents are being urged to go easy on toilet paper.
The floods also swamped chemical factories, causing thousands of tons of fertilizer, detergent and other poisons to leach into the river, said Vaclav Berousek, the government's chief environmental inspector for the Prague region.
"The river was pristine enough to support trout, even within the city limits. No more," Berousek said, describing damage reminiscent of communist-era environmental abuse.
"We hope life in the river will survive and the water will be clean again," he said. "But it will take a year or two."
The government is scrambling to prepare Prague for a NATO summit in November that will bring together Western heads of state, including President Bush. Some say the summit will test the resolve that enabled Czechs to survive communist rule and finally overthrow it in 1989.
Others say they've already passed the test.
Working by candlelight in an army tent, Alena Urbanova recruits volunteers to help clean homes.
"Some have taken days off from work to help, and we've even had homeless people pitch in," she said. "It's not pleasant work, and there's still so much to do. But there are people who care."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY109-112
 Load-Date: October 8, 2002

 

End of Document
