

The first lady embraces the teaching of values as an answer in turning hate to hope
May 14, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 881 words
Byline: By SANDRA SOBIERAJ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




In her inaugural foray into the substance of international diplomacy, first lady Laura Bush turned her teaching experience to the problem of terrorism and young Palestinian suicide bombers, telling a Paris audience Tuesday that education can transform hate to hope.
"Every parent, every teacher, every leader has a responsibility to condemn the terrible tragedy of children blowing themselves up to kill others," Mrs. Bush told a forum of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The former schoolteacher and librarian called for children across the globe to be taught respect and tolerance.
"A lasting victory in the war against terror depends on educating the world's children because educated children are much more likely to embrace the values that defeat terror," Mrs. Bush said.
As the first lady addressed representatives of the OECD's 30 member countries, she especially had in mind the 18-year-old Palestinian girl, Ayat Akhras. Outside a Jerusalem supermarket on March 29, Akhras detonated explosives strapped to her body, killing herself, 17-year-old Rachel Levy and a security guard and wounding 25 other people.
"Education can help children see beyond the world of hate and hopelessness," Mrs. Bush said.
"First and foremost, we must teach all the world's children to respect human life - their own life, and the lives of others. … With education comes greater self-respect and respect for others. With education comes greater understanding and tolerance."
She was emphasizing the teaching of values and not schooling in and of itself, no doubt aware that several of the Sept. 11 suicide hijackers were university educated, including ringleader Mohammed Atta, who studied for eight years at the Technical University in Hamburg, Germany.
In an interview, Mrs. Bush was at a loss to reconcile Atta's example with her thesis that education can be a tool to wipe out hopelessness and poverty, which she called the root causes of terrorism.
"I don't think you can explain one individual's reason for being a terrorist," she told White House reporters traveling with her. "But I think, in general, if citizens are educated in countries around the world, that will help us fight terrorism."
She said she had no trepidation wading into the Middle East crisis, which has proved a diplomatic challenge to her husband.
"It's so easy to empathize with families in Israel and around the world who literally would be afraid to send their children to the grocery store or the bowling alley" for fear of suicide bombers, she said.
Asked if she had empathy for the other side in the Israeli-Palestinian dispute, she answered with reflexive bluntness: "Can I empathize with a mother who sends her child out to kill herself and others? No."
After a beat, she continued to say that both Israelis and Palestinians are dying. "You have to have sympathy for both sides and all of us in the world need to urge both of them - both Palestinians and Israelis - try to stop the violence and come to the table," she said.
In her speech, Mrs. Bush cited not only the suicide attacks in Israel that have fueled the Middle East crisis, but also last week's bombings in Kaspiisk, Russia and Karachi, Pakistan, where 11 French citizens were killed.
The message was not just for the polite audience here, which listened quietly and applauded dutifully Mrs. Bush's last word. Following the speech, she did three live interviews with the network TV morning shows back home.
In her 25-minute address to the OECD, Mrs. Bush outlined the education reforms her husband signed into law earlier this year. And she spoke about early childhood development, a pet topic for her. She ticked off a list of aid - school supplies and toys - that the United States has provided to the children of Afghanistan.
The speech was a "coming out" on the international stage for Mrs. Bush. Although she has visited 15 countries in the 16 months she's been first lady, she made those trips on the arm of President Bush and confined her separate appearances mostly to colorful, cultural photo opportunities.
Not so on this 10-day trip, which includes the capitals of Hungary and Czech Republic.
The once-shy Texas teacher was also tackling women's health issues, the reconstruction of post-Taliban Afghanistan and the condition of women and girls there.
Tagging along this week is her camera-shy daughter, Jenna.
With White House officials insisting that Jenna, 20, is on a private trip and off-limits to the press, the first daughter did not disembark the Air Force jet when it landed in Paris Monday evening until a military steward produced two large garment bags to shield her as she crossed in front of a small press entourage on the airport tarmac.
Mrs. Bush's itinerary is on the light side, with whole days kept free for private sightseeing. And aides say she will break no new ground in U.S. foreign policy.
But by amplifying U.S. humanitarian concern for the Muslim people of Afghanistan, Mrs. Bush does carry an important goodwill message at a time when her husband's administration is seeking Arab support for his anti-terrorism and Mideast policies.
"Goodwill is not something to sniff at, particularly now when there is so much anti-Americanism overseas," said historian Carl Sferrazza Anthony, a student of America's first ladies.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo JSA103
 Load-Date: May 15, 2002

 

End of Document
