

The finance minister, the intern and the heiress cause a fracas in Austria
The Associated Press
June 12, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 713 words
Byline: By DANICA KIRKA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIENNA, Austria
Body




Austria's finance minister is 36 and unmarried, but when he was caught kissing crystal heiress Fiona Swarovski at a Paris airport, it became headline news - in part because he was engaged to his former intern at the time.
Karl-Heinz Grasser sued the magazine News, which published photos of The Kiss, in a case that has many in this country of 8 million wondering whether politics may have begun to devolve into American-style mini-scandals that stress style over substance.
Austrians closely watched the California gubernatorial campaign of favorite son Arnold Schwarzenegger - and some political observers argue that politicians in this alpine nation learned something.
"Personality is becoming more and more important a part of campaigning," said Peter Filzmaier, a professor of political science at the University of Klagenfurt. "Schwarzenegger won because of talk-show politics. Everyone in Austria realized that."
The pictures of Grasser kissing Swarovski in March caused a ruckus in Austria, since he was engaged at the time to Natalia Corrales-Diez, a former ministry intern. More headlines followed when she drove her car into a tree upon learning of the photos and wound up in a hospital.
In a country where politicians traditionally keep their private lives private, only a few leaders have overstepped those taboos - most notably former President Thomas Klestil, who brought his family onto the campaign trail before having to face an embarrassing divorce.
But the photogenic Grasser blurred the lines between public and private by inviting the media to chronicle his life as Austria's most eligible bachelor, complete with a Web page that featured a snapshot of him as a child on his bicycle and a photo of him mugging from atop the tower of Vienna's landmark St. Stephen's Cathedral.
The exposure ended up costing him politically after reporters discovered the site had been financed in part by Austrian industrialists.
But after The Kiss, Grasser tried to put the genie back in the bottle. The question is whether it's too late for Austria - as well as for Grasser.
"It's a trivialization of politics," said Reinhold Gaertner, a political science professor at the University of Innsbruck. "Now it is important what the minister of finance does on his weekends."
Grasser testified during a court hearing on his suit against News that he and Swarovski were merely sharing a cup of coffee at Charles de Gaulle Airport after a weekend of dining and museum-hopping in Paris when the heiress sat on his lap for a smooch and snapshot by the cafe's waitress. A group of teenagers and tourists recorded the scene.
Grasser learned pictures of the smooch would be published and made it clear he objected, the Austria Press Agency reported.
"I am 36, unmarried and a man with feelings," Grasser told state television as the scandal broke.
When he failed to stop publication, he went to court, arguing that he had the right to privacy - and won.
"This showed that the finance minister has a private life and the press has to accept that," Grasser's spokesman, Thomas Schmid, said after Grasser won a $8,500 judgment last week.
The magazine immediately appealed the decision, arguing that a politician who puts his private life on display in a public place "puts himself outside of the private sphere." Both sides expect the case to end up before the European Court of Human Rights.
Things quickly went from bad to worse for the beleaguered minister - although no one has suggested that he might lose his job.
The airport pictures soon were followed by snapshots of the couple vacationing on the beach in Capri - Grasser in green boxer shorts cavorting with Swarovski, who was wearing a string bikini. Grasser testified that 15 to 20 photographers were hidden "behind trees, between bushes, on the beach."
"I couldn't even open the door," Grasser was quoted by APA as saying. "It was an unbelievable interference in my private life."
Other beach scenes followed and Christoph Kotanko, the editor-in-chief of the newspaper Kurier, suggests that he may spark the ire of government conservatives who question why "he's on holiday every other week."
"I think the Grasser affair was a lot of fun in the very beginning but now it's gotten a little bit boring," Kotanko said. "It's much more of the same."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY108
 Load-Date: June 13, 2005

 

End of Document
