

The head of the Catholic bishops group gains stature amid church scandal
June 11, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 718 words
Byline: By RICHARD N. OSTLING, AP Religion Writer
Body




Amid the waves of scandals battering the Roman Catholic Church, there is one key American figure who has gained stature this year - Bishop Wilton Gregory, the prelate who will lead his colleagues in an all-important meeting starting Thursday.
Gregory, 54, the bishop of Belleville, Ill., is the president of the U.S. bishops' conference, which is gathering in Dallas to decide on a national policy for preventing further sex abuse by the clergy.
He has won guarded praise even from those skeptical of the church's efforts.
Gregory "certainly has demonstrated more of an awareness about this than the vast majority of other bishops," says Jason Berry, the investigative reporter who brought national attention to clergy sex abuse in the 1980s.
"He has been adroit in an extremely difficult situation."
In his own diocese, Gregory has faced a series of priestly abuse cases. Bob Swart, a St. Louis activist with Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests says that, locally, "everything I hear about him is pretty good. … He's trying."
Just before news broke that the Milwaukee Archdiocese had secretly paid $450,000 to a man who alleged that Archbishop Rembert Weakland made unwanted advances on him, Gregory announced what abuse cases had cost the diocese each year since 1993, a step few bishops have been willing to take. The total, including therapy for priests and victims, other payments to victims and legal fees: $2.8 million.
The sex abuse crisis exploded shortly after fellow bishops elected Gregory as their first black president last November. The new president sought to assure parishioners their bishops grasped the situation.
"We're dealing with a crime," he said. "We're dealing with human depravity, we're dealing with a sin, we're dealing with human psychosis, but first of all we are dealing with a crime."
He also took three concrete steps toward restoring trust.
Under his leadership, a March meeting of the bishops' administrative committee decided this week's gathering would confront the abuse crisis head-on by debating a broad new reform plan to be prepared by the hierarchy's Ad Hoc Committee on Sexual Abuse.
Later, Gregory beefed up the Ad Hoc Committee and installed as chairman Archbishop Harry Flynn of St. Paul and Minneapolis, supplanting New Hampshire's John B. McCormack, who faced accusations of his own over handling of abusers when he worked in Boston.
And during regularly scheduled briefings with Pope John Paul II and Vatican officials, he underscored the crisis in the American church. His words were one factor that provoked the pope to call April's extraordinary snap summit meeting, attended by the U.S. cardinals, Gregory and other leaders.
Gregory is more forthright than bishops typically are about colleagues. For instance, he said in March that it was "a travesty" that the Jefferson City, Mo., Diocese failed to notify Catholic higher-ups about past sexual abuse by Anthony J. O'Connell before he was appointed a bishop in Florida. O'Connell resigned in March.
However, Gregory has avoided taking a stand on whether Boston's Cardinal Bernard Law should resign, saying it would be "completely inappropriate for me to offer any opinion one way or another."
Revelations that Boston church officials shuffled a serial abuser from parish to parish sparked the 2002 crisis.
A traditionalist on many matters, Gregory thinks it would be a mistake to open the priesthood to women or married men. "We cannot address the crisis by denying who we are as a people of faith," he insists. And he warns that the church must make sure the priesthood doesn't become "dominated by homosexual men."
Gregory was a protege of the late Cardinal Joseph Bernardin of Chicago, who long led the mildly progressive majority within the U.S. hierarchy. In 1994 he became bishop of Belleville, a small diocese (169 priests, 107,000 members) that covers the southern third of Illinois, including St. Louis suburbs.
As president through late 2004, Gregory will not set policy single-handedly, but he bears the prime responsibility for making sure this week's decisions take hold. His newfound prominence has added to speculation that the pope will put him in charge of a major U.S. archdiocese.
On the Net:
Diocese of Belleville: http://www.diobelle.org 
U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops: http://www.usccb.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo STK105
 Load-Date: June 12, 2002

 

End of Document
