

The death of an agent tests Italy's friendship with the United States
The Associated Press
March 6, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 745 words
Byline: By VICTOR L. SIMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME
Body




Italy and the United States have been consistently close allies since World War II, but the relationship has had to survive such tough tests as a military standoff over Washington's bid to capture a Palestinian guerrilla leader in Sicily and the killing of 20 people when a Marine jet sliced a ski gondola's cables.
Now Premier Silvio Berlusconi must manage a fresh crisis - outrage after U.S. troops in Iraq killed an Italian intelligence officer who negotiated the release of a journalist held hostage for a month.
With President Bush calling Berlusconi to assure him the shooting would be investigated, both sides appeared to be moving swiftly to contain the damage.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld called his Italian counterpart, Antonio Martino, and the Italian defense minister said he felt "sure that investigations will shed full light on the circumstances that led to the tragic epilogue of the affair," the ministry said Sunday.
The Friday slaying of Italian intelligence officer Nicola Calipari, who was driving with journalist Giuliana Sgrena to Baghdad's airport shortly after her release, raised the political stakes for Berlusconi. Sgrena writes for the left-wing newspaper Il Manifesto, which opposes the deployment of Italian troops in Iraq.
Berlusconi has forged a close relationship with Bush, sending 3,000 troops after the April 2003 fall of Saddam Hussein to help in reconstruction.
He acted despite wide opposition to the war in the streets - a rainbow peace flag hangs from a window beside his Rome residence - in part to give Italy a greater voice in international affairs. Italy's two continental rivals, France and Germany, opposed the war.
When news of the killing reached him Friday night, Berlusconi summoned the American ambassador, Mel Sembler, and demanded that someone be held responsible.
Bush also called Berlusconi on Friday to express his regret and promise a full investigation into the shooting.
Sgrena said U.S. forces opened fire on her car as it approached an American checkpoint and Calipari died in her arms after he tried to shield her from the gunfire.
She has disputed U.S. military accounts that the car was speeding toward the checkpoint and that the Americans used hand and arm signals, flashing white lights and warning shots to get the car to stop. She also declined to rule out that U.S. troops may have shot at her car on purpose but gave no evidence to support the claim.
White House counselor Dan Bartlett said Sunday on CNN's "Late Edition" that the shootings were a "horrific accident" and cautioned that "it's critically important that we get the facts before we make judgments."
Berlusconi's political allies warned against using Calipari's killing as an excuse to pull out Italian troops.
Gianni Alemanno, a Cabinet minister from the right-wing National Alliance party, told the Corriere della Sera newspaper that "to run out would only serve to offend the sacrifice made by a hero like him."
But Francesco Giro of Berlusconi's Forza Italia party told the Apcom news agency that Washington "must not commit the same errors" as after the 1998 Alpine ski lift tragedy, when a U.S. military jury acquitted the pilot of manslaughter.
The pilot later was sentenced to six months in prison and was dismissed from the Marines for helping to destroy a videotape of the flight. The jet's navigator also was dismissed from the Marines over the video, while charges were dropped against two back-seat crewmen.
An Italian prosecutor wanted to try the crew of the Marine jet in the ski tragedy, but an Italian judge ruled the courts here lacked jurisdiction under a NATO treaty.
The most serious crisis in U.S.-Italian relations came when Washington was angered over Italy's release of Abul Abbas, the mastermind of the Achille Lauro cruise ship hijacking in 1985. During the hijacking, American passenger Leon Klinghoffer was killed and his body and wheelchair dumped into the Mediterranean.
When a U.S. warplane forced a plane carrying the hijackers and Abbas to land at an air base in Sicily, U.S. commandos faced off with Italian Carabinieri for control of the passengers. The Americans did not give way until then-Premier Bettino Craxi called President Ronald Reagan.
Italy arrested the hijackers but allowed Abbas to slip out of the country. The government said it lacked evidence to hold him, although he was later convicted by an Italian court in absentia.
Abbas died in U.S. custody in Iraq, where he was captured in April 2003.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY115-117
 Load-Date: March 7, 2005

 

End of Document
