

Tony Blair may want to change the subject, but Iraq is still in the spotlight at G-8 summit
The Associated Press
July 6, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 464 words
Byline: By JUDITH INGRAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GLENEAGLES, Scotland
Body




British Prime Minister Tony Blair may want to change the subject from the divisive issue of Iraq, but President Bush and other G-8 leaders can't seem to get enough.
Blair's agenda, focused on Africa and the environment, gives him a chance to discuss something different because "the subject in Britain in particular has been his unpopularity, and Iraq, and his closeness with George W. Bush," Philip Gordon, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington, told a briefing last week.
But Sir Michael Jay, Britain's chief G-8 negotiator, says he expects Iraq to be discussed as well as North Korea during the three day summit that began Wednesday because the leaders "are going to talk about what is on their mind."
Russian President Vladimir Putin, in fact, will push the Group of Eight to work toward giving the United Nations a leading role in Iraq, as well as setting a possible timeframe for U.S.-led forces to leave Iraq, a Kremlin official said.
Bush intends to give his G-8 partners an accounting of the course of stabilization, White House officials have said. During a press conference Wednesday in Copenhagen en route to Gleneagles for the summit, Bush strongly defended his decision to go into Iraq.
A senior German government official said his delegation was prepared to discuss Germany's role in police training and "capacity-building" - rebuilding Iraq's ministries.
G-8 members Russia, France and Germany sharply opposed the invasion of Iraq, while Blair's popularity has been badly dented because he stood with Bush on the war.
Despite its opposition to the war, Russia has backed stabilization efforts, repeatedly expressed concern over the continuing violence.
Moscow also appears intent on playing a greater role in Iraq, sending its ambassador to a Baghdad meeting last month with radical Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr in what Russian officials portrayed as an attempt to widen Russia's dialogue with various political forces. Analysts cast it as a Kremlin attempt to carve out an independent niche.
A Russian- and Chinese-led security grouping, the Shanghai Organization, called Tuesday for the United States and its coalition allies to set a date for withdrawing from several states in Central Asia, reflecting growing unease at America's military presence in the region.
The Kremlin official, who declined to be identified in accordance with Kremlin press rules, also said the G-8 should work to make the political process in Iraq more inclusive.
That was the recommendation of last month's Brussels meeting on Iraq hosted by the European Union and the United States. Delegates there expressed support for the Iraqi government's efforts toward democratization amid friction between the Shiite Muslim majority and the once politically dominant Sunni Muslim minority.
 Load-Date: July 7, 2005

 

End of Document
