

U.S. envoy to Sudan: 'The eyes of the world are on Darfur'
The Associated Press
April 12, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 380 words
Byline: By LIZ SIDOTI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OSLO, Norway
Body




The United States on Tuesday pressured Sudan to quell bloodshed plaguing the African country's western region with the State Department's second-in-command proclaiming "the eyes of the world are on Darfur."
"The world knows what is happening in Darfur and the government cannot escape the consequences of that knowledge," Robert Zoellick, top deputy of Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, told donors at an international conference for Sudan.
He called on the Khartoum-based government to stop Arab militias and hold people accountable for atrocities as well as assist the African Union to monitor military flights over the bloodied swath of Sudan.
For its part, Zoellick said the Sudan People's Liberation Movement must work with Darfur rebels to comply with a cease fire.
An estimated 180,000 people have died and more than 2 million have lost their homes since early 2003 when black African farmers clashed with government-backed Arab militias in what former Secretary of State Colin Powell has called genocide.
In Oslo to pledge more than $1.7 billion in humanitarian aide and reconstruction assistance for the Sudanese, Zoellick told other donor countries that "the violence and atrocities in Darfur cast a dangerous shadow over our work."
He also sent a message to Sudanese leaders, saying that while the United States wants to help Sudan rebound from its two-decade-old civil war, "we need to see an end to atrocities and the return of peace in Darfur."
Zoellick said the North and South can't be committed to achieving peace in accordance with their January agreement without addressing violence in the western region.
Failing to do so could impede future international donations for implementing the peace accord and "Sudan could slip back into the depths," he said.
While in Norway, Zoellick pressed the U.S. concerns in meetings with leaders of the mostly Arab Sudanese government in the North and the black African rebels who control the South. He plans to visit Sudan, including Darfur, this week.
In a statement, the Sudan People's Liberation Movement said the Darfur crisis should not be seen as adversely affecting the implementation of the peace agreement, which it said would provide "the best opportunity for the resolution of the conflicts in Darfur and Eastern Sudan."
 Load-Date: April 13, 2005

 

End of Document
