

Ukraine: Where will the new vote take the nation?
The Associated Press
December 3, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 656 words
Byline: By MARA D. BELLABY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIEV, Ukraine
Body




Once again the Kremlin-backed candidate will face the opposition leader who favors closer ties with the West. But little else will ever be the same for Ukraine, where a sea of protesters decked in opposition orange have reshaped the political landscape.
The Supreme Court's decision to snatch back Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych's victory and order a repeat runoff against opposition leader Viktor Yushchenko on Dec. 26 tips the political scales.
The Western-oriented Yushchenko goes into the race stronger than ever, pitted against an opponent so tarnished by the post-election fallout that his sponsor, outgoing President Leonid Kuchma, had pushed for a completely new election, a move widely seen as a bid to field a more popular candidate.
The key question now is whether the new vote can heal the fractures that have riven Ukraine during the bitter election crisis or whether it may drive the wedge deeper.
The crisis threatened to open a serious rift between largely Russian-speaking eastern Ukraine, where ties with Russia are treasured, and Yushchenko's power bases in the west, where Ukrainian nationalism is stronger and many are wary of Moscow's intentions.
The disputed election also deepened the divide between the West and Russia, which has staunchly backed Yanukovych.
However, both candidates and Kuchma pledged in advance to honor the court's decision, and analysts said the court's clean reputation - and the live broadcast of its proceedings - gave the losing side little room to maneuver.
"The live broadcast of the court session played a positive role, helping allay suspicions and ease tensions," said Oleksandr Lytvynenko, an analyst with the Kiev-based Razumkov Center for Political Studies. "It was especially important because people got tired of the lack of openness."
Yanukovych and Kuchma didn't immediately react to the ruling, but analysts said their silence doesn't mean Yushchenko can expect a free ride.
The opposition leader must try to appease people in the east, who are concerned about his ties to Ukrainian nationalists, and he already has begun softening his rhetoric and peppering his speech with Russian in an effort to ease their fears.
He must deal with a humiliated and stunned Russia - and he must still win the runoff.
If Yushchenko wins the Dec. 26 election, he will have to contend with an entrenched elite that controls much of the economy and a bureaucracy that has been used to running the show for 10 years under Kuchma.
"The problem is that the former oligarchs, and I say former because they are losing power, will not give up so easily and that is a major risk," said Andriy Blinov of the Kiev-based International Center for Policy Studies. "This former elite will be fighting to hang on and their opposition will be hard to overcome."
Yushchenko also made a deal with Socialist Party leader Oleksandr Moroz to carry out political reforms that would weaken the presidency and harden the hand of parliament - an agreement that might come back to haunt him.
Parliament meets this weekend to pass legislation for the Dec. 26 vote that is intended to prevent the fraud that marred last month's runoff. Lawmakers also are expected to consider replacing the 15-member Central Election Commission.
The Supreme Court's decision, and the fact that it was allowed to decide at all, is likely to strengthen the backbone of the Ukrainian public.
"This was a great step forward for the Ukrainian people," said Anton Buteiko, an independent analyst. "This is evidence that the Ukrainian people are starting to follow the path where law is the ultimate power."
Fyodor Lukyanov, editor of a leading Russian foreign policy journal, noted that this election - despite all its troubles - "opened Ukraine to the West."
"No matter who becomes the new president, Ukraine will begin to drift toward the West," he said.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Mara D. Bellaby has covered Russia and the other former Soviet republics since 2001.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo XKIV107
 Load-Date: December 4, 2004

 

End of Document
