

Walters exhibits paintings for the Russian people, carvings for the elite
The Associated Press
March 6, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 966 words
Byline: By BEN NUCKOLS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BALTIMORE
Body




While this city celebrates Russian art and culture to mark the 300th anniversary of St. Petersburg, it's worth remembering that for most of the last century, that city had a different name: Leningrad.
That's impossible to forget while walking through "Origins of the Russian Avant-Garde," the more provocative of two exhibits that opened recently at the Walters Art Museum as part of Baltimore's citywide "Vivat! St. Petersburg" celebration.
The exhibit includes about 70 paintings from the State Russian Museum in St. Petersburg, most of which have never been seen in the United States. As a result, most Americans will find the artists obscure, yet their work is vivid and vital, with a potent, inescapable political context.
Much of the work was painted in the last few years leading up to the October Revolution of 1917, when Communism was still the ideology of starry-eyed leftists who dreamed of a classless society, rather than the source of a murderous, totalitarian regime.
Red - bold, at times almost neon - is a near-constant throughout the work, which celebrates peasant life with a near-religious fervor. The sickle is everywhere, though the hammer is absent: These artists didn't find industrial workers nearly as iconic.
"This is one moment when revolution in society and revolution in art happened at exactly the same time," said Eik Kahng, the exhibit's curator.
The goal of the exhibit is to reclaim this art as uniquely Russian, arguing that the artists were influenced just as much by regional folk art as by the western Europeans whose stylistic innovations they appropriated: Picasso, Cezanne, Gauguin, Matisse.
The paintings hang next to household items, clothing and toys, as well as prints and signboards that at times inspired the artists' choice of palette, graphic elements, and use of line and patterning, Kahng said.
You can see both the avant-garde and folk influences in the work of Natalia Goncharova, who shared with Gauguin "the same overt and deliberate simplification of form, and the embrace of the flatness of the picture plane," Kahng said.
Also like Gauguin, Goncharova depicts her subjects as the inhabitants of an untouched Eden. But unlike the Frenchman who ran off to Tahiti, she doesn't seek out the exotic: She is completely familiar with what she paints. "Peasants, From the Picking Grapes" (1911) is a striking example, a picture of two nearly identical peasants carrying baskets of grapes on their heads against a blue-black moonscape - a clear-eyed elevation of peasant life to myth.
Goncharova's lifelong companion, Mikhail Larionov, goes even further, reverting to a "neo-primitivism" that wouldn't be out of place on the walls of the nearby American Visionary Art Museum. His "Venus" (1912) is a willfully naive, slightly parodic nude on rough canvas, incorporating the style of children's drawings as part of his rebellion against what Larionov called "Greco-Roman sanctimoniousness."
Wassily Kandinsky, unlike many of his contemporaries in the Russian avant-garde, became well-known abroad. His techniques were far more sophisticated than Larionov's, but he still looked to folk art and popular myth for his subjects. The exhibit places Kandinsky's "St. George" (Version 2, 1911) next to a 16th-century, tempera-on-wood icon, calling attention to Kandinsky's supple abstractions and harmony of color.
But despite the presence of St. George, the stars of the show are the anonymous peasants, whether they are painted in photorealistic detail - like the dark-skinned young women of Philipp Malyavin's color-saturated "Dancing Peasant Woman" (c. 1909) and "Verka" (1913) - or with rounded, featureless faces, as in Kazimir Malevich's "Reaping, Modello" (1928-29), which casts an elegiac light on peasants at sunset. As Kahng pointed out: These artists really did believe their work could help change the world.
After a heavy dose of challenging, politically charged painting, the Walters has dessert waiting in the form of "The Faberge Menagerie," a collection of Peter Carl Faberge carvings that concentrates on his whimsical, colorful animal figurines. These baubles are an innocent example of the tremendous imbalance of wealth the Bolsheviks rebelled against.
The exhibits are diametrically opposed to the point that they engendered some friendly ribbing among the museum's curators. Kahng referred in jest to the "little piggies" downstairs from the avant-garde works, while Faberge show curator Bill Johnston jokingly characterized the paintings upstairs as "gross."
To be fair, the piggies - and froggies and birdies - are easy to love. Faberge worked mostly with stones that could be found in large quantities in the Ural mountains, and when he used diamonds, they were usually so small that they had little monetary value.
"He prided himself on working with natural objects, stressing the artistry rather than the value of the materials," Johnston said.
Faberge's craftsmen also showed an artistic sensibility engaged with other cultures. A highly stylized, tiny elephant with diamond eyes is balled up into a nearly spherical shape, resembling a Japanese carved bead called ojime.
While some of Faberge's animals are caricatures, others are more realistic, Johnston noted. "Seals on an Ice Floe" - with the animals made out of highly polished gray obsidian, sitting on rough rock crystal with 10 diamonds inserted in its surface - achieves a brilliant physical realism.
Though the exhibit includes four of Faberge's famous eggs, the animal carvings have none of the pomp and ceremony attached to those artworks - and therein lies their appeal.
"They're just little trinkets that go in a cabinet," Johnston said.
"Origins of the Russian Avant-Garde" runs through May 24, and "The Faberge Menagerie" through July 27.
---
On the Net:
http://www.thewalters.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY451-452 of March 6

 

End of Document
