

West Africans fear Le Pen shutting the door on the people of France's former colonies
April 24, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 532 words
Byline: By LOUIS OKAMBA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRAZZAVILLE, Republic of Congo
Body




Many people in former French colonies in Africa heard the sound of slamming doors as they learned of the strong showing by right-winger Jean-Marie Le Pen in the first round of the French presidential election.
"Well, I can say goodbye to France," said Aime Sita, a young man in this tiny Republic of Congo capital.
For two years, Sita has tried but failed to get a visa for France - still the land of opportunity for many in the more than two dozen French-speaking countries sprawled across Europe's former colonial empire in Africa.
"If Le Pen becomes president of France … with all his conditions, immigration is going to get very hard," he said.
Le Pen is known for his anti-immigration stance and for blaming North Africans in particular for France's growing crime rate. The candidate, who bested Socialist Prime Minister Lionel Jospin in Sunday's first round voting, now meets conservative President Jacques Chirac in the May 5 runoff.
Le Pen picked up the anti-immigration theme again Monday, saying "This push, this constant foreign immigration will - if a barrier is not erected - eventually submerge our country, making it disappear."
Republic of Congo's government was alarmed enough to say a Le Pen presidency would be "a real mess, a catastrophe" for Africa. Headlines across French West Africa issued shrill charges of racism and rejection by one-time ruler and latter-day patron.
"France doesn't want any more foreigners!" said a headline in Ivory Coast's Notre Voie daily. "Has France gone mad?" asked Le Soleil.
Le Pen told Senegal's Le Soleil in a telephone interview he was only "against massive immigration," not immigration per se and said France would "not demean" its "long-standing relations with Africa."
He said, however, citizens best realized fulfillment "in the midst of their countries of origin."
France's job, he told the newspaper, was to help African nations develop so that residents would not leave to find money and jobs in France. What's more, Le Pen told the newspaper, France needed to do more to compel African students to return home after studies, saying they are "lost to their countries, if they do not return."
"Africans shouldn't cry because they're threatened with getting kicked out," said Philippe Missatou, of Republic of Congo's electric utility.
"Le Pen's doing us a favor by sending us home to work here, (to) develop it like the French have developed their (country)," he said.
But he was one of few voicing that opinion.
African politicians expressed fear for Franco-African economic dealings.
Republic of Congo spokesman Francois Ibovi said the common currency in French West Africa was threatened if Le Pen were elected and turned inward, away from both the former colonies and European neighbors.
The currency, once linked to the French franc, now is tied to the euro.
Others worried about the future of France.
"The election shows the fragility of the symbol that is France," wrote Didier Depry of Ivory Coast's Notre Voie. "The country of the rights of man, France made flesh such noble values as democracy and liberty.
"Letting this symbol self-destruct … nurtures a monster that is progressively devouring the world: racism and intolerance," he said.
 Load-Date: April 25, 2002

 

End of Document
