

What is the International Criminal Court, and why does the United States oppose it?
July 2, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 761 words
Byline: By MATT KELLEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The United States is so opposed to a new international war crimes court that it is willing to put peacekeeping missions at risk to make its point.
On Sunday, the United States vetoed a six-month extension of the U.N. mandate to continue peacekeeping in Bosnia, where peacekeepers would be subject to the International Criminal Court's jurisdiction. The United States agreed to extend the peacekeeping mandate until Wednesday to try to work out a compromise.
The conflict has been building for months as President Bush's desire to protect Americans from possible bogus claims clashed with an international drive to punish people responsible for crimes against humanity.
The United States has refused to ratify the 1998 treaty that created the International Criminal Court.
Here, in question-and-answer form, is a look at this new court:
Q: What is it?
A: As of now, it's a four-member team with a phone and fax machine at offices in the Netherlands. The court opened for business Monday under a 1998 treaty ratified by 75 countries.
It is the first general international criminal court created to try individuals. Other courts have been created for specific conflicts, such as World War II and the ethnic warfare in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
The countries involved will elect the court's 18 judges, as well as a lead prosecutor and deputy prosecutors. They should be in place early next year.
Q: What crimes can be prosecuted in the court, and what penalties can it give?
A: The court will try cases of alleged genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity. Genocide is defined as organized attempts to wipe out a specific ethnic, religious or national group. War crimes and crimes against humanity include systematic attacks on civilians; most uses of chemical, biological or nuclear weapons; and violations of Geneva Conventions on the conduct of war, such as torturing prisoners.
The court can only try cases that involve acts that occur from Monday onward.
Those found guilty could be sentenced to up to 30 years in prison or, in extreme cases, to life in prison.
Q: Who could be charged?
A: The court claims jurisdiction over any acts committed on the territory of ratifying nations, which include Bosnia, or by citizens of those nations. Citizens of countries that have not ratified the treaty could be charged for acts that happened in a ratifying country.
Q: What is the United States worried about?
A: Officials say they don't want Americans caught up in politically motivated prosecutions. They object to the court's claim of power to prosecute people from the United States and other countries that have not ratified the treaty creating the court.
"A politicized or a loose cannon prosecutor in a court like that can impose enormous difficulties and disadvantages on people," Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said last week.
Supporters of the international court, including staunch U.S. allies such as Britain and France, say the court has safeguards to prevent politicized prosecutions. Judges and prosecutors will be elected by countries that have ratified the treaty. The court's charter says prosecutors should bring cases based on facts and nothing else.
Q: How does the United States handle crimes by U.S. peacekeepers?
A: U.S. soldiers who commit crimes abroad usually are handled by U.S. military courts. For example, a U.S. military court in 1999 sentenced Staff Sgt. Frank J. Ronghi to life in prison for raping and murdering a girl in Kosovo while serving in the peacekeeping mission there.
U.S. soldiers also may be subject to the laws of countries where they commit crimes. American service members in Japan, for example, have been convicted and imprisoned for committing crimes outside U.S. bases there.
Q: What's going to happen to U.N. peacekeeping efforts now?
A: That's unclear. Both U.S. and U.N. officials say Bush's position toward the court could jeopardize peacekeeping operations elsewhere, such as in Kosovo and East Timor. Besides Bosnia, there has been no formal action taken on peacekeeping operations, although the United States said it will withdraw three military observers from East Timor.
In Bosnia, 46 Americans participate in a 1,500-member U.N. operation training a multiethnic police force. The 18,000-member NATO-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia includes about 3,100 U.S. soldiers.
U.S. officials say they are trying to work out a solution that would exempt from the international court's jurisdiction any forces participating in peacekeeping operations.
On the Net: International Criminal Court: http://www.un.org/law/icc/index.html 
 Load-Date: July 3, 2002

 

End of Document
