

Yes, those really are women on the wrestling mat - and in the Olympics
The Associated Press
August 21, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 523 words
Byline: By ALAN ROBINSON, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: ATHENS, Greece
Body




For years, women fought for the right to wrestle in the United States, sometimes unsuccessfully and almost always with little support from anyone but their families.
They went to court to be allowed onto boys' teams. They ignored the taunts and teasing of parents who didn't want them to compete against their sons. Even when they gained admission to the mat, they nearly always lost to the boys, often by overwhelming scores.
Still, they persevered, despite absorbing daily beatings in the wrestling room and hearing unflattering remarks in the locker room. They gamely competed in the few competitions open just for them or migrated to the half-dozen U.S. colleges who sponsored their sport.
Now comes the reward for their patience, persistence, bumps and bruises, and damaged egos.
Finally, they are Olympians.
Now that they have a chance to win a medal, the four-member U.S. team - Patricia Miranda, Sara McMann and Toccara Montgomery, Tela O'Donnell - said just being an Olympian isn't good enough.
"We're moving this sport forward," U.S. coach Terry Steiner said.
Tricia Saunders, another U.S. coach and probably the best female wrestler in U.S. history, can remember hoping in 1989 that the sport would gain Olympic status.
"I thought 1992, 1996, but it didn't happen," said Saunders, whose own career was interrupted for years because she couldn't find competitions to enter.
Fittingly, since this is the first Olympics with women's wrestling, the women are first up with qualifying and pool matches Sunday before the medal matches are wrestled Monday.
After that, it's Rulon's turn - American super heavyweight Rulon Gardner, bad luck and all, goes for a second Olympic gold following four adventuresome years since he upset supposedly unbeatable Russian three-time champion Alexander Karelin in Sydney.
The seven Greco-Roman weight classes will be competed over three days Tuesday through Thursday at the Ano Liossia wrestling hall in suburban Athens. After that, a talented but exceptionally inexperienced U.S. freestyle team wrestles over the final three days of the games.
The U.S. women have been competitive against the field, and all talked of wanting to perform well to accelerate the sport's advancement in the United States.
"We have a long way to go to gain respect, and this is how it starts," Miranda said. "This is our stage to say, 'Hey, look at us."'
Miranda, a Stanford grad who put off Yale Law School for two years to pursue the Olympics, was a one-point loser to three-time world champion Irina Melnik of Ukraine in last year's 105 1/2 pounds (48kg) world finals.
Japan has won the last four world titles at 121 pounds (55kg), with Saori Yoshida winning the last two. Yoshida beat George 5-2 in the world finals.
At 138 1/2 pounds (63kg), McMann has beaten two-time world champion Kaori Icho of Japan, but Icho beat her 4-3 in overtime in the world finals. Icho's sister, Chiharu, also is among the favorites at 105 1/2 pounds.
Montgomery beat world champion Kyoko Hamaguchi in Tokyo a month after Hamaguchi beat her in the September world finals, but Hamaguchi bounced back to win in a test tournament at the Athens Olympic venue.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo planned
 Load-Date: August 22, 2004

 

End of Document
