

You've heard the answers. Now answer the questions.
June 28, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 712 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




There may be no perfect answers to the situations that follow, although you might never guess that from the number of people willing to offer their opinions.
Too often, however, their "answers" are just that, opinions adulterated by political and investment biases rather than the product of serious consideration, original thinking and independent judgment.
Consider the following scenario.
A bipartisan commission has been appointed by President Bush to consider Social Security reform, including the wisdom of allowing contributors to invest in securities of their own choosing.
This would seem to be in keeping with the American tradition of personal initiative, individual responsibility and belief in the private sector way to economic growth.
To one degree or another, more than 20 nations, including Great Britain, Australia and Chile, even Sweden, already allow such "privatization."
In the United States, exemplar of capitalism, the very idea is worrisome. Some surveys show senior citizens are opposed. The AFL-CIO is anti-privatization. Economists, as usual, are split down the middle.
Stocks are risky, say some. Some say individuals will make poor investment decisions. Others, even amid fears that the existing system could collapse if not changed, argue that things are OK as they are.
Privatization defenders say, OK, keep a base of contributions in the existing system and allow the rest to be privately invested in securities. In stocks, for example, whose value might multiply in 20 years.
In such a way, they say, retirement funds will grow to sums many times larger than existing Social Security benefits. And they add that the widening asset gap between rich and poor might even be shrunk a bit.
Question: Why does the United States fear doing what less capitalistic nations have been doing for years, and reportedly with degrees of success?
Another scenario: You might be justified in believing that highly popular stocks are also highly profitable. But, according to investment counselor H. Bradlee Perry, they're "almost sure to turn into losers, usually huge losers."
Perry has done his homework, choosing the most popular stock on the New York Stock Exchange for each year back to 1982, based on its price-to-earnings ratios. He concludes: You'd have been better off in an index fund.
Buying into an index fund, which tends to reflect the market as a whole, is a conservative, perhaps very conservative, way to invest. And yet, to have done so would have been better than to have invested in the most popular stock.
Perry offers these examples in The (David L.) Babson Staff Letter:
An investment in Corrections Corp., April 1995's most popular stock, would have brought you a loss of 82 percent by June 2001. In the same period, the Standard & Poor's 500 index rose 152 percent.
An investment in Coca-Cola Enterprises in April 1998 and kept to June 1 of this year would have brought you a loss of 55 percent, compared with a 13 percent gain in the S&P.
Had you invested in Cisco in April 2000 you would have had a 73 percent decline by June 1. The S&P index also fell, but only by 13 percent.
Over the entire period since 1982, an S&P index fund would have provided you with a cumulative return of 315 percent. The super popular stocks would have earned about 40 percent as much, or 133 percent.
There's a lesson in this. Perhaps many lessons. Identify them and benefit.
You might find this scenario more difficult to explain.
David Hirshleifer, an Ohio State University professor, has found that morning sunshine at the sites of 26 stock exchanges around the world is linked to stock profits on those exchanges that day.
"There's a great deal of evidence from psychology that sunshine helps put people in a good mood," he says. "And people in good moods make more optimistic choices and judgments."
The results, he says, suggest investors can trade profitably on the weather. He concedes it isn't a get-rich formula, but says you should consider the weather "if you're optimally balancing risk and return."
Brokerage house analysts spend millions of dollars eviscerating and analyzing financial reports to arrive at their recommendations. Still, their views often are far off the mark.
Should they consider calling the Weather Service instead?
 
End adv for Sunday, July 1
 
 Load-Date: July 2, 2001

 

End of Document
