

Yugoslavia from the beginning to the end
The Associated Press
February 4, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 549 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Key points in Yugoslavia's turbulent history:
 
1918: After fighting on the winning side in World War I, Serbia and Montenegro decide to merge and expand by taking in a few Slav-populated provinces of their defeated neighbor, the Austro-Hungarian empire. The Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes is created, covering roughly the western half of the Balkans.
1929: The country is renamed Yugoslavia, which means "the country of southern Slavs."
1941: Nazi Germany overruns Yugoslavia and declares Serbia occupied territory, while areas populated by Croats and Bosnians are turned into a short-lived Nazi puppet state. The rest is annexed by Germany's allies, including Italy and Hungary, and tens of thousands are killed.
1945: Yugoslavia is reborn as a republic under the leadership of Josip Broz Tito and his multiethnic communist guerrillas, who won Allied support for fighting the Nazis. The monarchy is abolished and Yugoslavia becomes a federation of Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia, Slovenia, Montenegro and Macedonia.
1948: Tito ends his close ties with the Soviet Union and begins toeing the line between East and West. As Yugoslavia's president-for-life, he makes this an official policy.
1974: Tito allows constitutional reform to give some self-rule to each of the six republics and to two provinces within Serbia. One is ethnic Albanian-dominated Kosovo.
1980: Tito dies. A collective eight-member presidency succeeds him, but its unity gradually crumbles. Old ethnic feuds are revived, and after the fall of the Berlin Wall, Yugoslavia's demise looks inevitable.
1990: Yugoslavia's ruling Communists agree to end their monopoly and allow a multiparty system, but nationalist parties win elections.
1991: Slovenia, Croatia and Macedonia declare independence. Serbia-supported federal troops make a brief, failed attempt to prevent Slovenia's secession. In ensuing fighting in Croatia, up to 10,000 die as the local Serb community opposes Croatia's independence and declares its own mini-state within Croatia. Croatian army later retakes the territory.
1992: Bosnia declares independence, but without consensus among its key ethnic groups: Muslims, Serbs and Croats. Widespread fighting and a violent land grab begin, leaving 200,000 people dead and millions homeless in 3 1/2 years of war.
1992: With four out of six republics gone, Serbia and Montenegro decide to carry on as Yugoslavia and proclaim their new federation in April. International sanctions are imposed on the country as punishment for Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic's warmongering.
1997: Montenegro's leader Milo Djukanovic distances himself from Milosevic and begins advocating independence for his tiny republic.
2000: Increasingly unpopular at home, Milosevic loses power in a Western-backed revolt in Belgrade. A new, democratic government takes over, but Montenegro's independence drive continues.
2002: Trying to prevent further fragmenting of the Balkans, the European Union brokers a deal keeping Serbia and Montenegro together in a loose union for at least three years, sharing only a weak central administration running a common defense and foreign affairs.
Feb. 4, 2003: After its ratification in the parliaments of Serbia and Montenegro, the Yugoslav federal assembly approves the accord, overhauling and renaming the country.

 

End of Document
