

'Show me the money' replaces climate change on agenda of follow-up to 1992 Earth Summit
August 20, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 913 words
Byline: By PAUL GEITNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMSTERDAM, Netherlands
Body




When world leaders gather at the 10-year follow up to the Earth Summit next week, Pascal van den Noort wants them to think about bicycles.
The Dutch campaigner behind Bikes for Africa, which sends used bikes from the West to Africa to be refurbished and sold, talks about how cycling can alleviate poverty by enabling people to take jobs outside the communities.
They aid education by getting children to distant rural schools quicker, he adds, and promote gender equality by making women - usually the last ones with access to cars - more mobile.
"I want to take cycling away from the Spandex and helmet crowd and make it relevant," says the boisterous van den Noort. "Cycling is not the solution to every problem, but it helps."
But the developing world wants much more than used bicycles from the World Summit on Sustainable Development, which aims at finding environmentally friendly ways to enrich the world's poor.
Many say prior summit commitments are being neglected, especially as world attention shifted after Sept. 11.
"I think the tensions are going to be … about 'Show me the money,"' said Lilian Chatterjee of the International Institute for Environment and Development in London.
When leaders gathered in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, the atmosphere was more optimistic: the Iron Curtain had just collapsed, the Gulf War won, Asian tiger economies were roaring and dot-coms were just taking off.
Today, "the international political situation is fragile," says Jan Pronk, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan's special envoy to the conference. In addition to the war on terrorism, the Middle East crisis is flaring and world economies are shaky.
"In 1992, people were ready to talk about sustainable development," a senior European Union official said. Now, "I fear that it's going to be rather difficult to sell."
The final pre-summit meeting in Indonesia in June was not very encouraging.
Poor countries accused the rich of failing to live up to commitments to increase foreign aid, and of hypocrisy for demanding open markets while maintaining their own agriculture subsidies and trade barriers for steel. Rich countries demanded more emphasis on eradicating corruption.
Two extra days of pre-summit negotiating on Saturday and Sunday have been added in a last push for compromise before the summit opens next Monday.
Annan wants world leaders to focus on delivering results for the world's poor in five key areas:
- Clean water and sewage treatment;
- Energy supplies and the search for new, sustainable sources;
- Fighting killer diseases, including AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis;
- Increasing agricultural productivity and reversing land degradation;
- Preserving biodiversity and improving ecosystem management.
This agenda is a huge expansion over the 1992 conference, which set in motion the process that led to the Kyoto protocol on climate change. The pact has yet to go into force, largely because the United States pulled out last year.
With the European Union and Japan on board, it can still be saved if Russia ratifies. U.N. officials are hoping Russian President Vladimir Putin will commit at the summit to do so by the end of the year.
"Signals are positive," says Pronk, who shepherded the agreement through a series of international conferences.
Other problems remain.
The European Union wants a commitment to halve the number of people without access to clean water and sanitation by 2015, bringing clean water to an additional 1.5 billion people. It also wants to increase the share of renewable energy sources to at least 15 percent of primary energy supply by 2010.
Developing countries want to know who will pay for that, while the United States has resisted committing to more targets.
Washington and the EU both are pushing good governance in developing countries to support private investment and ensure foreign aid benefits those it is intended to help.
But the United States wants less emphasis on political declarations and more on promoting on-the-ground partnerships between governments, aid groups and - most controversially - private companies.
"The (summit's action) plan is no more than lofty rhetoric and aspirations," a senior Bush administration official said. "Texts don't provide any fresh water to a village, they don't save any forest, they don't bring any better health care or provide education."
Yet developing countries such as Brazil worry that public-private partnerships will only give governments an excuse to reduce their financial commitments.
Anti-globalization and environmental campaigners accuse Western countries of seeking to open up ownership of public services such as water distribution in poor countries to their own multinationals.
"Basically this means that the (Group of Eight), and many others undoubtedly, are going to abdicate responsibility for protecting the environment and alleviating poverty to the private sector," Greenpeace charged.
European officials support the United States, but are demanding "political accountability," the EU official said.
Developing countries seem ready to agree not to try to reopen deals reached at recent development and trade conferences.
In return, they expect the United States and the EU to make a strong recommitment to the Millennium Development Goals.
After recent efforts by South Africa to bridge the divide, EU, U.S. and U.N. officials say they are guardedly optimistic an agreement can be reached.
---
On the Net:
http://www.johannesburgsummit.org/index.html 
http://www.developmentgoals.org/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY191-192
 Load-Date: August 21, 2002

 

End of Document
