

'We're like the Marines of the church,' says missionary to remotest tribes
The Associated Press
August 23, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1573 words
Byline: By RICHARD N. OSTLING, AP Religion Writer
Dateline: JERSEY SHORE, Pa.
Body




Seven young adults gather for informal Sunday worship in a rude, two-room house fashioned from plastic sheeting and lumber that they cut themselves. Clad in shorts and jeans and clutching well-thumbed Bibles, they join in song to guitar accompaniment.
"Lord, reign in me, reign in your power, over all my dreams, in my darkest hour ..."
The melody drifts across a surrounding makeshift encampment where 28 students have spent the last two weeks, the final exercise in a unique training program for the most exotic vocation imaginable.
This is the Missions Institute of New Tribes Mission, a yearlong boot camp that's far more rigorous than the usual orientation programs for foreign missionaries - and for good reason.
New Tribes specializes in evangelism among the 3,000 indigenous groups in the world's remotest tracts, places that remain isolated from the outside world and thus untouched by Christianity. Most operations are in Latin America, Southeast Asia and West Africa.
Teams of five or six missionaries leave the modern world and its conveniences behind to spend years living among tribespeople, learning their language and culture in order to translate the New Testament and parts of the Old Testament into tribal languages, most of which have never before been reduced to writing. The workers then teach reading and writing, and establish churches to be run by tribal converts.
Groups may spend 10 or 20 years, or even longer, in the same location. Think of it as career-length "Survivor" - only for real, as opposed to reality TV.
"We're way out there. We're like the Marines of the church," says Greg Sanford, the sophisticated but plainspoken director of the Pennsylvania institute (there are also campuses in Durant, Miss., and Baker City, Ore.).
Despite the rigors and outsiders' accusations of cultural imperialism, New Tribes, based in Sanford, Fla., has assembled one of the largest missionary forces in the world: 3,200 workers in 17 nations, two-thirds of them Americans.
New Tribes is similar to the even larger Wycliffe Bible Translators, based in nearby Orlando, Fla., and the two agencies often cooperate in the field. Both are staunchly evangelical Protestant, and employ techniques pioneered by the late University of Michigan anthropologist Kenneth L. Pike to render oral languages into newly written form.
Enlistees aren't lured by the money. The mission's recommended pay for a couple without children is $4,000 a month, before deductions for all benefits and business expenses. Candidates must raise that on their own through pledges from supporters. Some 20,000 U.S. congregations and thousands of individuals contributed $41 million last year, providing most of the mission's revenue.
The work can be dangerous. During New Tribes' 62 years of operation, 87 missionaries have died in untimely ways, the vast majority in plane crashes during the early years.
The mission's very first foray in 1943 ended disastrously when fearful Bolivian tribesmen killed all five visiting missionaries, though contact was later established and today the local people are one-third Christian.
Twenty-two missionaries have been kidnapped, with six killed. The latest victim was Martin Burnham, who was shot to death in 2002 during an attempt to free him from Muslim kidnappers in the Philippines; his wife Gracia was wounded. New Tribes recently intensified training in security measures and how to act if taken hostage.
"There are always concerns about safety and different diseases," says recruit Ruth Dickey from Bowdoinham, Maine, who is pregnant with her first child. "You have to overcome fear with the knowledge that the Lord will take care of us."
Another candidate, Robyn Lenz of Climax, Mich., great-granddaughter of a Bolivian martyr, says institute training built her confidence, proving "you can do without and enjoy it" and "make things very homelike" in the wilderness.
Students are taught food preservation, breadmaking, haircutting, welding, logging, how to situate and frame a house, collecting and treating water, and the mysteries of plumbing, septic systems, small engine maintenance, solar batteries and portable generators.
"In 90 percent of our countries, you're on your own," says Kim Waldon, a former missionary to Papua New Guinea who runs most of the hands-on coursework.
Other institute classes, equally practical, teach time management, mediation of team conflicts, how to maintain morale and solid marriages under stress and child-rearing in the bush. Missionaries' children typically receive home schooling for the lower grades, then attend New Tribes boarding schools.
Sanford carefully interviews all incoming candidates. "I weed out as many Indiana Joneses as I can," he explains, since lust for adventure won't last for the long haul. Other essential traits: excellent health, teamwork skills and "discipline, commitment, initiative." Chats with his charges show them to be low key and humble, yet self-assured.
The crucial aspect of the training is more conceptual, teaching how modern missionaries should approach cultures that are radically different. The heart of it, Sanford says, is distinguishing between biblical basics and Western cultural assumptions.
For instance, he spent 14 years with Venezuela's Yanomamo Indians, who did without clothing. Instead of changing that, the missionaries learned the group's own traditions of modesty. Other practices violated biblical teaching, such as wife beating and killing newborn twins. The institute trains missionaries to patiently suppress revulsion over such things and realize that changes will only occur after individuals become Christians.
Students spend two years at Bible college before the Missions Institute, and afterward move to the Language Institute in Camdenton, Mo., where they discover how to learn new languages, fabricate them Pike-style in written form and translate the Bible.
"It's a big job. It's a killer," Sanford says. One language New Tribes encountered has 14 vowels, another has four forms of "we" and yet another lacks words for "grace" or "salvation."
Survival International, the London-based tribal rights champion, and many academic anthropologists criticize outside incursions by missionaries. But Sanford vigorously defends New Tribes practices. He insists that the missionaries help preserve tribal cultures rather than undermining them, and are humanitarians who provide literacy, basic medical treatment and other helpful knowledge.
They do, of course, import Christianity to compete with local forms of animism. On that, New Tribes says it provides the opportunity for people to learn about the Bible if they wish, but doesn't believe in forcing faith upon anyone.
The church relations director at New Tribes headquarters, Dave Zelenak, chuckles at accusations about imposing beliefs: "They must have watched some old Tarzan movie to think somehow you come in and everybody just obeys your word. Not a chance. You have to earn respect."
The mission makes no apologies for its conservative creed, including the belief that "every person is responsible to receive salvation by personal faith in the Lord Jesus Christ" and that those who do not face "unending punishment." Another specific: New Tribes practices only "believers' baptism by immersion."
While New Tribes' mission hasn't changed much since it was founded by Paul Fleming, a one-time missionary to British Malaya, technology has aided its work dramatically in recent years. The time required from the original contact with a tribe through completion of a Bible translation used to be 20 to 30 years. Now, thanks mainly to computers, that has been cut in half.
On the down side, a shrinking number of Americans are willing to volunteer. New Tribes was annually sending out some 200 new missionaries in the 1980s - this year, the number is 80.
Meanwhile, missionaries who joined during boom years are retiring and the number of dropouts from the field, though small (eight families in the past three months), is increasing. Among the reasons: Need to care for aging parents back home and Americans' general tendency to change occupations with some frequency.
Zelenak and Paul Wyma, the member of the governing Executive Committee who supervises U.S. operations, cite other recruiting problems. For some churches, the work of missionaries is seen as less urgent these days, while parents worried about security may discourage children from working overseas.
Then there's the lure of contemporary culture. Young Americans awash in materialism are less apt to have rural backgrounds or experience with outdoor activity and hard physical labor. For many, spending decades on a narrow-gauge task seems unpalatable.
But recruits like institute graduate Timothy Depue keep coming.
"The culture has a huge emphasis on material wealth I struggle with," the bearded Depue admits as he cleans up after a simple camp breakfast. "I want the sports bike and the big house. I have to contemplate every day that Jesus gave up all to do what he did."
At the Sunday camp devotionals, Craig Schafer told his six teammates that they might have missed things like ice cream or pizza during their simulated bush experience, but "do we hunger for the Word of God like that?"
If so, he said, taking the biblical message to people who have never heard it is an exciting prospect. "That's what life is all about. There's nothing greater in this life."
---
On the Net:
New Tribes Mission: http://www.ntm.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY333-340
 Load-Date: August 30, 2004

 

End of Document
