

After weekend spat, IMF and Argentina confer on ways to revive the Argentine economy
January 14, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 637 words
Byline: By KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




President Eduardo Duhalde announced plans for a national dialogue on Argentina's financial woes Monday even as he struggled to ease a hated banking freeze and win the support of foreign lenders for his efforts.
"We will work together without flagging and with renewed hope," said Duhalde on a national television late Monday.
The dialogue will bring together political, business, labor and church leaders to confront joblessness, government spending, corruption and other key issues, he said.
"I wish to be one more worker in the dialogue," said Duhalde, adding that talks are a must in order to confront the debacle that put Argentina on "the brink of anarchy and violence."
An International Monetary Fund delegation arrived in Buenos Aires on Monday, working with Argentine leaders to gather information about the country's finances and offer technical assistance on efforts to rebuild the economy.
The IMF withheld $1.2 billion in badly needed aid last month as the Argentine economy careened out of control, saying the government wasn't doing enough to rein in spending. The agency had lent Argentina more than $40 billion.
IMF officials have said they would consider fresh bailout funds only if the government developed a "sustainable" economic program. Analysts say the IMF wants Argentina to drastically cut spending, develop a more austere 2002 budget and suspend its dual currency exchange rate.
Locked in four years of recession, Argentina is trying to recover from financial collapse after devaluing the peso, releasing it from an 11-year peg at one-to-one with the U.S. dollar, and defaulting on its foreign debt.
The government has set an official rate of 1.4 pesos to the dollar, but it applies mainly to foreign trade. For ordinary Argentines, the peso on the open market free floats and is now hovering at 1.7 to the dollar. The IMF, analysts say, wants Argentina to free float the peso on all markets.
Deputy Economy Minister Jorge Todesca said Monday he thought the government could work out a deal "within a month" with the IMF for up to $15 billion in a new financial aid package. There has been no comment from the IMF.
The banking crisis began on Dec. 1, when then President Fernando de la Rua partially froze accounts after panicked depositors yanked $2 billion from banks in a single day.
The freeze contributed to riots and looting that drove de la Rua from office later that month. Argentine banks have operated on a limited basis since Dec. 21, when de la Rua resigned.
Last Thursday, Duhalde's government announced measures that put a tighter grip on the financial system, freezing more than a third of Argentina's $67 billion in bank deposits.
Todesca said the government was looking for ways to relax the banking freeze that has enraged Argentines by closing off access to their savings. The restrictions limit cash withdrawals to 300 pesos a week.
"It's a complicated and delicate situation," he said, likening Argentina's situation to the Great Depression in the United States during the 1930s. "We can only (lift) it gradually."
As the government worked with the IMF officials, the Buenos Aires stock exchange remained closed for a sixth straight day due to the government freeze on banking and finance.
A spokesman said it was unclear when the stock exchange might reopen.
In the northernmost Argentine province of Jujuy, hundreds of demonstrators blockaded highways to demand the government fulfill pledges of assistance to the unemployed, while in central Cordoba, more than 2,000 people banged pots and pans to oppose the banking restrictions.
Also Monday, hundreds of state workers marched to the Labor Ministry in Buenos Aires, demanding back pay and Christmas bonuses.
"I could only afford a few Christmas gifts for kids," said Anna Maria Rodriguez, a 42-year-old worker. "This government owes me money!"
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BAI105-106
 Load-Date: January 15, 2002

 

End of Document
