

After the failed prosecution of Tyson Foods, who's next?
The Associated Press
April 1, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 621 words
Byline: By BILL POOVEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHATTANOOGA, Tenn.
Body




Tyson Foods' acquittal on charges of conspiring to hire illegal immigrants dealt a setback to the government's strategy of enforcing immigration laws by going after big business.
That doesn't mean major employers of unskilled workers should rest easy.
With 7 million plus illegal immigrants in the United States - most lured here by job opportunities - the temptation for abuse still exists and immigration law experts predict more such prosecutions in the future.
"Is there going to be another target? Absolutely," said Matthew Yarbrough, a Dallas attorney who last year successfully defended a Tyson personnel employee in a similar case.
But the experts say any other case will face the same obstacle the Tyson prosecutors faced - the vast gray area in the law that requires companies to make a "good faith effort" to determine if the workers they've hired are legal.
Tyson attorneys argued successfully that if the company hired illegal workers, it was because of the huge underground market for phony immigration papers and the government's flawed system of screening immigrants.
Company attorneys showed jurors copies of Justice Department Civil Rights Division brochures, including one titled "Look at the Facts, Not at the Faces," with warnings about discrimination based on appearance. The brochures advise employers to accept worker documents "as long as they appear to be reasonably genuine."
Tyson attorney Tom Green told jurors that the company could be hiring a "refugee from the North Pole or the man from Mars" if the worker has genuine-looking documentation.
"This is the dilemma. Did they make the good faith effort or not?" said Bill Strassberger, spokesman for the U.S. Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
"The problem is, in general terms, there are some employers who will make a good faith effort with a wink and nod so they can hire necessary workers to staff up whatever their business is."
Prosecutors in the Tyson case relied mostly on tapes of secretly recorded conversations between undercover agents who posed as smugglers and transporters of immigrants and former managers at Tyson poultry plants.
Agents testified that they delivered 136 illegal immigrants from Mexico and Central America for Tyson employment. Other testimony said the company tried to shield itself by using temporary employment agencies to find workers, mostly illegal immigrants.
Prosecutors charged that top executives at Tyson's Springdale, Ark., headquarters also knew about illegal hiring, but jurors who deliberated for seven hours were not convinced.
One juror, 46-year-old church secretary Barbara Hailey, said the evidence showed there is "too much gray area" for employers to determine who is legal. She said there should be "stricter guidelines" than requiring two identifying documents that look genuine.
Assistant U.S. Attorney John MacCoon, the lead prosecutor in the Tyson case, offered a note of caution to other employers: If they are trying to hide behind the good faith element to knowingly hire illegal workers "they are abandoning the good faith element."
Chattanooga attorney Robert Divine, who represented a prosecution witness, Tyson's former ethics compliance office, predicted the government won't back down on further prosecutions.
"I don't think other companies who employ large numbers of unskilled workers in unpleasant jobs can relax now and sit back and check documents and fill out … forms and feel like, 'We'll be OK," Divine said. "It may very well be there are other investigations ongoing right now."
U.S. Attorney Harry "Sandy" Mattice Jr. said afterward that he had to "confess to frustration" about the verdict.
"We are consoled by the fact that we believe we did the right thing," Mattice said.

 

End of Document
