

After the ceremony, dancing the night away
January 20, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 614 words
Byline: By JONATHAN D. SALANT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Writing the final chapter of the story of President Bush's swearing-in, almost 50,000 well-wishers donned tuxedos and gowns to dance the night away at eight balls around the capital.
Newly inaugurated President Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney and their wives planned to make the rounds of all eight balls and celebrate with their supporters. Military bands at each location prepared to play "Hail to the Chief" for Bush and "Hail, Columbia" for Cheney.
Nell Carter, Kelsey Grammer, Drew Carey, Marie Osmond and Meat Loaf were among the masters of ceremonies scheduled to officiate at the balls, while the Guy Lombardo Orchestra, Mr. Fabulous and the Tommy Dorsey Orchestra were on tap to provide music to dance by.
The black-tie balls have been part of the inauguration ceremonies since Dolley Madison hosted the first one in 1809, and have been held every four years since Dwight and Mamie Eisenhower restored the tradition after a 36-year absence in 1953.
Tickets cost $125, with the cost of the eight balls held down by the almost $40 million in donations collected by the Presidential Inaugural Committee, a record haul. Much of the money came in contributions of $100,000 from corporations with business before the federal government.
Each state had a place at one of the eight balls. Texas, home state of Bush, and Wyoming, home state of Cheney, partied at the Washington Convention Center. Tennessee, home state of defeated Democratic presidential candidate Al Gore, was at the Ronald Reagan Building with seven other states. New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania took over Union Station.
Attendees had their choice of hot and cold hors d'oeuvres served on buffet tables, and could quench their thirst at a cash bar. They also received a special inaugural souvenir.
The eagerly awaited inaugural balls were just some of the parties celebrating Bush's swearing-in on a blustery wet day in Washington. Also on Saturday, the Fiesta Americana Inaugural Ball, featuring Hispanic and Latin American guests, was taking place at the Organization of American States.
Some private groups planned their own balls.
Enron, General Motors and some renewable energy companies were among the sponsors of the Environmental Inaugural Ball, to be held at a Georgetown waterfront restaurant. Scheduled attendees included New Jersey Gov. Christine Todd Whitman, Bush's choice to take over the Environmental Protection Agency, and Sen. Bob Smith, R-N.H., chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee.
High-technology companies sponsored the eNaugural.com ball at the National Press Club. The event was being broadcast live over the Web.
The liberal Americans for Democratic Action planned a counter-inaugural celebration at the Mayflower Hotel in downtown Washington. The Oxymorons were musical guests.
In addition, more than a dozen state societies - organizations that represent citizens of particular states who now live in Washington - have been holding their own inaugural celebrations.
On Friday, some 9,000 Texans and Lone Star State expatriates held their quadrennial Black Tie and Boots ball, an event that gained in stature with the election of Bush as president. The Wyoming State Society held its own event Friday. Bush and Cheney attended both.
The National Republican Senatorial Committee, the fund-raising arm for the Senate GOP, held its own black-tie inaugural ball Friday evening. Naomi Judd and Dixie Carter were among the celebrity guests.
On the Net:
Presidential Inaugural Committee: http://www.inauguration-2001.org 
Americans for Democratic Action: http://www.adaction.org 
Environmental Inaugural Ball: http://www.environmentalball.org 
eNaugural ball: http://www.eNaugural.com 
 Load-Date: January 21, 2001

 

End of Document
