

American agents - some veterans of Oklahoma City - search the rubble of Colombia's terror bombing
The Associated Press
February 11, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 682 words
Byline: By ANDREW SELSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




Their blue jump suits powdered with dust, U.S. explosive agents - some of them veterans of Oklahoma City - tried to reach ground zero Tuesday at the exclusive Bogota club devastated by a terrorist bombing.
Floors on the verge of collapsing have so far kept investigators from reaching the exact spot where a huge car bomb exploded Friday night inside the 11-story El Nogal club, killing 35 people and injuring 162.
"The floors are so weak, you can't walk," one agent of the U.S Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms said outside the shattered building.
The ATF's quick deployment of its International Response Team in the wake of the attack underscored the close ties between Colombia and United States, which has sent troops to help this Andean nation battle a drug-funded rebel insurgency that has dragged on for nearly 40 years. U.S. and Colombian officials say rebels were responsible for Friday's attack.
The United States and Colombia also were tied by the tragedy of the bombing. One of the people killed, Juan Pablo Jimenez, had planned to study for a masters degree in business administration at the University of South Carolina this fall.
On the slopes of a green mountain ridge overlooking Bogota, American and Colombian flags flew at half staff at an American-style school attended by children of wealthy Colombians and U.S. diplomats and executives.
Three parents of Colombian students at Colegio Nueva Granada were killed and two young Colombian students were wounded in the attack on the crowded sports and entertainment club.
Students and hundreds of parents - Colombian, American and other nationalities - attended a memorial service at the school Tuesday for the victims.
"Let us pray for President Alvaro Uribe, who is doing everything he can to make Colombia a safe place," said Dan Voll, an American pastor and longtime Colombia resident. "He needs our support. We are not moving backward."
Uribe, a hard-liner, was elected by a landslide last year after his predecessor's peace initiative with rebels failed.
Uribe arrived in Panama Tuesday for a meeting with six Central American leaders in which he asked them to support Colombia's fight against leftists rebels and right-wing paramilitaries whom he called "terrorists."
Four days after the attack, ATF agents - some of whom had investigated the 1995 bombing of the Oklahoma City federal building - joined Colombian experts to cautiously probe the interior of the wrecked club.
When the car bomb exploded inside the multistory interior parking garage, it blew out walls, collapsed floors and showered chunks of debris across a six-lane avenue.
Smashed cars sat atop one another in the garage. Workers dragged some of the debris toward a sidewalk, including twisted pieces of metal barely recognizable as the remains of a vehicle.
Workers shored up floors in the parking garage with beams and a crane. Black netting hung from the soot-scorched building to prevent debris from spilling out. A large Colombian flag dangled alongside.
Some observers believe the bombing was a sign of desperation and weakness on the part of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known as the FARC, which shortly before the bombing had threatened to strike against Colombia's elite.
Others disagreed.
"It is a sign of strength, that they do this in the heart of Bogota in a place where the elite go," said a senior European diplomat.
Army Gen. Fabio Bedoya said his troops seized 825 pounds of a powerful explosive near Bogota on Tuesday, averting another terror attack. But experts warned the rebels would not have a hard time making more of the explosive - a mixture of ammonium nitrate and fuel oil known as ANFO.
More attacks seemed likely, as the FARC kept up pressure for the government to make concessions.
The 16,000-strong rebel group issued a statement Tuesday saying the government should provide a safe haven where insurgents could exchange dozens of politicians, soldiers and police officers being held hostage for jailed rebels. Uribe has ruled out granting a place for such a trade.
The rebel statement made no mention of Friday's bomb attack.

 

End of Document
