

Amid chaos at the U.N., American envoy works quiet diplomacy while his bosses push for war
The Associated Press
March 7, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 687 words
Byline: By DEBORAH HASTINGS, AP National Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The job: to represent the president of the United States, who seems increasingly set on war. The location: the United Nations, founded on keeping peace.
John D. Negroponte sees no conflict in this.
The American envoy is, above all things and in the truest sense, a diplomat. Meaning he takes the time to smile and shake hands and make polite inquiries, no matter what is happening.
Even now, when the U.N. Security Council - which seeks peaceful negotiation above all things - cannot agree itself on one of the most important issues ever to face its 15 members: should military might be used to disarm Iraq?
But Negroponte, a tall man with an instant ability to charm, does not like to talk about war, though that is what President Bush and Secretary of State Colin Powell are threatening. Neither does he mention his pivotal role in presenting the U.S. position to the United Nations.
Instead, the career ambassador whose former bosses include Powell - a security adviser under President Ronald Reagan - and Henry Kissinger - during the Paris peace talks that ended the Vietnam War - likes to talk about progress. In a diplomatic way.
"Without trying to forecast what will happen," he said Thursday in a telephone interview with The Associated Press, "I think it's been interesting that in the recent past … the council has been able to achieve a surprising degree of consensus."
He was talking about last November's passage of Resolution 1441, which made it through the council largely because of his negotiating skills, and gave Saddam Hussein a final opportunity to disarm or face "serious consequences."
That is not the situation now. Bitterly divided with time running out, the council will hear Friday from top weapons inspectors Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, who say the Iraqis' cooperation has improved - and from Powell, who says it never existed.
Despite the Security Council's divisiveness - and President Bush calling the U.N. "irrelevant" and "a place to vent" - ambassadors consider Negroponte one of their own, which is not faint praise in these contentious times.
"He has obviously got a very difficult case to present at the moment, and I feel personally that he's doing it the best he can," said Pakistani ambassador Munir Akram, whose country is likely to abstain from voting on the U.S.-led resolution authorizing force.
"He is able to differentiate between personal relationships and official positions," Akram said.
It is a skill that well serves the son of a Greek shipping magnate who was born in London and raised on Park Avenue. He entered the Foreign Service in 1960, after graduating from Yale University, and quickly ascended the ranks from Kissinger to Powell to ambassadorships to Mexico and Honduras.
He and his wife, Diana, adopted five children in Honduras. And it was his time there, in the 1980s, that eventually caused his only public scandal.
His U.N. ambassador confirmation hearings in 2001 were held up for more than six months over questions about whether he overlooked right-wing death squads in Honduras while he was America's envoy to the Central American country.
"You seem to be unwilling to acknowledge the fact that indeed, the state was involved, the government was involved … People were murdered," Sen. Paul Wellstone, D-Minn., said then.
Negroponte is a man who rarely displays anger. But his answer to the senator was unequivocal. "To this day, I did not believe that death squads were operating in Honduras."
After Sept. 11, the president wanted quick help from the international community. On Sept. 19, 2001, Negroponte was at the United Nations, urging the Security Council to pass anti-terrorism resolutions.
Negroponte is "a man of dialogue," Bulgaria's U.N. Ambassador Stefan Tafrov said Thursday. "He is personable. It's a real pleasure to work with him." Bulgaria's vote is undecided, but the country is believed to be in the U.S. camp.
That Tafrov and his colleagues took time to comment on Negroponte Thursday, amid all that is going on, is notable.
"Just because we have very strong differences in points of view … that doesn't mean we don't share a laugh," Negroponte said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY114

 

End of Document
