

An AP Investigation: Deportees from the U.S. bring gang warfare to Central America
The Associated Press
October 30, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 2319 words
Byline: By RANDALL RICHARD, AP National Writer
Dateline: SAN PEDRO SULA, Honduras
Body




Bishop Romulo Emiliani was angry, his tattooed flock shamefaced and silent.
"Why," he demanded, "must you kill your brothers?" The bishop was near tears, but still no one answered.
Four days earlier, Emiliani was in this same prison courtyard, singing and praying and asking God's forgiveness with the same 100 or so members of Mara Salvatrucha, a street gang formed by criminal deportees from Los Angeles.
But now, during Easter week, they had killed again. This time, they didn't disembowel their victims. This time, all seven were found dead in their bunks. A needle and syringe, the prison director guessed, a single deadly air bubble to each of seven hearts - and not a drop of blood.
For that, at least, the bishop was thankful. But prayer alone was not working, he decided; he must go to Los Angeles to negotiate a truce. It was from there, gang members told him, that they get their orders.
There have always been street gangs in Central America, but they used to be small and loosely organized.
"They were different, not like now," said Eddie Ramirez, El Salvador coordinator of Homies Unidos, a Los Angeles and Central American organization that tries to mediate gang disputes and pull young people out of the gang lifestyle. Before, they were not nearly this sophisticated or violent, "but the deportations changed everything."
No one knows how many of the 500,000 criminal aliens deported from the United States since 1996 are gang members. The U.S. Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement said it doesn't keep track, and the countries that receive the deportees don't either.
What is known is that as of last December, nearly 60,000 of the criminal deportees had been sent to Central America and the Caribbean, and that many came from a pool of American street gang members that law enforcement officials say is about 800,000-strong.
Once in Central America, they quickly reconstituted their American gangs, recruiting new members from among hundreds of thousands of poor teenagers, said gang experts including Al Valdez, an Orange County, Calif., assistant district attorney.
The deportees arrived sporting gang tattoos and dressing like American gang members. Young locals "saw their style," Ramirez said, "and they wanted to be part of that."
The deported gang members found an abundance of Central American kids who had no purpose in life, said Alex Sanchez, a Salvadoran-born former street gang member who founded Homies Unidos in Los Angeles. They had seen American gangsters on TV, "only we were the real thing, so they started idolizing us. 'Hey man, can we get into your gang?'
"So finally, finally they had something they could say, 'This is mine; this is what I am going to claim; I am going to protect it,"' Sanchez said. "And then the gang wars started."
Today, these reconstituted American gangs have tens of thousands of members, officials throughout Central America say. The gangs are known as "maras." The word, which has no literal translation, is believed to have been taken from a 1970s Brazilian movie, "Marabunta," about ants that leave a trail of destruction in their wake.
With allies in American cities including Los Angeles and Houston, the gangs have morphed into transnational criminal organizations, trading drugs, stolen cars and guns across international borders, said gang experts including Dr. Louise Shelly, director of the Transnational Crime and Corruption Center at American University in Washington, D.C.
Gang leaders in Los Angeles communicate with members in Central America by telephone and the Internet, said Valdez, who spends hours monitoring their Web traffic.
Sometimes, they communicate the old-fashioned way, Ramirez said. "It comes on the next plane down here. A personal message: Kill this guy."
Before the large-scale deportations, Shelly said, international criminal networks used countries such as Honduras to launder money but "didn't have a chain or network to hook into." Now, she said, Central America has been populated with criminals who have personal contacts with criminal organizations not only in the United States but also elsewhere in the hemisphere.
In a high profile case last year, Honduran police killed one Mara Salvatrucha gang member and wounded another while breaking up a drug trafficking network along the El Salvador-Honduras border. Evidence confiscated in the raid linked the Honduran gang to the Arellan Felix cartel, a criminal organization operating on the American border in Tijuana, Mexico, said Courtland Winthrop, a researcher at the Graduate School of Public and International Affairs at the University of Pittsburgh.
Deportations have also given rise to transnational gangs in the Caribbean.
In Jamaica, deportees have formed criminal networks that trade South American cocaine for sophisticated North American weapons, said Aham Brown, police liaison with the Jamaican embassy in Washington. They are also flooding Jamaica - known traditionally for marijuana - with heroin and crack cocaine, he said.
In Guyana, deportees are exploiting their contacts in the United States to expand markets for international drug cartels, said Ronald Gajraj, the Home Affairs Minister. Taking advantage of the country's long coastline and a string of clandestine airstrips, they are using Guyana as a major transshipment point for drugs going into the United States, he said.
In Central America, the new transnational gangs are at war with indigenous gangs and with one another over spoils and turf.
Two of the biggest, Mara Salvatrucha, which was born on 13th Street in Los Angeles, and Mara Dieciocho, which originated a few blocks away on 18th Street, traffic in guns and drugs and have tens of thousands of members in the United States, according to police. Now, they are playing out their old American rivalries on a Central American canvas.
The result, police throughout Central America say, is a region-wide explosion of assault, robbery, kidnapping, rape and murder.
A favorite crime of the criminal deportees is to climb on city buses, take off their shirts to expose their American gang tattoos, and then rob and terrorize the passengers, said Eduardo Linares, Metropolitan Police Chief in San Salvador.
On Aug. 30, for example, gang members attacked two buses in San Pedro Sula, killing eight on one bus and three on another.
Often, it is difficult to know who has committed individual crimes, but government officials and church leaders throughout the region say the criminal deportees from the United States, and the gang culture they brought with them, are responsible for the growing violence.
While crime statistics from these third-world countries are few and unreliable, Inter-American Dialogue, an organization representing Western Hemisphere political leaders, said the gang problem has become so severe that it may represent a national security threat to countries in the region.
In El Salvador, the Army has begun conducting periodic sweeps of gang-infested barrios. In just one sweep of seven cities and towns in August, more than 328 gang members were rounded up and held without charges.
The country's gang problem is "so big it can't be measured," Linares said.
Ramirez, the El Salvador coordinator of Homies Unidos, is a criminal deportee himself, and a former gang member - 14 years old when he emigrated to Los Angeles and joined the 18th Street gang. He was 30 when he was deported in 1998 for a drug conviction.
He was shot not long after he arrived in the El Salvador capital of San Salvador, he said, and then rattled off the names of murdered friends: "Moreno, Rico, Carlito, Teomarcus, and then Gino. Gino just got killed two months ago. Crazy, man."
Sometimes, the innocent get caught in the crossfire. On the day Ramirez was interviewed for this story, two of his aunts from the United States were visiting him and other relatives in San Salvador. They came reluctantly, he said, because they were fearful of the violence. As they waited for a bus in the center of city, they got caught in a shootout between rival gangs. One was wounded, the other killed.
Bishop Emiliani said some of the gangs are no longer content with simply killing their rivals. Sometimes, he said, they dismember their victims, using their body parts in rituals to prove their loyalty to their gangs. Authorities have found heads in bags hanging from trees, intestines strung along fences.
More times than he allows himself to think about, the bishop said, gang members in San Pedro Sula, a Honduran industrial town of one million people, get their revenge by killing not just their enemies, but their families as well.
"It's terrible - more horrible than what we saw in the movies about what happened in the United States in the '30s," he said. "They kill not just the boy, but they kill the brothers, the sisters and the mama and father."
On August 4, for example, nine members of the same family were gunned down in a nearby barrio.
Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, has been touched personally by the increasing violence. In 1997, his son was kidnapped and murdered by a gang of local thugs. Elected in 2001 on an anti-crime campaign, he has virtually declared war on the gangs.
Last month, the Honduran Congress gave him the tools he needed to strike back, making gang membership illegal and punishable by up to 12 years in prison. To enforce it, masked police carrying assault weapons and supported by helicopters have been breaking into homes of gang members and carting scores of them off to prison.
In both Honduras and El Salvador, vigilante groups have also been fighting back against the American-inspired gangs.
"Kill them all, that's the solution, that's what they think," Linares said. Unfortunately, he said, the attitude, is, "Be a patriot, kill a gang member."
Some criminal aliens in the United States are so fearful of the vigilantes that they go to great lengths to try to avoid deportation to Honduras and El Salvador. In some cases, their parents have spent their life savings on hopeless legal appeals.
On June 8, 2000, Gavriel Trevino, 41, held Archbishop Patrick Flores of San Antonio, Texas, hostage for nine hours with a dummy hand grenade after U.S. officials told him he was to be deported to El Salvador. As a result, he remains in the United States, serving a 40-year sentence for kidnapping.
Sometimes, the vigilantes don't bother to discriminate between the criminal deportees, their local gang disciples and innocent young people, Emiliani said.
At least 50 suspected gang members and street kids are killed by vigilantes in Honduras each month, according to Casa Alianza, a Honduran youth advocacy group. The group has counted 1,900 since it started documenting such cases in 1998.
The Rev. Thomas Goekler, a Maryknoll priest from Hartford, Conn., works in a barrio of 85,000 people in San Pedro Sula. There, he said, the vigilante squads began as small groups of off-duty security guards and police. Now, he said, they include otherwise law-abiding civilians. "They're quote-unquote good family guys who have had a few pops and decide to go out and kill a kid," he said.
"The gangs know who they are," Goekler said, and are fighting back. "So far, they've killed five of them" just in his barrio.
The gangs are fighting back in El Salvador, too. Sanchez said they have taken to rolling hand grenades under SUVs with tinted windows - the vehicles favored by the vigilantes. Grenades can be had on the black market for as little as $3 each.
Some of the gang members are frightened by the violence, but getting out of a gang is not easy, Emiliani said.
"If a boy leaves his mara to lead a normal life, the mara will kill him," he said. "And if he does not leave his mara, the other mara will kill him. And if they don't kill him, the death squads with kill him."
Goekler said, "Half the kids I work with will be killed."
To improve their odds, some are turning to another Honduran priest who has cobbled together a home-made laser gun and trained volunteer nurses to use it to burn off the extravagant American gang tattoos that mark deportees for execution.
The process is excruciating, "too painful even to watch," Goekler said, but deportees and members of their gangs come by bus from as far as 200 miles away for the procedure. Depending on the extent of the tattooing, the burning can take several sessions.
"Like everything else in their lives, it's terrible," Goekler said.
Emiliani said that as of July, more than 1,200 young men had completed the tattoo removal.
If there is a solution to the violence, the bishop said, it is to be found in negotiation and dialogue. And it is for that reason he keeps talking - both to the gang members and to those who want to kill them.
Four days before the killings at the prison in San Pedro Sula, Emiliani was the guest speaker at the annual Semana Santa breakfast in Tegucigalpa, the capital's social and religious event of the year. There, he brought dozens of government ministers, legislators and mayors literally to their knees in a fit of compassion and forgiveness for his other flock - the one at the prison.
But whatever goodwill he managed to elicit at the breakfast was squandered by the Easter Week killings in San Pedro Sula. Then, less than a month later, there was another prison massacre, this time in La Ceiba. This time, 69 members of Mara Dieciocho, Mara Salvatruca's chief rival in Central America and Los Angeles, were stabbed, beaten to death or burned alive in their cells.
Emiliani plans to go to Los Angeles soon with this message to the gang leaders there:
"We live in a very poor country. We have a lot of problems. And now, people die here every day, and you are responsible. I don't want to destroy your maras. No, no, no! I want only for you to tell your maras to stop the war. I say to you that the poor people of my country want to live in peace."
Next: For Kim Ho Ma, there is no second chance. Convicted of a crime at 17, he can never live in America again.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY478-489; AP Graphics TATTOO REMOVAL, EXPORTING CRIME LOGO
 Load-Date: October 31, 2003

 

End of Document
