

An outpouring of emotion to the news of Ronald Reagan's death
The Associated Press
June 5, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 908 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Some reaction to Reagan's death:
"Ronald Reagan was a president of great historic impact who led the United States with strength and conviction, and the positive impact of his policies is still felt today here and around the world. More than two decades after he was first elected president, the Republican Party still bears his imprint. Because Ronald Reagan lived, people across the globe live in greater freedom and prosperity." - Republican National Committee chairman Ed Gillespie.
"America has lost an icon. Ronald Reagan's leadership will inspire Americans for generations to come. His patriotism and devotion to our country will never be forgotten. - Senate Minority leader Tom Daschle.
"He was our hero, he was our hometown boy made good. At the church we feel that we nurtured a president and we are pretty proud of the fact." - Wanita Trader, a leader at the First Christian Church in Dixon, Ill., which Reagan attended.
"On foreign policy he will be honored as the president who won the Cold War, and his 'Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall' will be linked forever with President Kennedy's 'Ich bin ein Berliner.' President Reagan and Nancy were always very gracious to the Kennedy family and they are both very much in our thoughts and prayers in this difficult time." - Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass.
"President Reagan transformed our nation's psyche with his optimism and positive vision. He was a strong leader who made a lasting mark on our nation's history. He was gentle and kind and every American can learn from his example." - Michigan Democratic Gov. Jennifer Granholm.
"We all know Reagan's legacy, from the Iran-Contra affair to the funding of the Nicaraguan military in which over 200,000 people died. The groundwork for the move steadily to the right happened with the Reagan administration. People want to elevate him to some mythic level; they have their own reason for doing that." - actor Danny Glover, at an anti-war rally in Los Angeles.
"An unequaled champion of freedom, smaller government and market-oriented principles, he has always been an inspiration to me. Perhaps most importantly, this happy warrior faced the gravest threat of his time and made the difficult decisions that ultimately won the Cold War." - Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, R-Texas.
"Ronald Reagan was a unique leader who understood the greatness and goodness of America. History will judge him well. He led our nation through historic challenges and changes with unyielding confidence and courage. Ronald Reagan embodied the best of America. He was the American spirit." - Sen. Chuck Hagel, R.-Neb.
"The sun has set on the remarkable life of the great man who reminded us it is always morning in America. President Ronald Wilson Reagan will always be remembered as a man of unwavering principle whose sense of hope, optimism and opportunity appealed to the best in Americans." - New York Republican Gov. George Pataki.
"He was a man who loved his country. I don't know of anybody who's done more for this country and the entertainment industry." - Johnny Grant, honorary mayor of Hollywood and a longtime friend of Reagan from his Hollywood days.
"President Reagan restored America's source of pride and confidence in itself. He was a wonderful person to work for and a truly great president. His willingness to stick to his principles changed the world." - James A. Baker III, former White House chief of staff and Treasury secretary for Reagan.
"Ronald Reagan was a great president and an even better man who inspired, led and brought optimism back to our great nation - all with honor, humility and humanity. … He was always a gentleman who dedicated his life to freedom and liberty in every corner of the globe." - Tommy Thompson, U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary and former Republican governor of Wisconsin.
"Ronald Reagan served our nation well at a time of great uncertainty in the world. I will never forget his quick wit and ability to communicate with the American public like few other politicians in history. While I did not agree with many of his policies, his devotion and love for our nation was undeniable." - Sen. James Jeffords, I-Vt.
"It can be said that Ronald Reagan got his start in politics at Screen Actors Guild. He served as president of the union twice, from 1947 to 1952 and again from 1959 to 1960. While President Reagan's politics grew conservative over the years and, at times, at odds with the nation's labor movement, there can be no question that he devoted years of his life to advancing the wages, benefits and working conditions of his fellow actors. - Screen Actors Guild president Melissa Gilbert.
"He was an old guy and sweet fellow. Even though I disagreed with him on everything, he had a good heart." - David Cutler of Bellingham, Wash., after arriving at Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport.
"President Reagan fueled the spirit of America. His smile, his optimism, his total belief in the ultimate triumph of democracy and freedom, and his willingness to act on that belief, helped end the Cold War and usher in a new and brighter phase of history." - Secretary of State Colin Powell, who served as Reagan's national security adviser.
"I think his legacy will be that he was probably the most human of any presidents we've ever had. He was very down to earth, no particular ego, loved to talk show business, just kind of a regular guy with a great sense of humor." - comedian and impressionist Rich Little.
 Load-Date: June 6, 2004

 

End of Document
