

Angry over recession and austerity moves, Argentines rebuke president at the polls
October 15, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 662 words
Byline: By BILL CORMIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




Argentine voters rebuked President Fernando De la Rua for his handling of the country's economic crisis, propelling opposition Peronists to gains in congressional midterm elections.
Sunday's outcome further weakened the embattled president, already under fire for failing to steer South America's second largest economy out of a recession.
At the ballot box, voters poured out their distaste for politicians in general by casting an exceedingly high number of blank or nullified ballots, one of the few ways to register discontent in a country where voting is compulsory
De la Rua said late Sunday he had heard the message of the people. But he signaled he would not backtrack on a string of austerity measures meant to curb a lengthy recession and avoid default on a $132 billion public debt.
"I know very well what's going on in the country, the needs and worries of the people and what they are going through in these difficult times," he said, pledging to find ways to lift the stagnant economy.
On Sunday, voters replaced the entire 72-member Senate and 127 of 257 seats in the lower house of deputies. They also elected 11 provincial legislatures, one governor and local officials in the most important political contest since De la Rua's 1999 election.
With more than two-thirds of the vote counted, election officials said opposition Peronist Party candidates led Senate races in 18 of the 23 provinces. The Peronists could also become the leading party - though not the majority - in the lower house.
Before Sunday's vote, the Peronists had 39 of 72 seats in the Senate, while in the Chamber of Deputies, they had 99 seats to 102 held by De la Rua's ruling Alliance coalition of the Radicals and the leftist Frepaso party.
Final results were expected later Monday.
Many of the new lawmakers expected to be elected from De la Rua's ruling Alliance coalition are his political foes, weakening his control of the coalition and making it difficult to pass legislation.
Argentines are in a foul mood as the jobless rate remains stuck above 16 percent and seven austerity programs in two years have fired up near daily protests in the streets.
In the capital alone, nearly 30 percent of all voters cast the so-called "Voto Bronca" - or vote of anger - while some two in every 10 voters did so in several outlying regions.
Some voided ballots by leaving them blank, others by angrily writing in the names of cartoon characters like Bart Simpson and Mickey Mouse. Still others took note of recent corruption scandals by scrawling slogans on their ballots aimed at the politicians: "Stop stealing" and "You're all thieves!"
De la Rua, who took office with an approval rating of 63 percent 22 months ago, is now down to 18 percent today. His powerful Economy Minister, Domingo Cavallo, has a similar rating of 16 percent after exacting punishing cuts in the education and health budgets and slashing state worker wages and pensions by 13 percent.
The president has insisted he will keep Cavallo on if he reshuffles his Cabinet after the vote. Cavallo turned around Argentina's inflation-ridden economy in the early 1990s but has since seen his popularity plummet.
Some said Sunday's outcome should force the president to reconsider the stinging austerity packets that have prompted scattered social unrest, including near daily blockades of rural highways and the pounding drumbeat of jobless youths in major cities.
Peronist power broker Eduardo Duhalde, who ran a distant second to De la Rua in the 1999 presidential race, was a bigger winner on Sunday as he took a double-digit lead over De la Rua's Radical Party leader in a key senate race.
Duhalde said the time had come for De la Rua to reconsider his prescriptions for the country's ailing economy.
"This economic model, based on one austerity program after another, has carried us to depression, recession, and chaos." said Duhalde. "This is an ultimatum from the people: the policies must change because the situation is getting worse.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BAI114,117
 Load-Date: October 16, 2001

 

End of Document
