

AP News in Brief; Iraq accepts U-2 overflights; Bush brushes aside the concession as a 'stall for time'
The Associated Press
February 10, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1385 words
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




Iraq agreed Monday to allow U-2 surveillance flights over its territory, meeting a key demand by U.N. inspectors searching for banned weapons as European opposition to American military action mounted.
President Bush, however, brushed aside Iraqi concessions as too little, too late.
"This is a man who is trying to stall for time," he said after a meeting with Australian Prime Minister John Howard, a staunch U.S. ally against Iraq. "The reason we need to fly U-2 flights is they're not disarming."
Iraq's acceptance of the U-2 flights, as well as its submission of new documents to the United Nations over the weekend, marked Baghdad's latest step to stave off a U.S.-led attack and convince other governments that it was now ready to cooperate in full with U.N. inspectors.
NATO in crisis after French, Germans, Belgians block military planning to protect Turkey from Iraqi missile threat
 
BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - Europe's split with America deepened Monday after France, Germany and Belgium vetoed a U.S.-backed measure to authorize NATO to make plans to protect Turkey in the event of attack by Iraq.
Turkey responded by invoking a clause in NATO's mutual defense treaty requiring immediate consultations. It was the first time in 53 years that a member of the Atlantic alliance publicly activated the emergency measure.
American ambassador Nicholas Burns said the European rejection had plunged NATO into crisis.
The NATO decision was followed later Monday by a joint declaration in Paris in which Russia joined France and Germany in calling for strengthened U.N. weapons inspections in Iraq.
 
NASA says wing fragment came from Columbia's troubled left side
 
SPACE CENTER, Houston (AP) - NASA said Monday that a piece of broken wing found last week was from Columbia's troubled left side, giving investigators a potential clue in the space shuttle disaster.
The fragment includes a 2-foot piece of carbon-composite panel, a dense material that covered the leading edge of the wing, and a 1 1/2-foot piece of the wing itself. Engineers are not yet certain where the piece fits.
The fragment could be extremely important, given that all the trouble apparently began in the left wing during the final minutes of Columbia's flight Feb. 1. The shuttle broke up above Texas as it returned to Earth, killing all seven people aboard.
After the wing fragment was found last week, NASA deputy associate administrator Michael Kostelnik called it "a significant recovery."
 
Cold weather, threat of war send heating oil, gasoline prices soaring
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Prices for heating oil and gasoline are soaring and likely to keep rising as energy markets cope with a colder than expected winter, the loss of Venezuela's production and worries about war with Iraq.
A deep freeze in the Northeast caused heating oil prices to spike by 20 percent last week. The Energy Department, citing low stocks - as well as higher natural gas prices - said heating bills could be 50 percent higher this year than last winter.
Consumers are getting hit at the gasoline pumps as well.
Nationally, gasoline prices increased for the ninth straight week to an average of $1.61 a gallon for regular grades, 50 cents a gallon higher than a year ago, according to the federal Energy Information Administration. Many parts of the country have seen price hikes of 20 cents a gallon in recent weeks.
 
Charity director linked to Osama bin Laden pleads guilty to racketeering, feds promise details
 
CHICAGO (AP) - The head of a Muslim charity accused of funneling money to Osama bin Laden's terror network pleaded guilty Monday to illegally buying boots and uniforms for fighting forces in Bosnia and Chechnya.
As part of the plea bargain, prosecutors dropped charges that Enaam Arnaout aided bin Laden. But they insisted he committed the offense, and said they agreed to the plea bargain to secure a conviction and Arnaout's cooperation while sparing the government the expense of a trial.
Arnaout faces a maximum of 20 years; no sentencing date has been set. He has admitted defrauding donors to his 10-year-old Benevolence International Foundation by telling them the group helped only widows, orphans and the poor in Muslim lands.
 
Jurors begin deliberating spy suspect's guilt or innocence
 
ALEXANDRIA, Va. (AP) - Jurors began weighing spy suspect Brian Patrick Regan's guilt or innocence Monday after prosecutors argued that, for $13 million, he would have sold Iraq or Libya "whatever they would have paid for."
Defense attorneys said the intelligence information he carried when arrested would not have compromised U.S. security and wasn't even secret - it could readily be found through public sources.
The jury deliberated about an hour, then broke for the night. Jurors were to take off Tuesday and resume deliberations Wednesday.
Regan, 40, of Bowie, Md., has denied trying to sell classified information to Iraq, Libya and China. The retired Air Force master sergeant worked both as a military member and as a civilian employee for defense contractor TRW Inc. at the National Reconnaissance Office, the government's spy satellite agency.
 
Ancient grave shows Stonehenge could be work of foreigner
 
LONDON (AP) - Stonehenge, the mysterious ring of ancient monoliths from the dawn of Britain's proud civilization, could be the work of a central European immigrant, archaeologists said Monday.
An early Bronze Age archer, whose grave was discovered near the stone circle last year, may have helped build the monument. And tests on the chemical components of his tooth enamel showed he likely grew up in the region that is now Switzerland.
The archer "would have been a very important person in the Stonehenge area," said Andrew Fitzpatrick, Wessex Archaeology's project manager in charge of Stonehenge.
The 4,000-year-old man was identified as an archer because of the flint arrowheads found by his body, along with other artifacts belonging to the Beaker Culture that flourished in the Alps during the Bronze Age.
 
J&J looks to boost biotech position with purchase of Scios
 
TRENTON, N.J. (AP) - Johnson & Johnson, the health-care giant the public knows for its baby, skin and wound-care products, is boosting its biotech might with the acquisition of Scios Inc. in a $2.4 billion cash-for-stock deal announced Monday.
Buying Scios, a 22-year-old biotech company with one product on the market, gives J&J a new, likely lucrative heart drug and a possible future blockbuster, while Sunnyvale, Calif.-based Scios should get sales and research support that will help it grow quickly, analysts say.
The deal, expected to close in this year's second quarter, would be the third acquisition of a biotechnology company in less than four years for the New Brunswick-based maker of No More Tears shampoo and Band-Aids.
 
Spears and Madonna flicks, 'Star Wars' lead worst-movie list
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Voters for the Razzies, an annual spoof of the Academy Awards, have a message for Britney Spears and Madonna: Don't quit your day jobs as pop divas.
Spears' teen buddy flick "Crossroads" had a leading eight Razzie nominations and Madonna's island-romance bomb "Swept Away" received seven, including worst picture and worst actress for both movies.
"Star Wars: Episode II - Attack of the Clones," also received seven nominations, among them worst picture and director for George Lucas, creator of the sci-fi saga.
Nominees for the 23rd annual Razzies, organized by the Golden Raspberry Award Foundation, were announced Monday, a day before Oscar nominations. Razzie "winners" will be announced March 22, the eve of the Oscar ceremony.
 
Green surprises favored Earnhardt with pole victory
 
DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. (AP) - Unheralded Jeff Green took the spotlight from Dale Earnhardt Jr. by winning the pole Monday for the Daytona 500.
Earnhardt, who went into qualifying heavily favored to take his first Daytona pole after showing muscle by winning Saturday night's Bud Shootout, held the top spot on the speed chart with a lap of 186.382 mph.
Green, the next driver on the 2 1/2-mile Daytona International Speedway oval, pushed Earnhardt to the outside of the front row for the season-opening Winston Cup race with a fast lap of 186.606.
Green's Chevrolet was 0.058 seconds faster than that of Earnhardt. Those are the only cars with guaranteed starting positions for NASCAR's premier race.

 

End of Document
