

AP News in Brief; NASA's 'best and brightest' minds didn't think the thermal tiles were reason for worry
The Associated Press
February 3, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 842 words
Dateline: SPACE CENTER, Houston
Body




While Columbia was still in orbit, NASA's "best and brightest" minds analyzed the potential damage done to its thermal tiles by a piece of debris during liftoff and concluded that the flight was in no danger, agency officials said Monday.
High-level officials at NASA concurred with the engineering report, which was issued on Day 12 of the doomed 16-day flight, the officials said.
On Monday, 48 hours after the disaster, NASA's top spaceflight official, William Readdy, said the damage done by the broken-off piece of fuel-tank insulation is now being looked at very carefully as a possible cause of the tragedy.
The shuttle broke up 39 miles over Texas and fell to Earth just as it was experiencing maximum re-entry heat of 3,000 degrees. All seven astronauts aboard perished.
Columbia was covered with more than 20,000 thermal tiles to protect it from burning up while re-entering Earth's atmosphere.
 
Powell to offer U.N. Iraq photographs, overheard conversations to press U.S. case
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Secretary of State Colin Powell will present photographs of mobile biological weapons and transcripts of overheard Iraqi conversations to convince allies that Saddam Hussein has potent arsenals in defiance of U.N. disarmament demands, an administration official said Monday.
Powell sifted through classified U.S. intelligence on Monday to choose what he will make public on Wednesday to the U.N. Security Council. He is expected to display the photographs and refer to transcripts, an official told The Associated Press.
The chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, Rep. Duncan Hunter, R-Calif., said he expected the evidence to show details of a transfer of technology from other countries and the relocation of weapons systems within Iraq.
 
Bush seeks $1.3 trillion in new tax relief
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - President Bush called for $1.3 trillion in new tax relief over the next decade in the budget he sent the Republican-controlled Congress on Monday, featuring proposals to accelerate and then make permanent the cuts lawmakers approved two years ago, as well as his highly contested plan to slash taxes on corporate dividends.
Apart from the biggest-ticket items, though, Bush's budget includes tax incentives designed to stimulate energy production, implement pending free trade agreements with Chile and Singapore and make telecommuting more attractive. Tax breaks for ethanol production, set to expire in 2007, would be extended, and some individuals who care for relatives with long-term needs would qualify for an extra tax exemption.
Democrats, a minority in both houses of Congress, vowed a fight against administration proposals they said were tilted toward the richest Americans.
 
With Chavez firmly in power, Venezuelan strikers return to work in all areas except oil
 
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - Workers in all sectors but the vital oil industry returned to their jobs Monday - abandoning a two-month general strike that devastated Venezuela's economy but failed to oust President Hugo Chavez.
As life began returning to normal in stores, factories and banks, the government made gains toward restoring oil production to pre-strike levels in a nation that is a major supplier of crude to the United States and the world's fifth-largest petroleum exporter.
The fear of bankruptcy and shortages of gasoline and other essentials prompted leaders to end the strike, which began Dec. 2, said Albis Munoz, vice president of the country's biggest business chamber, Fedecamaras.
Chavez, elected in 1998 and re-elected in 2000, vows to defeat his opponents in the streets and at the ballot box. He said Sunday he will prosecute strike leaders for sabotaging the economy.
 
Record producer Phil Spector arrested in California homicide investigation
 
ALHAMBRA, Calif. (AP) - Phil Spector, the legendary record producer whose "Wall of Sound" helped change the sound of pop music in the 1960s, was arrested Monday for allegedly shooting a woman to death at his suburban mansion.
Spector, 62, was seized at the castle-like estate around 5 a.m. after authorities were called about shots being fired, sheriff's Sgt. Joe Efflandt said. Spector was taken to the Alhambra Police Department and booked for investigation of murder.
Attorney Robert Shapiro, whose clients have included O.J. Simpson, said he was representing Spector but couldn't discuss the case until he talked to his client. Bail was set at $1 million.
 
So long, Comiskey - hello U.S. Cellular Field
 
CHICAGO (AP) - For more than 90 years, the Chicago White Sox have played in a South Side ballpark called Comiskey Park.
Now that the stadium's name has been turned into an advertisement for U.S. Cellular, some are calling it "Sell-Your-Soul Field."
Three days after announcing that the company paid $68 million to rename the ballpark U.S. Cellular Field, White Sox owner Jerry Reinsdorf said the money would go toward making it more fan-friendly.
"This is going to be a much better place for our fans," he said.
The South Side ballpark is the 15th of the 30 major league parks to sell its name to a corporation.

 

End of Document
