

AP News in Brief; Blix, ElBaradei open new round of Baghdad talks, crucial but 'not the last chance' for peace
The Associated Press
February 8, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1555 words
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




With a shadow of war on the horizon, U.N. disarmament chiefs faced their Iraqi counterparts Saturday in "useful" and "very substantial" talks to finally get answers to questions about anthrax, VX and other forbidden arms from the past.
After more than four hours of meetings, U.N. nuclear watchdog Mohamed ElBaradei reported the Iraqis had presented unspecified "explanations on some of the issues." The discussions resume Sunday.
The talks were pivotal, but they were "not the last chance" for peace, ElBaradei said, clearly seeking to counter talk in Washington that the time for diplomacy had all but run out.
ElBaradei and chief U.N. arms inspector Hans Blix were looking for quick Iraqi concessions on practical matters in the disarmament effort here, such as clearance to fly American U-2 reconnaissance planes in support of their inspections.
One week after astronauts died, NASA still has more questions than answers
 
SPACE CENTER, Houston (AP) - One week after the space shuttle Columbia broke apart as it streaked over Texas just minutes from home, NASA still has more questions than answers.
Searchers have recovered remains of all seven astronauts and more than 12,000 shards of metal, wires and debris that rained down across two states. But the findings so far have yielded few clues.
The most significant discovery has been a 2-foot section of shuttle wing, including the carbon-covered leading edge designed to protect Columbia's insulating tiles as the spacecraft heats to 3,000 degrees re-entering the atmosphere.
If that section came from the troubled left wing, where temperatures surged in the shuttle's final moments and sensors failed in rapid sequence, it could provide hard evidence of what went wrong.
Investigators hadn't yet determined which wing the fragment belonged to.
 
Lawyers' group pushing for death penalty changes
 
SEATTLE (AP) - Six years after urging a halt to executions, the American Bar Association is ready to issue states another challenge: fix shoddy defense systems for accused killers.
The nation's largest lawyers' group is overhauling 14-year-old standards for capital defense lawyers in the face of criticism from Supreme Court justices and others about the quality of legal representation.
The ABA's policy-making board will vote early this week on a plan encouraging states, and in some places counties, that pay for the defenses of poor defendants to update their standards. Some governments follow the 1989 guidelines. Many others have no standards.
Among the recommendations are bolstering defense teams to include two lawyers, an investigator, a background specialist, and in some cases an expert to help with jury selection.
Supporters contend that changes will help defense teams compete against often better-paid and equipped prosecutors.
 
Colombian rebels blamed for worst terrorist attack in Bogota in more than 10 years
 
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - Colombia's government blamed leftist rebels Saturday for a car bomb that ripped through an exclusive social club, killing 31 people - including six children - and injuring 157 in the worst terrorist attack in Bogota in more than a decade.
The bomb, which gutted the 11-story club Friday evening, was planted on the third floor inside a parking garage and was packed with 330 pounds of explosives, officials said.
The attack was a shock to capital residents accustomed to a war, now in its fourth decade, fought mostly in the countryside. Vice President Francisco Santos said he "had no doubt" the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, was responsible.
He blamed the rebel organization for adopting the tactics of the drug lords who plague the country as well.
Not since drug lord Pablo Escobar unleashed a bloody campaign to avoid extradition to the United States had Bogota seen an attack of Friday's magnitude. With Escobar's death in 1993 and the subsequent breakup of Colombia's large drug cartels, the rebels inherited control of the country's cocaine trade.
 
Rumsfeld tells Europeans that further delay in disarming Iraq makes war more likely
 
MUNICH, Germany (AP) - In a jab at major U.S. allies, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Saturday countries such as France and Germany that favor giving Iraq another chance to disarm are undermining what slim chance may exist to avoid war.
"There are those who counsel that we should delay preparations" for war against Iraq. "Ironically, that approach could well make war more likely, not less, because delaying preparations sends a signal of uncertainty," Rumsfeld said in the opening address at an international conference on security policy.
President Bush said he will not wait much longer before moving against Saddam Hussein, declaring in his weekly radio address that the Iraqi leader is wasting a last opportunity to come clean.
Rumsfeld said "there is no chance" Saddam will disarm voluntarily or flee his country if given yet another opportunity to comply with the U.N. Security Council resolution from November that demands Iraq's complete disarmament.
 
Tens of thousands march in support of striking Venezuelan oil workers
 
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - Tens of thousands of Venezuelans marched Saturday in support of 9,000 oil workers fired for leading a two-month strike against President Hugo Chavez that battered the economy of this oil-dependent nation.
Chavez opponents gathered outside four Caracas office buildings of the state oil monopoly, Petroleos de Venezuela S.A., or PDVSA, waving national flags and chanting anti-government slogans.
Venezuela's opposition - business groups, labor unions and leftist and conservative politicians - this week ended a two-month general strike in all areas but the crucial oil industry. The strike began Dec. 2 and sought Chavez's resignation or early elections.
The government claims most of PDVSA's 40,000 employees have returned to work. Strike leaders deny this, saying thousands refuse to return to their posts until Chavez rehires the fired workers and agrees to an early vote on his rule.
The government gradually is recovering Venezuela's oil industry, which was the world's fifth-largest exporter and a major U.S. supplier before the strike, when production was 3 million barrels a day.
 
Former National Guard intelligence officer, ex-wife at center of espionage case
 
SPOKANE, Wash. (AP) - National Guard intelligence officer Rafael Davila admits he spent years bringing home secret and top-secret documents, stacking them in his basement and finally in a rented storage locker. He told the FBI he just wanted to read them.
Now in a case with ties to the shadowy world of white supremacists and anti-government militias, prosecutors are accusing Davila and his ex-wife, Deborah, of espionage. Investigators are still trying to track down hundreds of files apparently containing information about nuclear, chemical and biological warfare.
A federal indictment charges the Davilas with unauthorized possession of sensitive documents during the first eight months of 1999. Deborah Davila is also charged with trying to deliver the documents to an unidentified person in August of that year.
During a hearing last week, Davila, 51, sat silently with Deborah, 40, as prosecutors vilified them for allegedly exposing the nation to danger from terrorists and anti-government extremists.
The Davilas, whose marriage crumbled in 1999 after less than a year, have pleaded innocent. Prosecutors said there is no evidence that foreign governments are involved in the case.
 
Film critic Roger Ebert recuperating from cancer surgery
 
CHICAGO (AP) - Film critic Roger Ebert is recuperating from follow-up surgery for papillary cancer, a common and curable type of thyroid cancer.
The 60-year-old movie reviewer for the Chicago Sun-Times and television audiences underwent the procedure Thursday at Northwestern Memorial Hospital.
"It went very successfully," a hospital spokeswoman said.
A year ago, doctors removed Ebert's thyroid gland and selected lymph nodes in his neck. They said at the time that Ebert was expected to make a complete recovery.
Ebert said in a statement Friday that he would attend screenings on Monday and would cover the Oscar nominations on Tuesday.
"In other words," he said, "it's business as usual."
 
Ward still believes he's best to lead USOC
 
CHICAGO (AP) - Lloyd Ward still thinks he's the right person to lead the U.S. Olympic Committee.
Even with Congress threatening to force changes in his organization, Ward said Saturday he has no plans to resign.
The USOC's executive committee was meeting a few feet away behind closed doors as Ward spoke. While Ward did not specifically ask for a vote of confidence, he said he expects to come away with one.
Ward's first public remarks since a Senate hearing almost two weeks ago came five days after USOC president Marty Mankamyer stepped down amid accusations she tried to oust Ward in a bid for more power.
Counting interim president Bill Martin, the group has had three presidents in the last 11 months. And three CEOs since 2000. The departures haven't exactly been pretty, either.
With the Athens Olympics only 18 months away, the organization designed to support and promote America's top athletes is getting most of its ink for ugly, petty scandals. Congress held one hearing and has another scheduled for Thursday, and Sen. Ben Nighthorse Campbell called on Ward to resign.

 

End of Document
