

Arab and non-aligned nations demand an end to the war in Iraq
The Associated Press
March 27, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 590 words
Byline: By KIM GAMEL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Arab and non-aligned nations demanded an end to the war in Iraq, while some U.S. allies backed the United States and said the blame rests with Saddam Hussein.
The open Security Council meeting Wednesday was held to give U.N. member states outside the council their first chance to express their views on the military campaign that began last week.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan avoided blaming either side for the violence but called on the warring parties to ensure the protection of civilians and prisoners of war, as well as the distribution of humanitarian aid.
The meeting was continue Thursday. Nearly 80 nations had signed up to speak.
"Many people ask why the Iraqi government did not take full advantage of the last chance they were given by the council," Annan said. "But, at the same time, many people around the world are seriously questioning whether it was legitimate for some member states to proceed to such a fateful action now."
"We all want to see this war brought to an end as soon as possible," he added. "But while it continues, it is essential that everything be done to protect the civilian population, as well as the wounded and the prisoners of war on both sides, and to bring relief to the victims."
The 22-member Arab Group and the Non-Aligned Movement, which represents about 115 mainly developing countries, had asked for Wednesday's open Security Council meeting to denounce the military action. But they did not introduce a resolution demanding a halt to the fighting and withdrawal of all foreign forces, apparently out of concern that the measure would not receive the nine votes needed to pass.
"This war should not have been started in the first place. Therefore, it should end immediately," said Malaysia's U.N. Ambassador Rastam Mohamed Isa, whose country chairs the Non-Aligned Movement.
Representatives from Iran, Libya, Jamaica, Vietnam, Brazil, Venezuela and several other countries also called for an end to the fighting.
Poland, Singapore, Australia and Japan were among those offering support for the U.S.-led effort to rid Iraq of alleged weapons of mass destruction.
"If Iraq today faces the serious consequences … it has no one but itself to blame for failing to take advantage of the time and opportunities provided," South Korean Ambassador Sun Joun-yung said.
The mood reflected that of the 15-nation Security Council, which remains bitterly divided over the decision of the United States, Britain and Spain to attack Iraq last week after abandoning an attempt to get U.N. authorization.
Iraq's U.N. Ambassador Mohammed Al-Douri called on the Security Council to condemn "this invasion and aggression" that he said had hit civilian targets including homes, schools and mosques and led to "thousands of casualties, among whom are women, children and the elderly."
In expressing concern about civilians, Annan cited reports from Baghdad that cruise missiles struck a heavily populated area, killing 14 people and injuring 30.
Earlier, Annan hosted a meeting of U.N. relief agencies to work on an appeal for about $2 billion in aid for Iraq. The Security Council also was discussing a draft resolution that would authorize Annan to run the U.N. oil-for-food program to bring humanitarian aid to Iraq.
About 60 percent of Iraq's 22 million people are fed through the oil-for-food program, which began in 1996 to help civilians cope with U.N. sanctions against Baghdad. Under the program, Iraqi oil revenue is put into a U.N.-controlled escrow account and used to buy food, medicine and other humanitarian aid.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos

 

End of Document
