

Argentines bracing for the worst as a currency devaluation now seems imminent
January 4, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 730 words
Byline: By KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




Recession-weary Argentines prepared for a currency devaluation as the country's new president, Eduardo Duhalde, faced the defining challenge of his administration: how to release the peso from its 10-year peg to the U.S. dollar.
As Argentina grinds through its worst economic crisis in decades, economists and analysts say a devaluation of its currency appears all but certain, predicting the government will decrease the worth of the peso by up to 40 percent.
Duhalde's Economy Minister, Jorge Remes Lenicov, said he would announce a new economic plan on Friday, and news reports suggested the government would act to end the dollar peg that has made the Argentine peso Latin America's most stable currency for the last decade.
Most economists agree Duhalde, a populist and veteran politician who became Argentina's fifth president in two weeks on Wednesday, has little choice but to break the peg that has kept the peso equal in value to the dollar since 1991.
When it was enacted, it vanquished triple-digit inflation almost overnight and attracted foreign investment, ushering in an era of financial stability to a country rocked by economic crisis in the late 1980s.
The peg at first brought price stability and a boom in foreign investment, but many Argentines have come to see it as a straitjacket, suffocating repeated attempts to drag South America's second-largest economy out of a slump now nearly four years old.
In recent years, Argentine exports have grown less competitive while neighboring Brazil, whose currency floats at a rate more than 2 times weaker than the peso, has attracted factories and given the country a major export advantage.
Cabinet Chief Jorge Capitanich said the government would immediately send Congress a package of sweeping economic reforms. He refused to say whether the measures would include abandoning the peg, which in the 1990s made Argentina one of the fastest growing economies in the world.
Today, the country is virtually bankrupt. It officially entered default on its $132 billion debt Thursday, missing a $28 million payment on an Italian bond. Argentina is now shut off from international credit markets.
"They made payments on everything in December, but today they didn't," said Fernando Losada, chief Latin American economist at ABN-Amro in New York.
Duhalde took office after Congress chose him to serve until December 2003, completing the unfinished term of former President Fernando de la Rua, ousted by violent street protests Dec. 20. The first man Congress chose as interim president resigned after a week in office, and two others served briefly as acting president before Duhalde was voted in.
As Duhalde's economic team worked on a rescue plan that will likely mean the success or failure of his presidency, many Argentines braced for a devaluation. Media reports said the new government would fix the exchange rate between 1.3 and 1.4 pesos to the dollar for 90 days.
Thousands of Argentines lined up at banks to withdraw as much money as they could to spend the currency before its value fell. Some rushed to trade their pesos.
"I want to dump these pesos as fast as I can," said Francisco Rosas, a 32-year-old school teacher seeking out black market traders in downtown Buenos Aires. "Who knows how much these will be worth over the next few days."
Others invested their money by buying costly imported goods such as household appliances, fearing the prices could climb quickly after a devaluation.
Some businesses did not wait for a devaluation. At the Mikladel toy store, which sells mostly imports, store manager Laura Lage said many items were being priced 20 percent higher already.
"Importing our toys is now going to be more expensive," she said, adding that she was worried about the effects of a devaluation. "Sales are already down 30 percent and we fear they'll keep dropping."
Some pharmacies stopped taking payments from government health plans and accepting credit card payments, worried they would not be processed before devaluation.
While most Argentines earn their salaries in pesos, the economy is largely dollar-based and more than 80 percent of contracts and debts are listed in dollars. Many fear a devaluation could push thousands of businesses and households into bankruptcy.
If the new exchange rate were set at 1.4 pesos to the dollar, for example, a salary now worth $500 a month would drop to about $360.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo BAI118
 Load-Date: January 5, 2002

 

End of Document
