

Argentina's 'Paris of the South' unsettled by crime surge
July 1, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 909 words
Byline: By CELESTE TARRICONE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




She had her necklace snatched while running errands, and her apartment was burglarized last year. A few weeks ago it only got worse: She came home to find a crowd shouting "crazy murderer!" at a neighbor across the street.
Sylvia Cristaldo's new window bars and extra locks suddenly seemed worth the money. A police SWAT team burst into the man's apartment and arrested him for allegedly stabbing a woman just a few doors up.
She watched it all while cradling her toddler in her arms.
"I'm so upset. This is becoming a very dangerous place," said Cristaldo, who lives in a neighborhood of old stone buildings where the aroma of fresh-baked croissants perfumes the air. "It wasn't always like this."
Long one of Latin America's safest cities, Buenos Aires with its 24-hour cafes, tango bars and glittering nightclubs is losing its nocturnal bonhomie amid an escalating spate of killings, bank heists, restaurant stickups and shootouts in the streets.
Crime is the talk of the town in this city of 3 million people that historically considered itself a European outpost in South America. Many people now fear they are increasingly vulnerable to the urban crime that has long afflicted other big cities in the region.
"Buenos Aires isn't the same city it was 10 or 15 years ago," said Mariano Ciafardini, a federal official who tracks crime.
His statistics show that "crimes against the person," which combine homicides with serious assaults, increased from 6,148 in 1990 to 24,351 last year. Robberies over the same period soared from 50,606 to 143,843.
Despite the anxieties, Buenos Aires remains much safer than many cities in the Americas. For instance, the city had 149 murders last year, which was a big jump from the 47 it had in 1990 but still below the rate for New York, which had more than quadruple the killings for double the population.
Police contend local media coverage has blown the crime problem out of proportion.
"We haven't lost control yet," said Daniel Rodriguez, a Buenos Aires police official. "If the situation was so bad, you wouldn't see so many people in the streets or so many businesses open at night."
Try to telling that to Susana Yrigoyen.
Since she had her Rolex watch ripped off her wrist a year ago, she's afraid to go out at night. "I have panic attacks all the time. I try to go out but I'm too afraid. It causes me so much stress," she said.
The rise in crime has coincided with a 3-year-old recession that some say encourages the desperate to resort to crime. The jobless rate is 14.7 percent, and a quarter of Argentina's 37 million people live in poverty.
For a decade after the fall of the violent military dictatorship that ruled from 1976 to 1983, people enjoyed the celebrated nightlife without fear. When they emerged from the cafes and discos at any hour, most simply walked home.
Now they worry whether shopping or commuting to work, whether dining out late with friends or conversing over cups of espresso at sidewalk cafes.
"I used to love going to the movies, the theater, the opera, but now I never go out at night. I'm too afraid," said Gladys Bazan.
Tango singer Ricardo Rosas never used to fear the darkened streets when he emerged from a dim, smoky dance hall after a night of crooning. But after being robbed at gunpoint, he's used a door-to-door car service.
"I've been very scared to go to work, but I have to go," he said. "It's been very traumatic. There was always crime here, but now you see much more of it."
Experts say many factors are at play, including rising illegal drug use and increasingly violent and youthful offenders. One armed bank robbery in June was carried out by two teen-agers and a 12-year-old boy.
"We can't deny the reality. Crime is reaching a level where it's more violent. There's more use of guns," said Daniel Rodriguez, a police department spokesman.
Last October, six bandits used an anti-aircraft gun mounted on a pickup truck to riddle a bank truck carrying more than $1 million. The armored car got away, but the driver and a guard were seriously wounded.
In May, a bungled jewelry shop heist in Recoleta, a high-rent district of boutiques and upscale apartments, turned into a breakneck chase past tourist cafes before ending in gunfire blocks from the cemetery where Eva Peron is buried. One suspect died, but no one else was injured.
Frequently, however, bystanders fall prey: 21 alone were killed in the 15 months through March 31.
Law enforcement officials say they're addressing crime as best they can, but recession-strapped budgets have shrunk funds for everything from bulletproof vests to putting new officers on patrol.
Meanwhile, private citizens are paying $1 billion a year for a burgeoning army of private security guards to watch over houses and businesses. More than 100,000 licensed security guards were working in Argentina last year, up from 40,000 a decade ago, said Teodoro Fusaro, president of the Argentina Chamber of Security Businesses.
Shopowner Salvador Gargiulo has been robbed 11 times since 1995.
"Before it was rare for a business to get robbed; now you have to be ready for it at any minute," said Gargiulo, who has lost thousands of dollars in merchandise, cash registers, even a refrigerator.
Each night when he locks up, he barricades doors with heavy metal bars and flicks on an alarm connected to police.
"You do anything you can," he said. "The danger has no limit."
---
On the Net:
Justice Ministry crime report: http://www.jus.gov.ar/polcrim/polcrim.htm 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY323-326 of June 25
 Load-Date: July 2, 2001

 

End of Document
