

Argentines wonder how far to bottom as devaluation and despair felt in the streets
January 12, 2002, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 652 words
Byline: By LAURENCE NORMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




A banking freeze has penned up most of people's savings. A deep currency devaluation threatens inflation. Even insulin is getting scarce, and the cashless country is turning to impounded Customs goods to help the needy.
For Argentines caught in their worst economic crisis in decades, the question is: Where is rock bottom?
The country is in the fourth year of a bitter recession. Food riots and supermarket looting erupted in December, and protesters attacked banks and ATMs on Friday. There have been five presidents in less than a month.
Argentina has defaulted on its $141 billion public debt, the newly floated currency has slumped 39 percent on the open market, and bank accounts are virtually frozen to stop a catastrophic run on the banks.
"People are just desperate to protect their savings," said Oscar Dellano, a 60-year-old retired sailor standing in a throng outside a currency exchange office trying to buy dollars.
The economy is all but paralyzed. With the financial system in flux, checks are bouncing and credit cards are no longer accepted because merchants worry about the risks from further erosions in the peso's value.
But it is the "Corallito" - "Little Corral" - that has most Argentines enraged. Each day they turn up the radio newscast for the latest word on the government rules that freeze most savings to prop up the tottering banking system.
The freeze was imposed Dec. 1 and led to the downfall of the last elected president, Fernando De la Rua, who resigned Dec. 21 after riots that resulted in 28 deaths and more than 200 injuries.
New President Eduardo Duhalde has only tightened the government's grip on bank accounts. His government has ordered money over $10,000 in checking accounts and $3,000 in savings accounts switched into fixed-term deposits, putting the funds out of reach for at least a year.
Anger over the decision triggered the first major street demonstration since Duhalde took office Jan. 2 as Argentina's fifth president in less than a month.
"We want our money and we want it now!" shouted Ruben Orlando, a 46-year-old doctor beating trash can lids together as thousands of middle class families protested Thursday night. What began peacefully later turned ugly as riot police fired tear gas and rubber bullets at lingering demonstrators.
Alfredo Palmeiro, who runs the Four Kings hotel, says the unrest and economic uncertainty have driven down its occupancy rate from 85 percent to 35 percent.
"No tourists are going to come here when they see pictures that make the country seem as violent as Afghanistan. People think we are at war," he said.
In a sign of the times, the government plans to seize clothes, canned food and other goods impounded by Customs and distribute them to the needy. Some 40 percent of Argentina's 36 million people now live in poverty.
Meanwhile, the government has ordered drug companies to fully stock medicine after fears of a shortage of insulin for diabetics. Fifteen diabetics protested outside the government palace at midweek, and Argentina's foreign minister brought back the first part of a 12-ton shipment of donated insulin after a visit to Brazil.
For many, though, finding a job is the biggest challenge. The unemployment rate has been in double digits for years.
Claudio German, a 36-year-old certified accountant, was fired from his bank job last August. Married and without children, he is now a regular at the pot-banging street protests.
German said he had $30,000 in savings in the bank, all frozen now, and must live off a $300-a-month unemployment payment.
"I have an apartment to pay for and I have money here in this country which has now been taken away," he lamented.
At the Mitos Argentinos tango hall in the cobblestoned San Telmo neighborhood, the mournful tango tunes seem in sync with the nation's gloomy mood.
But business is off sharply anyway, manager Hugo Garcia said. "We've never lived through something like this."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY193
 Load-Date: January 13, 2002

 

End of Document
