

Army patrols bring 14 dead down from the Andes mountain; 31 soldiers still missing after blizzard
The Associated Press
May 21, 2005, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 533 words
Byline: By FEDERICO QUILODRAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES, Chile
Body




The bodies of 14 soldiers who died in a blizzard in the Andes were recovered by army patrols in four-wheeled drive vehicles Saturday, but 31 were still missing and feared dead from the ill-fated march that got caught in a "snow tsunami."
Helicopters joined the search Saturday for the first time because of clearing weather, but the possibility of finding the missing alive are considered slim, army chief Gen. Juan Emilio Cheyre said.
"Hope is the last thing we should lose, but the information I have makes me think we are resuming the search for 31 men who are dead," Cheyre said as he prepared to leave to resume the search.
The soldiers were on a training march in the Andes Mountains on Wednesday when they were hit by the area's worst snowstorm in decades, which Cheyre called a "snow tsunami."
President Ricardo Lagos later announced that the patrols were returning with 13 bodies. Another body had been brought to this city earlier.
"We are all sad for those Chilean young men who died in the mountain," Lagos said, and declared three days of mourning.
Cheyre emerged from the mountain search late Friday to announce that the missing soldiers were probably dead. Much of the area, near the dormant Antuco Volcano was under 6 feet of snow. The volcano is 350 miles southeast of Santiago.
"We will continue to work hard to bring them, dead or alive, to us and to their families," he said.
Cheyre removed the top three commanders of the soldiers' regiment from their posts and ordered an investigation into their actions.
"The march should not have been started, never, under those weather conditions. It was the worst snowstorm in 30 years. And if it was started, it should have been suspended," he said. "Those were officers specialized in mountaineering, and they should have known better."
Initially nearly 100 members of the 485-soldier regiment were missing, but dozens had been located over the previous two days.
Now recovering at their regiment's headquarters in Los Angeles, 400 miles south of Santiago, they told harrowing tales of watching exhausted and disoriented comrades tumble into snow drifts.
Army Pvt. Juan Millar, 18, said it was snowing so hard he couldn't see. Just when he felt he could go no farther, his lieutenant ordered the unit to drop their 100-pound backpacks.
"At one point, I fell to the ground and nearly fainted. But the lieutenant told us to drop our backpacks and save our lives," Millar said.
Millar said as young soldiers fell into drifts, more experienced corporals pulled some onto sleeping bags, which they used as sleds to pull them down the slopes.
Most of the soldiers were teenagers who began their military service just last month, and had little experience with the fury of such a storm, said Millar. He said he is haunted by seeing some of his buddies fall without getting up.
"They just stayed in the snow," he said. "The corporals had to abandon them to save their own lives."
In Los Angeles, relatives gathered at the headquarters of Mountain Regiment 17. Some accused the army of not doing enough.
"They are only concerned about the officers, not the soldiers," Jose Contreras, whose 18-year-old son was among the missing, told Radio Cooperativa of Santiago.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XSLL101, XRC110-113; AP Graphic CHILE SOLDIERS
 Load-Date: May 22, 2005

 

End of Document
