

At the Movies: 'The Dancer Upstairs'
The Associated Press
April 30, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 510 words
Byline: By BEN NUCKOLS, Associated Press Writer
Body




When actors turn to directing, you might think they'd be more attuned to chemistry, better able to utter the secret chant that summons it from thin air. But that's not true in the case of John Malkovich, who makes his directing debut with "The Dancer Upstairs."
For its emotional impact, this political thriller depends almost entirely on the chemistry between Javier Bardem and Laura Morante, wife and frequent on-screen partner of Italian filmmaker Nanni Moretti.
Bardem and Morante have plenty working against them: Malkovich shoots their scenes flatly, and screenwriter Nicolas Shakespeare brings a flaccid, random structure to their occasional meetings.
But ultimately, chemistry is up to the actors, and they don't have it. There's no fire in their eyes as they regard one another; you feel neither the crackle of desire when they're together nor the ache of longing when they're apart.
Bardem is Agustin Rejas, a police captain in an unnamed Latin American nation investigating a string of terrorist attacks believed to be the work of left-wing revolutionaries; Morante is Yolanda, his daughter's ballet teacher.
For a while, Yolanda simply offers good conversation for the stressed-out Rejas, an intriguing alternative to his vapid, materialistic wife (Elvira Minguez). But late in the going, the movie tries to elevate the importance of their relationship, so much so that it overwhelms the long-gestating plot: the search for a terrorist who fancies himself the "Fourth Flame of Communism."
Malkovich's biggest mistake in his debut was allowing Shakespeare, a novice screenwriter with no idea how to structure a movie, to adapt his own novel. Scenes dither and meander, illuminating little that we didn't intuit already.
The movie begins with a chance encounter between Rejas - a lawyer turned cop - and a mysterious man at a border check. Rejas snaps his picture, but his fellow guards allow the man to slip away.
Five years later, Rejas has advanced to a position of importance within the police department, just as a revolution begins to brew. Dead dogs are strung up along the streets, and members of the nation's economic elite are assassinated. Rejas is placed in charge of the investigation, but it's clear the government, represented by a single corrupt official, doesn't have much confidence in his abilities.
Malkovich shows occasional flourishes of cinematic intelligence, but "The Dancer Upstairs," for all its suggestions of intrigue, is trying, tedious, ultimately enervating.
"The Dancer Upstairs," a Fox Searchlight Pictures release, is rated R for strong violence and language. Running time: 135 minutes. Two stars out of four.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY681; AP Graphic AISLE SEAT

 

End of Document
