

At the Movies: 'Trials of Henry Kissinger'
October 2, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 882 words
Byline: By DAVID MINTHORN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




American foreign policy was operating largely as crisis control in the late 1960s when a new style of activist diplomacy came into vogue with the Nixon presidency.
The backdrop: A half-million U.S. troops were locked in an unwinnable war in South Vietnam. The White House was trying to extricate them without appearing weak, fearing that other countries would fall like dominoes to communism.
Enter Dr. Henry A. Kissinger - German immigrant, Harvard intellectual, sometime White House adviser and global power theorist. In 1968, he was plucked out of relative obscurity by President-elect Nixon and told to revamp U.S. global strategies.
Kissinger charged into the fray with gusto, skill and shrewdness. His studies of Old World diplomats like Klemens von Metternich and Otto von Bismarck helped him shape a blueprint for American-style "realpolitik." He stressed a pragmatic approach toward the Soviet Union and China to encourage detente, combined with a readiness to use covert force and weapons sales to preserve the balance of power.
As national security adviser and then as secretary of state under Presidents Nixon and Ford, Kissinger became the best-known U.S. statesman of the 20th century, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate for the Vietnam agreement, and a bigger celebrity than the Hollywood actresses he squired to glittering events.
"The Trials of Henry Kissinger," an engrossing and disturbing new documentary by American filmmakers Alex Gibney and Eugene Jarecki, traces the course of his activist foreign policy and focuses on some havoc that resulted.
"He saw international diplomacy as a grand game for finding the right balance between opposing superpowers," notes the film's narrator, actor Brian Cox.
"Recently released documents show episodes when Kissinger may have needlessly sacrificed human lives to pursue strategic goals."
The BBC-funded film, directed by Jarecki, is based on a critical book about Kissinger by columnist Christopher Hitchens.
"I believe he's a war criminal, a liar, responsible for kidnapping and murder," Hitchens declares, asserting that Kissinger should be brought to justice.
The film presents official transcripts and interviews with former U.S. diplomats to back up contentions that Kissinger orchestrated illegal and secret U.S. bombing in Cambodia.
Similarly, Kissinger is linked to Indonesia's use of U.S.-supplied weapons in the 1975 invasion of East Timor, in which 100,000 people died, in defiance of an act of Congress.
And he is portrayed as having encouraged the kidnap and killing of a Chilean general who stood in the way of a CIA-backed coup against leftist President Salvador Allende.
Kissinger declined to be interviewed for "The Trials," but he appears in several film clips disputing the accusations.
In a 1979 interview, Kissinger rebuts critics of the Cambodian bombing, which he justified as protecting American and South Vietnamese soldiers from North Vietnamese troops using Cambodia as a sanctuary.
In the case of East Timor, Kissinger says the invasion plan and use of U.S. weapons wasn't mentioned by Indonesian leader Suharto when he and President Ford visited Jakarta in December 1975. But official transcripts of the meeting show Suharto told them of the coming crackdown, launched a few days later.
"Our leverage was limited," former Ambassador David Newsom says. "Seen in 1975-76 in light of the post-Vietnam era, Indonesia was viewed as a very important country for us."
Kissinger also denies sanctioning the plot against Gen. Rene Schneider, chief of the Chilean general staff, and contends that he stopped a plan to move against the general a week earlier. Gen. Augusto Pinochet subsequently seized power from Allende and began a 17-year dictatorship, with U.S. backing.
The film asks whether U.S. public figures should be held accountable under international law for alleged crimes committed in pursuit of foreign policy goals.
Whether Kissinger bears ultimate responsibility for policies formulated and approved under Presidents Nixon and Ford isn't addressed.
An array of prominent writers, editors and former government officials comment on Kissinger's conduct.
Supporting him are New York Times columnist William Safire, former national security adviser Brent Scowcroft and former Secretary of State Alexander Haig. Detractors include journalists Seymour Hersh and William Shawcross, Harper's publisher Lewis Lapham, and author Roger Morris, who served with Kissinger on the National Security Council.
CIA operatives, former diplomats and some Washington colleagues present a decidedly negative view of Kissinger, portraying him as overly ambitious, disloyal, duplicitous and manipulative.
To Kissinger, "what really mattered in the end was power," Walter Isaacson, Time magazine editor and author of a Kissinger biography, says in the film.
The documentary suggests that Kissinger's world view was shaped by several experiences: his upbringing in Germany as the brilliant son of Jewish academics; the family's emigration to the United States in 1938 to escape Nazi anti-Semitism; the subsequent deaths of 13 relatives in the Holocaust; and his return to Germany in World War II in the Army counterintelligence service.
"The Trials of Henry Kissinger," a First Run Features release, runs 80 minutes. Two and a half stars (out of four).
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY685
 Load-Date: October 3, 2002

 

End of Document
