

At the Movies: 'The Constant Gardener'
The Associated Press
August 29, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 717 words
Byline: By DAVID GERMAIN, AP Movie Writer
Body




John le Carre's rich worlds of intrigue can be a tough sell on the big screen. Yet the assured directing of Fernando Meirelles and the fluid chemistry of Ralph Fiennes and Rachel Weisz combine to place "The Constant Gardener" among the better le Carre adaptations.
The film works only fitfully in its big-picture subject of heartless pharmaceutical executives and government officials putting dollars ahead of the lives of Kenyans used as guinea pigs for an experimental tuberculosis drug.
But Meirelles succeeds nicely on the personal front, presenting a bittersweet, tragic story of love and loss, faith shattered and restored.
The energy of Meirelles' direction gives "The Constant Gardener" irresistible momentum despite its twisting, nonlinear structure, dense plot and a rather cliched gallery of villains.
That's no surprise, though, considering this is the filmmaker whose superb "City of God," a gritty tale of boys with guns in service of Brazil's drug trade, earned him an unexpected Academy Award nomination for best director.
The story opens with the murder of Tessa Quayle (Weisz), whose body is found in a vehicle along a lonely stretch of Kenyan highway. A British crusader on behalf of health issues relating to Africa's masses, the outspoken Tessa has bedeviled the Kenyan government and many of her own government's bureaucrats there.
A local doctor (Hubert Kounde) who was Tessa's rabble-rousing ally and traveling companion is suspected in her murder, possibly a crime of passion.
Tessa's hubby, Justin (Fiennes) properly grieves and stiff-upper-lips his way through the ordeal. A meekly pleasant midlevel functionary for the British High Commission in Kenya, Justin is expected by colleagues to fold up camp and head back to England to lick his cuckold's wounds.
Instead, driven by a perverse desire to know the extent of his wife's apparent infidelities, Justin sticks around and pokes his nose into Tessa's murder, the trail leading circuitously to revelations his wife had uncovered about the abominable human side effects of medical research in the name of profit.
Working off a script by novelist Jeffrey Caine, Meirelles steers the story back and forth to tell the charming little history of Tessa and Justin's unlikely whirlwind romance in Britain and the trials and traumas of their married life after he's posted to Kenya.
Why a spitfire such as Tessa would fall for a cheery yet dull weenie like Justin is never made clear. Still, Weisz and Fiennes play so endearingly off each other, they make the opposites-attract relationship work even though the characters have nothing in common.
Danny Huston leads the supporting cast as a pal and co-worker of Justin's and not-so-innocent admirer of Tessa's. His puppy-dog demeanor may or may not conceal sinister motives and complicity.
Bill Nighy has a few terrifically dry moments as a senior British official, yet his character and other government types generally come off as stereotypes of cold bureaucrats out for personal gain.
Meirelles and cinematographer Cesar Charlone craft a dazzling pastiche of gorgeous African vistas and wildlife balanced by frenetic, darting camera work that captures the squalor of human habitation with the rawness of "City of God."
Justin's detective work seemingly is the most pro-active thing the character has ever undertaken. It's almost as though he's possessed by his wife's spirit, compelled to learn what she may have known that could lead to her murder and eventually encountering death threats himself.
The path takes him to a melancholy but somehow hopeful place not uncommon in le Carre's stories, where some justice gets done and a whole lot of wrong remains unpunished, yet love somehow still triumphs.
"The Constant Gardener," a Focus Features release, is rated R for language, some violent images and sexual content/nudity. Running time: 130 minutes. Three stars out of four.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NYET680; AP Graphic AISLE SEAT
 Load-Date: August 30, 2005

 

End of Document
