

Blair says deadly explosions will not halt the work at world leader summit
The Associated Press
July 7, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 978 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: GLENEAGLES, Scotland
Body




Flanked by fellow world leaders, British Prime Minister Tony Blair said deadly explosions in London would not halt an annual summit and said the terrorists responsible would be defeated.
"We will not allow violence to change our societies or our values nor will we allow it to stop the work of this summit," Blair said in a statement on behalf of the Group of Eight leaders and the heads of five developing nations meeting here. "We will continue our deliberations in the interest of a better world."
Earlier, Blair termed the blasts terrorist attacks and said it was reasonably clear they were "designed and aimed to coincide" with the meeting.
"We are united in our resolve to confront and defeat this terrorism that is not an attack on one nation but on all nations and on civilized people everywhere," the world leaders said in their joint statement.
Blair read the statement as President Bush and the other G-8 leaders stood somberly behind him. They were joined by the leaders of China, India, Brazil, Mexico and South Africa, who met with the G-8 on Thursday to discuss ways to combat global warming.
Blair then rushed from the summit to return to London for briefings on the attacks.
Minutes later, Bush told reporters that Blair was carrying with him "a message of solidarity" from his fellow world leaders - all jointly resolved, he said, to defeat terrorism.
"The contrast couldn't be clearer between the intentions and the hearts of those of us who care deeply about human rights and human liberty, and those who kill, those who've got such evil in their heart that they will take the lives of innocent folks," Bush said. "The war on terror goes on. … We will not yield to these people."
Blair planned to return to Gleneagles for the summit's final day of talks on Friday. And the other leaders - already protected by extraordinary security measures that local authorities said were sufficient for now - planned to proceed Thursday in Blair's absence with discussions on the issues of global warming and African poverty that the British leader has made the centerpiece of the gathering.
"All of our countries have suffered from the impact of terrorism," the leaders said. "We shall prevail and they shall not."
At least six blasts rocked the London subway and tore open at least one packed double-decker bus in nearly simultaneous explosions during Thursday's morning rush hour. Deaths and injuries mounted and officials shut down the entire underground transport network.
The explosions came as Bush and Blair were meeting over breakfast and answering questions from reporters.
"It's particularly barbaric that this has happened on a day when people are meeting to try to help the problems of poverty in Africa, the long-term problems of climate change and the environment," Blair told reporters.
G-8 leaders took a long break in their morning opening session so they could get individual briefings on developments.
White House spokesman Scott McClellan said the president received frequent updates from Chief of Staff Andrew Card and National Security Adviser Stephen Hadley. Bush had no plans to return to Washington early, McClellan said.
Liz Kirkham, spokeswoman for Tayside Police Force, which covers the Gleneagles area, said no additional security precautions were being taken at the summit as a result of the blasts, as substantial measures had already been put in place.
There was no immediate word on who was responsible.
"Just as it is reasonably clear that this is a terrorist attack or a series of terrorist attacks, it's also reasonably clear that it is designed and aimed to coincide with the opening of the G-8," Blair said.
Earlier, Bush and Blair met but could not bridge differences over how to tackle global warming.
"There is no point in going back over the Kyoto debate," Blair said alongside Bush after the two leaders met over breakfast.
Blair had sought to do just that at this year's summit. As host, Blair wanted the United States, along with the other countries, to set specific targets for reduction of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases blamed for global warming.
The United States is the only G-8 country that has refused to ratify the Kyoto agreement which mandates greenhouse gases reductions. The international treaty took effect in February.
"Now is the time to get beyond the Kyoto protocol and develop a strategy forward," Bush said.
Seeking to emphasize areas of mutual agreement, Bush praised Blair for inviting China, India and other emerging economies to the summit and its discussions of climate change. The president says the Kyoto treaty, aside from being bad for the U.S. economy, is seriously flawed because it does not include developing nations.
Well aware of the impasse with the United States over global warming, Blair has tried to shift the debate toward increasing support for emissions controls in China, the world's second-leading emitter of greenhouse gases after the United States.
"You made a wise move, Mr. Prime Minister," Bush said.
Faryar Shirzad, a top Bush foreign policy aide, told reporters on Air Force One that final touches were being made on a G-8 declaration that that would unanimously emphasize "common ground" on climate control without detailing remaining differences. The document will state that human activity is a cause of greenhouse gases and subsequent climate change, Italian negotiator Cesare Ragaglini told reporters.
Blair said he hoped to get back on a path to consensus by the time Kyoto expires in 2012.
The meeting began Wednesday with a formal dinner hosted by Britain's Queen Elizabeth.
Hoping to avoid a repeat of protest violence that broke out on the opening day, police - many in riot gear - placed a "safety cordon" Thursday around a camp several miles from Gleneagles that houses some 5,000 activists. Police blocked the main entrance to the camp and urged protesters to stay inside.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: July 8, 2005

 

End of Document
