

BOOKS 12-2; The little railroad builder that could
December 2, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 638 words
Byline: By RON BERTHEL, Associated Press Writer
Body




"Last Train to Paradise: Henry Flagler and the Spectacular Rise and Fall of the Railroad That Crossed an Ocean"@ by Les Standiford (Crown, 272 pages, $24). 
---
Did you know that there used to be a railroad that puddle-jumped 153 miles along the Florida Keys, connecting Miami with Key West?
"Last Train to Paradise" is the saga of Henry Morrison Flagler's "railroad across the ocean" - its planning ("unthinkable"), construction ("impossible"), and destruction 22 years later by the strongest hurricane ever to hit the United States.
Les Standiford starts at the end, with the 1935 Labor Day hurricane - the practice of naming hurricanes didn't start until 1953 - that destroyed the entire line, except 60 feet of track, and put the Key West Extension permanently out of business.
Ernest Hemingway, Key West's most famous resident, is followed around briefly as the storm approaches, and Standiford offers some of Hemingway's observations.
But Key West wasn't hit nearly as hard as was Matecumbe Key, 80 miles to the north and east. There, the storm unleashed its full fury, leveling just about everything in sight and killing 700 people, most of them workers - who, ironically, were building the highway that now parallels the railroad's route. Its winds reached nearly 200 mph and it produced a tidal wave that toppled several cars of a rescue train dispatched from North Miami in vain.
Then it's back to the beginning, to Flagler's impoverished childhood in upstate New York and his move to Ohio that eventually led to his partnership with John D. Rockefeller. The two men established Standard Oil - at one time the world's most successful company - making both of them obscenely wealthy.
Flagler could have lived off his millions, but a second career beckoned: building luxury hotels in the no-man's land that was then Florida and establishing railroad lines to deliver tourists to the hotels.
In 1896, Flagler extended his Florida East Coast Railway to Miami to serve guests at his new Royal Palm Hotel - a move that put Miami on the map. So impressed were the locals that "Flagler had to gently urge the new town council to choose the original Native American name for the settlement over his own name."
Flagler wasn't finished. He envisioned the development of Key West, the southernmost point in the United States, into a deep-water port that would serve ships using the proposed Panama Canal. In 1904 he conceived the Key West Extension, which would take train travelers from Miami to Key West. The project would require building through swamp and over open water - one of its several bridges would be 7 miles long - to connect the keys. Such a line, predicted Jefferson Browne, Florida state senator, would make Key West "the most important city in the South."
Thousands of workers spent years battling the heat and humidity and mosquitoes and muck, while living in temporary makeshift dwellings, to make Flagler's dream come true. They are the heroes of this saga.
A nod also goes to Flagler and his supervisors, whose resolve overcame the skeptics ("Flagler's Folly") and unforeseen obstacles of engineering and nature - including three hurricanes within four years during the construction - to clear stubborn land, build bridges and lay track.
The chronicle holds the reader even though there is little mystery: we know from the start that the extension is built and how it's destroyed. It's not so much where the story goes as how it gets there, and this book is a worthy guide to an important, even spectacular achievement of 20th-century history that is not widely known about today.
Similarly, Flagler's name isn't nearly as well-known as that of his partner, Rockefeller. Flagler became such a force in the development of Florida that a joke of the times had it that the state's abbreviation "Fla." really stood for Flagler.
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY632
 Load-Date: December 3, 2002

 

End of Document
