

Brazilians are taking carnival back to the street, away from the commercial spectacle
February 10, 2002, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 521 words
Byline: By MICHAEL ASTOR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




For Noca de Portela, carnival lost much of its shine in 1984, the year that Rio de Janeiro city officials took the party off the streets and installed it in the Sambadrome stadium.
Now, he thinks he sees it glimmering back to life.
Brazil's carnival kicks into high gear Sunday night with Rio's samba parade, featuring 14 costumed dance groups that flow through the Sambadrome in a seemingly endless procession of sequins, feathers and bare-breasted women. The groups compete over two nights to be declared carnival champion.
But Portela, a veteran singer and songwriter who penned five championship samba songs, won't be parading for the first time in 35 years. He says he can have more fun in the streets.
"Today, the samba parade is just a party for tourists. The future of carnival is in the streets," Portela said.
Carnival is the last celebration before the Lent season, when Christians are encouraged to give up luxuries. The same holiday is known elsewhere as Fat Tuesday or Mardi Gras.
When Rio moved the carnival parade to the Sambadrome, 95 percent of the city's carnival budget went with it, and for many years it seemed like the only party in town. The event attracts big-name visitors - this year, even former First Lady Barbara Bush will be there.
But fed up with huge prices, the restrictions of being enclosed far away in the stands and perhaps the officialdom, residents and, even some tourists have begun breaking away. They say the celebration had become too cold and commercial.
Ticket prices for the stadium party range from $21 for a seat high in the stands to several thousand for a parade-side table. Costumes, required to parade in the Sambadrome, cost $150-$200, out of reach for many in a country where the monthly minimum wage is $75.
In the last year alone, 18 new street "blocos," as the smaller carnival groups are known as, have sprung up around the city, bringing the total number to around 80. Their parties have been clogging Rio's streets since Friday and will continue until Wednesday.
"The street blocos are the old formula: Good, good-looking and cheap. All the sambas are funny and irreverent, the drummers are good and there are lots of beautiful women," said Paulo Saad, president of Sebastianas, an association dedicated to preserving street carnivals.
A good example of this irreverence is the bloco called "Suvaco de Christo," or Christ's Underarm, because they parade in the shadow of a Jesus statue with outstretched arms.
Suvaco draws as many as 20,000 revelers who spray shaving cream and sing along to samba songs filled with double entendre and sexual innuendoes.
One of the groups most responsible for the revival of street carnival has been Monobloco, led by the Brazilian rock musician Pedro Luis.
Monobloco doesn't parade during carnival, only in the weeks leading up to it, but more than any other bloco it has attracted the young middle class who long ago abandoned samba for rock music.
"We're having fun in the way that we know how. And we're happy, even a little shocked, at what a success it has been," said Luis.
---
On the Net:
http://www.liesa.com.br 
http://www.carnavalvirtual.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos RIOX106,RIO4
 Load-Date: February 11, 2002

 

End of Document
