

Brazilians go to the polls in first electoral test faced by country's leftist president
The Associated Press
October 3, 2004, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 692 words
Byline: By STAN LEHMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAO PAULO, Brazil
Body




Brazilian voters gave a boost to President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva in nationwide municipal elections on Sunday, according to initial results, in the first electoral test for the leftist leader and his plans to remake Latin America's biggest country.
Silva's left-leaning Workers' Party, which currently controls 204 city halls, has said it hopes to increase that number to at least 400, with analysts saying he is likely to increase his strength across the country.
With 71 percent of the votes counted, the Workers' Party seemed certain to have won outright in six of 26 state capitals, but only came in second place in the country's biggest and politically most important city, Sao Paulo.
The results tallied by the Superior Electoral Tribunal showed the Workers' Party with commanding leads in Belo Horizonte, Brazil's third largest city, and in Recife, capital of Pernambuco state.
In Rio de Janeiro, the second-biggest city, incumbent mayor Cesar Maia of the Liberal Front Party - in opposition to Silva on the federal level - was close to victory in the first round of voting.
But the real test will be the Workers' Party performance in the 95 cities with more than 150,000 voters and which account for 40 percent of Brazil's population.
With mandatory voting, turnout was expected to be high. Final nationwide results were not expected before Monday.
Political analysts said the elections were the government's first confirmation of how the electorate views its performance and will exert a major influence in the general elections in two years.
Silva, a former metalworker's union leader, became Brazil's first elected leftist leader in a landslide election, promising social and economic justice for Brazilians.
But in July, thousands of Brazilians took to the streets across the country to protest high unemployment and interest rates. Protesters at the time said they still support Silva, but they said they were disappointed his administration opted for a conservative fiscal policy aimed at reining in inflation and prompting slow, sustainable growth.
"I have a lot of confidence," Silva said after he voted in the industrial city of Sao Bernardo do Campo, where he rose through the labor unions as an autoworker. "The Brazilian people will choose the best."
Cities with more than 200,000 registered voters may have to have a runoff election on Oct. 31, if none of the candidates for mayor receives more than 50 percent of the vote. In that case the election will be decided between the two top finishers.
The big prize is Sao Paulo, a city of 10 million and the country's industrial and financial nerve center, which alone accounts for nearly 8 percent of Brazil's Gross Domestic Product that for 2004 has been estimated at $465.3 billion.
With 90 percent of the votes counted, former Health Minister Jose Serra of the opposition Social Democratic Party led with 43.5 percent, while incumbent Mayor Marta Suplicy, 59, a Stanford-educated psychologist, trailed with 35.8 percent.
"It wasn't an easy choice. Both candidates are good," said Rafael Figueira, a 28-year-old schoolteacher. "In the end I voted for Marta, because she has experience and needs more time to finish what she started."
In Rio de Janeiro, the incumbent Maia of the Liberal Front Party won a first-round victory with 50.1 percent of the vote. His closest rival was Marcelo Crivella of the Liberal Party, a bishop in the evangelical Christian Universal Church of the Kingdom of God, with 21.8 percent.
"I voted for Lula (Silva) as president, but I'm voting for Maia as mayor. He's competent and I already know the kind of things he will do," said Charles Santana, a 35-year-old interior designer.
In Belo Horizonte, the Workers' Party candidate and incumbent mayor, Fernando Pimentel, was also headed to a first-round victory.
Winning the big cities is important for Silva because mayors are important power brokers for the 2006 elections, when Silva will be up for re-election.
"So far, the results are showing that the president is successfully paving the way for his re-election in 2006," said Christopher Garman, a political analyst with the Sao Paulo-based Tendencias consulting firm.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XVC103,104
 Load-Date: October 4, 2004

 

End of Document
