

Bush promotes democracy in hemisphere of the Americas
The Associated Press
June 6, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 646 words
Byline: By DEB RIECHMANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla.
Body




President Bush urged the nations of the Western Hemisphere on Monday to work together to prevent governments in the region from backsliding to authoritarian rule.
Venezuela's foreign minister said the U.S. seemed to be aiming at his country.
Bush, in a brief speech to the Organization of American States, said that Cuba was the only country in the hemisphere that was not democratic. He pushed for expanded trade and said the nations of the Americas needed to choose between two visions for their future: one of hope or one of rolling back "the democratic progress of the past two decades."
The president didn't mention President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela, who has acted in ways the Bush administration has described as undemocratic.
However, the United States has submitted a draft proposal calling on the OAS secretary general to issue a report outlining a "plan of action" for strengthening the democratic charter so the organization can deal more effectively with countries struggling with threats to democratic rule. Other countries have submitted alternate proposals, and the delegates hope to agree on a compromise in time for the conclusion of the conference on Tuesday.
At a news conference after Bush's speech, Venezuelan Foreign Minister Ali Rodriguez said that although the U.S. proposal was not explicit, "it seems aimed at one country" - his own.
In a speech before Bush's arrival, Rodriguez said the OAS charter was clear in demanding a policy of nonintervention in the internal affairs of member states.
Earlier, Venezuelan Ambassador Jorge Valero denounced the proposal, saying it was aimed at turning the OAS into the policeman of hemispheric democracies. And in a weekly radio address, Chavez - a foe of Bush and friend of Cuban President Fidel Castro - said the proposal amounted to U.S. meddling in the affairs of other nations. "The times in which the OAS was an instrument of the government in Washington are gone," Chavez said.
Bush, in his speech, spoke of two competing visions for the hemisphere.
"One offers a vision of hope. It is founded on representative government, integration into the world markets, and a faith in the transformative power of freedom in individual lives," Bush said.
"The other seeks to roll back the democratic progress of the past two decades by playing to fear, pitting neighbor against neighbor and blaming others for their own failures to provide for their people."
U.S. officials want to see the OAS monitor democratic progress in the hemisphere, checking the credibility of elections and the growth of institutions that respond to people's needs. At the meeting, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice singled out Bolivia, Ecuador and Haiti as countries that need help in overcoming chronic instability.
The U.S. proposal is backed by officials from some nations, especially ones whose governments are under siege from opposition groups perceived to be sabotaging democratic changes.
The OAS holds foreign ministers' meetings each year. This is the first held on U.S. soil since 1974. In that year, 10 of the 23 members that attended the general assembly had elected democratic governments. Today, all 34 members do.
"Only one country in this hemisphere sits outside this society of democratic nations, and one day the tide of freedom will reach Cuba's shores as well," Bush said.
He also called on Congress to approve the Central America Free Trade Agreement. He said it would make about 80 percent of American exports to Central America and the Dominican Republic duty-free and open up a market of some 44 million consumers to U.S. products.
"CAFTA is more than just a trade agreement," he said. "It is a signal of the U.S. commitment to democracy and prosperity for our neighbors - and I urge the United States Congress to pass it."
---
On the Net:
Organization of American States: http://www.oas.org 
CAFTA background: http://www.ustr.gov 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos FLCD104-108
 Load-Date: June 7, 2005

 

End of Document
