

Bush administration calls for IMF reforms in the area of currency surveillance
The Associated Press
September 23, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; Washington Dateline
Length: 806 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Bush administration said Friday the International Monetary Fund should do a better job of policing currency regimes worldwide, a change that could pressure China in a way that would reduce America's huge trade deficits.
Treasury Undersecretary Tim Adams, the administration's point person on international economics, said the IMF needs to be "far more ambitious in its surveillance of exchange rates."
His comments came on a day when Treasury Secretary John Snow and Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan met with their counterparts from the world's seven richest industrial countries to search for ways to make sure that surging energy prices do not derail the global economy.
The Group of Seven finance officials were joined at an opening lunch by finance ministers and central bank presidents from some of the world's fastest-growing developing countries - China, Russia, Brazil, India and South Africa.
Snow also discussed energy and the hurricanes that have battered the Gulf Coast during a one-on-one session with Japanese Finance Minister Sadakazu Tanigaki earlier Friday. Snow assured Tanigaki that the U.S. economy would be able to weather the devastation from Hurricane Katrina, which struck on Aug. 29 and Hurricane Rita, which was expected to make landfall along the Texas Gulf Coast early Saturday, Treasury spokesman Tony Fratto said.
"The U.S. economy will recover and we remain fully committed to the president's deficit reduction goals," Fratto quoted Snow as telling Tanigaki. America's major allies have grown concerned that the billions of dollars in new federal spending that will be required to recover from the hurricanes could jeopardize the administration's goal of cutting the federal budget deficit in half by 2009.
Prior to the G-7 talks, the Chinese announced a modification to Beijing's new currency regime that would allow the Chinese currency to move in value by a slightly greater amount against non-dollar currencies. However, the Chinese did not modify the small 0.3 percent change that it will allow in the yuan's value against the dollar on a daily basis.
Fratto said the Chinese indicated in July when they scrapped a decade-long policy placing a fixed link to the dollar, that they would continue to take steps toward greater flexibility in the Chinese exchange rate, something the Bush administration has been lobbying for as a way to deal with America's soaring trade deficit with China.
"This is a technical step in that process and we will continue to monitor their implementation," Fratto said. He replied "no comment" when asked if the administration was disappointed that China did not announce that it would allow the yuan to rise in value by a greater amount against the dollar.
In his speech on IMF reforms, Adams said the 184-nation lending agency already has the authority to hold special consultations when it deems that a country's currency is having a major impact on another nation. But in more than a quarter of a century, the IMF has only used this power twice, Adams said.
"The perception that the IMF is asleep at the wheel on its most fundamental responsibility - exchange rate surveillance - is very unhealthy for the institution and the international monetary system," Adams said in a speech at a conference sponsored by the Institute for International Economics, a Washington think tank.
Treasury officials announced that Snow would have one-on-one sessions on Saturday with Chinese Finance Minister Jin Renqing and Zhou Xiachuan on the sidelines of the annual meetings of the IMF and its sister lending agency, the World Bank.
On the agenda for those meetings was an effort to finalize a deal to forgive more than $40 billion in debt that the world's 18 poorest countries - many of them in Africa - owe to the IMF, the World Bank and other international lending organizations.
Friday's discussions mark the third time that China has participated in the G-7 talks over the past year. At each of the previous meetings, the United States highlighted the need for China to scrap its decade-old system of linking its currency tightly to the U.S. dollar. China on July 21 announced that it was allowing the yuan to rise in value by 2.1 percent against the dollar and would in the future link the country's currency to a marketbasket of foreign currencies, not just the dollar.
However, American manufacturing groups contend that China's currency is undervalued by as much as 40 percent against the dollar and the small revaluation allowed by the Chinese will do virtually nothing to narrow a U.S. trade deficit with China.
The trade gap soared to a record of $162 billion last year and is expected to be 30 percent higher this year because of a surge of Chinese imports of clothing and fabric.
---
On the Net:
International Monetary Fund: http://www.imf.org 
World Bank: http://www.worldbank.org 
 Load-Date: September 24, 2005

 

End of Document
