

Casualty lists highlight thousands of non-citizens serving in the military
The Associated Press
April 4, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 754 words
Byline: By DEBORAH KONG
Body



AP Minority Issues Writer
 
DALY CITY, Calif. (AP) - Among the first U.S. troops killed in Iraq were men who died for a country where they couldn't even cast a vote.
Marine Lance Cpl. Jose Gutierrez, a native of Guatemala, and Cpl. Jose Angel Garibay, from Mexico, were among the 31,000 non-citizens serving in the military.
Such troops normally receive little public attention, though the sacrifices of Gutierrez and Garibay have highlighted their presence and Defense Department officials say the number of non-citizens in the ranks is growing. A recent executive order speeding the citizenship process for those in uniform has made it more attractive for some immigrants to join.
Soldiers were required to complete three years of active service before applying for citizenship, but last July, President Bush issued an order making them immediately eligible. It was billed as a reward to those serving during the post-Sept. 11 war on terrorism.
From his Army recruiting office tucked in a suburban San Francisco shopping center - alongside stores selling Asian groceries and serving up Vietnamese noodles - Sgt. 1st Class Rodolfo Abalos said the quick path to naturalization is already emerging as a useful recruiting tool.
"That's another thing we can offer, especially to Asians who want to become citizens," said Abalos, who was born in the Philippines and tells potential recruits about his own experience becoming an American citizen a decade ago while serving in the Army.
"I tell them about how they can get the citizenship a lot faster joining the Army, compared to being a civilian and waiting for five years."
Beyond citizenship, many immigrants join the military for the same reasons others do - for college funding, new skills, travel and a desire to serve their country, Abalos said.
Gutierrez, an orphan who grew up on the streets of war torn Guatemala, found a new life in the United States. His foster brother, Max Mosquera, said Gutierrez joined the Marines "to pay back a little of what he'd gotten from the U.S."
Garibay, who came to the United States when he was a baby, often visited his former high school, proudly dressed in full uniform.
Both men were granted posthumous citizenship this week.
Defense Department officials don't have exact figures on how much the ranks of non-citizen soldiers are increasing, but between July and February 5,441 military personnel applied to become citizens, following Bush's executive order, according to the Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services.
If the trend continues, the numbers for the year could be the highest in a decade, said BCIS spokesman Dan Kane.
Rep. Martin Frost, D-Texas, wants to ease the citizenship path for soldiers even more. He introduced a bill last month that would allow troops overseas to attend naturalization interviews at consulates, embassies and military installations, instead of having to travel back to the United States. It also would waive naturalization fees for non-citizen soldiers.
Joseph Macaraeg, who recently enlisted at the Daly City recruiting office, hopes his 4-year-old daughter, who lives in the Philippines with his wife, will grow up as an American citizen.
His main reason for signing up was "to get my family here," said Macaraeg, 31, who plans to apply for citizenship when he completes basic training. "I'm always thinking about my daughter."
Ligia Florian, a supply specialist at Fort Knox, Ky., said she joined the Army to travel, get college funding and to follow in the footsteps of her stepfather, an Army master sergeant.
People sometimes "look at me weird, like, 'Why are you here?"' when they find out she is not a citizen, said Florian, who came to the United States from Guatemala as a teenager and plans to apply for citizenship soon.
"It's home now," she said.
In Mexico, the U.S. Embassy has received hundreds of requests from people offering to fight for the United States in exchange for American citizenship. It has informed people the only non-citizens who can join the U.S. military are legal permanent residents with green cards.
Sgt. Peniel Saintfleur, who came to the United States from Haiti when he was 11, applied for citizenship a few months ago because he plans to pursue a career in the Army, and non-citizens are permitted to serve for only eight years.
The Army "is like a family," said Saintfleur, 24, a personnel administration specialist at the Dallas Recruiting Battalion in Irving, Texas. "If a person is willing to die for the country, I think that should be enough to become a citizen."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo; AP Graphic NON-CITIZEN SOLDIERS

 

End of Document
