

Chavez's return means gloom for the rich, relief for poor
April 30, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 767 words
Byline: By JUAN PABLO TORO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




In a slum of the Venezuelan capital, jobless men play dominos against a squalid backdrop of trash tumbling down the hillsides and crumbling public housing with paint peeling off the walls.
The men here say its clear why thousands of working-class Venezuelans pushed for the restoration of President Hugo Chavez after a short-lived coup.
"The rich who are bleeding this country wanted to take power so the poor could be even poorer," Andres Aldana said.
The turmoil that saw Chavez toppled by elements in the military and businessmen in mid April, then quickly restored to power, highlighted this South American country's gaping class divisions and resentments.
Critics say Chavez for months before the coup only fueled the country's class hatreds. Now bridging that divide will be one of his biggest challenges as he tries to stabilize his rule. As much as many poor cheered Chavez's return, the wealthy have felt only gloom.
On April 11, opposition marchers and pro-government protesters clashed, leaving 17 people dead and hundreds wounded. Alarmed by the violence, Chavez's military high command ousted him at dawn the next day and installed an interim government made up of conservative politicians headed by one of Venezuela's most important businessman.
The provisional leaders struck down dozens of laws promulgated under Chavez, including one intended to hand out land to peasants.
Chavez was swept back to power two days later by loyalist troops and thousands of protesters, mainly people who descended from the shantytowns ringing this South American capital, where the average wage-earner makes about $6 per day.
In Caracas' wealthy suburbs, residents are now dismayed.
"I'm leaving the country in 10 days because I don't think the situation is going to improve. I have a young son and I don't want him to grow up in Venezuela," said Maya Aguilar, a housewife interviewed while shopping in an elegant Caracas mall.
The mall is in the upscale Chacao neighborhood, home to mansions and exclusive country clubs.
Aguilar plans to move to Mexico with her husband, a Venezuelan businessman who began searching for a job abroad after Chavez's return.
Venezuela's elites say Chavez has stoked class division by labeling as "rancid oligarchs" many who opposed his left-leaning policies.
"I think it's criminal to make people believe that one part of society stole what they have from another," said Pedro Luis Echeverria, an economist.
U.S. National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice said Monday that Chavez had helped bring about the coup attempt with undemocratic policies.
"The threat to democracy in Venezuela didn't begin with those people in the streets," Rice told a foreign-policy forum. "We have to remember that Chavez also, in shutting down the press, for instance, was doing things to harm Venezuela democracy long before that fateful outcome."
The turmoil should prompt Chavez "to recognize the importance of democratic values for real - not just claiming that, because you're elected, you are exercising democratic values," she said.
For Venezuela's have-nots, Chavez's tough rhetoric was a welcome challenge to a ruling class they blame for squandering the country's vast oil wealth while 80 percent of the 24 million Venezuelans live in poverty.
"Before, people blamed political parties for the country's situation," said Luis Vicente Leon, a pollster with local firm Datanalisis. "Now, they blame rich people and businessmen."
Chavez - a former army lieutenant colonel of humble origins, who was elected in 1998 after serving time in prison for taking part in a coup - claims his policies are helping the poor.
These include programs for easy credit to small businesses, a new constitution that gives native peoples unprecedented rights and the land reform law.
Critics say he has accumulated too much power, and is further impoverishing the country through leftist rhetoric that spooks investors, and laws expanding the government's role in the economy.
"This is a rich country full of poor people," said Carlos Fernandez, president of the largest business federation, Fedecamaras. "Chavez has not taken advantage of millions of dollars from the increase in oil prices to reduce poverty."
With investigations continuing into the killings during the coup, and opposition leaders calling for a referendum on his rule, a chastened Chavez says he is committed to healing the country's divisions.
"Many people tell me - and they are right," the president said in a speech on Sunday, "Chavez, don't forget that you are the president of all Venezuelans, of the upper class, the middle classes, the lower classes."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY191-196
 Load-Date: May 1, 2002

 

End of Document
