

China says it won't give up the right to subsidize its farmers for the WTO
January 17, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 382 words
Byline: By NAOMI KOPPEL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GENEVA
Body




China said Wednesday it refuses to give up the right to subsidize its farmers in order to strike a deal to get into the World Trade Organization.
An emotional Long Yongtu, the head of the delegation negotiating Beijing's entry into the WTO, said China had already made a big concession by agreeing to remove all subsidies directly linked to exports when it joins the WTO. Those subsidies are considered to have the biggest effect on international markets.
It is not prepared to limit its use of other subsidies, Long told a press conference at the end of eight days of talks at the Geneva headquarters of the WTO - the body which sets rules on international trade.
"If five million farmers in the United States are human beings, then 900 million farmers in China are human beings. They should all have some entitlement," Long said.
The issue revolves around whether China should be treated as a developing country for agriculture or as a developed country.
Under WTO rules, countries classes as "developed" have the right to subsidize up to 5 percent of their agricultural output. For "developing" countries, the figure is 10 percent.
Although China currently only subsidizes 2 percent, it insists it must have the right to increase that figure if necessary.
Countries which do not protect their farmers, including Australia, Canada and Brazil, oppose this and say China is a developed nation. The United States is another primary opponent.
Long said the U.S. chief negotiator, Don Phillips, had made three compromise proposals during the course of the meeting, but they had failed to reach an agreement.
At the beginning of the meeting last week, Long had said he believed China could complete all the major outstanding business with the WTO's 140 members.
"Each representative has his own political constraint, and I fully respect that kind of constraint, as they respect mine," he said.
Negotiators have agreed that they will not complete any deals relating the outstanding areas of disagreement until they have completed all of those areas - in order to give them room to maneuver.
Other issues still to be settled are: trade in services, trading rights for foreign companies in China and problems with China's system for inspecting imports.
China has been trying to join the WTO for more than 14 years.
 Load-Date: January 18, 2001

 

End of Document
