

Choked by burgeoning debt, spooked by elections, could Brazil be the next Argentina?
June 18, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 824 words
Byline: By TONY SMITH, AP Business Writer
Dateline: SAO PAULO, Brazil
Body




Could Brazil be the next Argentina?
That's the question that's spooking currency, stock and bond markets as South America's largest economy appears to be lurching toward a potentially explosive debt crisis.
Unnerved by a possible win by the left in October elections and fears of a possible default on a massive internal public debt worth more than 70 percent of the country's economic output of $370 billion, its currency, the real, has slid to near-record lows and the benchmark C-bond has slumped.
Brazil's country risk has soared to levels last seen just before Argentina collapsed late last year and traders, analysts and even presidential candidates are warning that Brazilians could be headed for a meltdown like their southern neighbors.
Mired in a four-year recession, Argentina has defaulted on its foreign debt, seen its currency lose more than two-thirds of its value and more than half its population slip below the poverty line. It is cut off from international markets.
Could Brazil be next?
According to J.P. Morgan's Emerging Markets Bond Index, Brazil must pay more than 13 percentage points over U.S. Treasuries on capital markets, making the country a riskier investment proposition than any other barring Argentina and Nigeria.
According to Celso Pinto, chief editor of business daily Valor, "whoever was saying that Brazil had escaped unharmed from fallout from the Argentine crisis is reviewing their position."
"All attention is now on Brazil, the presidential elections and the internal debt," Pinto wrote Thursday.
With Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, the three-time failed presidential candidate of the left-wing Workers' Party, way ahead in opinion polls for October's ballot, investors have been increasingly reluctant to take on long-term Brazilian paper.
In the past, Lula has openly flirted with the idea of renegotiating Brazil's $54 billion foreign public debt, something more conservative investors fear really means a default. Although the Workers' Party has moved toward the center, many investors are still wary of buying longer-term Brazilian debt.
The central bank has had to issue more and more short-term paper, increasing the roll-over burden for the first quarter of 2003, when the new government takes over, to more than 17 billion reals ($6.3 billion).
Leading commentator Clovis Rossi of the Folha de Sao Paulo daily has called the debt "a time bomb...ready to explode in the lap of the next government."
Pinto wrote that the next government "could be engulfed by a huge crisis."
Only 18 months ago, Brazil's economy was robust, but the global economic slowdown, a home-grown energy crisis, the collapse of neighboring Argentina - a principal export market - and a credit squeeze on Wall Street have all helped strangle growth, expected to reach 1.5 percent at most this year.
In addition, the central bank's concern - some claim obsession - with keeping interest rates high at 18.5 percent to meet ambitious inflation targets is further stymieing recovery.
Central Bank Governor Arminio Fraga and Finance Minister Pedro Malan on Thursday unveiled a package of economic measures - including freeing up an extra $10 billion in International Monetary Funds, boosting budget surplus targets and lowering foreign reserve levels - to soothe the markets' nerves.
But markets hardly reacted. The real was trading Friday at 2.716 to the U.S. dollar, slightly lower than Thursday's close. The C-bond slipped further to just below 65 cents on the dollar.
Still, most people say likening Brazil with Argentina is like comparing apples and oranges.
"Brazil has all the elements to avoid being the next Argentina," said Marcelo Carvalho, chief economist at Bank of America in Sao Paulo.
"Argentina's debt was mostly external, Brazil's is mostly internal. Brazil has a flexible, floating currency unlike Argentina's fixed rate regime, and Brazil has built up a credible monetary policy over recent years," he said.
IMF and U.S. Treasury officials have given strong words of support to Brazil in recent days.
"I think the market reaction has been somewhat exaggerated," said Carvalho. "But, despite yesterday's measures, there is still a sense of doubt in the markets."
Both Malan and Fraga have called upon the Workers' Party to clarify its commitment to market-friendly policies and fiscal discipline, but the party so far has not laid down hard and fast rules for its economic program.
Perhaps the main element that will prevent Brazil melting down like Argentina is the country's size and its 170 million population, by far Latin America's biggest.
"I don't believe Brazil will become the next Argentina," said Eduardo Rocha Azevedo, former president of Sao Paulo's stock exchange.
"Where would Ford or General Motors go? You close those factories down and take them where?" he asked. "There are more interests at stake here than in Argentina and Brazil's potential as a consumer market is much greater than any other Latin American country."
 Load-Date: June 19, 2002

 

End of Document
