

Cigar Dave radio show celebrates stogies, the good life
The Associated Press
June 2, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 861 words
Byline: By MITCH STACY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TAMPA, Fla.
Body




David Zeplowitz hates the "pleasure police."
That's what he calls those who would impugn his right to enjoy such pursuits as sipping a cocktail, digging into a thick steak and - especially - stoking up a fine, hand-rolled cigar.
"Cigar Dave," as he is known to the estimated 750,000 devotees of his weekly radio program, stands ready to defend the good life while extolling the virtues of a good smoke for two hours every Saturday afternoon.
"I look at myself as a spokesperson for people that say we enjoy doing these things, we're adults, we can make our own decisions and we're going to fight," he says.
Zeplowitz's celebration of the finer things, his vast knowledge of cigars and conservative political rants have earned the 39-year-old veteran broadcaster a following in close to 90 U.S. cities since his show debuted in Tampa eight years ago.
Between the "long ashes" greeting to listeners and the ceremonial "lightation" of the week's featured stogie, Zeplowitz - respectfully called "the General" by his Cigar Army legions - fields questions, advises, introduces new products and chats up cigar-smoking celebs. Beer, cocktails, fine food and other accouterments of the "cigar lifestyle" also are popular topics.
New to cigar smoking? Zeplowitz will recommend a good beginner's "stick" and send a few out to you. Wondering about the proper way to cut and light it? He's got the paraphernalia and the answers.
Are those illegal Cuban cigars really superior? That's a myth, he says. Today's state-of-the-art farming and quality control make cigars from Honduras, the Dominican Republic and Nicaragua even better than the forbidden Cuban product.
Cigar makers who buy up the commercial spots on Zeplowitz's show also fill his office with boxes and boxes of top-shelf smokes for him to sample and give away to listeners.
It's good to be the General.
"I think people want to go back to the Rat Pack days," the Buffalo, N.Y., native said. "When you went to Vegas you could have a good time, you could smoke a cigar, you could have your beverage, you could tell dirty jokes and nobody cared. It was fun. And that's really what we do on the show. We're politically incorrect and damn proud of that."
Politics has crept onto his agenda more lately, especially as the war with Iraq was unfolding. Cigar Dave and his listeners hashed over the conflict and kept up the attaboys for President Bush and the troops. For weeks, he harped on France for refusing to support the U.S. war effort, calling for a boycott of French wine.
"To not discuss the war and what was going on and not be patriotic would have been a tremendous insult to the troops over there," he said.
Zeplowitz's formidable following has made him a central figure in the cigar universe. Manufacturers see his fans packing remote broadcasts and asking their dealers for the smokes he talks about on the show.
"He's a pretty bright man, and he got himself educated on the product and found a niche," said Jim Colucci, senior vice president of sales and marketing for Altadis U.S.A. Inc., makers of Montecristo, H. Upmann, Romeo y Julieta and other popular brands.
Gary Bahrenfus, who manages the landmark Edward's Pipe and Tobacco shop in Tampa, is an occasional guest on the show and sat alongside Zeplowitz recently for the annual "Cigar Draft," in which callers chose and analyzed favorite cigars in an NFL Draft format.
"There will come a time when he will be lauded by the industry," Bahrenfus predicts. "He has a been an asset to our industry, more than any other one person I can think of."
A Syracuse University graduate, Zeplowitz moved to Florida in 1989 after buying a small AM station in Zephyrhills, north of Tampa. Tracing his love of cigars back to his grandfather, he found Tampa - arguably the epicenter of the nation's cigar culture - an ideal locale to immerse himself in the hobby.
Tampa's early growth was spurred by the cigar industry, when Cuban manufacturers began relocating here in the 1880s to escape political and labor unrest in their native land. The east Tampa community - dubbed Ybor City after cigar magnate Vincent Martinez-Ybor - grew to more than 250 cigar factories with 30,000 employees. For 50 years the city was the cigar capital of the world.
But the Depression took its toll, cigarettes eclipsed cigars as the smoke of choice and the area declined. Still, cigar heritage remains celebrated as a theme of Ybor City's revitalization as a busy entertainment district.
Zeplowitz started the radio show in July 1995 in the midst of a boom in the popularity of imported cigars. Two years later, he moved to his current flagship station, WFLA-AM. A few other radio shows around the country are devoted to the subject, but none boast his reach and popularity.
Besides the featured cigar he lights on the air, Zeplowitz says he smokes only one or two more during the week. When he's tasting product, he'll only burn an inch or so of each cigar. Moderation is a Cigar Dave mantra.
A bachelor, Zeplowitz owns a boat, loves to fish and play golf, pastimes that are, of course, enhanced with a good smoke.
His favorite brand of cigar?
"Whatever I'm smoking at the time."
---
On the Net:
www.cigardave.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY344

 

End of Document
