

Colombian peasants flee the fields after paramilitaries move in
The Associated Press
April 4, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 639 words
Byline: By JUAN PABLO TORO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIOTA, Colombia
Body




It's harvest time in this coffee growing region an hour and a half drive from Bogota, but hundreds of the peasants who make their living picking the shiny beans are missing from the plantations this year.
Some 2,500 have fled the fields to take refuge in the town of Viota after right-wing paramilitary fighters threatened to kill anyone who collaborated with the leftist rebels who have controlled the area for a generation.
During a swift expedition into the area, the right-wing militias hacked a peasant to death and kidnapped eight others, including a 14-year-old girl.
It all began before dawn Saturday, when many of the peasants were heading out to the fields. Three trucks loaded with 30 or so men armed with rifles, wearing camouflage uniforms and the armband of the feared Peasant Self-Defense Forces of Casanare, or ACC, began to roam the villages of the region.
"To all the collaborators of the guerrillas, we give you three days beginning today to disappear from the zone, or you will be a military target," Ramiro Ramirez says he was told at gunpoint.
Ramirez, a short, stocky man of 44, believed the threat and fled to Viota with his wife, two daughters and dozens of neighbors.
The same scene was repeated in several villages. News spread quickly that the ACC, previously unknown in these parts, had arrived.
As the peasants began to pour into Viota, the army set out to look for the illegal gunmen. Soldiers were able to locate the eight hostages, and they found a recent grave site at a farm where Wilson Duarte, of the village of Mogambo, was buried. But the militia members who hacked him to death had faded into the mountains.
"It was horrible to see Wilson that way," said a family member who was too scared to give his name. "His wife came to my house but she doesn't want to talk of the fear."
The army says it has deployed 400 soldiers to the area.
"This zone is calm; it's already occupied by troops," said Lt. Col. Rodrigo Gonzalez. He thinks the peasants who have fled their fields are being held hostage by rumors, since very few say they were actually approached by the ACC.
He even thinks the leftist Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, is taking advantage of the situation to try to call attention to the paramilitary forces.
"This isn't just any zone," said political analyst Alejo Vargas. "It seems like an attempt to challenge the established order in a region that has an important political tradition for the communists and the FARC."
The ACC incursion is surprising not only because it occurred in a historically communist area, but because the ACC is one of three paramilitary organizations that declared a temporary end to hostilities late last year while its leaders try to negotiate a peace deal with the government.
Whatever prompted the incursion, the results are all too familiar. Hundreds of refugees crowded into Viota's church, sleeping outside in the town plaza, cooking over open fires on the street, in need of the most basic assistance just to survive. The International Committee of the Red Cross sent 10 tons of food to help the desperate villagers.
Colombia has the worst refugee problem in the Western Hemisphere, with more than 1 million people forced to flee their homes in recent years by the escalating violence of a four-decade-old war. The conflict pits the leftist rebels against the government and the outlawed paramilitary groups.
The Red Cross aid will get the refugees in Viota through the next few weeks, but the hard part will be convincing them to return to their homes.
The army insists that troops have the region secured, but many here don't trust the military, which has often been accused of collaborating with the paramilitaries.
"We're only asking that they take out the paramilitary fighters and the armed forces," Ramirez said. "We know how to defend ourselves."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BOG102,103

 

End of Document
