

Colombia's armed groups on the verge of demise, says defense minister
The Associated Press
January 18, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 656 words
Byline: JUAN PABLO TORO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CASTILLETES, Colombia
Body




U.S. military aid, more army troops and citizen informants will not lead to quick victory in Colombia's 38-year civil war, but will help weaken the insurgents, the defense minister said.
In an interview with The Associated Press, Defense Minister Martha Lucia Ramirez said the number of police and soldiers will be increased by 55,000 to 315,000, paid for in part by a war tax imposed by the government last year.
"Eventually, we'll gain control of every part of the country," Ramirez said Friday from Castilletes, a village on Colombia's Caribbean coast, 539 miles northeast of the capital, Bogota.
Accompanied by military commanders, Ramirez visited Castilletes Friday hoping to assure residents that the government was securing the largely unprotected, desert region from attacks by insurgents.
Since taking power last August, President Alvaro Uribe has enlisted civilian informers and peasant soldiers, raised taxes, and lobbied for additional U.S. military aid. It's all part of an effort to fulfill his campaign promise to crack down on leftist rebels and a rival right-wing paramilitary group.
The one-time, 1.2 percent war tax on assets will help the government add the new police officers and soldiers and build 143 new police stations in towns that have been abandoned by the state and left open to rebel attacks, said Ramirez.
She said the buildup would be complete by the end of the year.
The U.S. government has already given nearly $2 billion in mostly military aid to Colombia over the past three years.
U.S. military aid so far has been largely restricted to curtailing drug production, the key source of funding for both the rebels and the paramilitaries.
In a sign of Washington's deepening role in Colombia, the U.S. ambassador said Friday that 70 U.S. Army trainers had arrived in the northeastern state of Arauca to train Colombian soldiers to protect an oil pipeline frequently bombed by rebels.
"Never before have Colombians been so convinced that they want to do away with the armed groups," said Ramirez.
However, Ramirez was also wary of promising quick victory.
"It isn't possible to think of defeating these groups in the short term," Ramirez said. "But we do believe that through military action and the solidarity of our citizens, we will weaken them."
The nation's largest rebel army, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, has 16,000 fighters and the strong support of Colombia's vast countryside. The country's smaller rebel group, the National Liberation Army, or ELN, has some 5,000 fighters.
Citing widespread discontent among the ranks of the rebel armies, Ramirez said the government was hoping to persuade 6,000 combatants to desert this year. Capturing rebel leaders could also debilitate the insurgents.
"If we succeed in sufficiently weakening these groups, we believe the leaders will be the first to ask for any type of negotiation," said Ramirez.
The ELN ended discussions aimed at launching formal peace negotiations with the government in December. A three-year peace process between the FARC and the previous government collapsed early last year without results.
Meanwhile Saturday, residents of remote Antioquia province in the northwest said FARC fighters rounded up villagers Thursday night and shot them in the head after accusing them of belonging to a rival right-wing paramilitary group. At least 16 people were killed, said Hugh Posada, an official in the nearest township of San Carlos, about 130 miles from Bogota.
No one has claimed responsibility.
Also Saturday, authorities located four members of the country's counternarcotics police who suffered minor injuries when their helicopter went down in a southern drug-growing region rife with rebels.
The crash on Friday in Narino province killed one officer. Authorities blamed it on mechanical failure.
Police have been fumigating drug crops in the region, but it was unclear if the helicopter was on a spraying mission when it crashed.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo BOG101

 

End of Document
