

Colombia's soldier-farmers train to join the war at home
The Associated Press
February 7, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 608 words
Byline: By JUAN PABLO TORO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: POPAYAN, Colombia
Body




Walter Gomez, his face streaked with camouflage paint, has exchanged a hoe for an assault rifle and is ready along with a thousand other "soldier-farmers" to defend their villages from rebel attacks.
In a bold but controversial move, President Alvaro Uribe's government is giving military training to young farmers to defend their remote villages - far from any regular military bases - from attacks by the leftist insurgents.
Gomez's village, high in the mountains above the colonial city of Popayan, has been attacked six times in recent years. For him, the program is a simple way for him to defend his family and farm.
"Now, the town will be safer, not like before when there was a lot of danger because of the guerrillas," the wiry 20-year-old during a break in training recently.
Gomez is one of 108 soldier-farmers being trained in Popayan on handling weapons, patrolling, respecting human rights and carrying out urban combat tactics.
More than 1,000 young farmers are currently being trained across Colombia a nation slightly larger than Texas and California combined. A total of 12,000 are to be trained by the end of the year.
In the three-month boot camp, the farmers - who will be issued military uniforms and weapons - learn everything from how to cross a street under fire to how to enter a house where the enemy is hiding.
The training is practically the same that regular soldiers receive.
"The difference is they are not trained for offensive operations," explained Colombian Army Col. Gilberto Ibarra. "The peasant-soldier is one more soldier, but he will defend his town."
Human rights activists worry that at best the program will only increase the violence in Colombia, and at worst the soldier-farmers will be infiltrated by right-wing militia fighters looking for a legal cover for their death squads.
Like regular draftees, the soldier-farmers will remain attached to the army for two years and receive a monthly salary of 50,000 pesos, or about $17.
Military officials say the advantage of the new troops is their knowledge of their home areas and its people.
Gomez is one of 108 soldier-farmers being trained in Popayan on handling weapons, patrolling, respecting human rights and carrying out urban combat tactics.
"One knows who is the good one and who is the bad one," Gomez agreed.
The damage left by attacks by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known by the Spanish initials FARC, are visible throughout Gomez' hometown, Almaguer.
The roof of the cathedral was destroyed in one attack. Pieces of the roof still sit on the pews. The walls of many houses are pocked by bullets. The police have abandoned their station, demolished in an attack more than a year ago.
Despite the widespread destruction, the imminent arrival of 36 soldier-farmers - native sons prepared to defend the town - has generated mixed opinions.
"I have always said that the day the people were capable of taking up arms, they would beat the guerrillas," town priest Carlos Enrique Zuluaga said, standing in the ruins of what was once a soaring cathedral. "Because then the peasants would defend what is theirs: the land of the fathers and the land that they will leave to their sons."
But Jose Guzman, the teacher in the local high school, fears rebel reprisals.
"Everything that is an obstacle for the guerrillas is a provocation," he said.
In a recent statement, the FARC said it believes the ranks of the soldier-farmers were already being infiltrated by right-wing paramilitary fighters.
Defense Minister Martha Lucia Ramirez insisted in an interview that the soldier-farmers are being carefully screened to prevent any paramilitary members from joining.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BOG101-106

 

End of Document
