

Colombia blows up nearly 7,000 stockpiled land mines in effort to eventually rid the country of the weapons
The Associated Press
October 24, 2004, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 534 words
Byline: By DAN MOLINSKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




Colombia's armed forces blew up 6,800 stockpiled land mines Sunday as President Alvaro Uribe, Queen Noor of Jordan and dozens of mine blast victims watched on large screens, launching an effort to eventually rid the country of the weapons.
The queen, U.S. Ambassador William Wood and other dignitaries gathered Bogota's main plaza as the land mines were destroyed in eight thunderous explosions in a rural area near the northern city of Barranquilla.
The unprecedented act was aimed at underscoring Colombia's commitment to destroying all state-owned mines, Uribe said, even though Marxist rebels who have battled the government for 40 years have increasingly used them.
"Be our ambassador, Queen Noor, and tell the world … that the Colombian government is destroying its mines," Uribe said.
The queen sat next to Uribe and applauded as each explosion took place. Dozens of land mine victims and soldiers wounded in Colombia's civil war also were present and Juanes, a Colombian pop star, performed "Suenos" (Dreams), a song from his new best-selling album that deals with the everyday life of a Colombian soldier.
Land mines have become a huge problem in Colombia, where government troops and allied militia fighters are battling two leftist rebel groups. Each faction has planted land mines. As a result, the Andean nation has the fourth-largest number of annual casualties from mine blasts, behind Chechnya, Afghanistan and Cambodia.
Anti-personnel mines have killed or injured some 560 people in Colombia this year, up from just 29 in 1990, according to the office of Vice President Francisco Santos. Sixty percent of this year's victims were government soldiers.
Queen Noor, who did not speak at the ceremony, has made the reduction of land mines in developing nations one of her main platforms for peace.
The queen, who was born Lisa Najeeb Halaby in New York in 1951, is the widow of King Hussein of Jordan, who died five years ago. She planned to visit mine blast victims in southwest Colombia on Monday.
Colombia in 2000 ratified the Ottawa Convention that calls for banning and destroying all land mines worldwide by 2009. After Sunday's blasts, Colombia will have completed the first phase of the agreement, which calls for destruction of stockpiled mines. However, the military will retain several hundred mines for training purposes.
For the second phase, Colombia's government said it will destroy thousands of government-planted mines that remain in the ground, ready to explode.
Col. Nelson Rocha, who oversees the military's mines, said Saturday the government has 30 to 35 minefields in strategic spots around military bases and communications centers, as well as near electricity towers, a popular target for sabotage by Colombia's main rebel group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC.
Each minefield has close to 500 individual mines, and he estimated total government-planted mines at about 14,000.
The Washington-based International Campaign to Ban Landmines estimates that some 100,000 mines are buried across Colombia.
The government says the FARC, a smaller rebel group and the right-wing United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, or AUC, are responsible for most of those mines.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo BOG103
 Load-Date: October 25, 2004

 

End of Document
