

Colombian candidate seized by rebels is anti-corruption crusader with a flair for the sensational
February 25, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 753 words
Byline: By JARED KOTLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




It was, to many here, a reckless move - a presidential candidate driving into Colombia's hottest war zone despite the military's warnings that there could be rebels on the road.
But for Ingrid Betancourt, the brash, in-your-face politician now being held hostage by the nation's main guerrilla army, the voyage into peril was completely in character.
Friends describe Betancourt, of the tiny but strident Oxygen-Green movement, as a strong and stubbornly confident woman who has never put her own safety first.
"Ingrid is a very bold and daring woman. She takes big risks," said Sen. Rafael Orduz, a former colleague of Betancourt, who resigned her Senate seat last year to run for president.
Betancourt, 40, was abducted Saturday at a roadblock erected by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, as she tried to reach a town inside a former rebel stronghold being targeted by airstrikes and a military ground offensive.
President Andres Pastrana launched the strikes last week, accusing the FARC of scuttling peace efforts and ordering the military to recapture the territory he ceded to the rebels in 1998 as an incentive for negotiations.
Betancourt took off immediately for the zone - to show solidarity with the residents of its largest town, San Vicente del Caguan, she said. The town's mayor is a member of Oxygen- Green.
"Going there was a gesture to be with her people. It was very sincere," Orduz said.
Betancourt's car was stopped on a highway between Florencia and San Vicente del Caguan. She and campaign manager Clara Rojas were taken away in trucks. Both are still being held hostage.
Government officials condemned the FARC but also called Betancourt irresponsible for making the trip. Military officials had warned her the road wasn't safe and had denied her requests for transport into the zone. Betancourt's campaign blamed the government Monday for denying transportation.
The rebels kidnap thousands of people every year, and they are currently holding five members of Congress.
Interior Minister Armando Estrada announced Monday that the government received a communique saying Betancourt would be held until guerrillas held by the government are freed. He said officials were trying to authenticate the statement, signed by senior rebel commander Joaquin Gomez.
The kidnapping stirred national and international concern, not just for Betancourt but also for the security of candidates in March legislative elections and a May 26 presidential vote.
"We're very concerned. This has left us speechless," said French Ambassador Daniel Parfait. Betancourt spent much of her childhood and college years in France, and recently published a best-selling memoir in French.
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan condemned the kidnapping Monday. "Such violent actions undermine the forthcoming elections and intimidate the civilian population," he said in a statement. The U.S. State Department and the European Union also criticized the kidnapping. Pastrana said the FARC was "kidnapping democracy."
An earthy and informal politician who usually wears jeans and a T-shirt in public, Betancourt has a penchant for being in the news. Offbeat publicity stunts have been her specialty in a career dedicated to battling political corruption and privilege.
Although she lags far behind in the polls ahead of the presidential vote, she made headlines by recently distributing Viagra pills on Bogota's streets - to give Colombian politics "a lift." During her 1998 senate campaign, Betancourt handed out condoms, saying a vote for her was protection against corruption.
After a privileged childhood in a politically connected family, she gained national prominence in the 1990s when she took a leading role in efforts to prove that former President Ernesto Samper received campaign contributions from drug traffickers.
More recently, she has taken on the FARC. Betancourt was one of four presidential candidates to visit rebel territory Feb. 14 and, in a nationally broadcast peace forum, lecture the rebels about their drug ties and kidnappings.
Betancourt's frankness has brought death threats. In 1996, she sent her two children to live with their father in France, from whom she is divorced, after a well-dressed man walked into her office at Congress and told her it would be best if she get out of Colombia.
In her memoir, "Rage in the Heart," Betancourt wrote that she thought the man was a well-wisher but realized otherwise when he told her she hadn't understood him.
"We have already paid the hit men," the man said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY185-186
 Load-Date: February 26, 2002

 

End of Document
