

Colombia's main rebel group marks its 40th year with no signs the war will end soon
The Associated Press
May 25, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 788 words
Byline: By MARGARITA MARTINEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GAITANIA, Colombia
Body




Colombia's main rebel army celebrates its 40th anniversary this week and the Marxist guerrillas are literally digging in for the long haul - burying food stores in the mountains and predicting victory will eventually be theirs.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, said in a statement posted Monday on a Web site linked to the group that it has "an iron will to fight and profound faith that our cause will triumph."
Here in the verdant mountains of western Colombia that was the FARC's cradle, a local rebel commander said his forces have buried food caches and are splitting up into three-person units to evade government troops.
In the past five days, a string of rebel bomb attacks coinciding with Thursday's anniversary of the FARC's founding have killed at least 13 people and wounded more than 100.
Colombia's military - backed by billions of dollars in U.S. military aid and training - has the rebels on the run, with hardline President Alvaro Uribe trying to bring Latin America's longest-running insurgency to its knees.
In a speech Monday at a military base in southern Colombia that the FARC overran in 1998 and that Colombian army troops retook in February, Uribe urged the military and police forces to keep attacking the rebels.
"These terrorists, these criminals, thought they would triumph … but your actions will transform this arrogance into a bitter grimace of defeat," Uribe said at the Miraflores base, 260 miles southeast of Bogota.
Security forces, aided with U.S. intelligence, have captured several regional rebel leaders, and even netted a top rebel commander, Simon Trinidad, in neighboring Ecuador five months ago.
But Manuel "Sureshot" Marulanda, who co-founded the FARC near this village and at 74 is still the group's top commander, has a reputation for staying a step ahead of his pursuers.
"He's got a special sense of smell that lets him know where the army is approaching from and when it is time to flee," said retired army Gen. Alvaro Valencia Tovar, who led military operations against Marulanda's band four decades ago.
Forty years ago, Marulanda - whose real name is Pedro Antonio Marin - was a demobilized Communist guerrilla living in Gaitania, a village of brick houses nestled amid towering green mountains.
Colombia's government sent troops to crush Marulanda and the other Communists, fearing they would trigger a widespread uprising like the one Fidel Castro led from the Sierra Maestra Mountains in Cuba in 1959.
"It was the era when it was said the Andes were going to be the new Sierra Maestra," said Malcolm Deas, a Latin America expert at Oxford University.
But amid the 1964 government offensive, Marulanda - who according to local lore earned his nickname by killing a policeman with a single shot at 500 meters - and 40 men fled deeper into the mountains and created the FARC.
"He was the most distant and distrustful man I have ever known, and that's why he has survived," said Pedro Ardila, 85, who lives in Gaitania, 155 miles southwest of the capital.
The FARC is now believed to have some 15,000 fighters - its expansion fueled by its entry into Colombia's cocaine trade in the 1990s. Its involvement in drug trafficking, kidnappings and extortion rackets has landed the FARC on Washington's list of terrorist organizations.
While many observers say the FARC has morphed into one of the world's biggest organized crime gangs, some insist its leaders remain focused on fighting for the poor. U.N. special envoy James LeMoyne touched off a storm of controversy in Colombia last year when he said he believes some FARC members are ideologically committed.
Valencia Tovar, now 83 and retired in Bogota, said the decision to attack the nascent rebel movement in 1964 was the right one, but should have been accompanied by development projects.
"The failure was not the operation … but that the government did not accompany it with an economic and social plan to incorporate (the region) into the life of the nation," the retired military commander said in an interview.
Analysts say neither the rebels nor the Colombian military can vanquish the other side. Uribe, who remains highly popular among voters because of his drive to end the insurgency that kills some 3,500 people a year, says he wants to squeeze the FARC enough so that they enter into serious peace talks.
But there is no sign the rebels intend to ditch their long-standing hopes of winning power.
In their Internet statement, the FARC referred to Uribe and President Bush as megalomaniacs and fascists.
The FARC commander here, a 36-year-old wearing a camouflage uniform and who did not want his name to be used, made no bones about the rebels' ultimate objective.
"We are going for the presidential palace," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BOG101-103
 Load-Date: May 26, 2004

 

End of Document
