

Colombian's president rides high after first year in office; pledges to give his utmost for the country
The Associated Press
August 7, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 627 words
Byline: By VANESSA ARRINGTON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




President Alvaro Uribe, riding a wave of popularity amid his crackdown on leftist rebels, marked his first anniversary in power Thursday by dedicating Colombia's first monument to soldiers killed the country's wars.
"God knows the names of these brave souls, but from now on, a grateful nation will also know them," a somber Uribe said, standing near the black marble monument. Army snipers watched from rooftops as Uribe spoke, and troops cordoned off the area for blocks around.
Since Uribe took office a year ago during a rebel mortar attack on the presidential palace, he has pushed the U.S.-backed military to intensify its fight against insurgents.
The number of rebel desertions has increased while kidnappings and homicides have gone down. The hardline leader has also launched political reforms and has begun trimming a bloated state bureaucracy.
Uribe has drawn support from Colombians for his efforts to bring order to a nation crippled by corruption and violence. A Gallup poll last month showed he has an approval rating of 70 percent.
Colombians also like Uribe's austerity and no-nonsense manner. He is a proven workaholic, who practices yoga and doesn't drink or smoke.
In his televised speech at the war memorial, Uribe pledged to give his utmost to create a better Colombia.
"With desire, with infinite will, everything is attainable," he said. "What Colombia needs is for those of us who have responsibilities to be working at all hours … instead of being at cocktails or parties."
Uribe has the support of the U.S. government, which has spent more than $2 billion over the past three years to train Colombian troops, provide helicopters with the aim of wiping out cocaine production whose profits fuel the war, and to better attack the insurgents.
"They have in fact, in my view, turned the corner," Gen. James T. Hill, the U.S. military commander for Latin America and the Caribbean.
"There's still a lot of fighting to be done, on all fronts - on the military side, the economic side, the political side, the reform side, the human rights side," Hill told reporters in Miami on Wednesday. "But all those trends in my view are moving in the right direction."
Yet observers say there is still no end in sight to Colombia's war, which has dragged on for almost four decades. Though several outlawed right-wing paramilitary groups have agreed to disarm by 2005, leftist rebels have spurned appeals for a cease-fire and peace talks. The insurgents continue to wage war and carry out terrorist-style attacks.
Ten rebels of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia and one paramilitary fighter were killed in scattered clashes with government troops in northern central and southern Colombia over the past day, the army said Thursday.
A study by the Security and Democracy Foundation, a Bogota think tank, determined that while the military has become more aggressive under Uribe, it has not become much more effective.
In the first half of 2003, Colombia's military participated in 900 combat operations - up 55 percent from the same period last year, according to the study. Yet the number of insurgents killed in those operations - 1,128 - increased by just 24 percent, the study showed.
On Aug. 7, 2002, Uribe took office as rebels launched rockets at the presidential palace, where the ceremony was taking place. Twenty-one people were killed, most of them indigents who died when several of the rebel missiles landed wide and hit a skid-row section of the capital.
Uribe visited a church near the site of the rebel bombardment early Thursday, saying it was tragic that innocents had died on such an important day for Colombia. He also expressed solidarity with relatives of the victims.
Uribe's father was killed during an apparent rebel kidnap attempt in 1983.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo BOG103
 Load-Date: August 8, 2003

 

End of Document
