

Computers open Latin America's biggest slum to the world
July 29, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 829 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




Dozens of wires bristle from a concrete post, an electronic porcupine shooting clandestine power lines with stolen current across a garbage dump and up the twisting alleys of Latin America's largest slum.
The street scene in Rocinha, Portuguese for Little Farm, reflects a past of neglect and exclusion from even basic services that has created a gulf between the haves and the have-nots of Rio's favelas, or shantytowns.
Yet just a few doors down, a neat shop front offers a digital bridge across the chasm.
It's Estacao Futura, or Future Station, a pioneering campaign that has brought the computer world to Rocinha. For a token fee, residents now can surf the Net, get e-mail and earn the computer proficiency certificate required for many jobs.
"We always were interested in the Internet. We just never had an opportunity before," said Maria Luiza Carlos, head of a community residents' association. "Many people here don't have enough to eat, much less to buy a computer."
The idea came from Viva Rio, a rights group that works in the favelas. It raised donations and funds from the Inter-American Development Bank and the European Union to put 24 computers in the rented storefront at 19A Caminho do Boiadeiro, or Cowpuncher's Way.
Ten of the Pentium-driven PCs are reserved for the course, which teaches students how to use Windows, Word, Excel and other common programs. The monthlong course costs just 20 reals, or about $8, and some classes were full within days after the station opened in July.
Twelve other computers are open for surfing and gaming, at 80 cents an hour. Two are for the station's managers.
Connecting to the Internet adds no wires to the overburdened post outside. No phone lines here: each computer has a small antenna and connects using wireless technology developed by the Israeli military that wasn't even available in Brazil until now.
"From exclusion to cutting edge," chuckled Franklin Dias Coelho, an economy professor and Viva Rio's Director of Community Development.
Future Station is open from 9 a.m. till 10 p.m. daily, and there are few restrictions. The only request is that adults not access pornographic sites when children are present, and users themselves make sure the rule is usually obeyed. A glance around the room shows most of the screens occupied by games and cartoons, which Coelho sees as a healthy substitute for arcade games and a first step to building familiarity with computers.
"This is like the television of the future," marveled 22-year-old Adriano dos Santos, who recently lost his job at a travel agency. "Everybody will have to know computers and English."
But Future Station also offers a look into the favela itself. The group has launched a new portal, www.vivafavela.com, with news about Rocinha and other slums. There's news about community festivals, health services, and violence. One feature story on a brutal killing is entitled "Life after the massacre." A survey asks opinions about a police shakedown of a favela family.
Coelho sees the Internet not just as an electronic town crier, but as a catalyst for developing Rio's favelas - a tool to create cooperatives, provide job training and offer access to credit and markets. For example, he said, drugstore owners can order in bulk to reduce prices.
"Rocinha is a city," he said.
Yet, like other favelas, it remains in the shadows. Nobody knows how many people live here, although a survey by the resident's association five years ago put the population at more than 250,000. More - mostly from Brazil's drought-stricken northeast - arrive every day.
As Rocinha struggles for recognition, the sheer buying power of its huge population is bringing the outside world in. The Rio de Janeiro state bank Banerj and the federal savings bank Caixa Economica have opened branches here, and there's a McDonald's ice cream stand.
As in other favelas, drug gangs dictate rules and keep a curious kind of order. Robbery is forbidden and strictly punished. Street crime is virtually unknown.
But officialdom is still largely absent. Coelho said he lobbied for a project similar to Future Station during the 18 months he worked in the state government's Planning Secretariat but ran into bureaucratic walls.
"I could only do this outside the government," he said. "It would be ironic if it weren't tragic."
Viva Rio is getting ready to start work on Future Stations in two other poor districts, Sao Cristovao and the Mare favela complex. Each is expected to take about 45 days to set up and about $2,500.
In Rocinha, people already are looking at the future differently.
"When you are born and raised here, you think Rocinha is the world. You might be big here and not realize how small you really are," said Ricardo Lemos, 36, as he stood in line for a vacant computer. "If kids start exploring the Internet, they might realize that there's more out there than this."
On the Net:
Rocinha Profile: http://www.rocinha.com.br 
Favela Portal (in Portuguese): http://www.vivafavela.com.br 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY192-195
 Load-Date: July 30, 2001

 

End of Document
