

Countries lobby for U.N. Security Council seats on the sidelines of G-77 summit
The Associated Press
June 14, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 639 words
Byline: By JIM KRANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DOHA, Qatar
Body




For an issue that isn't even on the agenda, the lobbying is intense.
Little Benin found itself courted by India and Japan in the morning, and Brazil and Germany in the afternoon. Those big countries are using a summit of smaller, developing nations to garner votes in the U.N. General Assembly for permanent seats on the Security Council.
Germany and Japan are not members of the Group of 77 summit that meets here this week. But they, and India and Brazil, have formed the so-called Group of Four with the aim of obtaining four of the six permanent seats on the Security Council when the body's expansion goes to the vote, probably in July.
Benin Foreign Minister Rogatien Biaou said India and Japan had courted him Monday morning and he met Brazilian and German envoys in the afternoon. Biaou said he told them it was "too early" to declare a position on their Security Council aspirations as he had not consulted his African neighbors.
There is broad support among U.N. member states for expanding the Security Council, whose current five members are seen as a post-World War II anachronism. The chairman of the G-77, Jamaican U.N. Ambassador Stafford Neil, said: "A lot of diplomatic capital is being sunk into this issue, both for and against."
Germany, Japan, Brazil and India have found themselves in the unrewarding position of contributing more to the U.N. budget than the five permanent Security Council members. But their lack of a permanent seat means they have less diplomatic clout than such countries as France and Britain, who are on the council.
Views on how to expand the Security Council are contentious.
Under the Group of Four's draft resolution, the council's membership would jump from 15 to 25 states, with permanent members rising from five to 11. The G-4 wants to capture four of the new permanent seats. Two others would be reserved for African countries. South Africa, Nigeria and Egypt are said to be vying for them.
The expansion needs the approval of two-thirds of the U.N. member states. Tougher is the necessary vote to change the U.N. Charter, which requires a two-thirds vote and Security Council approval.
The vote is far from clear. At least a third of U.N. members have yet to decide whether to approve the plan, Neil said.
Malaysian Foreign Minister Syed Hamid Albar declared support Monday for Germany and Japan, but most diplomats here are reluctant to publicize their positions.
Plenty of countries oppose the Group of Four plan, perhaps none more vehemently than China, which has sent a delegation to Doha to lobby against it, mainly because it fears an ascendant Japanese rival.
"China is the toughest nut," said Nirupam Sen, India's U.N. ambassador. "They're adamantly opposed to Japan and that means adamant opposition to the expansion resolution."
Chinese diplomats at the summit did not respond to requests for comment. But Beijing has urged Security Council members not to approve the G-4 plan, complaining Japan never properly atoned for its World War II abuses.
The Group of Four sees July as the best opportunity in a decade to expand the council, and they are lobbying hard at this conference in a Doha hotel. They have made concessions - offering not to wield a permanent member's veto for at least 15 years.
The hotel-lined seafront of this tidy city was in a virtual lockdown Tuesday as dozens of heads of state arrived for the second-ever G-77, also known as the South Summit. Helicopters and patrol boats covered the sea approaches, as motorcades took leaders to their hotels.
Among those presidents expected were Venezuela's Hugo Chavez, Zimbabwe's Robert Mugabe, Lebanon's Emile Lahoud, Syria's Bashar al-Assad, Nigeria's Olusegun Obasanjo and Sudan's Omar al-Bashir. Also expected were the kings of Bahrain, Morocco, Nepal and Swaziland and the leaders of Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo DOH102
 Load-Date: June 15, 2005

 

End of Document
