

Criminal spirits in Venezuela's Santeria pantheon help the faithful avoid mischief
The Associated Press
May 6, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 808 words
Byline: By ALEXANDRA OLSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




Venezuelans have long practiced novel versions of the Afro-Caribbean Santeria faith, whose local pantheon includes 19th century South American liberator Simon Bolivar.
But there had been nothing like the newest icons at Santeria shops: criminals who are legends in Caracas slums. The foot-high statuettes, sporting guns and knives poking from jeans pockets, represent spirits trying to repent for their sins by warning youngsters to avoid crime, helping people get out of jail and curing drug addiction.
There's Kid Ismael, a bank robber who some say killed dozens of people in the 1970s before police gunned him down. His statue wears a baseball cap sideways, smokes a cigar and clutches a .38-caliber pistol.
The likeness of Kid Isabel, a prostitute and thief who died of venereal disease in her 20s, wears sunglasses, a tight pink T-shirt showing her bellybutton, a ski hat over blond hair and a knife in an ankle pocket.
These spirits are part of the 200-year-old cult of Maria Lionza - the basis for Venezuelan variations of Santeria, a faith that emerged in Cuba when African slaves began blending Yoruba spiritual beliefs with Roman Catholic traditions.
A beautiful Indian woman from the western state of Yaracuay, Maria Lionza presides over various courts of spirits. Original Santeria deities like Eleggua, the Yoruba god of destiny associated with St. Anthony, belong to the African court. One court includes Simon Bolivar, who liberated Venezuela and other South American nations from Spanish rule.
Kid Ismael and Kid Isabel are members of the "corte malandra," or criminal court.
The Catholic Church frowns on the cult of Maria Lionza but long ago abandoned efforts to eliminate it. Her supplicants come from all classes, but especially the poor. The size of the cult isn't known, though each year hundreds of thousands of people trek to Maria Lionza's reputed home - Sorte Mountain, 180 miles west of Caracas.
Shopkeepers say "malandro" statuettes began hitting the shelves two years ago. Malandros as spirits surfaced in the early 1990s, along with a rise in crime, says anthropologist Patricia Marquez, academic director of the Institute of Higher Administration Studies in the capital.
"For the upper classes, the malandro personifies the growing threat of urban violence. In contrast, in the slums, the figure of the malandro oscillates between hero and villain," Marquez writes in a chapter of the book "20th Century Venezuela," published by Fundacion Polar.
There were 9,000 homicides nationwide in 2002, up from 8,000 in 2001. Vulnerable to random violence and distrustful of sometimes brutal police, many shantytown residents seek protection from malandros, dominant figures who controlled turf and commanded respect and fear.
Most malandros were killed by police or rival gangsters in the 1950s, '60s and '70s. They are viewed as folk heroes - Robin Hoods who stole for the poor and protected neighborhoods.
"Ismael robbed, but it was to help the neediest," says Juan, a mechanic shopping for candles at a downtown Santeria shop.
Juan says he bought an icon of Ismael - the most popular malandro - after the spirit persuaded his son to "stay away from bad neighborhoods."
In contrast, Marquez said, the upsurge in crime has few people romanticizing the current crop of criminals as good guys. "Among other things, the corte malandra reflects nostalgia for that supposed malandro of the past, the one that protected the neighborhood," she said.
As with other spirits in the cult, malandros are believed to give counsel through mediums known as "santeros."
"Things were different back then. Not as many people had guns. We mostly used knives, and we never killed anybody just for kicks," says Saul Abache, a medium channeling the spirit of 1950s outlaw Armando Cedeno who is known in the slums simply as Armando.
Abache, who works in the Lino Valles Spiritual Center, the hub of the Maria Lionza cult in Caracas' Petare slum, has contacted Armando on behalf of Juan Carlos Aguiar. The taxi driver says he was wrongly imprisoned for 14 months on cocaine charges before Armando helped him get out.
Abache sits at a wooden table in a long blue robe. His face glows in candlelight. He smokes a cigarette and swigs anise, the drink malandros request when being invoked.
"I lost my life because I went down a bad path. I liked things that weren't mine," Abache says, relaying the words of Armando. "I died at the hands of police."
The spirit says he has counseled more than 100 people, mostly teenagers with drug problems.
"I tell the mothers their kids should see me right away," he says. "Mostly I just talk to them. I don't believe people turn to crime because they have to. When kids say that, I reply: 'You have a healthy body. You can work.' I'm tough on them."
---
On the Net:
Maria Lionza: http://religions.caribbeaninside.com/showreligion.do?code=002 
 Graphic



 
APN SUNDAY ILLUSTRATIONS: Subscribers get 5 photos by Leslie

 

End of Document
