

Crumbling currency scorches Brazil, but experts doubt it's the next Argentina
July 31, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 639 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




The scenario is grimly familiar: A crumbling currency, a shortage of dollars and a government seemingly helpless to reverse the slide. Is Brazil heading for an Argentina-style meltdown?
Probably not, analysts say. Brazil's economy is stronger and not shackled by a currency bound to the dollar, as Argentina was. Still, the currency crunch could hurt South America's biggest economy.
"Brazil is getting scorched," said Odair Abate, chief economist at Lloyd's Bank in Sao Paulo. The currency troubles could spill over and affect development, he said.
Brazil's currency, the real, opened at 3.19 to the U.S. dollar on Tuesday and quickly plunged to 3.30, an eight-year low. The Central Bank stepped in, selling dollars to stem the bleeding. The real closed at 3.30 to the dollar, the seventh record closing low in as many days.
Economists say foreign lenders and investors are worried that a left-of-center candidate will win the Oct. 6 presidential election. The supply of dollars has dwindled, and companies with overseas debts must pay dearly for the U.S. currency.
"There has been speculation, but the origin of the crisis isn't speculative," Abate said. "There is an exaggerated and, in my opinion, unfounded fear of what will happen after the election."
U.S. Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill added to the unrest over the weekend when he remarked that he wouldn't offer new aid to Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay when he visits those countries next week.
He also ruffled feathers when he said Latin American countries need to enact responsible economic policies so that international assistance "doesn't just go out of the country to Swiss bank accounts."
White House Spokesman Ari Fleischer tried to mend fences on Tuesday, saying that "Brazil has demonstrated its ability to use international monetary assistance effectively and they have sound economic policies in place."
He added that "the United States will continue to support international financial assistance to Brazil."
It's quite a change from just a few months ago, when Brazil seemed an island of calm amid South America's turbulent economies. Argentina, mired in recession, was forced to devalue its peso and defaulted on its debt payments, Brazil looked forward to a stable currency and modest but steady growth.
That changed as public opinion polls showed two left-of-center candidates leading the presidential race. The latest surveys show former labor leader Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva of the Workers Party out front with 33 percent of the vote, followed by ex-Finance Minister Ciro Gomes of the People's Socialist Party with 26 percent.
The government-backed candidate, former Health Minister Jose Serra, had a meager 13 percent and has been declining steadily in past weeks. At that rate, he won't even make the runoff on Oct. 27.
Markets are worried about Lula and Gomes, who in the past have called for a review - widely interpreted to mean moratorium - of the nation's foreign debt. While both have backtracked and now pledge to honor Brazil's commitments, investors would be much happier with the market-friendly Serra.
Serra promises to continue the frugal policies of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, the mentor of the 1994 plan that created the real and brought four-digit inflation down to 7 percent. Cardoso will finish his second term in January and cannot run for a third term.
The real survived a rocky devaluation in 1999, and Brazil's economy was expected to grow 2 percent this year. The real's sudden tumble will likely help exports, but the Central Bank could be under pressure to raise interest rates to keep inflation in check.
The government hopes that a quick bailout loan from the International Monetary Fund could help stabilize the real. A scheduled meeting with IMF was hastily moved up, and Brazilian negotiators were expected in Washington on Tuesday.
 Load-Date: August 1, 2002

 

End of Document
