

Cuba says anyone who thinks it will let a U.N. human rights monitor visit the island is 'dreaming'
April 11, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 534 words
Byline: By ANITA SNOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HAVANA
Body




The Cuban foreign minister on Thursday blasted a proposed U.N. resolution to censure his country for its human rights record and said Havana would never agree to a visit by a U.N. human rights monitor.
Speaking at a news conference, Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque accused the United States of pressuring Uruguay to propose a U.N. resolution calling for the communist country to promote fundamental liberties for its people and to let a U.N. human rights representative visit the island to help officials comply with the resolution.
"They're dreaming if they think that Cuba would let an inspector in the service of the United States government come here under these conditions," Perez Roque said. The U.N. representative would be doing the United States' bidding, he said, because the proposal allegedly was Washington's idea.
The United States denied it was responsible for the resolution introduced at the annual U.N. Human Rights Commission meeting in Geneva.
"We obviously have a substantial interest in this issue - there is no doubting that," U.S. Ambassador Kevin Moley told reporters in Geneva. "But until yesterday afternoon we didn't know for sure that a resolution would be forthcoming."
Uruguayan President Jorge Batlle has denied his country was pressured by the United States and claimed the Cuban accusations were "caused by ignorance on how these things are resolved."
But Perez Roque said the United States has been working on the proposal since October and has been shopping for a country to introduce it. He maintained the United States "desperately" needs the censure of Cuba's rights record as a pretext for maintaining its trade embargo after more than four decades.
Although introduced by Uruguay just minutes before the Wednesday evening deadline, "Cuba is not confused about its authorship," said Perez Roque. A vote is expected April 19, he said.
The United States has brought the proposal in the past, but it is not a member of the commission this year for the first time since 1947.
According to a text distributed in Havana, the proposed resolution recognizes the social rights that Cuba provides its people "despite an adverse international environment." The sponsors of the resolution "invite the government of Cuba to make efforts to obtain similar advances in the area of human, civil and political rights."
Although Cuba is not accused of such abuses as political killings and disappearances, international human rights groups complain that the Caribbean nation does not guarantee its citizens free speech, press, assembly and association.
Asked about a signature-gathering effort in Cuba known as the Varela Project to force a referendum on the communist government's practices, Felipe Perez declared activists involved in the effort were on the U.S. government payroll and said he doubted they would succeed.
More than the 10,000 signatures needed to force the referendum reportedly have been gathered and are being checked for authenticity before they are submitted to Cuba's National Assembly, or parliament.
The proposed referendum would ask voters to weigh in on issues ranging from an amnesty for political prisoners to opportunities for Cubans to run their own businesses.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos HAV101
 Load-Date: April 12, 2002

 

End of Document
