

Day at the races shows Argentina's finances may be galloping out of government's control
December 17, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 722 words
Byline: By TONY SMITH, AP Business Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




And they're off! It's the eighth race of the day at the Palermo Hippodrome and, defying superstition, my money - all two pesos of it - is on No. 13, Combat Cat, a real long-shot.
"If you win, you'll clean us out," jokes Orlando Ruarte, manager of the race track's swanky grandstand compound.
A win would mean a $400 payoff under the 200-1 odds. Such a payoff wouldn't cause Ruarte a problem, but it's close enough to show that Argentina's financial system is no day at the races.
Desperate to keep Argentina's banking system afloat and defend the peso's one-to-one parity with the U.S. dollar after four years of crippling recession, the government is trying to limit cash circulating in South America's second-largest economy to stop capital flight and a potential run on banks.
It imposed a partial banking freeze Dec. 1, limiting cash withdrawals to $1,000 a month per account. Other transactions must be done by account transfer, check, debit card or credit card.
The rules also cover payouts at the Hippodrome, meaning any wins over $1,000 can only be paid by check and therefore deposited in a bank account, which cannot be accessed for more than $1,000 a month.
But as a visit to the horse track shows, the government is having difficulty reining in parallel currencies, with the risk that the country's finances could gallop out of control.
Last week, the track began accepting bets in "patacones," bonds that the Buenos Aires provincial government has been printing since Aug. 21 to pay state workers.
The bonds have the same wallet-size look, feel and color of pesos, and they are now circulating freely alongside the official currency at a one-to-one rate, effectively bloating the money supply.
"To start with, we wouldn't accept them," Ruarte said. "But now they're starting to look like money. People are using them as money."
This is worrying international financial agencies, which fear the extra currency is a sign that Argentina is not determined to keep a tight control on its fiscal policy.
Argentines, who survived years of hyperinflation in the 1980s, are old hands at devising ways to make it through economic chaos. Even after a decade of stability brought by pegging the peso to the dollar, old habits die hard.
Within three days of the banking freeze, the Hippodrome installed debit card machines at its tills. Now it is taking bets - and paying out winnings - in patacones.
"Today, every shop in Argentina is a stock exchange floor where people trade bonds," said Martin Aracama, Ruarte's assistant.
The worrying thing for economists is that the trend is spreading.
Many of Argentina's other 22 provinces have followed Buenos Aires' example, printing bonds to pay government workers.
In northern Santa Fe province, Calchaqui, a small town of 13,000 people, has started to print its own "money" that can be used to pay rents, municipal utility bills and tourist services.
"There is no formal market for these bonds yet, but there probably will be in the future," said Pablo Tavelli, head trader at Banco Santander Central Hispano in Buenos Aires.
The patacon is the most widely accepted bond nationwide because of the economic strength of Buenos Aires province, home to the capital and much of Argentina's industry.
On the city's streets, one patacon ostensibly is worth a peso, which is still worth a dollar. But, as a measure of peoples' confidence, try to buy, say, the Pagina/12 newspaper that costs 1.60 pesos with a five-patacon note.
"I'll take it, but I won't give you change in pesos," said Manuel Mamari, who runs a newspaper kiosk on Lavalle Street.
There are no firm estimates of how many parallel bonds are circulating, but the International Monetary Fund let Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo know it didn't like the proliferation.
In response, the Central Bank started printing the "lecop," a federal bond that is supposed to substitute for patacones and other provincial bonds.
It's used in the same way, just that it's issued by the central bank and so is more controllable if all 23 provinces go round printing as many bonds as they like, it's a sure recipe for chaos.
"Lecops are the government weapon to try and stop profligate printing of money," said Aracama.
So will the Hippodrome accept them?
"Not yet, because they're not really in circulation yet," he said. "But we are studying it. We can never say never."
 Load-Date: December 18, 2001

 

End of Document
