

Delegates discuss bringing water and sanitation to the world's poor
August 28, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 719 words
Byline: By RAVI NESSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




Delegates at the World Summit on Sustainable Development focused Wednesday on ways to bring fresh water and sanitation to hundreds of millions of people who lack access to either.
According to the United Nations, 1.1 billion of the world's more than 6 billion people are without clean drinking water, and 2.4 billion lack access to sanitation. More than 2.2 million people in the developing world die each year from problems associated with lack of water and sanitation.
Despite this, few governments have focused their attention on the issue, said Margaret Catley-Carlson, chair of the Global Water Partnership.
"Why is water management not more of a priority?" she asked.
Activists need to create the political "ambiance" to push for better water management throughout the world, Catley-Carlson told the delegates in an opening session Wednesday.
The United Nations hoped the summit would agree to cut in half by 2015 not only the number of people without access to clean water, but also to sanitation - a new target. The United States has resisted setting new targets for action, saying results on the ground were more important than lofty words.
European Union officials, who support adding the sanitation target, said they couldn't understand the opposition. "It's important not only that people should be able to get drinking water, but to be able to get rid of waste water," said Danish Environment Minister Hans Christian Schmidt.
The 10-day summit, billed as the largest U.N. gathering ever, is also to focus on health, energy, agriculture and biodiversity issues. Negotiations over a plan of action to come out of the gathering have been riven with demands from the developing world for concrete action, and resistance - largely from the United States - to making new commitments.
Overnight, delegates reached agreement on text to protect the world's oceans and restore depleted fish stocks, "where possible," by 2015.
Schmidt, whose country represents the EU, hailed the agreement as "the first major breakthrough" at the summit.
EU officials said the agreement "fits well" with their own recent proposals to reform EU fisheries policies, which are attacked as "rapacious" by some African and South American nations that accuse huge fleets from Spain and other EU countries of depleting resources off their coasts that local people depend upon.
"We agree with the criticism of the way things are now," said EU Commissioner Poul Nielson. "We have reached that realization ourselves."
He said talks were under way to reach more sustainable fishing treaties country by country, but added "it's not always easy."
EU officials said the words "where possible" were added because in some cases it was too late to save severely depleted species, and in others, not enough was known about specific problems and how to solve them.
The United Nations estimates three-quarters of the world's fisheries are either fished to their limits or beyond.
Tuitoma Neroni Slade, chair of the Alliance of Small Island Nations, called the agreement "very satisfactory."
Activists also were generally happy that the summit set a target date, but expressed concern it was too far in the future to fully protect shark, tuna and swordfish communities.
"The restoration of those stocks is going to be really, really tough," said Sian Pullen, oceans specialist for the World Wildlife Fund. "2015 will be too late."
Negotiators also said Wednesday they had made some headway in the thorny discussions on global finance and trade. Those negotiators were still working on agreements on agriculture subsidies, how to define globalization and the concept that wealthy countries had greater responsibilities than poorer nations.
Meanwhile, at a parallel meeting of civic organizations, 10 Palestinian activists disrupted a presentation by officials from the Jewish National Fund, yelling, "Free Palestine." Police removed the protesters from the meeting.
Outside the convention center where the U.N. summit was being held, about 200 people, including Johannesburg street vendors decrying police harassment and farmers demanding access to global markets, staged a peaceful protest.
The protesters marched about a mile to the fringe of the summit site, chanting and waving banners with messages that ranged from "Empower People, Not the U.N." to "People or Pandas."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WSSD104, 110-111
 Load-Date: August 29, 2002

 

End of Document
