

Despite U.S. opposition, the world's first permanent war crimes tribunal will become a reality
April 11, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 598 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Despite vehement U.S. opposition, the world's first permanent war crimes tribunal will become a reality on July 1 with support from U.S. allies and nations from every continent.
At a ceremony Thursday morning, the treaty establishing the International Criminal Court will receive the crucial 60th ratification, triggering its entry into force in less than three months.
Ten nations will deposit their ratifications at the United Nations - Bosnia, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Congo, Ireland, Jordan, Mongolia, Niger, Romania and Slovakia. This will bring the number of ratifications from 56 to 66, but all 10 nations will go down as number 60 in order to spread the honor.
For many countries and organizations, the establishment of the court is a historic milestone, the culmination of years of campaigning to ensure that the perpetrators of the worst crimes committed by individuals are brought to justice.
For the Bush administration, however, the court is an unwelcome addition to the international legal establishment.
Even though then President Clinton signed the treaty, the United States has refused to ratify it, fearing its citizens would be subject to frivolous or politically motivated prosecutions.
Washington has campaigned unsuccessfully to exempt U.S. soldiers and officials, and two weeks ago the Bush administration said it was considering "unsigning" the treaty to stress that it won't be bound by its provisions. It is the only vocal opponent of the court.
The 1998 treaty establishing the court has been signed by 139 countries - and supporters have pledged to keep campaigning to make it universal. Richard Dicker, director of the International Justice Program at Human Rights Watch, said "signs are good" that 90 to 100 countries will have ratified the treaty by early next year.
"The International Criminal Court is potentially the most important human rights institution created in 50 years. It will be the court where the Saddam Husseins, Pol Pots and Agosto Pinochets of the future are held to account," Dicker said, referring to Iraq's president, Cambodia's late Khmer Rouge leader, and the former Chilean dictator.
Philippe Kirsch, chairman of the commission preparing for the court's operation and Canada's ambassador to Sweden, said he expects the court to become operational soon after the states that have ratified the treaty meet in early 2003 to select a prosecutor and judges.
The court will step in only when countries are unwilling or unable to dispense justice themselves for the most serious crimes committed by individuals: genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. It will have jurisdiction only over crimes committed after the treaty enters into force.
Cases can come to the court through a state that has ratified the treaty, the U.N. Security Council, or the court's prosecutor, who must get the approval of a three-judge panel.
Kirsch said he believes that, once the court shows it will act in "a very judicial and nonpolitical way," there will be less opposition.
"In my view, given the United States' tradition of commitment to international justice, it is a matter of time before there is some form of cooperation developing between the United States and an institution of this importance," he said.
The court will fill a gap first recognized by the U.N. General Assembly in 1948 following the Nuremberg and Tokyo trials for World War II's German and Japanese war criminals, respectively. Since then, laws and treaties have outlawed genocide, poison gas and chemical weapons, among other things, but no mechanism has held individuals criminally responsible.
 Load-Date: April 12, 2002

 

End of Document
