

Developments in the news industry for Oct. 4-11
The Associated Press
October 11, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 13067 words
Body




>+++++ CIA LEAK:
 
- New York Times reporter says she's reluctant to divulge confidential source
 
>+++++ NEWSPAPERS:
 
- Sun-Times moves out of 'scruffy' home, clearing way for demolition
 
- FBI investigating suspicious letters sent to newspapers
 
- Newspapers need to look beyond 'ink on paper,' executives say
 
- Hollinger to take $27 million charge for inflating circulation
 
- Hawaiian family buys minority interest in Star-Bulletin
 
- University of Northern Colorado, student paper settle budget cut lawsuit
 
>+++++ ELECTION-MEDIA:
 
- Democrats object to broadcaster's plan to run anti-Kerry documentary on 62 stations
 
- Bush and Kerry opened up for their town-hall debate
 
- Nielsen estimates 43.6 million viewers for vice presidential debate
 
>+++++ BROADCASTING:
 
- Move to raise indecency fines scuttled in Congress
 
- Rukeyser pulls plug on long-running financial show
 
- Central Texas radio station to dump CBS News
 
- General manager of WBUR-FM to resign
 
- NBC adds 5-second delay to NASCAR telecasts after Earnhardt vulgarity
 
>+++++ SATELLITE RADIO:
 
- Satellite radio takes off as new home of top shock jocks
 
>+++++ LIMBAUGH-MEDICAL RECORDS:
 
- Florida court rules Rush Limbaugh's medical records were properly seized
 
>+++++ ANTHRAX CASE-MEDIA:
 
- Judge admonishes government lawyers in anthrax lawsuit case
 
>+++++ FREE PRESS:
 
- California Supreme Court to decide if former convict's past was fair game
 
- Police, SW Missouri State newspaper at odds over crime photo
 
- N.H. judge denies release of financial forms in divorce cases
 
- California press freedom group honors two newspapers, reporter
 
>+++++ MAGAZINES:
 
- Ailing teen magazine YM will be shut down
 
>+++++ INTERNATIONAL:
 
- DirecTV to consolidate Latin American satellite units for $579 million
 
- Thomson specialist publications fetch $350 million
 
- Son of Colombian radio station owner gunned down in Cali
 
>+++++ GRAMLING AWARDS:
 
- AP announces nine staff winners for its 11th annual Gramling Awards
 
>+++++ PEOPLE:
 
- Silvestri named Richmond Times-Dispatch publisher
 
- Horton to retire as senior vice president of Scripps newspapers
 
- Walter, O'Connor named president, vice president at WREG-TV in Memphis
 
- Duff-Brown to head AP news operations in Canada
 
- Hartgen to step down as publisher in Twin Falls, Idaho
 
>+++++ DEATHS:
 
- Richard Ellison
 
- Lucrece Hudgins Beale
 
- Joyce Jillson
 
- Richard Reynolds
 
>+++++ NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
 
>+++++
CIA LEAK:
 
 
New York Times reporter says she's reluctant to divulge confidential source
 
NEW YORK (AP) - A New York Times reporter said Oct. 8 she is reluctant to divulge a confidential source to prosecutors investigating the leak of an undercover CIA officer's identify, even if the source permitted her to do so.
Judith Miller faces up to 18 months in jail for refusing to cooperate with prosecutors investigating the leak. Miller, who gathered material for a story she never wrote, was held in contempt Oct. 7 by a federal judge in Washington.
She said she would have to be certain the source's decision to be identified "is really voluntary" before she considered disclosing the source's name.
"Supposing the investigation is beyond this one source to other sources, whom I may not be able to ask how they feel," Miller said Oct. 8 on NBC's "Today" show. "The issue here is whether or not I'm going to protect them and our readers by being able to do my job."
U.S. District Judge Thomas F. Hogan said Miller could remain free while pursuing an appeal.
"We firmly believe we have the law on our side, that the First Amendment protects us from having to give this information," said Times Publisher Arthur Sulzberger, who appeared on "Today" with Miller.
He said journalists need a federal "shield law," such as those in 31 states that protect reporters from testifying about confidential sources.
Hogan called the case "a classic confrontation of conflicting interests," citing Supreme Court rulings that reporters do not have absolute First Amendment protection from testifying before grand juries about confidential sources.
The judge said there was ample evidence that U.S. Attorney Patrick Fitzgerald of Chicago, the special prosecutor in the CIA leak case, had exhausted other means of obtaining key testimony before issuing subpoenas to Miller and several other reporters. There was no evidence prosecutors were engaging in a "fishing expedition" with reporters, Hogan added.
"The special counsel has made a limited, deferential approach to the press in this matter," Hogan said. "Ms. Miller has no right to refuse to answer the questions she now refuses to answer."
Fitzgerald is investigating whether a crime was committed when someone leaked the identity of CIA officer Valerie Plame, whose name was published by syndicated columnist Robert Novak on July 14, 2003. Novak cited two "senior administration officials" as his sources.
The Novak column appeared after Plame's husband, former Ambassador Joseph Wilson, was critical in a newspaper opinion piece of President Bush's claim that Iraq sought to obtain uranium in Niger. The CIA had sent Wilson to Niger to investigate that claim, which he concluded was unfounded.
Wilson has said he believes his wife's name was leaked as payback for his outspokenness.
Miller's attorney, Floyd Abrams, said he planned to appeal.
>+++++
 
NEWSPAPERS:
 
 
Sun-Times moves out of 'scruffy' home, clearing way for demolition
 
CHICAGO (AP) - It may have brought some luster to the riverfront when it was built a half century ago, but today the Chicago Sun-Times building looks like it belongs there about as much as a barge at a yacht club.
On Oct. 8, the Sun-Times staff moved out of the newspaper's squat seven-story home, clearing the way for Donald Trump to demolish it and build a glitzy 90-story condominium and hotel tower that's more in keeping with what the riverfront has become.
"So much changed, and we became the scruffy house on the block," said David Roeder, who reports on commercial real estate for the paper.
There was never much talk about preserving the building that, as the story goes, was actually supposed to look like a river barge. It has long been denigrated as an ugly building, perhaps the ugliest in a city that prides itself on fine architecture.
But the building was also a big part of the history of Chicago journalism.
Legendary newsman Mike Royko worked there. So did Ann Landers. Bill Mauldin was working there when he drew a famous editorial cartoon of the Abraham Lincoln statue from the Lincoln Memorial grieving the assassination of President Kennedy.
As the Sun-Times staff packed up for the move farther up the river to another ordinary-looking building, there was little talk of wanting to stay in a place that everybody agrees had been allowed to fall apart.
"It's scarred, stained, the walls are grimy," said Dan Miller, the paper's business editor. "We are well rid of it, the neighborhood is well rid of it."
The condition of the building is also a reminder of the paper's recent troubles, including allegations that Conrad Black, the former CEO of parent company Hollinger International, conspired with associates to loot the newspaper company of more than $400 million - nearly all of its profits from 1997 through 2003.
"David Radler (the former publisher) and Conrad Black never invested in the place," Miller said. "The building was allowed to deteriorate."
If staffers were happy to be leaving a gray box where escalators don't run and the ladies room furniture hasn't changed in more than 30 years, the move still prompted plenty of nostalgic talk.
"I guess it's not a big deal, but it's a sad deal," said Jeanne Lambin, a former preservation planner with the Commission on Chicago Landmarks. "It is one of the last vestiges of the industrial river we used to have."
And it looks like a newspaper building. "It was used a lot (in movies and television shows) as a newspaper backdrop," said columnist Neil Steinberg.
Reporters say there was nothing better than writing a story and going to the lobby to watch the presses churn out the commuter edition of the paper.
But the paper has not been printed on site for a few years. "That romance has already left," reporter Jim Ritter said.
The building occupied by the Sun-Times since 1958 won't be demolished immediately. Russell Flicker, executive vice president with The Trump Organization, said that once the Sun-Times officially notifies the company it has moved out, demolition will take about four months.
Trump's planned building may be the kind of structure that fits into the neighborhood today, but Steinberg suggested that in its day the Sun-Times was not an eyesore, but an attraction.
"Whatever you think of the building now, in the '50s this is what people wanted," Steinberg said. "This was a jet age building."
>+++++ FBI investigating suspicious letters sent to newspapers
 
DETROIT (AP) - The FBI is investigating envelopes containing suspicious powder that were sent recently to several newspapers.
Among them was an envelope addressed simply to The News that was opened by a Detroit Newspapers' stockroom clerk on Oct. 5, The Detroit News reported the following day.
The envelope included a brown granular substance and a letter that claimed it was "snail poison," said Richard Karstensen, purchasing manager for the agency that handles business operations for The News and the Detroit Free Press.
Three News employees - including Karstensen - were exposed to the substance, but did not suffer any ill effects or undergo any treatment.
Tests hadn't been completed, but the material wasn't believed to be harmful, FBI Special Agent David Brooks said.
The letter received by the News bore a return address of an Arlington, Va., post office box and a Sacramento, Calif., postmark - as did some of the other letters, said FBI spokesman Jeff Tarpinian in Omaha, the field office leading the investigation.
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution and The Charlotte Observer received letters Oct. 4, officials at both newspapers said. The FBI was investigating.
No injuries have been reported.
The Cleveland Plain Dealer received a similar envelope Oct. 2, but the substance turned out to be onion powder and other seasonings.
A day earlier, The Des Moines Register received a package, prompting the evacuation of 70 employees. Tests confirmed the substance in that letter was the chemical Metaldehyde, possibly from snail poison.
>+++++
Newspapers need to look beyond 'ink on paper,' executives say
 
WHITE SULPHUR SPRINGS, W.Va. (AP) - The newspaper industry's future is bright, if it acknowledges that "ink on paper" is in permanent decline and broadens its vision to include multiple methods of delivery, several newspaper executives said Oct. 11. Without that acknowledgment, they said, the picture is dimmer.
"If we acknowledge that the core business is in decline, and put our efforts in the non-core business, we're going to be fine," said William Dean Singleton, vice chairman and chief executive officer of MediaNews Group Inc., a Denver-based company which operates 40 newspapers in nine states. "If we sit around and wait for the economy to recover, those people are going to die."
"The reality that we have to understand and to believe is that our core print product, that has been the bell cow all of our lives, is in decline and it's going to continue to be in decline," Singleton said. "If we are able to replace that with niche products, and niche product revenues, and online revenue continues to grow at the rate it's growing today, we're still going to have a fabulous business."
Singleton said the newspaper industry must define itself as "providing information to our communities and selling eyeballs to our advertisers."
Donna Barrett, chief operating officer of Community Newspaper Holdings Inc. in Birmingham, Ala., relayed the frustration of her 12-year-old son, who, trying to find some sport scores in a newspaper, said, "They're just so hard to use!"
The newspaper executives discussed the industry's future during the annual Southern Newspaper Publishers Association convention at The Greenbrier resort.
Statistics from the Pew Internet & American Life Project show that about 68 percent of American adults go online each day, with 27 percent of them using the Internet to get news, trailing only e-mail and "searching" as activities. The Pew research shows that online use is higher among younger people, a group that newspapers struggle to reach; it is also higher among people with more money.
Meanwhile, since 1985, daily newspaper circulation has declined from 62.8 million to 55.2 million last year, according to the Newspaper Association of America. The percentage of adults who read newspapers has dropped from 77.6 percent in 1970 to 54.1 percent.
While saying "ink on paper is going to generate most of the revenue and most of the profits for a long, long, long, time," David Paxton, president and chief executive of Paxton Media Group in Paducah, Ky., said, "the reality that we all have to face is that the long-term decline in circulation is probably not going to change. There's simply too much competition for our readers.
"The response to that has to be to focus on our brand," Paxton said.
J. Stewart Bryan III, chairman and chief executive of Media General Inc. in Richmond, Va., agreed, and told his fellow publishers, "our future has to be trying to broaden the distribution of the local information that we put out to people, and by broadening it, I mean multimedia."
"We have to be providers of news and information to people in any form that they want it, whether it's wireless, internet, print or broadcast," Bryan said.
Walter E. Hussman, president of WEHCO Media Inc. in Little Rock, Ark., also cautioned that newspapers need to provide different kinds of stories to go along with the e-mail, pager and Internet versions. "The next day's coverage needs to be a lot longer on context than just reporting the event," he said.
Barrett championed the work of the Readership Institute at Northwestern University's Media Management Center as a way for newspapers to not only gain readers, but their trust as well in the wake of recent scandals both in newsrooms and over circulation numbers.
The institute's studies list imperatives for improving readership, and "it's just what the doctor ordered," Barrett said.
---
On the Net: http://www.pewinternet.org 
http://www.naa.org 
http://www.snpa.org 
http://www.readership.org 
>+++++ Hollinger to take $27 million charge for inflating circulation
 
CHICAGO (AP) - Hollinger International Inc. said Oct. 5 it will take a pretax charge of $27 million to settle advertisers' lawsuits over inflated circulation numbers issued for years by the Chicago Sun-Times.
The company also said an investigation by its board of directors' audit committee had uncovered similar tactics used to falsify circulation totals at three other Hollinger-owned newspapers: The Jerusalem Post and two Chicago-area papers, The Daily Southtown and The Star, both based in Tinley Park.
The extent of the additional misstatements was not disclosed, although Hollinger said it did not a material impact on the company.
The disclosures came four months after Hollinger first announced a discrepancy with circulation at the Sun-Times. It said the overstatement - amounting to roughly 16 percent of circulation - was discovered when a new leadership team took over after Conrad Black stepped down as CEO of Hollinger International last November.
The Chicago law firm of Gardner Carton and Douglas and the accounting firm Deloitte and Touche also participated in the Hollinger investigation.
The company said the internal review showed that inflation of Sun-Times circulation began "modestly" in the 12-month period that ended in March 1997 and increased over time. Circulation was overstated by an average of 50,191 weekday copies and 17,318 Sunday copies during the April 2002-March 2003 period, the most recent reported by the Audit Bureau of Circulations, and continued to grow after that.
According to the company, three methods were used to manipulate circulation figures:
- The Sun-Times shifted the accounting for a number of returned newspapers from the days they went unsold to days when circulation statistics can go unreported if certain criteria are met. It also altered internal records in order to meet those standards.
- It compensated newspaper distributors for not returning unsold papers, which are the basis of circulation calculations.
- The newspaper steered its recycling proceeds into a charitable trust established to buy and distribute papers in local schools, a practice that had the effect of the Sun-Times purchasing its own newspapers.
The company said records were falsified at The Daily Southtown to increase the reported number of newspapers printed, and recycling proceeds were used to buy newspapers at both the Southtown and The Star.
Advertising and marketing officials at The Jerusalem Post also misrepresented that newspaper's circulation figures to advertisers, Hollinger said, although there is no independent audit agency that reports circulation figures for Israeli newspapers.
"We intend to ensure that all of Hollinger International's publications, led by the Chicago Sun-Times, establish and maintain best practices in accuracy and transparency in circulation figure reporting," said Gordon Paris, Hollinger's interim chairman and chief executive officer.
John Cruickshank, the Sun-Times' publisher, said the newspaper is working to resolve all advertiser claims.
>+++++ Hawaiian family buys minority interest in Star-Bulletin
 
HONOLULU (AP) - The owners of Hawaii's largest furniture retailer have acquired a minority interest in the Honolulu Star-Bulletin and Mid-Week.
A spokesman for the Wo family, Michael Wo, said the family is impressed with Canadian newspaper owner David Black's success and track record and feels confident about the local management team and leadership he has put in place.
Black is the majority owner of Oahu Publications, parent company of the Star-Bulletin and Mid-Week.
The Wo family owns C.S. Wo & Sons, headed by Robert Wo Sr., along with his sons Robert Jr., Wendell, Michael, Bennett and Scott.
The family joins several other local families that have invested in Oahu Publications.
Included are the Daniel Case family, Lawrence and Claire Johnson, Duane Kurisu, the Warren Luke family, Jeff and Lynn Watanabe, and Islands Holdings, represented by Colbert Matsumoto and Franklin Tokioka.
>+++++ University of Northern Colorado, student paper settle budget cut lawsuit
 
GREELEY, Colo. (AP) - The University of Northern Colorado's student newspaper will get its funding from subscription fees to settle a lawsuit filed over a 40 percent budget cut allegedly enacted as retribution for articles unfavorable to the student council.
The Mirror, an independent nonprofit organization that provides journalism experience to UNC students, will get $3.17 from each full-time student fee, according to the settlement reached Oct. 5. The money will be taken from existing student fees.
Several stories by the newspaper documented perceived violations of open meeting laws by the student run body, which also was the subject of a lawsuit previously settled by the university. Another article documented a council member's arrest for drunken driving.
The Mirror's funding will be restored to last year's level of about $35,000, with annual increases based on inflation. The university's Board of Trustees will review the arrangement every five years.
>+++++
ELECTION-MEDIA:
 
 
Democrats object to broadcaster's plan to run anti-Kerry documentary on 62 stations
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - The Democratic Party and 18 senators are objecting to a broadcasting company's plan to air on 62 TV stations a critical documentary about John Kerry's anti-war activities after he returned home from Vietnam three decades ago.
Sinclair Broadcast Group has asked its television stations - many of them in competitive states in the presidential election - to pre-empt regular programming to run the documentary as part of an hourlong program two weeks before the Nov. 2 election.
Based near Baltimore, the company owns or manages affiliates of major broadcast networks in several states, including Ohio, Florida and Pennsylvania.
Mark Hyman, a vice president of corporate relations for Sinclair who also is a conservative commentator for the company, said Oct. 11 the show would contain some or all of the 42-minute film as well as a panel discussion of some sort. He said final details had not been worked out.
The documentary, called "Stolen Honor: Wounds That Never Heal," chronicles Kerry's 1971 testimony before Congress and links him to activist and actress Jane Fonda. It includes interviews with Vietnam prisoners of war and their wives who claim that Kerry's testimony - filled with "lurid fantasies of butchery in Vietnam" on the part of U.S. troops - demeaned them and led their captors to hold them longer.
The Democratic National Committee said it planned to file a complaint with the Federal Election Commission contending that Sinclair's airing of the film should be considered an illegal in-kind contribution to President Bush's campaign. Also, 18 Democratic senators sent a letter to the Federal Communication Commission asking that it investigate whether Sinclair's plan was an improper use of public airwaves.
However, Sinclair's Hyman said, "The documentary is just a part of a special news event that we're putting together. We've invited one person to be a guest. That's Senator John Kerry." The company posted a note on its Web site on Oct. 11 urging people to call Kerry's headquarters to urge his participation.
Chad Clanton, a Kerry campaign spokesman, said, "Everything is on the table but it's hard to take an offer seriously from a group with such a fierce partisan agenda, a group that's clearly not interested in the truth."
Democratic National Committee Chairman Terry McAuliffe said the company was acting as a mouthpiece for the Republican Party rather than a legitimate news outlet.
"In this election cycle, they have put their money where their right-wing mouths are," he said. "Sinclair's owners aren't interested in news. They're interested in pro-Bush propaganda."
Campaign finance records show that the company's executives have donated thousands of dollars to Bush's campaign. In April, the company was in the news for refusing to run a "Nightline" show in which hundreds of names of American troops killed in Iraq were read by ABC anchor Ted Koppel.
Hyman called the allegations about the documentary "absolutely absurd."
"Would they suggest that our reporting a car bomb in Iraq is an in-kind contribution to the Kerry campaign? Would they suggest that our reporting on job losses is an in-kind contribution to the Kerry campaign?" he said. "It's the news. It is what it is. We're reporting the news."
Carlton Sherwood, a Vietnam veteran and former journalist who made the film, said Oct. 11 that he felt the media had not explored the period of Kerry's life after he returned from Vietnam, including when he testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee alleging atrocities in Vietnam.
"For 33 years, we've been saying that how Kerry portrayed us was utterly false. It was purgatory of the worst kind. It was slander," Sherwood said. "But no one wanted to talk about it. Everybody ran for cover."
Sherwood, based in Harrisburg, Pa., said the film took six weeks to make, and Sinclair contacted him last month upon the film's completion. He said he was told last week of the company's plans to run it, and that the company was not compensating him for the film.
>+++++ Bush and Kerry opened up for their town-hall debate
 
NEW YORK (AP) - President Bush and John Kerry were the stars, but 140 supporting players were what gave a welcome burst of life to the second presidential debate.
Those chosen voters, and the questions some of them got to ask, were what made the big difference Oct. 8 from the first debate eight days ago.
"Hats off to these questioners," NBC's Tim Russert said afterward. "They framed this election and this debate better than I've ever seen before."
Another advantage the town-hall format provided: It unleashed the presidential rivals from the lecterns of their first meeting, to actually move about the eye-popping red floor with their wireless mikes and engage with the citizens. (Even so, the audience, which had been cautioned to remain silent throughout the 90 minutes, at times seemed frozen in earnest attention, like wallpaper behind the candidates.)
Occasionally, the opponents engaged with each other in ways they had opted not to do in the first debate. Saddam Hussein "didn't have weapons of mass destruction, Mr. President," Kerry said sharply to Bush in one early confrontation.
This was a much-anticipated rematch after the Sept. 30 debate in Miami, where Kerry was widely credited with outperforming Bush in a tightly structured format with PBS' Jim Lehrer asking the questions.
In the televised theater-in-the-round at Washington University in St. Louis, ABC News' Charles Gibson served smoothly as moderator. With schoolmasterish half-frames propped on his nose, he identified each questioner, then let the exchange happen. More than once, he voiced a follow-up question.
Both candidates seemed to relish the chance to play to this group (and, afterward, to do what politicians do best, shake hands with everyone in reach).
Kerry seemed quite at home. Bush, clearly improved from the first debate, was fired up, too, though sometimes overheated in his delivery. After listening to Kerry at one point, he bulldozed through Gibson's setup, declaring, "I gotta answer this," and never looked back.
As with the first debate, reaction shots were interesting to note.
Once again, Kerry appeared composed, often scribbling notes as Bush responded to his questions.
Bush, who during the first debate had often been caught by the cameras looking peeved at things Kerry said, made a joking reference to it Friday: "That answer," he said when Kerry finished one response, "almost made me want to scowl."
Even so, he was still hardpressed to hide his feelings. At times he was seen in close-up listening, his eyes narrowed and lips pursed in annoyance.
Along with observing what the candidates would say and how they would say it, at least a few viewers came to the debate with a bizarre yet tantalizing issue to scope out: The cut of Bush's jacket across his back. And soon enough, anybody who wondered could conclude it was smooth and well-tailored.
This was in contrast to the first debate, when a rear-positioned camera glimpsed what, in replay, looked to be a rectangular lump between the President's shoulder blades and a cord traveling up to his right shoulder.
Just an incidental pucker in the fabric? Or instead could it have been a hidden receiver equipping Bush to take cues through an earpiece from someone offstage? That was the rumor zipping across the Internet, as reported by the webzine Salon.com.
The White House denied Bush had been wired.
After the town-hall debate, suspicious viewers found they'd have to probe elsewhere for intrigue.
>+++++ Nielsen estimates 43.6 million viewers for vice presidential debate
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Despite competition from the baseball playoffs, an estimated 43.6 million television viewers watched the vice presidential debate Oct. 5 between Dick Cheney and John Edwards, Nielsen Media Research said.
That's up from the 29.1 million people who saw Cheney take on Democrat Joe Lieberman in 2000, and reflects the heightened interest in the race.
Fox was the only major network not to carry the Cheney-Edwards debate. It was contractually required to show the New York Yankees-Minnesota Twins baseball playoff game, which had 8.5 million viewers.
The first presidential debate between George W. Bush and John Kerry attracted 62.5 million viewers.
It was the most-watched vice presidential debate since 1992, a three-way battle between Dan Quayle, Al Gore and Reform Party candidate James Stockdale, which had 51.2 million viewers. The only other vice presidential debate with a bigger audience was in 1984, when Geraldine Ferraro took on George Bush before 56.7 million people.
For the second debate in a row, more people watched on NBC, which had 11.5 million viewers. ABC had 10.3 million, CBS had 9.2 million, Fox News Channel had 7.8 million, CNN had 3.3 million and MSNBC had 1.5 million, Nielsen said.
>+++++
BROADCASTING:
 
 
Move to raise indecency fines scuttled in Congress
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - An effort in Congress to dramatically increase the fines federal regulators can slap on broadcasters for airing indecent material has failed, at least for now.
Lawmakers were considering raising the maximum fine from $32,500 to as much as $500,000 per incident, but that idea died last week when House and Senate negotiators couldn't reach agreement on a final plan.
The proposal stemmed from the uproar over Janet Jackson's breast-baring dance at the Super Bowl in February. The House voted to raise the fine to $500,000, while the Senate voted to increase it to $275,000 per incident, with a cap of $3 million per day.
House and Senate negotiators trying to reconcile differences between the two measures had agreed to compromise language that would have raised the fines to $500,000 per incident with a $3 million cap per day, according to two congressional aides, who spoke on condition of anonymity since the negotiations were in private.
The plan also would have given the Federal Communications Commission clear authority to fine artists and personalities for indecency on the public airwaves.
But the measure was scuttled because House and Senate negotiators could not agree on two other media measures attached to the legislation that included the fine increase.
One, offered by Sen. Byron Dorgan, D-N.D., would have blocked media ownership rules that the FCC adopted last year. Those rules, which critics say benefit huge media conglomerates, have been thrown out by a federal appeals court. The FCC is considering an appeal to the Supreme Court.
The other measure, by Sen. Ernest "Fritz" Hollings, D-S.C., would have required the FCC to study the V-chip and television ratings, and whether children were being protected from violence on TV.
"The conference decided to knock them all out. They have to be responsible for their decisions," Dorgan said Oct. 8. "I think they should have kept all three of those provisions in."
Support for hiking the indecency fines is overwhelming in the House and Senate, but the House Republican leadership has been cool to rolling back the ownership rules.
Gene Kimmelman, senior public policy director for Consumers Union, which publishes Consumer Reports magazine, blamed House GOP leaders for derailment of the indecency measure.
"After Congress claimed it was going to come down hard on indecent programming, it has once again failed to discipline the broadcast networks and it is the Republican leadership which has failed to follow through and effectively attack inappropriate programming on television," he said.
Sen. Sam Brownback, R-Kan., who sponsored the indecency fine hike, will try again, said spokesman Brian Hart.
FCC spokesman Richard Diamond declined to comment.
>+++++ Rukeyser pulls plug on long-running financial show
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Financial journalist Louis Rukeyser, who has been off television for a year because of cancer, has asked CNBC to end his long-running Friday night business news show.
CNBC said that "Louis Rukeyser's Wall Street," which has been airing with Consuelo Mack as substitute host, will cease production by the end of the year.
Rukeyser, 71, announced earlier this year that he had cancer in his lower back. He said Oct. 8 that complications had developed.
"I can no longer predict when I will be ready to rejoin you here," Rukeyser said.
Rukeyser lasted 32 years on the show, which started long before business news became popular. Most of that time it was on PBS, before the network fired him in 2002 in an attempt to update its format.
Angered by the move, Rukeyser shifted to CNBC and - to get back at his former employers - arranged to have his new show also aired on PBS stations. It was being shown on 162 PBS stations, a CNBC spokeswoman said.
He last appeared on his show last October.
"He is a true original and we, like his millions of fans, will deeply miss his wit, wisdom and our time together," said Pamela Thomas-Graham, CNBC president. "We send him all our best wishes for a full recovery."
>+++++ Central Texas radio station to dump CBS News
 
COLLEGE STATION, Texas (AP) - A Central Texas radio station is severing its ties with CBS News after receiving hundreds of complaints about the network's coverage of President Bush's military record.
Bryan-College Station radio station WTAW will begin airing national news from ABC within 90 days, station manager Ben Downs said.
About 350 people wrote to the station to complain about CBS' discredited "60 Minutes" report on Bush's National Guard service.
The network's Sept. 8 report focused on questionable memos that suggested Bush got preferential treatment because of his family ties. Anchor Dan Rather later offered an on-air apology on behalf of CBS News because the network could not authenticate the documents.
The apology wasn't enough for this station about 100 miles northwest of Houston.
"I don't think CBS has a defensible position on this," Downs said in the Oct. 6 online edition of the Bryan-College Station Eagle. "I feel a little checking would have found these were old claims."
WTAW features a lineup of conservative talk show hosts. It has aired national news from CBS at the top of the hour since the mid-1980s.
>+++++ General manager of WBUR-FM to resign
 
BOSTON (AP) - Jane Christo, longtime general manager of the Boston University-owned public radio station WBUR-FM, said Oct. 8 she's resigning.
Her resignation comes amid an investigation by the Rhode Island Attorney General's Office into the proposed sale of two affiliated radio stations in that state, and a separate internal probe by the university into allegations of mismanagement at WBUR.
The station said Christo notified the staff of the decision at a luncheon meeting.
"I am eternally grateful to the listeners, corporate and individual contributors, the staff of WBUR, and Boston University for the opportunity to have been a part of building something very special over the past 25 years," Christo said in a statement released by the station.
"However, the present controversy regarding my leadership of WBUR has become too large a distraction," she said. "I am confident that when concluded, the internal investigation will show that the allegations of improper conduct against me are baseless."
Christo became general manager in 1979. Since then, WBUR's weekly audience has grown from fewer than 80,000 to more than 500,000. The station produces several shows broadcast by other National Public Radio affiliates, including "Car Talk," "Only a Game," and "The Connection."
Boston University last month announced plans to sell its two public radio stations in Rhode Island, WRNI-AM and WXNI-AM, angering donors and listeners. Their complaints prompted Rhode Island Attorney General Patrick C. Lynch to investigate the sale, and raised questions about the management of the entire WBUR operation.
BU recently announced it was conducting its own internal investigation into allegations of wrongdoing at WBUR, including a charge that dozens of employees were patronage hires.
The station said an interim general manager will be appointed by university officials. Christo will continue working through a transition period.
>+++++ NBC adds 5-second delay to NASCAR telecasts after Earnhardt vulgarity
 
NEW YORK (AP) - NBC is adding a 5-second delay to its NASCAR telecasts after Dale Earnhardt Jr. used a vulgarity during a post-race TV interview.
"We're disappointed for our viewers to have to do this, but the delay provides a level of protection against anything inappropriate going out over the air," NBC Sports chairman Dick Ebersol said Oct. 7.
Earnhardt was docked 25 points in the Nextel Cup standings and fined $10,000 for his slip of the tongue in an NBC interview after his victory at Talladega Superspeedway, dropping him to second place with seven races left in the season. He will appeal the point penalty.
Federal regulators have cracked down on objectionable content on TV and radio since Janet Jackson's "wardrobe malfunction" during her halftime performance at the Super Bowl. CBS was fined a record $550,000 by the FCC for Jackson's breast-baring incident.
Networks have installed delays of up to 10 seconds for some programming, and ABC's "Monday Night Football" is using a 5-second delay this season. But, until now, NBC had decided not to give itself a chance to censor its NASCAR telecasts.
>+++++
SATELLITE RADIO:
 
 
Satellite radio takes off as new home of top shock jocks
 
NEW YORK (AP) - When radio shock jocks Opie and Anthony considered their next career move after two firings in four years, they were ready to feign rehabilitation. Or at least that was the plan when they sat down with satellite radio executives.
"We were trying to convince them that we're reformed now, we've learned our lesson," recalled Greg "Opie" Hughes, one-half of the deposed radio ratings juggernaut. "And we heard over and over again, 'Guys, just go crazy. Do whatever you want in there."'
Welcome to the future of American radio.
O&A - as they're known to a legion of fans - debuted last week on XM Satellite Radio, bringing their slice of boys' locker room life to every market from coast to coast. The industry's other big player, Sirius, then announced a $500 million deal with self-proclaimed "King of All Media" Howard Stern.
In an announcement Oct. 6 ripping the FCC and media conglomerate Clear Channel Communications Inc., Stern told his loyal audience of 12 million that he was abandoning traditional broadcasting. His debut on Sirius will come in January 2006, after Stern finishes the rest of his current deal with Infinity Broadcasting Corp., the radio subsidiary of MTV owner Viacom Inc.
"I'm tired of the censorship," said Stern, who was involved in the two biggest radio fines ever imposed by the FCC - including a record $1.75 million settlement reached four months ago. "The FCC … has stopped me from doing business."
Federal Communications Commission Chairman Michael Powell said "it is not surprising that notable performers and journalists are turning to a medium that allows them to paint with a broader palette."
Stern signed a five-year, multimillion dollar deal with Sirius, according to the company. Stern, along with airing his own morning show, will program two additional channels for the company as part of the "reinvention" of a 25-year career that spawned scores of imitators.
If satellite radio was off a lot of listeners' radar before last week, it now looms as large as the antenna atop the Empire State Building. One industry watcher expects more and more big-name defections from the AM and FM dials if the Federal Communications Commission crackdown on content continues.
"The ancient regulations that the FCC is imposing on terrestrial radio are out of step with reality, and definitely striking a blow against AM and FM radio's ability to remain culturally pertinent," said Michael Harrison, founder of the trade publication Talkers magazine.
Translation: the post-Janet Jackson broadcasting world, with its increased government scrutiny and million-dollar fines for ill-defined indecency, is the best recruiting tool for satellite radio since it began broadcasting three years ago.
Like cable television, satellite radio is not subject to federal indecency rules because it's provided only to paid subscribers. In the case of XM, the 2.5 million customers shell out $9.99 a month; at Sirius, more than 600,000 buyers pay $12.95 a month.
Both Stern and the O&A duo rejected lucrative offers to remain on traditional radio. Both said constant censorship from their employers and the FCC drove them off.
"I'm going because I choose to, not because I was forced out," Stern said after announcing his January 2006 switch to his current 12 million daily listeners. "They've lured radio's biggest star to satellite. It's attractive now to do satellite."
Even Hughes and partner Anthony Cumia, who loathe Stern after a lengthy on-air feud, agreed his decision lent more legitimacy to a business that could use the attention. Sirius has lost an estimated $1 billion since its launch.
"It's put the spotlight on satellite radio," Cumia said after the pair finished their first week of shows. "Just because personally he's an (expletive) doesn't mean he isn't a huge radio star."
The satellite stations have already provided a haven for acts with a far lower raunch factor than the shock jocks, including former NPR morning host Bob Edwards, who just debuted on XM.
For an act like Hughes and Cumia, this newfound license to "spread the virus" - their expression for luring new listeners - is a revelation.
In 1998, they were fired by a Massachusetts radio station after announcing the very-alive mayor of Boston was killed in a car crash. Four years later, they were fired in New York City after airing a live account of a couple having sex in St. Patrick's Cathedral.
---
On the Net:
http://www.sirius.com 
www.infinityradio.com 
>+++++
 
LIMBAUGH-MEDICAL RECORDS:
 
 
Florida court rules Rush Limbaugh's medical records were properly seized
 
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. (AP) - A Florida appeals court ruled Oct. 6 that prosecutors did not violate Rush Limbaugh's privacy rights when they paid a surprise visit to his doctors and seized his medical records for an investigation into his use of painkillers.
Investigators raided the doctors' offices last November to see if the conservative radio commentator had engaged in "doctor shopping," or illegally visiting several doctors to receive duplicate prescriptions.
Limbaugh, 53, has not been charged with a crime and the investigation had been at a standstill pending a decision on the medical records, which prosecutors have not yet been allowed to examine.
The 4th District Court of Appeal rejected Limbaugh's claim that his privacy rights trumped investigators' power to seize his records, and also said prosecutors did not have to notify him of their search warrants or give him an opportunity to challenge them.
"The state's authority to seize such records by a validly issued search warrant is not affected by any right of privacy in such records," the three-judge panel ruled.
Limbaugh's attorney said he will appeal.
"This was a fishing expedition from the outset to see if there was anything they could find to charge me with," Limbaugh said on his afternoon radio show. "There was no doctor-shopping, but it was my contention all along that I shouldn't have to give up my right to privacy to prove my innocence. That's not the way it works in this country."
He also said: "The issue here goes beyond me, actually. It goes to the privacy of everyone's medical records."
Prosecutors went after Limbaugh's medical records after learning that he received about 2,000 painkillers, prescribed by four doctors in six months, at a pharmacy near his Palm Beach mansion.
Limbaugh admitted his addiction to pain medication last October, saying it stemmed from severe back pain. He took a five-week leave from his afternoon radio show to enter a rehab program.
State Attorney Barry Krischer, a Democrat accused by Limbaugh of pursuing him for political reasons, said the ruling will allow the case to move forward.
"This office did not violate any of Mr. Limbaugh's rights, constitutional or statutory, but to the contrary acted in accord with Florida law," Krischer said.
Limbaugh was supported by an unlikely ally - the American Civil Liberties Union. Randall Marshall, legal director for the Florida ACLU, said the decision threatens the privacy rights of all Floridians.
If the ruling stands, Marshall said, "you would never have an opportunity to try and limit the information that police can go through."
---
On the Net:
Rush Limbaugh: http://www.rushlimbaugh.com 
Florida 4th District Court of Appeal: http://www.4dca.org 
>+++++
ANTHRAX CASE-MEDIA:
 
 
Judge admonishes government lawyers in anthrax lawsuit case
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - A judge admonished government lawyers Oct. 7 after being told officials investigating the 2001 anthrax attacks still are talking to the media about a bioterrorism expert who has not been charged in the case.
Dr. Stephen Hatfill has filed a defamation lawsuit against Attorney General John Ashcroft and other government authorities who publicly named him as a "person of interest" in the attacks. He said his reputation has been ruined and is seeking unspecified monetary damages.
At a hearing before U.S. District Judge Reggie Walton, Hatfill attorney Thomas Connolly said investigators continue to leak his client's name.
"I am troubled," Walton said, his voice escalating in anger. "It undermines what this country is about: that people are treated fairly."
"If they didn't have the information to indict him, it's wrong to drag his name through the mud. And if the innuendo and whisper campaign is continuing, that's what they're doing," he said. "That's not a government I want to be a part of. It's wrong, and you need to do something about it."
Justice Department attorney Elizabeth Shapiro responded that top Justice officials have told FBI investigators to control leaks.
Hatfill's lawsuit claims officials named him to deflect attention from their inability to find whoever was responsible for the October 2001 attacks, which killed five people and sickened 17 others. He still is the only publicly named "person of interest" in the case.
Hatfill worked as a researcher at the Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases at Fort Detrick in Frederick, Md. The facility housed the strain of anthrax found in the envelopes sent to the victims, though Hatfill maintains he never worked with the bacterium.
The FBI had Hatfill under 24-hour surveillance for months following the attacks and in one incident, agents in a vehicle trailing Hatfill ran over his foot on a Washington street. Government lawyers have said Ashcroft named Hatfill as a "person of interest" to dampen speculation that he was a suspect.
Justice Department officials have repeatedly sought delays in making FBI investigators available for depositions in preparation for trial on the lawsuit, citing the potential risk of disclosing sensitive information in an ongoing investigation.
Shapiro emphasized that government officials aren't opposed to providing written responses to Hatfill's attorneys.
Walton in March granted the government a six-month stay, but expressed impatience last week after Shapiro requested another six months.
Walton told both sides to reach an agreement in two weeks, or face a court order. He also ordered government lawyers to file a written response to Hatfill's allegations - made more than a year ago - within 30 days.
Under a proposal submitted to Walton by Hatfill, government investigators would be shielded from depositions for an additional six months. However, Justice officials would be asked to sign waivers of any confidentiality agreements with reporters, so that Hatfill may depose them for information about the leaks.
Shapiro countered that the proposal was too broad and overly coercive, and Walton said he wanted both sides to seek a compromise and report back to him on Oct. 21.
---
On the Net:
U.S. District Court: http://www.dcdcourts.gov 
>+++++
 
FREE PRESS:
 
 
California Supreme Court to decide if former convict's past was fair game
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - He served his prison time, married, bought a home and tried to put the past behind him.
Then, 13 years after Steve Gates pleaded guilty to being an accessory to murder, the Discovery Channel aired a program in 2001 called "The Prosecutors" that retold the story behind the shooting of Gates' employer.
Gates, whose name and mug shot were broadcast nationwide, has sued Discovery Communications Inc. and New Dominion Pictures for invasion of privacy, saying he is no longer a public figure and therefore should be left alone.
Media lawyers countered that the criminal case is public record.
The California Supreme Court heard arguments Oct. 5 on whether the show had the right to air the resurrected details.
The question at the heart of the case is, "can a person, once a public figure because of his own bad conduct, ever regain his privacy by returning to a life of obscurity," said lawyer Niles Sharif, who argued Gates' case before the state Supreme Court.
"Or does the First Amendment trump his right to privacy so that he is forever fair game for the media?" the lawyer said.
Sharif argued that the time that passed between the crime and the re-airing of details meant the information about Gates was no longer newsworthy and therefore was outside First Amendment protection.
Attorney Louis Petrich, who represented Discovery, replied that once a fact is in the public record, it's public, protected by the First Amendment and publishable - regardless of how old it is.
A San Diego County Superior Court judge previously threw out a defamation claim by Gates but allowed the invasion of privacy suit to proceed. Discovery contested that ruling and convinced an appeals court to throw out the privacy case.
The state Supreme Court has agreed to review that ruling. A decision is expected within 90 days.
>+++++ Police, SW Missouri State newspaper at odds over crime photo
 
SPRINGFIELD, Mo. (AP) - Police investigating the theft of a flag from a political rally seized the memory card from a student journalist's digital camera but later returned it without reproducing a photograph showing the incident.
Amanda Stratford, photo editor of Southwest Missouri State University's student newspaper, the Standard, covered a rally on campus Oct. 3 for Democratic state House candidate Bill Sczepanski and photographed the theft of the flag.
At the time, she said, she was not aware a crime was taking place. So when she heard police and security officers talking about the flag, she showed them her photograph.
Officers seized the memory card after the paper's faculty adviser, Wanda Brandon, refused to hand it over or give police a printed copy of the photo.
"The police should not just automatically try to take something without considering whether they have the right to do it," Brandon told the Springfield News-Leader.
Police returned the memory card Oct. 5 on the advice of Greene County Prosecutor Darrell Moore.
Moore also recommended that officers not execute a search warrant allowing them to copy the photograph from the card.
"I'm glad we got we got the card back," Brandon said. "I'm waiting for an apology."
Police Chief Lynne Rowe, however, said people have a "civic duty" to help solve crimes.
"What you're really looking at here is a victim who's making a complaint to the police and a citizen who possesses material information that would solve that crime," Rowe said. "You know, it's civic duty at that point for the citizens to be involved."
An attorney and legal consultant for the Arlington, Va.-based Student Press Law Center said police violated the federal Privacy Protection Act. That law sharply limits police confiscation of journalists' materials unless they contain information that could prevent the loss of life.
Jean Maneke, an attorney who represents the Missouri Press Association, said officers might have been within their rights.
"My concern with the situation is that while there are First Amendment issues in all of this, if indeed this involves a crime - and by that I'm talking about a stolen flag, a stolen piece of personal property - then there are some cases out there that hold that while journalists have some First Amendment rights, when they are a witness to a crime, they lose that First Amendment protection because they are a first-party witness," Maneke said.
The Standard's editor, Dee Dee Nilson, said police could have access to the picture when the newspaper published it on its Web site. The picture was online on Oct. 6.
>+++++
N.H. judge denies release of financial forms in divorce cases
 
CONCORD, N.H. (AP) - A judge has denied a request from news organizations to suspend a law that closes to the public all financial documents filed in a divorce, child support or custody case.
The media organizations argued that public access to court records is essential to keeping legal proceedings fair and is protected under the state constitution. They asked that the law that took effect Aug. 10 be set aside pending review.
Merrimack County Superior Court Judge Edward Fitzgerald disagreed, saying the preservation of the right to privacy regarding the financial records is a "compelling interest." He wrote that the law doesn't violate either the state or U.S. constitution.
In his order dated Oct. 4, Fitzgerald cited a statement from Republican state Sen. Robert Clegg advocating passage of the bill.
Clegg said the amendment seeks a balance "between a person having a right to privacy and the public having a right to know. … The amendment neither forecloses an opportunity to open financial documents that may come to light in a high-profiled divorce case, nor does it leave to a judge's discretion alone, that documents remain sealed."
The media also argued that the denial of access to court records falls under the judicial branch, not the legislative. The state had argued during a hearing in August that the law doesn't usurp judicial authority.
Fitzgerald wrote that many other types of court records are sealed by statute, such as juvenile deliquency, abuse and neglect and adoption cases. He noted that the law contains a provision allowing the public to petition the court for access to the sealed financial information.
The Concord Monitor, The Keene Sentinel, Valley News, Portsmouth Herald, The Telegraph of Nashua, The Associated Press, the New Hampshire Association of Broadcasters and WMUR-TV sued.
Larry Laughlin, The Associated Press' northern New England bureau chief, called the ruling a disappointment and said media organizations are considering an appeal, which would have to be filed within 30 days.
William Chapman, lawyer for the news groups, said Fitzgerald appears to have overlooked a State Supreme Court decision recognizing that divorce cases take place in "a public forum, and consequently many private family and marital matters become public."
>+++++ California press freedom group honors two newspapers, reporter
 
BERKELEY, Calif. (AP) - The California First Amendment Coalition on Oct. 9 recognized two newspapers and a veteran reporter among those who received honors for fighting to provide public access to information.
A community Web site and public officials in San Diego and Santa Clara County also were among the winners of six Beacon Awards. The honors went to:
- The Contra Costa Times for its aggressive pursuit of government information, including a survey exposing routine violations of the California Public Records Act by public agencies. In addition, the Times filed suit against the city of Oakland to obtain the names of city employees making more than $100,000 a year.
- The Oakland Tribune for its attempts to expose the problems of the manufacturer of electronic voting devices widely used in California, resisting a prior restraint threat in the process.
- Denny Walsh of The Sacramento Bee for a career spent rooting out information that public officials did not want to see in print, from deals that enriched politicians to special treatment from the federal judiciary for well-placed figures.
- A Web site called www.watchourcity.com, an electronic effort to get information to residents about spending, special favors and questionable practices of the government of Huntington Park.
The California First Amendment Coalition was formed 16 years ago to protect the First Amendment and the public's right to know and its access to public agencies.
>+++++
 
MAGAZINES:
 
 
Ailing teen magazine YM will be shut down
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Having abandoned an attempt to turn around the fortunes of YM, an ailing magazine targeted at teens, publisher Gruner + Jahr USA announced Oct. 6 that it would sell YM's assets to publishing giant Conde Nast Publications.
Rather than try to revive YM, which has been rapidly losing subscribers and advertising, Conde Nast instead plans to shutter magazine and use YM's list of subscribers to bolster its own rapidly growing teen title, Teen Vogue.
Conde Nast said the December/January issue would be YM's last. Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. Both companies are privately held.
The deal is part of an effort by G+J's CEO Russell Denson to reshape the publisher following the ouster earlier this year of Dan Brewster, who was fired following a court battle with talk show host Rosie O'Donnell over the failure of her self-titled magazine.
Denson joined G+J, a unit of the German media conglomerate Bertelsmann AG, in May from the Reiman Media Group, a highly profitable unit of Reader's Digest Association Inc. that publishes folksy magazines on rural life.
G+J had announced this May that it would cut YM's guaranteed circulation base to 1.5 million from 2 million, reduce its frequency to 11 times per year, and attempt to reposition the magazine in the hotly competitive market for teen magazines.
But Denson told staffers last month the company would explore a sale of YM instead in order to focus on the company's other titles, which include Child, Family Circle, Fast Company and Inc. In a note to employees on Oct. 6, Denson said the sale would allow G+J to "focus our resources on our core magazines and markets."
The shutdown of YM will result in the layoff of about 60 staffers, according to a person familiar with the matter who didn't want to be named. That follows the layoff of 80 people last month at the publisher as part of a cost-cutting effort.
YM had been struggling to keep its place in the teen market, which has giants such at Teen People, Seventeen, and Elle Girl. In the year-to-date through August, YM has lost 42 percent of its ad pages, a key measure of health for a magazine, according to the Publishers Information Bureau.
>+++++
INTERNATIONAL:
 
 
DirecTV to consolidate Latin American satellite units for $579 million
 
EL SEGUNDO, Calif. (AP) - DirecTV Group Inc. said Oct. 11 it will pay $579 million to consolidate satellite operations in Brazil, Mexico and elsewhere in Latin America.
The deal is part of a series of transactions announced to stanch losses at DirecTV.
DirecTV will close the operations of Galaxy Mexico, its Mexican affiliate. Galaxy Mexico has sold its subscriber lists to Sky Mexico in exchange for a note.
As of June 30, DirecTV had about 266,000 subscribers in Mexico and Sky Mexico had about 940,000 subscribers.
DirecTV will fold DirecTV Brasil into the Sky Brasil network.
DirecTV will be issued shares representing 30 percent of the combined entity. DirecTV will acquire News Corp.'s and Liberty Media's stakes in Sky Brasil, giving it a 72 percent interest.
As of June 30, DirecTV had about 423,000 subscribers in Brazil. Sky Brasil had about 806,000.
DirecTV will acquire the interests of Globo, Televisa, News Corp. and Liberty Media in Sky Multi-Country Partners in Chile and Columbia.
About 89,000 Sky subscribers in Colombia and Chile will migrate to DirecTV.
DirecTV swung to a second-quarter loss of $13.3 million, or a penny a share, on revenue of $2.64 billion, as one-time charges outweighed increases in subscribers and revenue.
DirectTV, formerly Hughes Electronics, is 34 percent owned by Fox Entertainment Group, which is about 82 percent owned by News Corp.
>+++++ Thomson specialist publications fetch $350 million
 
TORONTO (AP) - Thomson Corp. announced Oct. 8 that it had reached a deal to sell a group of specialist publications including American Banker and Accounting Today to an investment company called Investcorp S.A. for $350 million.
The sale extends the evolution of Thomson, once Canada's largest newspaper publisher and former owner of The Times of London, into an all-electronic purveyor of information to financial, legal, scientific and other professionals.
Investcorp, a global investment firm with $8.6 billion in assets, will pay cash in the transaction, which is expected to close by the end of the year.
Thomson Media had revenue of $170 million last year, serving 750,000 clients with publications and databases. Its other titles include The Bond Buyer, National Mortgage News, Investment Dealers' Digest, Financial Planning, DM Review, Accounting Technology and Practical Accountant.
Jim Malkin, the CEO of Thomson Media, will continue to head the unit after the sale. Thomson Corp. is formally based in Toronto but has its executive headquarters in Stamford, Conn.
>+++++ Son of Colombian radio station owner gunned down in Cali
 
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - An unidentified gunman killed the son of the owner of a popular chain of Colombian radio stations early Oct. 11 in the crime-filled city of Cali, the victim's father said.
Johnny Pava, 28, was killed shortly after stepping out of his vehicle to enter a nightclub, said his father, Humberto Pava, who owns Super de Colombia, a chain of radio stations. The son was the director of a Cali music station.
"A young man came up to him and shot him in the head and then shot him again on the ground," Pava told reporters.
There was no clear motive for the crime, said his father, who is also a former congressman.
Cali, a city of 2 million residents located 190 miles southwest of Bogota, has the highest crime rate in the country with 1,705 homicides so far this year, according to the police.
>+++++
 
GRAMLING AWARDS:
 
 
AP announces nine staff winners for its 11th annual Gramling Awards
 
NEW YORK (AP) - The Associated Press has named nine staff members from around the world as winners of its 2004 Gramling Awards for excellence.
The honorees include a correspondent who faces daily challenges covering the news in Myanmar, a producer who has been the linchpin of AP's television coverage in Iraq, a Washington journalist who routinely uses source reporting, technology and strategic thinking to consistently put the AP ahead on major breaking stories, and a technology expert who is helping lead APTN's conversion to digital production.
The Oliver S. Gramling Awards, now in their 11th year, are given annually to staff members whose work and initiative contribute significantly to the news report and to overall AP operations. The awards are named for Oliver S. Gramling, an AP newsman and executive who in 1941 developed AP's first radio wire. Gramling bequeathed his estate to AP when he died in 1992, with instructions it be used for AP staff members nominated for excellence by their colleagues. A committee of bureau and department managers selected the winners.
This year's winners:
- $10,000 Gramling Journalism Awards: Rangoon-based Correspondent Aye Aye Win for her daily coverage of Myanmar under difficult circumstances, and Washington reporter Ted Bridis for putting the AP ahead on a wide range of major breaking stories such as the Abu Ghraib prison torture scandal and the decision in the Microsoft anti-trust case with a blend of source reporting, technology and strategic thinking.
- $10,000 Gramling Achievement Awards: London-based APTN Head of Technology and Strategic Products David Hoad for helping lead APTN's conversion to digital production and other projects, and Baghdad-based APTN Senior Producer Ahmed Sami for being the linchpin of the company's television coverage in Iraq for a decade and significantly contributing this year to AP's print, photo and radio newsgathering efforts.
- $3,000 Gramling Spirit Awards: New York-based National Writer Jerry Schwartz, who wrote the "AP Reporting Handbook," for embodying the spirit of the AP by sharing his insights with any colleague around the world who calls and asks for guidance on issues ranging from writing and editing to personal concerns; Los Angeles Assistant Chief of Bureau Andy Lippman for his decades-long devotion to the company, his work and his colleagues; and Lisa Matthews, All News Radio Editor for the Broadcast News Center in Washington, for her daily dedication to the AP's mission of cooperation and her exceptional and enthusiastic service to colleagues around the globe and member broadcasters.
- $3,000 Gramling Scholarship Awards: Chicago-based Business Writer David Carpenter, who will use his award to participate in the Financial Decision Making certificate program at the University of Chicago's Graham School of General Studies, and Omaha-based Nebraska News Editor Kia Breaux Randle, who will use her award toward a Master of Science in Management degree at Baker University in Overland Park, Kan.
Founded in 1848, The Associated Press is the world's oldest and largest newsgathering organization, providing content to more than 15,000 news outlets with a daily reach of 1 billion people around the world. Its multimedia services are distributed by satellite and the Internet to more than 120 nations.
>+++++
PEOPLE:
 
 
Silvestri named Richmond Times-Dispatch publisher
 
RICHMOND, Va. (AP) - Media General Inc. has named Thomas A. Silvestri president and publisher of its flagship newspaper, the Richmond Times-Dispatch.
Silvestri, who succeeds J. Stewart Bryan III on Jan. 1, will become the first publisher outside the family since 1887, when Bryan's great-grandfather, Joseph Bryan, assumed control of a predecessor to the newspaper, the Daily Times. Bryan will remain chairman and chief executive of Media General.
Bryan, 66, succeeded his father, D. Tennant Bryan, as publisher of the Times-Dispatch and The Richmond News Leader in 1978 and then became chairman and chief executive of Media General in 1990. But after the two newspapers merged in '92, he said, he spent more of his time on the parent company.
"It is now time for the next generation of leadership to take the Richmond Times-Dispatch to new heights," Bryan said Oct. 5.
Since January 2002, Silvestri has been president of Media General's community newspapers, which includes 20 dailies, several weeklies and Virginia Business magazine. The company has not announced his replacement.
Silvestri, 49, joined the Times-Dispatch in 1982 and served in various editing positions for 16 years. In 1998, he was promoted to director of news synergy and editor of the Media General News Bank, where he developed a shared-content network for the company's newsrooms. In 2000, he became vice president of community newspapers and then became senior vice president of community newspapers.
Media General also announced that Albert T. "Tappy" August III, president and general manager of the Times-Dispatch, will retire at the end of 2004. August, 64, has managed the newspaper's day-to-day operations since 1994.
The company does not plan to fill the general manager position.
Media General owns 26 television stations and 24 dailies in the Southeast, including The Tampa (Fla.) Tribune and the Winston-Salem (N.C.) Journal. It has a 20 percent interest in The Denver Post.
>+++++ Horton to retire as senior vice president of Scripps newspapers
 
CINCINNATI (AP) - Alan M. Horton, who oversaw an expansion of the E.W. Scripps Co.'s newspaper holdings and development of their Internet businesses, will retire Dec. 31 as senior vice president of Scripps newspapers.
Horton, 61, has spent all but five of the past 40 years with Scripps.
During his tenure, Scripps added newspapers in Texas, South Carolina, Kentucky, Florida and Colorado. The company helped form an operating agreement with The Denver Post and its parent company, MediaNews Group, preserving the Scripps-owned Rocky Mountain News in Denver.
Richard A. Boehne, 48, executive vice president of Scripps, will be responsible for day-to-day management of the newspaper division after Horton retires. Boehne, a former business reporter and editor at The Cincinnati Post, joined Scripps' corporate office in 1988.
During his career, Horton has been a reporter at The Cincinnati Post and The Cleveland Press; a national correspondent for the Scripps Howard News Service; managing editor of The Evansville (Ind.) Press, and editor of the Naples (Fla.) Daily News.
He was general manager of a Scripps and Knight Ridder joint venture in Pittsburgh that experimented with electronic delivery of information via personal computer and headed a Los Angeles-based group of 24 nondaily newspapers.
Scripps has daily and community newspapers in 17 markets. Its operations also include 10 broadcast television stations; the Home & Garden Television, Fine Living, Food Network and DIY - Do-It-Yourself cable channels; Scripps Howard News Service and United Media, which licenses and syndicates the Peanuts and Dilbert comic strips.
---
On the Net:
http://www.scripps.com 
>+++++ Walter, O'Connor named president, vice president at WREG-TV in Memphis
 
MEMPHIS, Tenn. (AP) - The New York Times Co. Broadcast Media Group has promoted Ronald Walter to president and general manager of WREG-TV in Memphis and named Maureen O'Connor executive vice president and station manager.
Walter, 55, was previously executive vice president and station manager at WREG-TV and group vice president of government and cable affairs. He joined WREG in 1987 as director of marketing, production and client services.
O'Connor, 47, joined the station and the Media Group in December 1998 as a general sales manager. Before that, she managed The New York Times advertising department's Memphis office.
Walter's job previously was held by Robert H. Eoff, who was promoted to group president last month.
Toby Usnik, spokesman for The New York Times Co., said Walter will remain the company's vice president of government and cable affairs. O'Connor's replacement has not yet been named, Usnik said.
The New York Times Co., which had revenues of $3.2 billion last year, includes The New York Times, the International Herald Tribune, The Boston Globe, 16 other newspapers, eight network-affiliated television stations, two New York City radio stations and more than 40 Web sites.
---
On the Net:
http://www.nytco.com 
>+++++ Duff-Brown to head AP news operations in Canada
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Beth Duff-Brown, chief of bureau for The Associated Press in New Delhi since 2000, has been named the AP's new chief of bureau in Toronto.
The appointment was announced Oct. 6 by Deborah Seward, AP's international editor.
In her new post, Brown succeeds Tom Cohen, who is on leave.
Duff-Brown, 47, joined the AP in 1990 in Miami and transferred to the International Desk three years later. She moved to Abidjan, Ivory Coast, in 1995 and was named bureau chief in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, two years later.
A native of California, Duff-Brown graduated from Northwestern University with a master's in journalism.
>+++++ Hartgen to step down as publisher in Twin Falls, Idaho
 
TWIN FALLS, Idaho (AP) - Stephen Hartgen, publisher of The Times-News for the past 15 years, is stepping down to take over a sister publication in central Idaho's Wood River Valley.
Hartgen will become publisher and editor of the Wood River Journal in Hailey, a weekly with a circulation of about 12,000. It is one of seven regional publications acquired earlier this year by The Times-News' parent company, Iowa-based Lee Enterprises.
Kim Patterson, former Times-News senior sales representative who became publisher of the Wood River Journal when Lee purchased the paper last spring, will stay on as general manager and marketing director, with responsibility for sales development.
Brian Kardell of Iowa, Lee's vice president for production and the company's chief information officer, will be acting publisher in Twin Falls during a nationwide search for Hartgen's successor.
Kardell said readers won't see big changes in the daily as he guides it through the transition.
>+++++
 
In other changes in the news industry:
 
- Tom Murray, a former managing editor of The Joplin (Mo.) Globe, is the new managing editor of The Daily Union in Junction City, Kan. He replaces Andy Obermueller. Murray, who worked at the Globe for 34 years, was managing editor there from 1982 to 1998.
- Matt Merritt, former city and education reporter at the Austin (Minn.) Daily Herald, is taking on the role of managing editor. Merritt, who has been at the Herald since February 2003, replaces Dan Fields, who left to become editor of The Sanford (N.C.) Herald.
>+++++
DEATHS:
 
 
RICHARD ELLISON, 80, a television producer whose documentaries about the Vietnam War and suicide stirred public debate and won him several Emmy Awards, Oct. 8 at his home in Kingston, Mass., of a neurological disease.
Ellison was best known for his 13-part series "Vietnam: A Television History," of which he was executive producer. The program, a product of six years of work by Ellison and journalist Stanley Karnow, was broadcast on public television in 1983.
Though it was critically acclaimed and won six National Emmy Awards - along with two individual Emmys for Ellison - conservatives accused it of falling too favorably on the side of the North Vietnamese. PBS agreed to air a two-hour rebuttal to the series in 1985.
Ellison also produced "Choosing Suicide," a 1980 documentary about a cancer patient who decided to kill herself. More than a dozen PBS stations opted not to show the film because of its sensitive subject matter.
His other television credits include "CBS Reports," "Bandwagon" and "Look Up and Live."
>+++++
LUCRECE HUDGINS BEALE, 90, who wrote a fanciful Christmas column for The Associated Press for many years in the mid-20th century, Oct. 6 at her home in Washington of complications from lymphoma.
Known as Lu, Mrs. Beale was the widow of William L. Beale Jr., who was news editor of the AP's Washington bureau when she arrived in 1941. He was chief of bureau from 1949 until his retirement 20 years later. William Beale died in 2002.
Born in Portsmouth, Va., Lu Beale began her journalism career in Massachusetts as a feature writer with the Boston Sunday Post in 1937. She joined the AP at its New York headquarters, and from there moved to Washington.
She published her first Christmas story on Dec. 7, 1942. Each story moved in 17 chapters, from Dec. 7-Dec. 24, and became a 27-year tradition.
The stories generally involved problems that faced Santa Claus as he tried to meet his Christmas Eve deadline.
>+++++
JOYCE JILLSON, 58, author of a nationally syndicated astrology column who also divined the stars on behalf of the Reagan administration, Oct. 1 in Los Angeles of kidney failure.
Her daily astrology column has appeared in nearly 200 newspapers, including the Los Angeles Times and the New York Daily News.
In 1988, Jillson was linked to the Reagan White House after former chief of staff Donald T. Regan wrote in a book that Nancy Reagan consulted astrologers.
Jillson contended she advised Reagan campaign aides to select George H.W. Bush as Reagan's running mate in 1980. Jillson also said she "spent a lot of time" at the White House after the March 1981 assassination attempt on the president.
Holiday Mathis, who had been Jillson's apprentice and editor since 1991, had been co-writing the astrology column the past few months, Creators Syndicate said.
Jillson and Mathis wrote in advance and the columns they prepared will run through Nov. 6. Starting Nov. 7, the horoscopes will be renamed "Horoscopes by Holiday," but their format will remain the same.
>+++++
RICHARD REYNOLDS, 61, a Nebraska broadcaster and journalist for four decades, Oct. 10 in Kearney, Neb., of prostate cancer.
Reynolds started in radio at WLEW in Bad Axe, Mich., but his career later took him to South Dakota and Nebraska.
He announced sports and news for KOGA radio in Ogallala, KODY Radio in North Platte and KRVN radio in Lexington.
Reynolds also was an anchor and reporter for KNOPTV from 1992 until 1997, when he returned to Michigan for a job in television. He later returned to Nebraska to write for the North Platte Telegraph.
>+++++
 
NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
 
 
Martha Stewart reported to a federal prison in Alderson, W.Va., before sunrise Oct. 8 to begin serving a five-month sentence for lying about a stock sale, slipping all but unnoticed past waiting supporters and reporters. While in prison, Stewart will forgo five months of her $900,000 yearly base pay from her company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia. Behind bars, Stewart will be eligible for jobs that pay 12 cents to 40 cents an hour. … Hak Haskins, managing editor of The Herald in Jasper, Ind., will heading to Kuwait this month but not for a journalistic assignment. The longtime Army reservist has been activated for what he expects to be a yearlong deployment in the Army's public affairs office in the Middle Eastern nation. It won't be his first deployment - his most recent overseas stint was to Bosnia in 1996. … About 150 diplomats, politicians, artists and others paid tribute at a concert in Karachi by Pakistani musicians to Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl, who was slain in the city by Islamic militants. Pearl was kidnapped and beheaded in Karachi in 2002 while researching a story on Islamic militancy. Pakistani vocalist Farooq Ahmed, accompanied by guitarist Amir Zaki, sang of tolerance, peace and harmony during the heavily guarded concert Oct. 4 at the U.S. consular general's residence. … The first edition of the new Lakota Times has rolled off the presses on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota. Amanda Takes War Bonnet, editor and publisher, said the publication will stress positive news and have a local emphasis. She was part of the staff for the original Lakota Times, which was founded on the reservation in 1981 and later became a national publication called Indian Country Today. … Hurricane season has battered Florida, but it's been more than kind to The Weather Channel, which posted its biggest ratings month in history for September. The network posted a single-day record, reaching 1.9 million households the day before Hurricane Ivan made landfall. The next day, as Ivan roared ashore, The Weather Channel beat all other news channels, including CNN and Fox News. … The Sheriff's Department in Rock County, Wis., must release reports about jail officers accused of viewing pornography on county computers, a state appeals court ruled Oct. 7. The decision was a victory for The Janesville Gazette, which sought the reports under the state open records law from the department's internal investigation of the employees.
>+++++
 Load-Date: October 13, 2004

 

End of Document
