

Developments in the news industry for Jan. 27-Feb. 3:
The Associated Press
February 3, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 11663 words
Body




SPACE SHUTTLE DISASTER:
 
- Images on TV tell viewers what happened before official word
 
- Newspapers, newsmagazines scramble to cover shuttle disaster
 
AOL TIME WARNER:
 
- Turner exits; AOL Time Warner loses $ 99 billion last year
 
- Turner departure raises questions about the future of CNN
 
WICK TEMPLE:
 
- AP vice president for membership dies at age 65
 
FOURTH-QUARTER EARNINGS:
 
- Disney earnings drop despite stronger TV, theme park figures
 
- Ad resurgence helps Tribune's net rise 87 percent
 
- New York Times Co. posts 45 percent profit rise
 
- Media General posts higher profit
 
- Pulitzer earnings up sharply
 
- McClatchy reports higher earnings in fourth quarter
 
- Journal Register earnings rise 50 percent
 
WAR COVERAGE:
 
- Reporters wary of Pentagon's promise of access to troops
 
NEWSPAPERS:
 
- Lincoln Journal Star bans 'Redskins'
 
- Former editor sues Variety for alleged gay discrimination
 
BROADCASTING:
 
- Senate committee reviewing radio ownership concentration
 
- Judge dismisses suit against Clear Channel
 
- ABC wins bidding war to Michael Jackson documentary
 
- Jury finds in favor of fired Honolulu TV news reporter
 
- Dismissed TV producer files religion-in-workplace lawsuit
 
INTERNET:
 
- Survey: Public considers Internet more important than ever
 
- Pentagon, tech. companies reach deal on wireless Internet
 
COURTS-FREE PRESS:
 
- Broadcasters request cameras in court for Malvo trial
 
- Ky. judge unseals church abuse records
 
- Iowa newspaper, college settle open meetings lawsuit
 
INTERNATIONAL:
 
- Journalists tell of hostage ordeal in Colombia
 
- Six men convicted of murdering Mozambican journalist
 
- Official seeks shutdown of Zimbabwe's only independent paper
 
- Pakistani scholar detained for U.S. immigration violation
 
- Journalists from Russia's NTV protest management shakeup
 
- Kazakh journalist convicted
 
- New Zealand tabloid closes two weeks after debut
PEOPLE:
 
- Cornog named publisher of CJR; Laventhol named chairman
 
- Former Men's Health editor to head TV Guide
 
- Trahant named P-I's editorial page editor
 
- Howard Goldberg named AP assistant chief of bureau in LA
 
- Adam Nossiter named AP correspondent in Baton Rouge
 
- Veteran correspondent Kate Adie leaving BBC
 
- Cogswell named Abilene Reporter-News publisher
 
- Troy Record names Williams publisher
 
- Bruce named editor of Glasgow (Ky.)
Daily Times
 
- LaMay to lead public radio station WXPN
 
DEATHS:
 
- Celia Stein
 
- Michael Oatman
 
- Stan Martin
 
NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
SPACE SHUTTLE DISASTER:
 
Images on TV tell viewers what happened before official word
 
NEW YORK (AP) - The arresting image of a white streak flashing across the sky then breaking into several pieces - repeated over and over - told television viewers what happened to the space shuttle Columbia before any official government word.
Broadcast and cable news networks covered the story full time on Feb. 1, although two networks were caught with their principal anchors far from their desks.
The pictures weren't as spectacular, but they immediately evoked memory of the space shuttle Challenger's explosion shortly after takeoff in 1986.
"It is a very eerie case of deja vu for all of us," said Gary Tuchman, CNN correspondent.
That there were pictures at all this time was a combination of luck and routine journalistic preparedness.
At WFAA-TV in Dallas, a cameraman is assigned whenever a shuttle streaks overhead on its way to a planned landing, both because it produces interesting pictures and to bear witness in case something goes terribly wrong, said cameraman Timb Hamilton.
John Pronk had the assignment and the network aired his pictures live. They were rerun repeatedly both nationally and locally when it became apparent something was wrong.
Hamilton, an amateur astronomer and Pronk's colleague, took his own camera to his front yard in Mesquite, Texas, to watch the same thing. He had seen nighttime shuttle fly-bys but none during the day. While following it in his viewfinder, he noted a large flash and what appeared to be debris flying away.
"I knew something was wrong," he said, "but first I tried to tell myself because it was daytime it looked different. But after a few seconds, my wife and I knew something was going on."
James Lenamon, a cameraman for KXAS-TV in Dallas, was assigned to look for the shuttle in between other assignments. It appeared in the sky about three minutes before he was expecting it.
He noticed the flashes and contrails that appeared to indicate something flying away from the shuttle. But he had no idea this was out of the ordinary. He filed the pictures and moved on to his next assignment.
It was only when he saw his pictures on NBC's special report that he realized what he had shot. "I was very emotional," he said.
Jeff Foreman, an engineer with a physics degree, told CBS News he was taking video and realized quickly something had gone awry.
"When multiple pieces started coming off, I thought that it was highly unusual, that it shouldn't be happening," he said. His suspicions were confirmed when he heard seven or eight sonic booms; during typical fly-bys he hears only two.
The networks were all on the story by 10 a.m. EST. CBS, with Dan Rather in the anchor chair by 10:30 a.m., was the most nimble in response. ABC - which, unlike its rivals is without a Saturday morning newscast, and with Peter Jennings hours away - was at an initial disadvantage. Jennings arrived at 12:20 p.m.
NBC's Tom Brokaw was on vacation, causing the network to replace him with his eventual successor as primary anchor, Brian Williams. Brokaw was cutting short his break to join the coverage later.
CNN had an advantage with Miles O'Brien, its NASA reporter, already in the studio as a host.
Traffic surged at online news sites as people looked to the Internet for details.
"Our traffic spike hit its peak at 10:30 a.m. (EST) at more than nine times what we usually get as our peak on a weekend day and more than twice what we usually see as our peak on our average weekday," said Mitch Gelman, executive producer for CNN.com. He said there were no problems handling the increased traffic.
In the first few hours, television newscasters had little to go on, although all sought quickly to play down concerns that terrorism was involved.
"In a time like this, all of us are in complete awe," Fox News Channel's Tony Snow said. "We have no idea what's going on."
In the end, the pictures told the story.
Newspapers, newsmagazines scramble to cover shuttle disaster
 
MIAMI (AP) - Banner headlines proclaiming "Columbia Lost" and "Shuttle Disaster" hit newsstands as newspapers across the country put out extra editions hours after the nation's worst space disaster in 17 years.
Other papers expanded their Sunday editions, while the nation's largest newsmagazines pushed back deadlines to overhaul the weekly editions that reach newsstands late Sunday.
Florida and Texas, both with strong ties to the space program and directly involved in the tragedy, appeared to have the highest concentration of extra editions on Feb. 1. Five papers in Louisiana also ran extra editions the day of the disaster.
"Columbia Lost," proclaimed the masthead of Florida Today, a daily newspaper serving Melbourne and the Space Coast region. The newspaper produced two special editions and its Web site had received more than 150,000 hits by 6 p.m., nine hours after NASA lost contact with Columbia.
The paper distributed 36,000 copies by 2:30 p.m. and 30,000 more in a 6 p.m. edition.
The Orlando Sentinel, The Miami Herald, the St. Petersburg Times, the Tampa Tribune, The Gainesville Sun and the Pensacola News Journal also published extra editions.
In Texas, the Houston Chronicle published an eight-page extra edition headlined "Shuttle Disaster" with a photograph of two National Guardsmen protecting a piece of the shuttle debris in a Nacogdoches, Texas, parking lot.
The San Antonio Express-News printed 34,000 copies headlined "Columbia Is Lost." The last extra editions published by the Express-News followed the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and the 1986 Challenger shuttle disaster.
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution printed a four-page extra edition with a headline nearly filling the entire page above the fold - "Shuttle Disaster, Columbia Crew Lost."
In Louisiana, extras were produced by The Town Talk of Alexandria, The Times of Shreveport, The Advertiser of Lafayette, and the News-Star of Monroe, as well as The Times-Picayune of New Orleans.
The Poynter Institute for Media Studies, based in St. Petersburg, collected front-page layouts of the special editions on its Web site.
Bill Mitchell, editor of Poynter Online, said the developing story would pose difficulties for daily newspapers.
"The main question of 'Why did this happen?' may not be answered for weeks, months, maybe never," Mitchell said. "So it really represents a major challenge for newspapers across the country."
Time and Newsweek both extended their press runs and produced editions focusing on the shuttle disaster.
"As soon as we heard, we switched the cover and cleared out as much territory as we could," said Newsweek editor Mark Whitaker.
Time devoted 17 pages to shuttle coverage and pushed its deadline back three hours, to 3 a.m. Feb. 2.
On the Net:
Poynter Institute: http://www.poynter.org/ 
AOL TIME WARNER:
 
Turner exits; AOL Time Warner loses $ 99 billion last year
 
NEW YORK (AP) - With Ted Turner leaving, beleaguered AOL Time Warner Inc. is moving even further from its roots as it plots its turnaround after a year that saw an astonishing $ 99 billion in losses.
Turner, the maverick cable TV mogul who founded Turner Broadcasting and CNN before selling to Time Warner in 1996, said Jan. 29 he's resigning as vice chairman in May and wants to focus more on his philanthropy after that.
His exit follows the recently announced departure of chairman Steve Case, the America Online co-founder who was one of the key architects of the $ 106 billion merger in 2001 between AOL and Time Warner.
Whether Turner - who owns 3.4 percent of the company and is its largest individual shareholder - will remain on AOL's board will be determined in the next few weeks, spokeswoman Mia Carbonell said.
In a statement, Turner was optimistic "the company will be able to move forward and reach its true potential."
AOL Time Warner executives were eager to look forward after announcing a staggering $ 45.5 billion charge in the fourth quarter to account for the media conglomerate's plunging value. That included a $ 10 billion charge to reflect the lower value of AOL's cable assets.
Analysts had been expecting AOL to take a writedown but were surprised by its enormity. It meant that in the three months ending Dec. 31, AOL lost $ 44.9 billion, or $ 10.04 per share, compared with a loss of $ 1.8 billion, or 41 cents per share, in the fourth quarter of 2001.
However, revenue rose 8 percent to $ 11.4 billion, and AOL said that without the one-time accounting markdown it would have earned 28 cents per share. Analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call had been expecting earnings of 28 cents per share and $ 11.2 billion in revenue.
The massive goodwill writedown disclosed Jan. 29 comes on top of a $ 54 billion charge AOL took in the first quarter to account for the company's stock decline. That move gave AOL the biggest quarterly loss in U.S. business history.
So, for all of 2002, AOL lost a record $ 98.7 billion, $ 22.15 per share, on revenue of $ 41.1 billion. In 2001, the company lost $ 4.9 billion, $ 1.11 per share, on revenue of $ 38.5 billion.
Those figures clearly weighed on Turner. In an interview with Mike Wallace to be broadcast on CBS' "60 Minutes II" this week, Turner estimated that he lost $ 7 billion to $ 8 billion on AOL Time Warner's sinking stock.
He also said his vice chairman role was like having "one foot in the door and one on the sidewalk." He called it "a title without portfolio … like the Emperor of Japan."
Other than federal accounting investigations, the biggest question over AOL Time Warner remains the performance of the AOL online division. Time Warner's media properties - which include HBO, CNN, Warner Music, Time and People magazines and blockbuster film franchises like "Harry Potter" and "Lord of the Rings" - have been the bright spot.
In fact, double-digit growth in AOL's cable, TV networks and movie divisions in the fourth quarter helped make up for the 6 percent drop in revenue from the online division.
New chief Richard Parsons said he was pleased with the company's overall fourth-quarter performance and pledged to "run each of our businesses as well or better than before, with a continued major focus on stabilizing and revitalizing America Online."
AOL Time Warner last week sold its 8.4 percent stake in Hughes Electronics Corp., the parent company of the DirecTV satellite service, for $ 800 million as part of a plan to reduce debt to $ 20 billion by the end of this year.
AOL also plans an initial public offering for its cable division, and analysts have speculated that AOL will sell its book-publishing division and the Atlanta Braves, the baseball team Turner brought to the media empire.
On the Net:
http://www.aoltimewarner.com 
Turner departure raises questions about the future of CNN
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Ted Turner's departure as vice chairman of AOL Time Warner Inc. renewed talk about merger negotiations between CNN and ABC or the possibility that Turner would consider buying back the cable network he founded.
Business analysts were mulling both possibilities, despite the tremendous obstacles that stand in front of both.
Turner, who founded CNN in 1980 but lost control over it in recent years of corporate infighting, reportedly opposed CNN merging operations with the Walt Disney Co.-owned ABC News.
Merger talks were put on hold by AOL Time Warner chief executive Richard Parsons last month. He said figuring out control issues was proving very complex, the same issue that scuttled merger talks between CNN and Viacom Inc.-owned CBS News.
Those concerns aren't likely to change with Turner out of the picture. There also are worries that the deal won't save both companies the kind of money that was predicted - up to $ 200 million in some reports, said Ken Auletta, media writer for The New Yorker magazine who is writing a book about Turner.
"CNN and ABC is a very difficult deal to put together," said Christopher Dixon, an analyst for UBS Warburg. "Although it makes sense on paper, there are some significant cultural differences. We still live in a world where it is difficult for farmers and cowboys to be friends."
Turner is "apoplectic" about what has happened to CNN, said Porter Bibb, an analyst for Technology Partners and another Turner biographer. Turner built a network with an unglamorous focus on news and, in the past few years, CNN has tried jazzy promotions of personalities like Connie Chung, Aaron Brown and Paula Zahn.
But CNN has lost its ratings pre-eminence to Fox News Channel, and the gap is widening.
In an interview for "60 Minutes II" to be broadcast on CBS this week, Turner conceded it was hard not to have a role in CNN but was diplomatic when asked what he thought of the network's direction.
"I think basically that CNN is doing a pretty good job," Turner told CBS' Mike Wallace. "I mean, there are some things, obviously, that I don't like, but I'm the old fuddy-duddy that it reported to for 22 or 23 years, so, I mean, obviously any changes are going to give me trouble."
Auletta said his initial thought after Turner's departure announcement was that Turner might try to reacquire CNN. But he concluded it was unlikely.
He said Turner, who told Wallace he has lost up to $ 8 billion because of the tumbling AOL Time Warner stock, may no longer have the resources to buy back his creation. Turner also has extensive philanthropic commitments, including a $ 1 billion donation to United Nations causes.
AOL Time Warner may be interested in selling some of its resources, but less likely to shed the profitable and prestigious CNN, he said.
Maura Donlan, a Turner spokeswoman, would not comment when asked if her boss would be interested in buying CNN. Tricia Primrose, an AOL Time Warner spokesman, noted that Turner said he wanted to devote more time to his philanthropic interests when he told Parsons he was leaving.
WICK TEMPLE:
 
AP vice president for membership dies at age 65
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Wick Temple, an Associated Press vice president whose four-decade career ranged from newsgathering in the civil rights-era South to leading the AP's sports, news, personnel and newspaper membership departments, died Feb. 1 in New York.
Temple had been undergoing treatment for throat cancer and was en route to a New York hospital with his wife, Margy McCay, when he died suddenly. It was not immediately known whether the cause of death was related to the cancer.
A smiling, avuncular presence at AP's Rockefeller Plaza headquarters for 30 years, Temple once described the sweeping changes he had seen over his career: "Computerization, digital photos, the Internet … specialization in journalism that makes AP's news report far better than it used to be."
He was remembered for his own role in many of these changes at the AP.
"He was very, very good at what he did professionally and a very good friend," said Burl Osborne, chairman of the AP board, publisher emeritus of The Dallas Morning News and a colleague of Temple's when Osborne worked at the AP himself. "The AP will miss him very much."
After heading AP bureaus in St. Louis, Helena, Mont. and Seattle, Temple moved to New York and became sports editor in 1973. In that position he directed coverage of such major events as the Olympics, the Super Bowl and the World Series.
In 1980, he was promoted to managing editor, directing day-to-day news operations, and in 1985, he became the AP's first director of human resources. Since 1988, he had served as director of membership, a key position at the AP, a not-for-profit cooperative made up of member newspapers and broadcasters.
"Wick was the newspaper members' advocate at headquarters. He brought four decades as a newsman, a bureau chief, and a senior editor and executive in New York to the task of maintaining the tightest bonds between us and our newspapers. And he did that superbly," said Louis D. Boccardi, AP president and chief executive officer.
"He never forgot the critical role our bureau chiefs play in this, and they will never forget his understanding leadership."
Wick Temple was a second-generation AP newsman. Born Oct. 24, 1937, in Little Rock, Ark., he grew up in Pennsylvania, the son of R.W. Temple, who worked for the AP for 21 years.
Temple began his own news career at age 16 on the Texarkana Gazette, and worked for the Austin American-Statesman while attending the University of Texas. He joined the AP's Little Rock bureau in 1959, during the civil rights struggle.
Later, while running the Seattle bureau and helping to expand AP's coverage of Alaska, he wrote about the building of the Alaska oil pipeline.
Temple's byline was on AP's story about legendary skyjacker D.B. Cooper, who commandeered a plane, parachuted out carrying a briefcase full of money and then vanished.
By coincidence, Temple happened to be at Sea-Tac Airport near Seattle at the time. He recalled later, "I dictated material from Sea-Tac until the plane took off. … The skyjacker, as everyone knows, bailed out from the tail stairs of the 727, and we had that memorable quote from the FBI that 'he's probably screwed into the ground up to his elbows."'
Colleagues said he drew on his firsthand news experience in all of his later management roles.
One of Temple's duties as membership director was to help oversee creation of AP's multimedia site, The Wire.
Beyond that, said fellow AP executive and friend D. Byron Yake, "Wick was somebody who was truly loved by everyone. He was an endearing person."
In addition to McCay, the AP's director of personnel, survivors include four children from previous marriages, Shawn Temple of Basking Ridge, N.J.; Wick Temple III of Everett, Wash.; Ellen Wallace of Langley, Wash., and Carol Halter of East Aurora, N.Y.; and a sister, Ann Graef of Houston.
A memorial service is scheduled for 2 p.m. EST on Feb. 11 at the 3 West Club, 3 W. 51st St., New York City.
In lieu of flowers, McCay asked a donation be given in Temple's name to either New Eyes for the Needy, 549 Millburn Ave., Short Hills, NJ 07078; or the American Cancer Society, 767 Northfield Ave., West Orange, NJ 07052.
FOURTH-QUARTER EARNINGS:
 
Disney earnings drop despite stronger TV, theme park figures
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - First-quarter profits plummeted 42 percent at The Walt Disney Co. despite a revenue rise pegged to stronger performance at its ABC Television network and increased attendance at its theme parks.
Disney reported net income in the first quarter ended Dec. 31 of $ 256 million, or 13 cents per share, compared with net income of $ 438 million, or 21 cents, in the quarter a year earlier.
Revenue in the most recent quarter grew 6 percent to $ 7.47 billion, compared with $ 7.02 billion a year ago.
Attendance and per capita spending at Disney's domestic theme parks rose during the past year, contributing to a 20 percent jump in operating income, to $ 225 million.
Operating income at Disney's media networks division, which includes ABC and its cable networks, dropped 7 percent in the quarter to $ 225 million, although revenue increased 9 percent.
Disney said it is beginning to see the results of higher ratings at ABC. Advertising revenue climbed during the quarter while costs decreased.
Ad resurgence helps Tribune's net rise 87 percent
 
CHICAGO (AP) - The nationwide resurgence in advertising spending plus lower newsprint costs helped Tribune Co.'s fourth-quarter profits jump 87 percent.
The media giant's earnings report released Jan. 29 reflected a much-improved advertising climate for both its television and newspaper groups.
Tribune, whose holdings include 12 dailies, 24 television stations and the Chicago Cubs baseball team, reported net income of $ 187 million, or 57 cents a share, compared with $ 100.1 million, or 47 cents a share, a year earlier.
Excluding certain items in both years, including restructuring charges in 2001, Tribune said operating earnings rose 21 percent, also to 57 cents a share. That was 3 cents higher than the consensus estimate of analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call.
Revenue rose 8 percent to $ 1.43 billion from $ 1.32 billion.
Operating revenue from the publishing business, which includes the Chicago Tribune, Los Angeles Times and Newsday, increased 31 percent to $ 242 million. The rebound in ad spending was a primary contributor - retail advertising climbed 6 percent for the quarter, national advertising was up 14 percent and classifieds rose 4 percent.
Another boost came from an 18 percent drop in Tribune's newsprint and ink expenses. Newsprint, the second-largest expense for newspaper companies, cost 19 percent less than a year earlier amid a comparatively weak advertising market and reduced demand for paper.
A 23 percent jump in TV advertising revenues helped the broadcasting unit post 31 percent higher operating profits, at $ 131 million.
Tribune's smaller interactive business, meanwhile, reduced its operating loss for the quarter to $ 1.6 million from $ 5 million a year earlier.
For the year, net income was $ 416.8 million, or $ 1.30 per share, up from $ 84.3 million, or 28 cents a share, in 2001. Revenues increased 2 percent to $ 5.38 billion from $ 5.25 billion.
New York Times Co. posts 45 percent profit rise
 
NEW YORK (AP) - The New York Times Co., helped by an improving advertising climate, reported a 45 percent earnings increase in the fourth quarter, beating Wall Street projections.
The company, which owns The New York Times, The Boston Globe and 16 other newspapers, as well as radio, TV and Internet holdings, posted profits of $ 107.5 million, or 69 cents per share, for the three months ended Dec. 31 versus $ 74.08 million, or 48 cents per share, in the year-ago period. Revenue rose to $ 840.2 million from $ 780.6 million a year earlier.
The results included a $ 5.9 million pretax charge related to work force reductions, $ 10.7 million in amortization expenses and other items.
Excluding these items, earnings were $ 106.7 million, or 69 cents per share. Analysts polled by Thomson First Call expected 67 cents per share.
Advertising revenue, which increased 10.1 percent, continued to strengthen in the quarter. Circulation revenue growth remained strong at the newspaper group, while the company's broadcast stations registered a record level of political advertising. The company's New York Times Digital division recorded its first full year of operating profitability.
The Times reported that newspaper group revenues grew 6.5 percent in the fourth quarter to $ 776.5 million from $ 729.1 million in the year-ago period. Advertising revenues gained 8.4 percent to $ 519.3 million, from $ 478.9 million a year ago, as a result of higher advertising rates and volume.
Circulation revenues increased 4.7 percent to $ 207.8 million in the period from $ 198.5 million a year ago, primarily as a result of higher prices at the Times and the Globe.
Total costs and expenses in the fourth quarter decreased slightly to $ 648 million from $ 650.2 million in the year-ago period.
For 2002, net income was $ 299.7 million, or $ 1.94 per share, compared with $ 444.7 million, or $ 2.78 per share. Revenues were $ 3.08 billion, compared with $ 3.02 billion a year ago.
Media General posts higher profit
 
RICHMOND, Va. (AP) - Media General Inc.'s profit climbed in the fourth quarter, boosted by strong gains in broadcasting revenue and an improvement in publishing revenue.
The Richmond-based newspaper and television company said Jan. 29 that net income totaled $ 21.6 million, or 93 cents a share, for the October-December period compared with $ 7.89 million, or 34 cents a share a year ago.
Revenue rose to $ 229.4 million from $ 209.5 million a year earlier.
The latest results beat Wall Street's expectations. Analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call had expected earnings of 87 cents a share for the quarter.
The quarter saw the year's first gain in revenue for the publishing division, while the broadcast division's revenue increased sharply because of strong political advertising and audience rating gains.
For the full year, the company lost $ 72.9 million, or $ 3.14 a share, versus a profit of $ 18.2 million, or 79 cents a share, in 2001. The loss included a one-time charge of $ 126.3 million for the writedown of intangible assets under a required change in accounting standards.
Revenue rose to $ 837 million from $ 807 million in 2001.
Media General owns newspapers, television stations and online information services, mainly in the Southeast. Its newspapers include The Tampa (Fla.) Tribune, the Winston-Salem (N.C.) Journal and the Richmond Times-Dispatch.
Pulitzer earnings up sharply
 
ST. LOUIS (AP) - Pulitzer Inc. earnings rose sharply in the fourth quarter, beating Wall Street expectations.
The St. Louis-based media company earned $ 12.2 million, or 57 cents per share, in the quarter ending Dec. 29, up from $ 3 million, or 14 cents per share, a year ago.
Excluding one-time items, Pulitzer earned 58 cents a share. Analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call had expected quarterly earnings of 53 cents per share.
Revenue rose to $ 108.4 million from $ 104.4 million in the period a year earlier.
Comparable retail advertising revenue rose 6.8 percent in the fourth quarter, while national revenue rose 18.7 percent. Comparable classified ad revenue decreased 2.9 percent, largely because help-wanted ad revenue decreased 10.1 percent.
Newsprint costs were down 7.9 percent due to lower prices.
For the year, Pulitzer earned $ 34.7 million, or $ 1.62 per share, up from $ 10.7 million, or 50 cents per share, in 2001. Revenue rose to $ 416 million from $ 413.5 million in 2001.
Pulitzer operates 14 dailies, including the St. Louis Post-Dispatch and the Arizona Daily Star in Tucson, and related new media activities. It also owns the Suburban Journals of Greater St. Louis, a group of 37 weeklies and niche publications.
McClatchy reports higher earnings in fourth quarter
 
SACRAMENTO, Calif. (AP) - Newspaper publisher McClatchy Co. posted sharply higher earnings for the fourth quarter, beating analysts' expectations.
Net income for the quarter ending Dec. 29 was $ 39 million, or 84 cents per share, compared with $ 20.9 million, or 46 cents a share, a year earlier.
Excluding a one-time expense of $ 1.6 million to write down the value of land at The News & Observer in Raleigh, N.C., its earnings were 86 cents a share.
That beat McClatchy's October forecast of 76 cents to 78 cents per share, as well as the consensus forecast of 80 cents a share by analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call.
Revenues increased by 4 percent to $ 287.9 million from $ 276.7 million during the period in 2001.
McClatchy said its newspaper circulation grew for the 18th year in a row.
Advertising revenues in the fourth quarter moved up 4.9 percent to $ 236.3 million, and circulation revenues were $ 42.6 million, up 1.5 percent.
McClatchy said it expects first quarter 2003 earnings to be between 55 and 57 cents per share. Analysts expected 61 cents per share.
For the year, the Sacramento-based company earned $ 131.2 million, or $ 2.84 a share, up from $ 58 million, or $ 1.27 a share, in 2001. Annual revenue was steady at $ 1.08 billion.
McClatchy publishes 11 dailies, including The Sacramento Bee and The Star Tribune of Minneapolis, and 13 non-dailies. It also owns and operates Nando Media, an Internet publishing unit, and The Newspaper Network, an advertising insert.
Journal Register earnings rise 50 percent
 
TRENTON, N.J. (AP) - Newspaper publisher Journal Register Co. reported a 50 percent increase in fourth-quarter net income as a result of higher advertising and circulation revenues and an asset write-down a year ago.
The Trenton-based publisher of 23 daily newspapers and 224 non-daily publications said its net income for the three months ended Dec. 29 was $ 14.2 million, or 34 cents per share.
That beat by a penny the consensus forecast of analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call.
A year earlier, Journal Register posted net income of $ 9.5 million, or 23 cents per share. Excluding a charge of $ 2.5 million for reduced value of some assets, net income would have been $ 11.9 million, or 28 cents per share.
Fourth-quarter revenues were $ 104.8 million, up nearly 2 percent from $ 103.1 million a year earlier.
For the 2002 fiscal year, Journal Register reported net income of $ 49.2 million, or $ 1.16 per share, down 37 percent from net income of $ 78.1 million, or $ 1.83 per share, for fiscal 2001.
Excluding a $ 1.2 million gain related to newly reduced estimates of the company's tax liability for 2002, net income would have been $ 48.1 million, or $ 1.14 per share.
The company said net income for 2001 would have been $ 44.1 million, or $ 1.03 per share, excluding a $ 42.1 million after-tax gain on newspapers it sold in January 2001 and a $ 10 million charge for reduced value of assets.
Revenues in 2002 totaled $ 407.8 million, up 3 percent from $ 394.4 million in 2001.
The company's publications are clustered in the Philadelphia and Cleveland regions, Connecticut, central New England and the Saratoga and mid-Hudson regions of New York. They include The Trentonian of Trenton and the New Haven Register, Connecticut's second-largest daily paper.
WAR COVERAGE:
 
Reporters wary of Pentagon's promise of access to troops
 
ANN ARBOR, Mich. (AP) - The military is offering reporters better access to American forces in a potential war with Iraq than they had in Afghanistan or the Persian Gulf, journalists at a forum said Jan. 27.
But the journalists said they remain wary of those promises, given the way they say the Pentagon handled journalists' access to U.S. forces in Afghanistan.
"We got essentially zip, nothing of any value, during that campaign," CNN's Christiane Amanpour said at the University of Michigan forum on covering war and bioterrorism.
Amanpour, the cable network's chief international correspondent, said the military needs to balance its security concerns with "what we the press need to meet our responsibilities."
Amanpour joined a panel of broadcast and newspaper journalists at the forum. She spoke via video link from Tel Aviv, where she was covering the Israeli elections.
Conference organizers said they sought but could not get a representative to present the government's view.
Contacted at the Pentagon on Jan. 27, Lt. Col. Dave Lapan said the military has "clearly committed to doing as much as possible to provide access not only to U.S. media but to the international media in the event of future military operations."
The military has said it wants to improve its relations with the news media during wartime. In November, the Pentagon brought 58 journalists together with military personnel to improve understanding on both sides.
"We are going to tell you the truth. We are going to tell you what we can tell you, and we are going to tell you when we can't," Rear Adm. John Stufflebeem said at the time.
While American forces in Afghanistan were of little help to reporters, Afghan forces were, NBC correspondent Ashleigh Banfield told the audience of about 400.
"The warlords were happy to tell us what they were doing," she said.
The public and government should see American journalists as part of the broader society, rather than outsiders, the speakers said.
Tom Rosenstiel, a professor of journalism at Columbia University, said journalists understand that in war they must decide whether the information they gather might hinder the military.
"We can hear things and learn things that we must hold close to ourselves," added Kevin Klose, chief executive of National Public Radio.
CNN news chief executive Eason Jordan said the military acknowledges the importance of giving reporters better access.
"They are saying the right things," Jordan said by video link from Atlanta. "Whether they do the right things remains to be seen."
NEWSPAPERS:
 
Lincoln Journal Star bans 'Redskins'
 
LINCOLN, Neb. (AP) - The Lincoln Journal Star will stop printing logos of teams that use American Indian symbols and will no longer refer to the nickname "Redskins" in stories about Washington's NFL team.
"We've made this decision out of respect for Native people. Plain and simple," Executive Editor Kathleen Rutledge said in a Jan. 26 letter to readers.
The paper will simply refer to Washington's NFL team as "Washington," she said.
"We will no longer use 'Redskins' or 'Skins' because it is a racial slur," she wrote. "It derives from an old, genocidal practice in this country of scalping Indians to earn a bounty."
Any team symbols that adopt imagery, such as the Kansas City Chief's arrowhead logo, or caricatures Indian culture, such as the Cleveland Indians' Chief Wahoo logo, also will no longer be used in the paper, Rutledge said.
"Instead, we'll use alternative logos that stay away from Native symbols," Rutledge said.
The Journal Star announced last summer that it would no longer use the Cleveland baseball team's Chief Wahoo logo, but it still used other team logos with Indian symbols.
Last year, the Native American Journalists Association asked news organizations to stop using sports mascots and nicknames that depict American Indians by 2004.
Other publications also have limited the use of Indian mascots and images in varying ways. For example, the Portland Press Herald in Maine also has banned "Redskins" from its sports pages, and the Minneapolis Star Tribune has banned the use of all Indian team names and mascots.
Former editor sues Variety for alleged gay discrimination
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - A former editor at the Hollywood trade newspaper Variety is suing the publisher, editor in chief and another editor, alleging anti-gay discrimination.
Ramin Zahed, who worked at Variety for nearly six years until he was let go in September, alleges in the Los Angeles County Superior Court lawsuit filed Jan. 24 that Editor in Chief Peter Bart mistreated him and frequently used slurs demeaning women and gays around the office.
The suit also names Reed Elsevier Inc., which publishes Variety, and special reports managing editor Thomas Tapp, who also is accused of making slurs about Zahed's sexuality.
The company denied the allegations.
"Employee decisions at Variety are made because of economics, merit, job performance and business needs and to suggest otherwise is simply unfair and untrue," Reed Business Information, which oversees Variety, said in a statement. "The individual in question lost his position as a result of a restructuring. This was a decision based solely on the needs and direction of our business."
Tapp and Bart declined to make any additional comments.
Zahed is seeking unspecified damages for complaints that include discrimination, wrongful discharge and emotional distress.
Bart, a former studio executive, was suspended for three weeks in August 2001 and ordered to participate in diversity training after a profile in Los Angeles magazine said he frequently used racist, sexist and anti-gay language.
He issued a statement at the time saying he was "deeply sorry" and that the alleged remarks did not reflect his personal beliefs.
BROADCASTING:
 
Senate committee reviewing radio ownership concentration
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - To Don Henley's ears, the FM dial has been transformed from a bazaar of choices to a place where "everybody gets the same McDonald's hamburger."
Taking issue with the musician on Capitol Hill, the chairman of a company that operates 1,200 stations said Jan. 30 it makes a point of offering a variety of formats, from talk to country to rock to Spanish language.
At issue is the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which loosened restrictions on owning multiple stations. Henley, who achieved fame with the Eagles, testified before the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee in favor a bill aimed at slowing consolidation in the radio and concert industries.
The Bush administration, however, appears to be leaning toward easing the remaining ownership rules. The Federal Communications Commission is reviewing them and the agency's chairman, Michael Powell, has expressed concern that many are no longer relevant.
The committee debated legislation sponsored by Sen. Russ Feingold, D-Wis., that would strengthen government oversight of radio station mergers and would ban arrangements in which recording companies pay radio stations' promoters for air time.
The proposal is aimed at Clear Channel, the country's largest radio station chain and biggest concert promoter, with more than 1,200 stations, or about one of every nine across the United States.
The chairman and chief executive of the San Antonio-based company, Lowry Mays, said that far from stifling diversity, Clear Channel has made a point of offering many formats.
But Jenny Toomey, executive director of the Future of Music Coalition, which seeks stricter ownership rules, said that was a fallacious argument.
"Measuring music diversity by counting the number of radio formats is like measuring the variety of food in your pantry by counting the number of cans without looking at what is inside them," she said.
The committee chairman, Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., engaged in a testy exchange with Mays over whether Clear Channel had plans to buy more stations.
Mays evaded the question several times, leading McCain to ask: "Do you have any plans to obtain more radio stations? I'd like to ask the question for the third time."
Responded Mays: "If we can serve the local community better and we see an opportunity, yes."
McCain also took on Clear Channel over its presence in San Diego. While federal rules prevent a company from owning more than eight stations in a market, Clear Channel has the maximum in San Diego and also owns five in Mexico that broadcast into San Diego.
"It's clearly in violation of the intent of the law," McCain said.
Critics of consolidation say ownership of so many stations in one market drives up advertising rates and limits choices.
The proposed legislation was greeted with skepticism by some Republicans.
"I think there are probably always complaints from competitors," said Sen. Conrad Burns, R-Mont. He asked why the committee was not investigating the sale of shelf space in supermarkets to the highest bidder.
"Radio airwaves cannot be equated with grocery store shelves," Henley said. "They are owned by the public."
Henley complained that he is essentially charged money to get his music on the air, because his recording company pays an independent promoter to get his songs on radio stations.
Although Mays conceded that his company receives payments from these promoters, he said it was in exchange for research information. He insisted the company has a strict policy against "pay-for-play."
On the Net:
Clear Channel: http://www.clearchannel.com/ 
Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee: http://commerce.senate.gov/ 
Judge dismisses suit against Clear Channel
 
MIAMI (AP) - A federal judge dismissed a lawsuit accusing broadcasting giant Clear Channel Communications and a partner of trying to drive the nation's largest Hispanic-owned radio operator out of business.
The lawsuit alleged that Clear Channel, along with the Hispanic Broadcast Corp., frustrated the Spanish Broadcasting System's plans to expand and limited its ability to compete in top U.S. Spanish-language markets.
SBS also alleged the two companies hurt its share price and its reputation in an attempt to acquire it and eliminate it as competition in the fast-growing Hispanic market.
Clear Channel denied the accusations, and U.S. District Judge Patricia Seitz ruled Jan. 31 that the claims were meritless.
SBS said it plans to appeal.
Clear Channel, the nation's largest broadcaster with more than 1,200 radio stations, was a major shareholder in HBC, the leading Spanish-language radio network.
SBS had been in negotiations to merge with HBC, but HBC agreed to be purchased by Univision Communications. SBS filed its complaint June 12, the day the purchase was announced.
Miami-based SBS owns or operates 27 stations in seven of the top 10 U.S. Hispanic markets. SBS and HBC are direct competitors in five top 10 U.S. markets.
ABC wins bidding war to Michael Jackson documentary
 
NEW YORK (AP) - ABC won a network bidding war to acquire the rights to a documentary on Michael Jackson and immediately scheduled it for prime time on Feb. 7.
ABC News spokesman Jeffrey Schneider would not say how much the network paid. The New York Daily News, quoting unidentified television executives, estimated the price at $ 4 million to $ 5 million.
The documentary, "Living with Michael Jackson," features "unprecedented and exclusive access to Jackson's private life," ABC promised.
British journalist Martin Bashir spent eight months with Jackson and was with him when Jackson horrified onlookers by dangling his baby from a hotel balcony in Berlin, the network said.
Some 25.7 million viewers tuned into "Michael Jackson: 30th Anniversary Special" on CBS in November 2001. Previous interviews with Oprah Winfrey and Diane Sawyer also attracted big audiences.
CBS, NBC and Fox also were reportedly interested in the documentary, which was produced by Britain's Granada Television, but the bidding battle came down to ABC and NBC.
"At some point, the dollars just don't make sense," NBC News spokeswoman Allison Gollust said, "especially when you have stories you report and produce yourself to rely on."
"Dateline NBC" has been producing its own hour about Jackson. That's scheduled to air on Feb. 17, although ABC's announcement of an air date may cause NBC to move it up.
Jury finds in favor of fired Honolulu TV news reporter
 
HONOLULU (AP) - A federal court jury awarded $ 87,000 to a television reporter after deciding KHON violated her rights when management reassigned and then fired her after she returned from maternity leave.
Mary Zanakis, who now works for KITV, alleged KHON violated her rights under the federal Family and Medical Leave Act by not returning her to her previous position as the station's morning health reporter after her leave in 1999. She was later terminated, after more than 18 years at the station.
"I think every woman who goes out on maternity leave needs to be protected and the law says they should be," Zanakis said Jan. 27 after the verdict.
The station argued during the two-week trial that Zanakis' reassignment and later dismissal were unrelated to her maternity leave. Lawyers for the station said her departure was the result of budget cuts imposed by station owner Emmis Communications of Indianapolis. Colleagues also testified that the quality of Zanakis' work was poor.
Zanakis, who was the Fox affiliate's highest paid reporter with a salary of more than $ 71,000, testified that she was never confronted about problems with her job performance or her attitude.
It will be up to U.S. District Judge David Ezra to decide if Zanakis should be reinstated at KHON or is entitled to any or all of the $ 770,000 in "future lost wages" she is also seeking, said Zanakis' attorney, Thomas Pico, who also is her former husband.
Dismissed TV producer files religion-in-workplace lawsuit
 
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. (AP) - A television producer alleges her former employer fired her after she complained about the company including scriptures inside paycheck envelopes and promoting Bible study at the office.
In the lawsuit filed Jan. 28, Rozanne Sonneborn also alleged WJMK Television Productions president Mark Kielar withheld two weeks' severance pay because she wouldn't drop a complaint of religious discrimination with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
WJMK attorney Joe Curley said Sonneborn was fired last year because of the sluggish economy.
"Her claims do not have any merit," Curley said. "That will be proven in court."
WJMK produces secular programs for cable television. According to the lawsuit, Kielar - a fundamentalist Christian who also owns a Christian TV station - tried to impose his religious beliefs on employees.
Sonneborn, described in the lawsuit as Jewish and nonreligious, alleged WJMK employees felt that going along with religious practices like voluntary Bible study sessions would help advance their careers.
Curley said Bible passages the Boca Raton company included with its paychecks were Old Testament proverbs meant to be inspirational, and dismissed charges that Kielar was trying to impose his religious beliefs on employees.
INTERNET:
 
Survey: Public considers Internet more important than ever
 
NEW YORK (AP) - U.S. Internet users consider the information network at least as important as other media, yet they don't necessarily trust what they find online, according to a survey.
About 61 percent find the Net "very" or "extremely" important as an information source, concludes the third annual nationwide survey on the Internet released Jan. 31 by the University of California at Los Angeles.
That's roughly the same as the importance Net users place in books and newspapers. By comparison, just half of them find television important, 40 percent think that of radio and 29 percent of magazines.
The survey of 2,000 households also found Internet users are spending more time online than before and watching less television than nonusers.
Overall, Internet users are averaging 11 hours per week online, up more than an hour from a year earlier.
However, only 53 percent of users said they believe most or all of what they read online, down from 58 percent a year earlier.
The survey found 92.4 percent of adult internet users had concerns about using credit cards online, and nearly a quarter of them said nothing can ease their fears.
The Federal Trade Commission said recently that complaints about identity theft doubled last year, with victims reporting hijacked credit cards, drained bank accounts and tarnished reputations.
The increased skepticism is healthy and suggests people "getting burned" are learning they haven't been trained to assess the credibility of online sources, said Jeff Cole, director of the UCLA Center for Communication Policy.
Cole's center conducted the telephone survey in English and Spanish from April to June and included follow-up interviews with respondents to previous UCLA Internet studies. The study has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.
Other findings include:
- Among the most experienced users - online at least six years - 73 percent found the Internet important, exceeding the 67 percent for books and 57 percent for newspapers.
- Newcomers with less than a year of experience consider books, newspapers and television more important than the Internet.
- Nearly 30 percent of Americans do not use the Net, most commonly because they don't have a computer or one good enough. But nearly half the nonusers say they are likely to go online within a year.
- Internet users averaged five hours less TV each week than nonusers. The Internet users watched 11 hours per week of TV, or one hour less than in 2001.
- Some 37 percent of parents say they have punished their kids by denying them access to the Internet. Forty-six percent withheld television as a similar punishment tool.
On the Net:
UCLA Center for Communication Policy: http://www.ccp.ucla.edu 
Pentagon, tech. companies reach deal on wireless Internet
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - The Defense Department and technology companies struck a compromise Jan. 31 to prevent interference with military radars from a new generation of wireless Internet devices.
The agreement effectively avoids traffic collisions in the invisible radio spectrum between high-speed Internet surfers and America's soldiers.
Under the compromise, manufacturers agreed to build into future devices technology to detect and actively avoid interference with military radars that operate on similar frequencies. The deal also specifies how sensitive that detection technology must be.
In exchange, defense officials will endorse U.S. proposals to nearly double the amount of lucrative wireless frequencies, which will permit more Internet traffic.
"That's important to the industry," said Peter Pitsch, communications policy director for Intel Corp. "We came up with a good compromise."
The wireless Internet market has been one of the few bright spots in the technology industry, which has been hit hard in the economic downturn.
Assistant Commerce Secretary Nancy J. Victory said the Bush administration "continued its goal of stimulating the economy and ensuring the national defense."
Defense officials worried that the cumulative effects of these devices operating in a city could degrade the performance of at least a dozen different radar systems that might be operating nearby.
"To us, the important thing was that military radars were protected from interference," Deputy Assistant Defense Secretary Steven Price said.
Industry experts said the technology being added to wireless devices probably would cost a few extra dollars.
COURTS-FREE PRESS:
 
Broadcasters request cameras in court for Malvo trial
 
FAIRFAX, Va. (AP) - A coalition of broadcasters filed court papers Jan. 30 seeking permission to broadcast the trial and pretrial hearings of sniper suspect Lee Boyd Malvo.
The motion by the Radio-Television News Directors Association argues that Virginia law presumes cameras should be permitted unless a party shows good cause to ban them. It also argues that the public interest is served by allowing television viewers to watch the proceedings.
"The right of a 'public' trial belongs not only to the accused, but to the public as well," attorney Barbara Van Gelder wrote in the motion.
Virginia law allows judges to decide whether to allow cameras. Fairfax County Circuit Judge Jane Roush, who is presiding over the Malvo case, has temporarily barred television and still cameras but agreed to hear arguments on the issue.
(In a Jan. 27 story about a preliminary hearing in the case, The Associated Press reported that Roush had ruled cameras would not be permitted in the courtroom. The story should have added that she left open the possibility that she would change her mind.)
Malvo's attorneys oppose cameras, arguing they could taint public perception and the jury pool for future trials.
Malvo, 17, and John Allen Muhammad, 42, are accused of killing 13 people and wounding six in Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland, Virginia and Washington, D.C.
The judge in the Muhammad case already has ruled against TV cameras but will allow still cameras.
Muhammad goes on trial in October, a month before Malvo. Both could be sentenced to death if convicted on the Virginia charges.
ABC, CBS, CNN, Court TV, Fox News, NBC, the Virginia Association of Broadcasters and other groups joined the news directors association in filing the motion.
Ky. judge unseals church abuse records
 
LEXINGTON, Ky. (AP) - A judge has unsealed allegations of sexual misconduct by priests in Lexington's Catholic diocese, ending a court battle with a newspaper that reached the Kentucky Supreme Court.
The diocese and the Lexington Herald-Leader - which sued last year for access to the records - agreed to the order by Fayette County Circuit Judge Mary Noble.
The Courier-Journal of Louisville published the contents of the sealed material on Aug. 24.
Noble's order said the Lexington Diocese and the Herald-Leader agreed to have the sealed material open to the public after they resolved the dispute through mediation. The Courier-Journal and Herald-Leader had argued to unseal the material; the diocese had argued it should be kept secret.
The Courier-Journal was not part of the mediation.
Last summer, Noble temporarily sealed a sex-abuse lawsuit against the dioceses of Lexington and Covington, including the allegations. But appellate courts took up the case before Noble could issue a final decision. All the case records eventually were opened except for the allegations.
In the end, the diocese and the Herald-Leader agreed there was no point in further withholding the records from public view, Noble wrote.
John Famularo, lawyer for the diocese, said church officials agreed to go along with Noble's order. However, they still believe the allegations are irrelevant to the suit's claims, so the public is not served in releasing them.
"We believe it runs the risk of turning the courts into a circus by including inflammatory allegations in the complaints with the knowledge that the press will pick up on them and print them," Famularo said.
The Courier-Journal reported that the sealed material included allegations that the Rev. Greg Schuler, former rector at Christ the King Cathedral - Lexington's largest parish and its center of Catholic worship - was removed in March for having a sexual relationship with a married parishioner instead of for job burnout, the reason he had cited publicly.
A spokesman for the diocese said Jan. 31 that Schuler resigned March 28 because of sexual misconduct against a woman in the parish. Spokesman Thomas Shaughnessy said church officials didn't provide any details at the time because the people involved asked for confidentiality.
Iowa newspaper, college settle open meetings lawsuit
 
WATERLOO, Iowa (AP) - The Hawkeye Community College board of trustees has agreed to pay $ 10,000 in legal fees to settle a newspaper's lawsuit charging the board violated the state's open meeting law when it fired the school's president.
The Waterloo Courier filed the suit almost 3 1/2 years ago, alleging the board held an illegal closed-door meeting that led to the firing of William Hierstein as president.
In the Jan. 28 settlement offer, the board admitted violating the open meetings law and approved the $ 10,000 payment for the Courier's legal fees. The board also agreed to follow open meeting laws in the future.
The Courier accepted the settlement Jan. 29.
"The college has admitted an open meeting violation but said that it was acting on the advice of its counsel and doing its best to respect the open meeting laws at the time," said HCC's attorney Andrew Bracken.
The newspaper sued HCC in 1999, alleging that the board discussed Hierstein's performance and then decided to terminate his contract in the closed meetings.
The open meetings law states that in discussions of job performance of public employees, the employee in question has the right to open or close the meeting and be present for the discussion. Hierstein was not allowed into the meetings.
A board also cannot take any action in closed session, but the Courier alleged that action was taken to decide Hierstein's fate.
Bracken said the board maintains a formal vote was not taken in the closed sessions. However, the board decided to resolve the matter because the majority of trustees at the time of the incident are no longer in office and further litigation would only result in additional cost.
"We're glad that it's resolved, and that Hawkeye Community College recognized it took action in violation of the open meetings law," said Courier publisher John Goossen.
"Our goal from the beginning was that of open, honest government and the public's 'right to know' how its governmental bodies do business," he said. "We think this settlement serves that purpose."
PEOPLE:

 
Cornog named publisher of CJR; Laventhol named chairman
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Evan Cornog, associate dean for policy and development at Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, is taking on an additional assignment as publisher of the Columbia Journalism Review.
Former Publisher David Laventhol, who last fall was appointed chairman of the Committee to Protect Journalists, will remain on staff at CJR as chairman and editorial director, Interim Dean David A. Klatell said.
Cornog will report to Laventhol, as will executive editor Michael Hoyt, Klatell said. Dennis Giza, formerly associate publisher, will become deputy publisher, working with Cornog on a variety of issues, Klatell said.
Former Men's Health editor to head TV Guide
 
NEW YORK (AP) - The former editor in chief of Men's Health magazine was named editor in chief of TV Guide on Feb. 3 in the publication's latest effort to rebound from years of circulation declines.
Michael Lafavore, 50, will be responsible for the editorial content, design and direction of the magazine. He replaces Steven Reddicliffe, who resigned last year after seven years at the magazine.
In a statement, Gemstar-TV Guide International Inc. highlighted Lafavore's record of improving magazine circulation. Lafavore, who was also a founding editor at Men's Health, oversaw that publication's circulation rise from 90,000 in 1988 to 1.6 million in 2000.
After leaving Men's Health in 2000, Lafavore was a magazine consultant with a focus on circulation for clients including Hearst Corp., Meredith Corp. and National Geographic magazines.
That expertise is important to TV Guide, which has seen its circulation fall. The magazine recorded just over 9 million subscribers for the six months ending June 30 according to the Audit Bureau of Circulations, the most recent statistics available - a nearly 4 percent drop from the same time a year ago.
Trahant named P-I's editorial page editor
 
SEATTLE (AP) - Mark Trahant, a newspaper editor and columnist who has worked for publications throughout the West, has been named editorial page editor of the Seattle Post-Intelligencer.
Trahant, 45, will succeed Joann Byrd, who is retiring in March at age 60, the newspaper said.
Since 2001, Trahant has been chief executive of the Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education in Oakland, Calif. The institute is dedicated to training and promoting the careers of minority journalists.
Trahant also has worked as executive news editor of The Salt Lake Tribune, editor and publisher of Navajo Nation Today, and a national reporter for The Arizona Republic, where he was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize in 1989 for a project on government failures in federal Indian policy.
In 1996, he became editor and publisher of the Moscow-Pullman Daily News in Idaho. While there, he also wrote a column on topics ranging from his Western roots as a member of the Shoshone-Bannock tribes to issues affecting journalism; the P-I ran his column throughout 1997 and into 1998, until he joined The Seattle Times as a twice-weekly columnist.
Trahant left the Times during the Northwest Newspaper Guild's strike in 2000.
Trahant is a trustee of The Freedom Forum and a member of the Accrediting Committee of the Accrediting Council on Education in Journalism and Mass Communications.
Howard Goldberg named AP assistant chief of bureau in LA
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Howard Goldberg, assistant bureau chief for The Associated Press in Columbus, Ohio, has been appointed assistant chief in Los Angeles for Southern California and Nevada.
The appointment was announced Feb. 3 by Sue Cross, Los Angeles chief of bureau.
Goldberg has been Ohio's assistant chief since 2000, after two years as news editor in Columbus.
He previously spent 12 years as an editor and supervisor on AP's national editing desk in New York.
Goldberg, 46, is a native of Cincinnati and a graduate of Duke University.
Before joining the AP in 1986, Goldberg worked for three newspapers in North Carolina: The Charlotte Observer, The News & Observer of Raleigh and The Hickory Daily Record.
He succeeds George Garties, who was named chief of bureau for Colorado and Wyoming, based in Denver.
Adam Nossiter named AP correspondent in Baton Rouge
 
NEW ORLEANS (AP) - Adam Nossiter, who has covered Louisiana and the South for The New York Times, The Washington Post and The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, has been named correspondent in charge of The Associated Press bureau in Baton Rouge.
The appointment was announced Jan. 29 by Louisiana Chief of Bureau Charlotte Porter.
Nossiter, 42, graduated from Harvard College with a degree in the history and literature of France.
He began his journalism career at The Anniston (Ala.) Star, moving a year later to the St. Petersburg (Fla.) Times. He joined the Journal-Constitution in 1987 as a regional reporter covering Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama, and left the paper in 1991 to write a book, "Of Long Memory: Mississippi and the Murder of Medgar Evers."
Starting in 1992, he did two stints as a free-lancer covering the South for The New York Times, with work in between as a reporter on the newspaper's metro desk. He left the Times to write a book called "The Algeria Hotel: France, Memory and the Second World War," then began freelancing for the Post from Louisiana.
Nossiter replaces Guy Coates, who retired in January after 34 years with AP.
His father, Bernard D. Nossiter, was a longtime correspondent overseas for the Post, then for The New York Times at the United Nations.
Veteran correspondent Kate Adie leaving BBC
 
LONDON (AP) - British Broadcasting Corp. correspondent Kate Adie is leaving her post as a reporter after 35 years at the BBC.
The BBC said the decision for Adie to leave had been mutual. Adie, 57, accused the BBC in 2001 of favoring looks over experience in hiring female journalists.
"Kate Adie is moving on from front line reporting as the BBC's chief news correspondent to be a freelance presenter," a spokeswoman said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Adie has had the title of chief news correspondent since 1989 and has reported from conflict zones including Kosovo, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and the Middle East.
She won awards for her coverage of the Tiananmen Square protests in Beijing in 1989, and was grazed by a bullet that killed a man next to her as she watched Chinese troops crush pro-democracy protests in the square.
The BBC said Adie would continue to work with BBC World television and to present a domestic current affairs show on radio.
Cogswell named Abilene Reporter-News publisher
 
ABILENE, Texas (AP) - George Cogswell, an E.W. Scripps Co. executive in Florida, has been named publisher of the company's Abilene Reporter-News.
Cogswell, 43, succeeds David Mercier, who announced his resignation last month.
Cogswell has been director of circulation and marketing services for Scripps' Treasure Coast newspapers in Florida: The Stuart News, The Tribune in Fort Pierce and the Press Journal in Vero Beach. Previously, he was circulation director of the Scripps-owned Wichita Falls Times Record News from 1997 to 2000.
Troy Record names Williams publisher
 
TROY, N.Y. (AP) - James K. Williams Jr. has been named publisher of The Record of Troy, succeeding Chad Beatty, who had been interim publisher and returned to his full-time role as publisher of The Saratogian of Saratoga Springs.
Both papers are owned by Journal Register Co.
Williams, 38, previously worked for Copley newspapers in positions including advertising director at the Times Reporter in New Philadelphia, Ohio.
Bruce named editor of Glasgow (Ky.) Daily Times
 
GLASGOW, Ky. (AP) - Layne Bruce, a former publisher in Mississippi, has been named editor and general manager of the Glasgow Daily Times.
Bruce, 30, succeeds Joel Wilson, who upon retirement assumes the title of editor emeritus. Wilson, 64, served his entire 45-year career at the Daily Times, a 10,000 circulation daily in south-central Kentucky.
Bruce was publisher of The Star-Herald, a 5,500 circulation weekly newspaper in Kosciusko, Miss. Both newspapers are owned by Community Newspaper Holdings Inc. of Birmingham, Ala.
LaMay to lead public radio station WXPN
 
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - The public radio station of the University of Pennsylvania, WXPN, has named former TV executive Roger LaMay as its general manager.
LaMay, 49, resigned recently as general manager of Fox affiliate WTXF-TV. He replaces Vinnie Curren, who left WXPN in January to become senior vice president for radio at the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
WXPN is known for showcasing new music by lesser-known singer-songwriters. Its signature program is World Cafe, which broadcasts daily on more than 150 public radio stations and features contemporary rock, folk, alternative country, rhythm and blues, world beat and jazz.
In other changes:
- Arthur Mayhew, publisher of the Bucks County Courier Times since 1984, will retire July 1, the newspaper announced. "It's hard for me to imagine the Courier Times without Art Mayhew at its helm," said Calkins Media Chief Executive Officer Gary Shorts, who called the 65-year-old Mayhew "a good friend and mentor."
- Joe Beegle, 41, general manager of the Bedford (Pa.) Gazette, has been named publisher. Beegle, who became general manager last year after 13 years with the newspaper, succeeds interim publisher Bill Anderson, who also is vice president of the newspaper's parent company, Sample News Group. Anderson will remain in that position.
DEATHS:
 
CELIA STEIN, 90, who co-founded Pulitzer Prize-winning Riverdale Press with her husband, Jan. 11 in New York.
Stein founded the weekly community newsletter with her husband, David A. Stein, in their living room in 1950. She advanced from society editor to women's editor to co-publisher and contributed two columns.
The Press, which now has a circulation of 13,000, won a 1998 Pulitzer Prize for editorials about schools and other issues. The editorials were written by Stein's son Bernard, who served as the paper's editor and co-publisher.
In addition to Bernard, survivors include son Richard, also co-publisher.
MICHAEL OATMAN, 63, a homespun Wichita, Kan., radio personality for nearly 40 years, Jan. 27 in Houston of liver cancer.
Oatman's morning show was on KFDI radio for 37 years. He became a partner with Mike Lynch in Great Empire Broadcasting Inc., which also owned KTTS AM-FM in Springfield, Mo.; KVOO-AM, Tulsa and WOW-AM, Omaha, Neb. Great Empire was sold to Journal Broadcasting Inc. in 2001.
Oatman also wrote a weekly column called "Life With Ol' Mike" for The Wichita Eagle.
Survivors include his wife and three children, all in the broadcast business: daughter Melissa McDermott, CBS-TV overnight news anchor in New York; Andy Oatman in Tulsa, and Richard Oatman, Kansas City.
STAN MARTIN, 64, a longtime New York radio personality and a cabaret expert, Jan. 28 in New York of a stroke.
From 1992 to 1998 Martin was program director for WQEW-AM, The New York Times' former popular-music station. During his tenure, Martin hosted a show on the station, inviting stars such as Rosemary Clooney and Tony Bennett into the studio.
Survivors include his mother and two sisters.
NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
The Goodland (Kan.) Daily News, which has been published since 1932, becomes the twice-weekly Goodland Star News beginning this week. "With a declining population base and business base, the support no longer exists for a daily newspaper," said Steve Haynes, president of Nor'West Newspapers, which owns the Goodland Daily News and other northwest Kansas publications. … Arnie Melendrez Stapleton, sports editor for The Associated Press in Wisconsin, has been chosen as the state sportswriter of the year by Wisconsin members of the National Sportscasters and Sportswriters Association. … Student Life, Washington University's student newspaper, celebrated its 125th anniversary. "The long and rich 125-year history of Student Life has spanned almost the entire history of the university itself, and our student-journalists have documented the life of the university from their unique, important perspective," Chancellor Mark S. Wrighton wrote in the Jan. 28 anniversary edition. … The National Park Service has bought a 12-acre parcel on Bar Island, Maine, from former NBC correspondent Jack Perkins to complete its ownership of the island. The sale was completed last month for $ 1.4 million, according to documents at the Hancock County Registry of Deeds; the 68-acre island, which is part of Acadia National Park, will not be developed, according to Len Bobinchock, the park's acting superintendent. … Bobby Edwards, a newspaper carrier for the Johnson City (Tenn.) Press, spotted an early morning house fire and awoke a family who escaped. "He was a godsend," said Mark Easterly, who escaped with three other family members.

 

End of Document
