

Duty-free trade with the U.S. ends for Andean region; businesses brace for economic hardship
May 17, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 663 words
Byline: By ANDREW SELSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




An 11-year-old deal that let some businesses in the Andean region trade duty-free with the United States has expired, leaving the survival of entire industries hanging in the balance.
The deal expired at midnight, and hundreds of millions of dollars in back levies were to kick in immediately.
Strong feelings of uncertainty and bitterness came with the expiration of the Andean Trade Preferences Act, a 1991 agreement created to strengthen legal alternatives to cocaine and heroin production. As of Friday, exporters across the South American region faced U.S. duties of up to 40 percent on staple trade items, including flowers and gold.
Andean businesses will also be required to pay retroactive duties to the United States that could climb as high as $400 million, for exports since Feb. 15.
The act technically expired Dec. 4, but President Bush extended it on Feb. 15 until May 16 in hopes the U.S. Congress would revive it. However, a renewed and expanded bill is stuck in the Senate, largely because of objections by the U.S. textile industry.
Many in the four South American countries covered by the agreement - Colombia, Peru, Bolivia and Ecuador - saw its expiration as a double-cross.
"Bolivia has put a lot of effort into eradicating coca, which has caused a lot of problems here," said analyst Carlos Villegas, referring to an eradication effort of the plant that produces cocaine. The drive has triggered clashes in which 39 coca farmers, police and soldiers have been killed since 1997.
"The least that we expected was some reciprocity from the United States - that they would open up their markets to help us compensate for these losses," Villegas said.
In Quito, Ecuador, the former head of the Chamber of Small Businesses called the Senate's failure to renew the agreement before the Thursday deadline an "enormous error."
"If the United States wants to grow economically and stem migration, it should promote jobs in this part of the world," Joyce de Ginatta said.
Antonio Castillo, head of the Peruvian government's export promotion agency, said many sectors will be hit hard, especially fisheries, chemicals, jewelry and agriculture, as tariffs rise between 4 and 21 percent. About 40 percent of Peru's exports in 2001 - worth about $680 million - were covered under ATPA, he said.
Exporters in the region were already lining up for loans to pay the back tariffs. Shanker Singham, a Miami-based trade expert, predicted many would be thrown out of the export market.
Colombian "flower exporters emerged as a business sector because of ATPA. They could easily disappear as a business sector because of the failure to renew ATPA," Singham said.
Colombia is the principal exporter of flowers to the United States, which, before the agreement expired, had been expected to reap revenues of $600 million this year. To keep prices competitive, the exporters won't be able to jack up prices and pass the tariffs onto the American buyer, said Augusto Solano Mejia, president of the Colombian Flower Growers Association.
There were also grim forecasts in Bolivia.
"This is definitely going to cause unemployment and decrease investment here. All agricultural producers and lumber and jewelry manufacturers are going to get hit hard," said Jose Vicente Maldonado, spokesman for the Andean Development Corporation, which provides development loans to member countries.
The controversy underscores how difficult it will be for the Bush administration to foster a Free Trade Area of the Americas, or FTAA - a duty-free region stretching from Alaska to Argentina - by 2005 as scheduled.
Still, there was some optimism the Andean accord could be rekindled.
"We haven't lost hope," said Bolivian Agricultural Minister Walter Nunez. "We're still counting on President Bush's administration to come through for us."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Associated Press correspondents Vanessa Arrington in La Paz; Gonzalo Solano in Quito; Craig Mauro in Lima and Cesar Garcia in Bogota contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: May 18, 2002

 

End of Document
