

EXPLORING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY; Modern world more a blessing than curse in this Brazilian outback
May 20, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 792 words
Byline: By MICHAEL ASTOR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAO GABRIEL DA CACHOEIRA, Brazil
Body




People still paddle to work in wooden canoes and women carry woven baskets strapped across their foreheads, like their ancestors thousands of years before them.
But telephone and Internet service are coming to the 40,000 Indians in this vast Amazon outback. A radar tower to monitor weather and planes already rises above the jungle canopy.
Will globalization be good or bad?
Elsewhere in the Amazon, it has meant environmental devastation, misery and the shock of Western culture. But not everyone here thinks the global economy is automatically a bad thing.
"If globalization means what's happening with mad cow and foot-and-mouth disease, we don't want it," says Braz de Oliveira Franca, the region's first indigenous candidate for mayor. "But Indians have become dependent on white culture, so we have to define a way of maintaining our culture in the globalized world."
Except for the occasional TV satellite dish, that dependence on white culture hasn't advanced much beyond the clothing, steel utensils and Western medicines introduced by missionaries in the 1800s.
But Indians in this Tennessee-sized reservation, some 2,200 miles northwest of Rio de Janeiro, hope globalization's late arrival will allow them to avoid the mistakes of more modernized Amazon regions.
TV sets came here a few years ago, powered by diesel-fueled generators. Then a local phone company moved to install pay phones in the grass-roof community houses of villages with over 100 people.
Indians can surf the Web now, thanks to the phone company's donation of 10 computers to the area school and a satellite link. Though just 120 people signed up, the Net service may branch into helping local Indians sell their handicrafts on the Web.
Orlando Jose de Oliveira, president of the Rio Negro Indigenous People's Federation, is enthusiastic the Internet will provide Indians valuable knowledge about the outside world. He's also wary it might have the same stupefying effect as TV.
"When Indians started getting television, they stopped working and only worried about getting money for diesel fuel to run the generators so they could watch soap operas," says Oliveira, whose federation unites the 22 different ethnicities that inhabit the reservation.
The encounter with globalization has been cushioned by an influx of doctors, anthropologists and aid workers.
Doctors from Unlimited Health, a Brazilian group, has successfully trained Indians to deal with easily preventable diseases.
Three days upriver by motorboat, Indians still go naked and hunt with blowguns. But native health workers use computers powered by solar panels and connected to the Internet by satellite to exchange e-mails with doctors back in hospitals.
Sao Paulo's Institute for Society and the Environmental is working on sustainable development projects like fish farming to reverse damage from overfishing. It wants Indians to use traditional techniques to make handicrafts for a national chain of furniture stores.
"I don't think this region has to go the way of others, because the nonprofit groups got here before the multinationals," said Marta Azevedo, an anthropologist from Sao Paulo.
Sheer distance has held off the international logging companies who are tearing down the Amazon at a rate of about 1,200 soccer fields a day.
With scant mineral resources, Sao Gabriel hasn't attracted the wildcat prospectors who roam the Amazon poisoning rivers with mercury to concentrate gold dust and corrupting Indians with promises of easy money, alcohol, disease and prostitution.
The area also was untouched by the dams and highways built with World Bank funding during a development drive in the 1970s and '80s in the Amazon. Many projects displaced Indians and brought in settlers who later were abandoned to their own devices, leaving ecological disaster, desperation and squalor in their wake.
Admitting its past mistakes, the World Bank helped fund the reservation's demarcation - marking its borders with signs warning visitors they are not welcome without permission from the federal government.
In local villages, Indians proudly display photos of themselves with painted faces and feathered headdresses, blowing on pan flutes to honor visiting World Bank representatives.
Since there's no mineral wealth to covet, no one is challenging the demarcation with the argument, popular among Amazon politicians, that handing so much land over to Indians will condemn the region to forever being an economic backwater.
One result of the demarcation has been a proposal in Congress to have the region sliced off of Amazonas state and transformed into a federal territory.
With no jurisdiction and no tax income from the area, state politicians don't want to bear the administration costs, however little they may amount to.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY191-195.
 Load-Date: May 21, 2001

 

End of Document
