

EXPLORING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY; Losing European protection, Caribbean banana farmers brace for worst
June 18, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 876 words
Byline: By IAN JAMES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LAUDERS, St. Vincent
Body




Fallen banana leaves crackle under Alston Lewis' feet as he inspects rows of trees on a steep hillside. The past few months have been dry, and even harder times lie ahead.
Low banana prices already have hurt his profits. But a trade deal reached across the globe, without his input, soon will pit bananas grown on his 15 acres against cheaper fruit from vast Latin American plantations. Thousands of small Caribbean growers like Lewis will be forced out of business.
Island leaders say it's time to adapt to the hard realities of the world economy.
"It is becoming more difficult for the small farmer to keep producing," Lewis said. "Quite naturally, we can't compete."
For years, European countries preferred to buy bananas, sugar and other products from their former colonies in the Caribbean, the Pacific and Africa - lending support to lands they once ruled and people they once enslaved.
While the sweeter Caribbean bananas are popular in Europe, they cost more and account for little more than 1 percent of world production.
The United States, arguing that European practices shut out American producers, imposed sanctions on nearly $200 million worth of European imports last year, from French handbags to Danish ham.
In April, the United States and the European Union struck a deal in which Caribbean farmers had little say: The Americans agreed to suspend the sanctions July 1, allowing the Europeans to keep banana quotas, although reduced, for former colonies until 2006.
After that, tariffs will remain but quotas will be eliminated, giving a boost to U.S. firms like Chiquita Brands and Dole Foods that charge less for Latin American bananas grown on giant plantations, where costs are lower.
Prime Minister Ralph Gonsalves of St. Vincent and the Grenadines estimates the number of farmers in the Windward Islands - St. Vincent, St. Lucia, Dominica and Grenada - will shrink from 10,000 to 5,000 in the next few years.
Finding work may be hard. On St. Vincent, there is 37 percent unemployment. Gonsalves says inefficient farmers will be led to other work through new job retraining programs.
"We have to restructure the industry," he said. "If we do not do this, the entire industry would collapse."
It's happened before. On a farm in southern St. Vincent, the vine-covered ruins of a sugar mill lie among the banana trees - a reminder of a crop built on slavery that faded in the 1960s amid competition from U.S-grown beet sugar. The farm's owner, Hugh Stewart, hopes to stay in business even though he is losing money. "I like bananas," he said, "and I believe it's worthwhile."
Another farmer, Teddy Fergus, plans to sell his five acres. "Bananas, they are nothing," he said.
Hit by stagnating prices, thousands of banana workers here already have left for jobs as landscapers or security guards. Some have cut down their banana trees and replaced them with plantains or arrowroot. Others have turned to an illegal but lucrative crop: marijuana.
"Bananas are too much trouble," said Kamal Jack, a 20-year-old high school dropout who harvests marijuana on St. Vincent's rugged peaks. "I prefer to go in the hills and farm on my own."
While fighting Europe's banana practices, the United States also sends troops periodically to eradicate marijuana, "binding both hands" of many in St. Vincent, said Albert Browne, who runs a refrigeration business in the former British colony.
Some banana farmers can't pay back loans from the St. Vincent Banana Growers' Association, which itself owes $9.4 million. Credit may be eliminated as part of the reforms.
Windward Islands leaders have agreed to a plan to restructure the banana industry in St. Vincent and are meeting on Tuesday in St. Lucia to discuss details. The European Union will help fund the plan, estimated to cost $56 million.
"The industry is going to have to adapt to what the market requires," said John Caloghirou, EU ambassador for the Eastern Caribbean.
Banana workers on St. Vincent - who pack fruit in boxes labeled "Ethically Grown" - make about $10 a day. Latin American pickers earn $6 to $8 a day but work longer hours, with Ecuador at the low end in pay.
Chiquita, based in Cincinnati, Ohio, sells bananas from Central America but not Ecuador, company President Steve Warshaw said. He said labor costs are comparable to the Caribbean when benefits such as housing, medical care and schooling are included.
But efficient Latin American plantations can afford to charge far less for bananas - and a worldwide glut has depressed everyone's prices. About 40 pounds of Windward Islands bananas sell at the docks for $9.50, compared to $3 to $4.50 for Latin American ones, according to Caribbean exporters.
To compete, some suggest letting farmers deal directly with exporters and cutting jobs in the region's main banana export company. Another idea, less popular among banana pickers, is to increase work hours.
Christine Thomas, a 36-year-old worker, earns $56 for 30 hours a week - already a low wage in St. Vincent.
"An eight-hour day for the same amount of pay?" she said. "That won't work."
---
On the Net:
Caribbean Banana Exporters Association: http://www.cbea.org 
European Union: http://www.europa.eu.int/index-en.htm 
Chiquita: http://www.chiquita.com 
Nonprofit group: http://www.bananalink.org.uk 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY191-192,199; AP Graphic GLOBAL LOGO
 Load-Date: June 19, 2001

 

End of Document
