

EXPLORING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY; Bolivia's dream to deliver energy to California faces global reality test
July 15, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 801 words
Byline: By VANESSA ARRINGTON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LA PAZ, Bolivia
Body




It's a grandiose vision: build a $5 billion, 5,000-mile natural gas route using ocean tankers and pipelines through three Latin American countries - and rescue energy-starved California.
Bolivia may be South America's poorest nation, but it has lined up major energy companies to help foot the bill for the daunting venture. If successful, the project would be a novel example of how world energy markets are bringing together business and government in previously unheard of ways.
The pipeline could earn Bolivia an estimated $1 billion a year, a giant leap above its current total exports of $1.2 billion, only 8 percent of which comes from gas. Corruption and inefficiency could prevent any potential riches from reaching the poor. Other nations with huge energy reserves, such as Nigeria, have a miserable record of sharing wealth with the masses.
Three-quarters of Bolivia's 8 million people are poor. Farmers in the high plains use oxen to plow fields. Hunters still use bows and arrows to catch dinner in the jungle. Rural Indians live without electricity or potable water.
But in less than four years, Bolivia's proven natural gas reserves have blossomed from 6.6 trillion cubic feet to 46.8 trillion, attracting the attention of British Petroleum, British Gas and Spanish- and Argentine-owned YPF.
At the same time, Bolivia's army, backed by the United States, has wiped out hundreds of thousands of acres of coca. Its economy devastated, Bolivia sorely needs alternative exports.
"We had the north addicted to coca," said Vice Minister of Energy Carlos Contreras, referring to the traditional Andean leaf used to make cocaine. "Why can't we have them addicted to our gas?"
It once took an enormous leap of faith to invest in a project that laid pipe across a region with a long history of strife. But the global economy has brought together buyers and sellers in new, efficient ways - and recent reforms in Bolivia have caught the attention of global energy players.
Bolivia's industries were nationalized until 1985, but the government has slowly privatized its economy and opened its borders to foreigners. Foreign investment has risen from $128 million in 1993 to $760 million in 2000.
"We decided to enter the era of globalization," said Claudio Mansilla, Bolivia's minister of foreign commerce. "In that moment, doors started opening."
Bolivia was the first South American nation to export gas, constructing a pipeline to Argentina some 20 years ago. It is a major exporter to Brazil.
Then came the energy crisis in California, and business and government leaders jumped into action. Bolivia needs only 20 percent of its natural gas reserves for domestic energy consumption and existing exports, meaning 80 percent has no home. Peru and Argentina also are seeking to boost gas exports, but both have higher domestic consumption and fewer reserves than Bolivia.
"You have the market, and the supplier," said Herbert Muller, an economist in La Paz who is advising the energy companies for the project. "The rest will work itself out."
The hurdles are staggering. Landlocked by the Andes, Bolivia envisions a complex land-and-sea route linking either Peru or Chile with Mexico and the United States.
Gas extracted from Bolivia's sunny region of Tarija, which shares a border with Argentina, would be piped west across the rugged Andes until reaching a Pacific Coast port town - either Mejillones in Chile, or Ilo in Peru. A plant at the port would turn the gas into a liquid that is put on a ship headed for Mexico.
On either the Pacific or Gulf side of Baja California in Mexico, a re-gasification plant would revert the liquid back to gas, then either send it in a pipeline north to California, or use it to generate electricity that would then travel through power lines to the energy-starved state.
Bolivia is not the only one looking to fulfill California's needs. As Bill Wood, chief natural gas forecaster for the California Energy Commission puts it, "everybody's flocking to California to sell gas."
Wood, who has been contacted by would-be gas providers as far away as New Guinea, has not yet heard from Bolivia. He believes they have yet to contact any government officials there.
Companies here say they have contacted El Paso Corp. in Texas, an energy company thinking of building a facility to convert liquid to gas in Mexico near the California border. Mel Scott, spokesman for El Paso, could not confirm the company had been contacted.
While some worry about corruption preventing any benefits from reaching the poor, others argue that those in power, perhaps for fear of returning to a coca economy, are united in the vision of a better Bolivia. They dream of safer roads, improved health care, decent education.
"This country will be different in five years from now, I guarantee you," Contreras said.
 Graphic



 
AP Graphics BOLIV GAS ROUTE, GLOBAL LOGO
 Load-Date: July 16, 2001

 

End of Document
