

Facing up to painful past, Spain reburies victims of the Franco regime
December 26, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 888 words
Byline: By CIARAN GILES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VALDESTILLAS, Spain
Body




A chill wind cut across the graveyard as silence broken by stifled sobs fell over villagers watching two coffins lowered into a grave.
But then the solemnity was snapped by a ripple of applause, signaling that this was no ordinary burial.
The coffins held the remains of nine sons of this village in northern Spain, dragged from their homes one night at the start of Spain's 1936-39 Civil War to be summarily executed by supporters of Francisco Franco and dumped beside the road.
They were among the estimated 30,000 civilians called "Spain's missing" - their deaths shrouded in silence during Franco's four-decade dictatorship and the era of democracy that followed his death in 1975.
Now, in a phenomenon with echoes of Argentina's Dirty War and the mass graves of the Balkans wars, families across Spain have begun digging up the remains of relatives who were murdered and dumped in ditches, fields and unmarked mass graves.
"We have a debt to them," said Asuncion Esteban, 38, of Valdestillas. Her great-grandfather and two other relatives were among the nine buried last month, a few days after their bones were exhumed from an unmarked grave.
"Now they're back home, in their towns. It's not just their remains, but their names and the dignity and pride of their families," said Esteban.
It's a story that seems out of place in a thriving democracy that belongs to the European Union and NATO. But many feel it is another necessary step in the transition to democracy begun after Franco's death in 1975.
"This is one of the most uncomfortable episodes of the transition," said Emilio Silva, who founded the Association for the Recovery of Historic Memory in 2000 after he discovered that his grandfather was buried in a ditch outside the latter's home town.
"It's possibly the most shameful because these people died in defense of the Second Republic's democracy, which Franco rebelled against," he said.
Franco came to power leading a military uprising against Spain's secular, leftist government. The Civil War pitted Franco's forces, called nationalists and backed by Nazi Germany, against the government's side, known as republicans and supported by the Soviet Union. The war also rallied fighters from other countries in defense of the opposing sides in Spain.
Many Franco supporters died in battle, but they alone are publicly commemorated. The missing on the losing side were all but forgotten, because of an "unwritten pact of silence," says Paul Preston, a Franco-era expert at the London School of Economics.
After 40 years of dictatorship, people felt it was best to leave the past alone for the sake of restoring democracy, he said. In 1977 Spanish political parties agreed to an amnesty on crimes committed during the Civil War and ensuing dictatorship.
But Silva says it disgusts him to see the republican dead still treated ignominiously while Franco's tomb in the Valle de los Caidos (Valley of the Fallen) - is lit up and presented as one of Madrid's most popular tourist sites. Hundreds of prisoners died hollowing out the side of a mountain for the mausoleum, working without safety equipment in hazardous conditions.
Silva's association estimates Franco's gangs murdered some 30,000 people and never gave them a proper burial. Some historians say the number is exaggerated, while others claim it is many times greater. Silva said there is evidence of killings right up to 1959, and claims there is ample evidence of mass graves containing thousands of bodies each, and in some cases as many as 3,000 or 4,000.
Possibly the most famous victim was the poet Federico Garcia Lorca, executed near Granada. His remains have never been found.
So far some 17 unmarked graves have been opened and more than 50 bodies exhumed. In many cases the bones have been identified by clothing or personal belongings. Others await DNA identification.
"In the villages, everyone has always known where their dead relatives are and that's why it's urgent that they speak up now because the generation has only maybe four or five years left to live," said Silva.
Conservative media have suggested the association is raking up the past for vindictive motives. The conservative government of Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar, whose members have strong family ties with the Franco regime, has until recently refused to condemn the dictatorship.
"We're not opening wounds. They've never been closed," said Esteban. "They're still bleeding and we're trying to heal them.
"There was fear among the wives and children who survived. But now, we grandchildren are able to talk."
Last month Silva's group won two important victories.
A U.N. working group on forced disappearances asked the government to help clarify the disappearance of at least two republicans executed after the war. And in an unexpected turnaround on Nov. 20, the 37th anniversary of Franco's death, Aznar's Popular Party backed a parliamentary opposition motion condemning the repression and calling for graves to be opened and the victims identified.
Asuncion Alvarez, 85, welcomed the news with tears. Her two brothers were executed and their bodies dumped outside a village in northern Leon province.
"Our mother forbade us to place flowers where we knew our brothers were," said Alvarez. "But what better flowers can we lay now than to have their remains finally laid to rest beside hers."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY425-428
 Load-Date: December 27, 2002

 

End of Document
