

Family members of hostages killed in rescue attempt blame the government
The Associated Press
May 6, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 948 words
Byline: By MARGARITA MARTINEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEDELLIN, Colombia
Body




Colombian rebels began shooting hostages as soon as they heard military helicopters flying overhead, one of the captives said, describing a botched rescue attempt in which a state governor, a former defense minister and eight soldiers were killed.
Colombian President Alvaro Uribe took responsibility for the failed jungle raid in an emotional television address late Monday during which he asked for the nation's support in Colombia's fight on terrorism.
But despite a growing public clamor to swap jailed guerrillas for dozens of remaining hostages - including a presidential candidate and three Americans - Colombia's military commander vowed Tuesday to push ahead with more rescue operations.
Gov. Guillermo Gaviria and former Defense Minister Gilberto Echeverri were among those killed in Monday's failed rescue. Three captive soldiers survived, two with gunshot wounds.
The governor and the former defense minister were taken hostage most recently, in April 2002; some of the hostages had been held for five or six years.
Army Cpl. Antinor Hernandez escaped by pretending to be dead.
"When three shots rang out, I threw myself to the ground and Gilberto (Echeverri) fell injured on top of me, and they shot him again and shot me in the leg," Hernandez told reporters late Monday. "But since I didn't move, they thought I was dead."
He said the rebels fled after the shootings, and the army arrived within 20 minutes.
Before seeing the bodies, Hernandez said Colombian troops began telling rebels through megaphones they wouldn't be killed if they surrendered and that "there is no need for even one shot to be fired."
Another survivor, army Cpl. Heriberto Aranguren, said rebels grabbed the hostages as soon as they heard helicopters. Then they gave the order to shoot.
"They killed my companions and left running," Aranguren said from his hospital bed in a televised exchange with Uribe Monday night. "Thank God we came out alive to tell this story, and tell the country what kind of people they are."
The third survivor, who was uninjured, met with the president Tuesday. Sgt. Pedro Guarnizo said that after the shootings, the rebels started to flee their camp of thatch-roofed huts when a commander ordered some to turn back to make sure all hostages were dead.
"I stayed down, and prayed," Guarnizo told Uribe and reporters, lying on the floor to demonstrate how he pretended to be dead.
Guarnizo agreed to stay in the area to help troops try to locate the rebels in the dense jungle. That decision delayed his return to his family, and his first meeting with his 5-year-old daughter, born after he was kidnapped.
During his meeting with the president, Guarnizo wore a T-shirt with a picture of his daughter that his family sent him in captivity. He wore the shirt in a video the rebels released of hostages several months ago.
Colombia's military commander Gen. Jorge Enrique Mora vowed Tuesday to push ahead with more rescue operations.
"It is our constitutional responsibility to bring home all the Colombians that these bandits have kidnapped," Mora said.
Uribe, too, pledged to continue his tough stance against the rebels, who have waged war in this South American country for 38 years. "In this moment of pain, Colombia cannot surrender," he said. "We must now fortify our decision to defeat terrorism."
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known as the FARC, holds dozens of captured soldiers and police, former presidential candidate Ingrid Betancourt and several state lawmakers. The FARC is also holding three Americans captured when their plane went down in rebel territory in February.
The U.S. Embassy in Bogota declined to comment on the rescue operation. Washington provides the Colombian military with intelligence assistance and military hardware, and U.S. Special Forces are in Colombia training troops in counterinsurgency tactics.
Pope John Paul II expressed deep sorrow over the deaths and denounced terrorists attacks. The European Union said "the escalation of terrorism by the FARC shows an absence of any humanitarian feeling or respect for democracy."
The rebels want to exchange hostages for guerrillas in government jails. They also are holding hundreds of ordinary Colombians for ransom, but they are not part of the rebels' proposed swap.
Uribe said he would only consider an exchange if it was brokered by the United Nations, included freedom for all hostages, and involved a third country - possibly France - taking in the rebels and guaranteeing they would not take up arms again.
Gaviria's wife tearfully blamed Uribe's government for the deaths.
"The government provoked this situation," said Yolanda Pinto, adding that the president did not consult with her family before launching the operation, as promised.
However, the daughter of the former defense minister said she supported Uribe. "We support him and the military forces." Lina Echeverri told reporters.
Opinion polls show most Colombians oppose trading imprisoned rebels for hostages, fearing the freed rebels would continue fighting the state.
But many relatives of hostages fear their loved ones will be killed if the government presses forward with rescue attempts.
"Looking at these tragic results, we are going to insist that the government abstain from doing any military operations to rescue Ingrid (Betancourt)," said Juan Carlos Lecompte, the husband of the former presidential candidate, who was kidnapped at a rebel roadblock 15 months ago.
Gaviria and Echeverri were kidnapped on April 21, 2002, as they led hundreds of peace marchers from Medellin to the village of Caicedo to meet with FARC commanders.
About 3,500 people, most of them civilians, die every year in the fighting with the rebels.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BOG102,104; AP Graphic COLOMBIA HOSTAGES

 

End of Document
