

FARM SCENE: Shrimp tariffs on the horizon? Louisiana fishermen hope so
The Associated Press
July 29, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 616 words
Byline: By CAIN BURDEAU, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW ORLEANS
Body




The American catfish and crawfish industries won tariffs against importers this month, and now Louisiana shrimpers hope to do the same.
The U.S. International Trade Commission slapped a tariff on catfish from Vietnam last week, and on July 15, the commission renewed a five-year tariff on Chinese crawfish tails.
In both cases, the commission granted tariffs to stamp out alleged unfair dumping of foreign products on the American market.
"To desperate shrimp people, the fact these two issues took place does nothing but give them a glimmer of hope that something can happen for their industry," said Jerald Horst, a biologist with Louisiana State University Agricultural Center's Sea Grant program.
American Shrimpers blame low prices in large part on cheap imported pond-raised shrimp.
About 75 protesters and shrimpers attended a march Saturday against a free-trade agreement between the United States and five Central American nations. Shrimpers say the passage of the Central American Free Trade Agreement, known as CAFTA, would worsen an already bad situation for shrimpers.
An eight-state group of shrimpers, the Southern Shrimp Alliance, has talked about filing an anti-dumping lawsuit since last year against at least 16 countries.
Now, Louisiana shrimpers say they may push ahead with an anti-dumping suit - with or without the other states.
"The Southern Shrimp Alliance is working with lobbyists, but Louisiana shrimpers are getting frustrated right now because nothing is getting done," said A.J. Fabre, the president of the Louisiana Shrimp Association.
Fabre said nearly all of the Louisiana group's 700 shrimpers favor filing an anti-dumping suit with the U.S. Department of Commerce. Louisiana harvests about 40 percent of U.S. shrimp.
Officials with the Southern Shrimp Alliance could not be reached for comment Thursday.
Not all Louisiana shrimpers believe an anti-dumping suit would work.
With shrimp prices so low, shrimpers do not have the money to pay for a petition, which could cost up to $5 million, said Pete Gerica, chairman of the board of the Louisiana Shrimp Industry Coalition.
He said limiting the amount of imported shrimp and improving the quality of U.S. shrimp would do more than tariffs to drive prices up.
In the meantime, Vietnam is worried that the tariff on catfish sets the stage for passage of tariffs on shrimp. The Vietnam Association of Seafood Exporters and Processors denounced the decision on catfish, saying it showed how "a small group of fillet breeders in some southern states of the U.S. can put pressure on American authorities" to ignore the principles of competition and free trade it preaches worldwide.
"Catfish in absolute form is not a big item, but it's a very symbolic step," said economist Le Dang Doanh. "It's the first lesson of Vietnam. The more successful the Vietnamese exporters are, the more difficulties they face."
---
BOZEMAN (AP) - Hot, dry weather has created the potential for toxic nitrate levels in some livestock forage, Montana State University officials warned.
Livestock managers are encouraged to have forage tested before feeding animals. County agents are trained to perform the tests in 31 Montana counties. Tests may be done in extension offices or in the field.
More than 4,300 samples have been tested since 2000. In about a third of the cases, hay lots had to be limit-fed, blended or destroyed. Severe cases of nitrate poisoning can cause abortion and death.
Nitrate poisoning can occur in crops such as barley, wheat, millet, corn and sudangrass and in weeds such as kochia and lambsquarters.
During normal growth, the plant converts nitrate into grain protein. However, if growth is disrupted, nitrate can accumulate in stems.
 Load-Date: July 30, 2003

 

End of Document
