

Former senator extradited to the United States promises to expose corrupt Colombian politicians
The Associated Press
September 7, 2003, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 690 words
Byline: By VANESSA ARRINGTON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




A former Colombian senator extradited to the United States acknowledged giving former President Ernesto Samper illegal campaign donations and claimed Samper allies plotted to kill an opposition leader, according to a magazine interview published Sunday.
Former Sen. Samuel Lopesierra told the respected Cambio magazine that the donations to Samper's 1994 campaign were meant to "buy" permission to continue his smuggling of cigarettes and liquor along Colombia's Caribbean coast. Samper could not be reached to comment on the claim.
Lopesierra spoke with the respected weekly newsmagazine from a Colombian jail in early August, before he was extradited, the newsmagazine said. He gave the interview on condition his remarks not be published until he left the country.
Lopesierra, accused of heading a ring that sent tons of cocaine to the United States, was sent to the United States on Aug. 29 in the custody of U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration agents.
Hours before leaving Colombia, Lopesierra told local media he planned to expose corrupt politicians once in the United States.
Perhaps most damaging for the former president are Lopesierra's claims that Samper's close circle of political friends conspired to kill opposition leader Alvaro Gomez Hurtado.
Gomez, a former senator and ambassador to Washington, was shot to death as he got into his car after teaching a class at a Bogota university in 1995. The publisher of an opposition newspaper, Gomez had written editorials urging Samper to resign over the allegations he won the 1994 elections with huge donations from the Cali cartel.
According to Cambio, Lopesierra said he took part in at least two meetings in which the assassination plan was discussed.
In 1997, Congressman Pablo Victoria also claimed that a witness linked Samper to Gomez's assassination. The government at the time called the claim "ridiculous."
In 1999, retired Col. Bernardo Ruiz, the former commander of a notorious army intelligence unit, was arrested on charges that he arranged the killing. He was later cleared of the charges.
According to Lopesierra, Samper's circle believed Gomez "was the only person who could force the president to resign," Cambio said.
Known as the "Marlboro man" for smuggling large quantities of cigarettes in northern Colombia, Lopesierra had previously said he feared he would be killed, in jail, by people who did not want him to talk.
Interior Minister Fernando Londono said Saturday that the Colombian mafia had indeed offered $5 million to have Lopesierra killed before he could reveal his secrets, prompting jail authorities to provide the former senator with extra security, he said.
Lopesierra told the magazine he had every intention of cooperating with U.S. officials in exchange for a lighter sentence. He appeared to admit his guilt in minor drug trafficking, but said the United States is more interested in obtaining information from him.
"They are going to extradite me for conspiring to send just five kilos (11 pounds) of cocaine to the United States - that's nothing," he said. "What will really be of use to the authorities there is everything I know about the corruption of Colombian politicians."
Lopesierra said that when he made the illegal campaign contribution, he handed over a check for $500,000 to police Col. German Osorio, the person in charge of Samper's security at the time, on behalf of former business partners. Lopesierra business partners in Venezuela also paid off Samper, he said.
Samper was elected in 1994 with $6 million in contributions from the Cali cocaine cartel. The former president denied he solicited the funds and was cleared two years later by a highly partisan Congress.
Lopesierra told Cambio he has documents that prove at least two international organizations also made campaign contributions to Samper that were never registered.
Lopesierra was arrested in October with 14 other people accused of sending tons of cocaine to the United States and having ties to outlawed paramilitary groups.
The right-wing militia, as well as their leftist rebel foes, use drug trafficking to finance their battles in Colombia's war, now in its 39th year.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos pursuing
 Load-Date: September 8, 2003

 

End of Document
