

Future of Colombia hangs in the balance as court decides president's fate
The Associated Press
October 7, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 646 words
Byline: By ANDREW SELSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




Nine Colombian judges have been deliberating nearly nonstop for more than two weeks whether President Alvaro Uribe can run for a second term as Colombians anxiously await the verdict that could decide the future of their nation.
Congress has struck down a law that bars presidents from second terms, but the Constitutional Court now must approve the measure before Uribe can appear on the ballot.
Uribe has been widely credited for bringing security to many corners of a country afflicted by a 41-year-old civil war and drug trafficking and - with a 70 percent popularity rating - would be the clear favorite.
But with a ruling expected any day, nerves are fraying and Colombia's stock market is falling due to jittery investors.
At one point, court president Manuel Jose Cepeda rebuked Uribe after a Cabinet minister said outlawed armed groups were pressuring the judges.
The nine magistrates have been meeting 12 hours a day, three days a week since Sept. 20 in a squat brown building housing the court off the main plaza in Bogota. The building is located where the Palace of Justice once stood before it was destroyed in a 1985 rebel attack. About 100 people, including 11 Supreme Court justices, died in the violence.
The judges must rule by Nov. 15. Court spokeswoman Luz Elena Botero said a decision was imminent.
"They are meeting in the plenary hall from 9 a.m. to 9 or 10 p.m. on this subject, sending out for coffee and tea, and only taking a break for lunch," Botero told The Associated Press. Only the official court stenographer is allowed in the room. Security guards stand outside.
The court is not hesitant to buck Uribe. In 2003, it struck down four questions on a 19-point nationwide referendum on austerity proposed by Uribe.
The longer the court deliberates, the higher tensions climb.
"I thought that the court would approve this with no problem, but I see such nervousness among government officials that now I am not so sure," said Sen. Carlos Gaviria, a former Constitutional Court president.
If the court rejects re-election, Colombia's political landscape will be plunged into disarray. Uribe has not named a candidate to run in his place in case of a "no" vote. Possible choices include Sen. German Vargas and former Bogota mayors Enrique Penalosa and Antanas Mockus.
Uribe says he needs more than four years to end a four-decade-old rebel conflict that has killed at least 35,000 people. He is President Bush's firmest ally in Latin America, and the United States has poured in $4 billion since 2000 to help Colombia battle rebels and drug traffickers.
But many Colombians are skeptical that the court will allow two-term presidents.
In July, Inspector General Edgardo Maya advised the magistrates to strike down the re-election measure, saying Congress made procedural errors.
Comments from Colombia's interior and justice minister, Sabas Pretelt, did not help.
Pretelt said in a newspaper interview that rebels and drug traffickers were pressuring the court to reject the re-election bid. Cepeda then responded with a letter to Uribe saying that if the government knows about such pressures, it should inform the court through official channels.
Cepeda also pointedly said he expects "all authorities and private citizens to abide by the rulings of the court, regardless of the subject."
In a letter marked by uncharacteristic humility, Uribe assured Cepeda he would respect any ruling and said he wanted an "atmosphere of tranquility to surround the honorable Constitutional Court, so in its wisdom it can make its pertinent decisions."
Poncho Renteria, a columnist for Colombia's leading newspaper El Tiempo, which is generally pro-Uribe, predicted in his column Wednesday that the court would reject Uribe's bid to stand for a second term, which begins next August: "The nine emperors - pardon me, the nine illustrious magistrates - will send him into retirement."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BOG106-107
 Load-Date: October 8, 2005

 

End of Document
