

G-7 finance ministers paving the way for summit
June 15, 2002, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 523 words
Byline: By TOM COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HALIFAX, Nova Scotia
Body




G-7 finance ministers met Saturday to discuss the global economy and to weigh strategies for preventing international financial crises like the one in Argentina.
The two-day meeting that opened with a Friday night working dinner is a prelude to a Group of Eight summit in Alberta later this month.
Finance ministers did not discuss their talks on Friday, but Canada's John Manley said the main topics were crisis prevention, new ideas on development aid for poor nations, and the overall economic picture around the world.
While the U.S. and other major economies are rebounding after last year's slowdown - exacerbated by the Sept. 11 attacks - the overall climate is not "problem-free," Manley said Friday.
He also said some U.S. trade policies, such as recently approved agriculture subsidies, hinder the ability of rich nations to convince others to reform their economies.
"It's going to be difficult for all of us to advance the cause of liberalization" in the new round of global trade talks agreed to last November, Manley said.
In a long-running dispute between the North American neighbors, who share the world's largest trade relationship, the United States has set high duties on Canadian softwood lumber - a move Canada has challenged before the World Trade Organization.
The Group of Seven comprises the United States, Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan. Russia, a member of the G-8, also was invited to the meeting, along with the World Bank, International Monetary Fund and European Union.
Police barricaded streets surrounding the convention center, and a few dozen policemen armed with pistols and clubs stood at the fence outside as about 100 protesters marched in the streets, some playing bagpipes and banging drums.
Activists also held a news conference to call for cancellation of debt owed by poor African nations and more openness in the talks.
Manley said the finance ministers would "set the stage" for the June 26-27 summit, particularly on a new African development plan pushed by Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien.
Called the New Partnership for African Development, it is based on the idea that foreign investment is more effective than direct foreign aid in promoting economic growth needed to combat poverty, AIDS and other ills.
Other issues on the agenda included a compromise in a dispute between the United States and Europe over World Bank support for poor countries.
The United States says the World Bank, which currently extends almost all of its support to the poorest nations as low-interest loans, should shift to grants that don't have to be repaid.
Britain and other European nations say the shift could hurt the World Bank's pocketbook unless rich countries put more money in.
A compromise made public Thursday by a U.S. official calls for at least 18 percent of the World Bank support to be grants, far less than the 50 percent sought by Bush.
A senior Canadian official said Friday that the proposal still required approval from the ministers.
On the Net:
Canadian Department of Finance, http://www.fin.gc.ca 
World Bank: http://www.worldbank.org 
International Monetary Fund: http://www.imf.org 
 Load-Date: June 16, 2002

 

End of Document
