

Goss promises to keep Congress in the loop if installed at helm of CIA
The Associated Press
September 14, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 618 words
Byline: By KATHERINE PFLEGER SHRADER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Rep. Porter Goss, President Bush's choice as new head of the CIA, pledged to Congress Tuesday that he would conduct business in a nonpartisan way and would cooperate with the oversight role that lawmakers play.
"You have my word on that," replied Goss, when asked by Intelligence Committee Chairman Pat Roberts if he would disdain a partisanship approach to the job.
Goss, a former CIA operative, said the mission of the intelligence community is to provide information to keep the nation safe, and that this mission is more critical than ever in an era of terrorism.
Even as Congress faced work in revamping the nation's intelligence network, lawmakers seemed intent on putting a new CIA chief in place before they adjourn for the November elections.
The 65-year-old Goss, a Florida Republican, is expected to win Senate confirmation, but only after Democrats question his ability to steer a politically independent course.
Roberts gave Goss a rapid-fire quiz just after the nominee's opening statement, asking the congressman pointedly just how much he would cooperate with Congress as it carries out its oversight role concerning intelligence operations.
Before he delivered his opening statement, Goss was introduced to the panel by Florida's two U.S. senators, Democrats Bob Graham and Bill Nelson, who both recommended his confirmation. Goss was the only scheduled witness at the hearing.
"Porter Goss will need to answer tough questions about his record and his position on reform, including questions on the independence of the leader of the intelligence community," the committee's senior Democrat, Sen. Jay Rockefeller of West Virginia, said last month.
Rockefeller's spokeswoman, Wendy Morigi, said Monday a key question is whether Goss can provide independent, objective analysis to the Bush administration, or if he will be inclined to reinforce what administration officials want to hear.
If confirmed, Goss would succeed George Tenet, a Senate Intelligence Committee aide when he was tapped by President Clinton to head the agency in 1997. Tenet resigned in June, just before the intelligence committee and the Sept. 11 commission released reports criticizing the agency's performance during much of his tenure.
Congressional aides say they expect Goss will win Senate approval and Majority Leader Bill Frist, R-Tenn., has indicated he wants the Senate to vote on the nomination as soon as next week.
Some critics have questioned whether Goss, a CIA operative in Europe and Latin America for roughly a decade, may be too cozy with the agency to carry out widespread reforms. They also note that he had congressional oversight during the intelligence failures of the last few years.
Goss rejects suggestions that he can't be a balanced critic, and his allies say his experience makes him well-suited for the job. After announcing the nomination, Bush said Goss "knows the CIA inside and out. He's the right man to lead this important agency at this critical moment in our nation's history."
A former Army intelligence and CIA clandestine officer, Goss would also assume the post's dual role as head of the 14 other agencies in the U.S. intelligence community at a tumultuous time.
The Sept. 11 commission called for separating the two jobs and empowering a new national intelligence director with budget and personnel authority over all of the nation's spy network. The commission said the terrorists exploited deep institutional failings within the U.S. government.
Bush has endorsed giving the new director budgetary authority but not all of the powers that the commission suggested. Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry has endorsed adopting the commission's 40-plus recommendations in their entirety.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY116
 Load-Date: September 15, 2004

 

End of Document
