

Government often dangles cash for big criminal suspects - but enterprising crime-stoppers should read the fine print
November 22, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 734 words
Byline: By NANCY BENAC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




With mixed success, the government has dangled bounties before the public to catch famous fugitives: Jesse James, John Dillinger, the Unabomber and the Oklahoma City bomber, to name just a few.
But never has the incentive been stronger than in the case of Osama bin Laden, who has a $25 million price on his head. The offer is being proclaimed in Defense Department leaflets raining down on Afghanistan and in U.S. military broadcasts into the region.
"It's been going on forever and ever," said Gilbert Geis, a criminology professor emeritus at the University of California, Irvine. "It's the way we raise our children - we bribe them."
Enterprising crime-stoppers take heed though: The offer is not without some fine print. State Department spokesman Richard Boucher stresses the reward for bin Laden is "up to" $25 million for information leading to his capture.
A government committee would decide how much money a tipster would get. The panel would evaluate the relevance of the information provided, the risk the person took in providing it and how much they cooperated in an investigation or trial, he said.
Over the years, the government has doled out millions to motivate people to turn in everyone from tax evaders to international terrorists. While the chances of a government reward actually paying off are generally low, prospects are somewhat better in terrorism cases.
"Pretty much the only place where a reward works is in the area of terrorism," said Jack Levin, director of the Brudnick Center on Violence at Northeastern University in Boston. That's because terrorists' associates aren't apt to help without a financial incentive.
The government's biggest reward payout so far was $2 million for the unidentified informant who in 1995 helped the government find Ramzi Yousef in Pakistan. Yousef was convicted of leading the 1993 World Trade Center bombing.
Other big reward offers: $5 million for former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic and other senior officials indicted for war crimes; $2 million in the Oklahoma City bombing; $1 million still available for Eric Rudolph, wanted for the 1996 Olympics bombing and other crimes; $1 million for Unabomber Theodore Kaczynski; and $1 million for Panamanian leader Manuel Noriega.
Of those, only the Unabomber reward was paid because the others were captured principally without informants. Among famous fugitives of yore, bank and train robber Jesse James had a $5,000 bounty on his head, and bank robber John Dillinger's bounty was $20,000.
Until a few weeks ago, the most the government could offer was $5 million, but the new anti-terrorism law boosted the limit to $25 million. This week, Secretary of State Colin Powell signed the authorization for that amount to be applied to bin Laden, the suspected mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks, and other top al-Qaida leaders.
The potential reward represents an unfathomable sum in Afghanistan, where per capita income is about $200 a year. It's equal to nearly 10 percent of U.S. humanitarian assistance planned for the entire country this year.
Levin said rewards can be particularly effective in terrorism cases because those with critical information often "are themselves terrorists or they're citizens of some other country who feel no allegiance at all to the United States."
State Department officials say their "Rewards for Justice" program has paid out $8 million in 22 cases over seven years. The government won't discuss specifics on who got what for fear of endangering informants.
The money isn't just for bounties on criminals; it also can be used to reward tipsters whose information helps prevent planned acts of terrorism.
Since Sept. 11, the program has received 22,000 tips related to terrorist attacks, most through e-mail and telephone calls, but Boucher said none of the tips so far has produced a concrete result.
Criminologists caution that a big reward can also create big headaches.
"It brings out the pathological liars and those who would give us false leads and fabricated information," said Levin.
Often, the rewards serve more as a symbolic gesture to show the government is concerned, said Geis, adding, "The $25 million is simply to make a big splash."
On the Net:
State Department's "Rewards for Justice": http://www.dssrewards.net/ 
FBI's "Top 10" List: http://www.fbi.gov/mostwant/topten/fugitives/fugitives.htm 
Postal Service anthrax reward: http://www.dssrewards.net/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX106-109, AP Graphic BOUNTIES
 Load-Date: November 23, 2001

 

End of Document
