

Hamann takes the blame
July 1, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 691 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Germany's Dietmar Hamann said Sunday he shared the responsibility for Brazil's first goal in the World Cup final.
Hamann lost possession to Ronaldo, who found Rivaldo with a quick pass. The midfielder then struck a powerful shot that goalkeeper Oliver Kahn failed to hold - and Ronaldo pounced on it for a 1-0 lead in the 67th minute.
"I was looking for a player, but couldn't find one," Hamann said. "I tried to keep the ball, but lost it. It's an area where you really shouldn't lose the ball."
Ronaldo added another goal in the 79th to clinch a 2-0 victory for Brazil's fifth world championship.
But Hamann said Germany should take heart from its World Cup campaign.
"It's very important that we've shown the German people what we can do," he said. "They have suffered a lot over the last three years. Now we've shown we are back."
Hamann singled out the qualifying playoff against Ukraine - a 1-1 tie on the road and a 4-1 win at home - as the key in Germany's turnaround.
"We'd lost 5-1 to England in that infamous game and we'd done poorly at Euro 2000," he said. "But the Ukraine games were the turning point. That gave us our confidence back."
Now, he said, Germany must build on its World Cup success and start thinking of Euro 2004.
"It's obviously very hard right now, but we should congratulate ourselves for a great tournament," he said. "We'll be stronger for this experience.
"We lost to the best team in the tournament. And nobody had expected us to get that far."
---
WORLD CUP ARRESTS:@ Japanese police arrested 93 people for World Cup-related crimes and turned away 65 suspected hooligans over the month Japan was co-host of the tournament. 
Ticket scalping topped the list of crimes, leading to 30 arrests, according to the National Police Agency. Another 17 people were arrested for obstructing police officers, while 10 were booked on obscenity charges. Others were arrested for trespassing into stadiums, selling fake soccer jerseys or theft.
The record spans May 28-June 30, when Japan staged the world's most popular sports event with neighboring South Korea.
By nationality, Japanese accounted for nearly two-thirds of the arrests at 60. Britons were next with 13 arrests, followed by three arrests of Irishmen.
Of the 65 foreigners not allowed entry into the country, 53 were from Britain and three from Ireland. Local police and British spotters at airports identified them as suspected hooligans.
This year's World Cup, the first held in Asia, ended Sunday.
---
GERMAN PRAISE:@ German politicians were united in praise of the soccer team Sunday even as its stunning run ended in a 2-0 defeat by Brazil. 
"The German team played great, had a good tournament and became a surprise runner-up," the governing Social Democratic party said in a message of congratulations.
With an eye on elections Sept. 22, it added that "we are all looking forward to Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder welcoming the team to the World Cup in Germany in 2006."
Schroeder traveled to watch the final in Yokohama, as did his conservative election rival, Bavarian governor Edmund Stoiber. President Johannes Rau also attended.
Stoiber congratulated coach Rudi Voeller on putting together "a splendid team that has plenty of character and great virtues. The team has really made progress with cohesion, work and discipline."
Schroeder and Stoiber have wasted no opportunity to celebrate Germany's unexpected progress at the World Cup. Stoiber planned to fly home with the team Monday, while Schroeder - arguing earlier this week that politics should stay out of its homecoming - has turned down the offer.
---
ATTENDANCE FIGURES: More than 2.7 million fans watched the World Cup matches at stadiums in South Korea and Japan.
Despite a mixup over ticketing that led to thousands of empty seats at many early-round games in both countries, an average of 42,269 spectators turned out for each game. There were 64 games in the tournament, 32 in each nation.
The average was slightly lower than the 43,366 during the 1998 World Cup in France.
The monthlong World Cup, staged in Japan and South Korea, ended Sunday after Brazil defeated Germany 2-0 in the championship match in Yokohama.
 Load-Date: July 2, 2002

 

End of Document
