

Hamas, Hezbollah, other Palestinian groups cited for terrorism by the State Department
October 5, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 416 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The network headed by Osama bin Laden and several Palestinian groups were cited by the State Department Friday as foreign terrorist organizations.
They were included in a list of groups issued by the State Department. It updated, with a few changes, the department's 1999 list.
"Every one of these groups has continued to engage in terrorist activity over the past two years," department spokesman Richard Boucher said. And most of them have carried out murderous attacks on innocent people, he said in a statement.
These included Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka, the FARC in Colombia, the Basque ETA separatists in Spain, and al-Qaida, Boucher said.
Also, he said, two of the groups, Egyptian al-Jihad and the Gama'a al-Islamiyya, have provided direct support for bin Laden's network.
Under a 1996 law, U.S. citizens are prohibited from providing listed organizations with assistance. Banks and other American financial institutions must freeze their assets.
Al-Qaida, which bin Laden operates from his sanctuary in Afghanistan, is on the list, which appeared in the Federal Register. The Bush administration considers al-Qaida the prime suspect in the terrorist attacks Sept. 11 in New York and Washington.
Among the Palestinian groups listed were Hamas and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. Hezbollah, which wages guerrilla war against Israel from Lebanon and is known also as The Party of God, is also on the list.
Among the 25 groups are Kahane Chai, or Kach, a militant Jewish group, and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, also known as FARC.
President Bush on Sept. 24 issued an order freezing the assets of 11 organizations including al-Qaida as part of the U.S. counterterrorism campaign.
The Palestinian groups were not included among those whose assets were frozen. This raised questions whether Hamas and the others were being spared criticism.
Officials responded that the groups had been listed already by the department and similar curbs on their finances already applied.
Dropped from the list were the Japanese Red Army and Tupac Amaru, a Peruvian group.
Three others were added to the list during the year.
One is AUC, formerly known as the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, a right-wing paramilitary group.
The second is the Real IRA, an offshoot of the Irish Republican Army. It was implicated in the bombing of Omagh in Northern Ireland in 1998.
The third group added during the year is IMU, an Islamic group in Uzbekistan.
 Load-Date: October 6, 2001

 

End of Document
