

Hounded by critics, U.N. secretary-general goes on the offensive
The Associated Press
April 15, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 803 words
Byline: By NICK WADHAMS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Besieged over the oil-for-food program and other scandals, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan has taken a tougher stand against his critics in recent weeks, defending himself heatedly against American opponents, the media and even member governments.
The depth of his exasperation was evident this week in remarks he made during a reunion of former U.N. spokesmen - an event he thought was off the record. Shedding the diplomatic discretion for which he is well-known, Annan lamented that U.N. opponents had been "relentless" in their attacks and the world body wasn't fighting back enough.
"We are outgunned. We are outmanned," Annan said. "We need help from outside groups. We need to be able to organize outsiders to work with us to write to papers, to appear on television."
The last several months have been extremely difficult for Annan and the United Nations. Several scandals have rocked the world body, and Annan has found himself in the middle of it. U.S. congressional leaders have demanded he resign, but he has steadfastly refused to do so.
An investigation led by former U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker, criticized Annan for his management of the $64 billion humanitarian program in Iraq and faulted his son, Kojo, for hiding the extent of his involvement with a Swiss company that won a contract under the program.
While acknowledging flaws in the oil-for-food program, Annan also has hit back before the media and to staff, part of a larger strategy shift toward taking bolder action, according to U.N. officials and people close to him.
"I think his natural instinct has been to take a lot of blame," said William Luers, a friend of Annan's and a former U.S. ambassador who now heads the U.N. Association of the United States, an advocacy group. "He's somewhat self-effacing and he's sort of a servant to the U.N., (but) I think he's convinced himself and others that he's got to be an assertive leader and it's probably time to do it."
There could be several reasons for the shift, Luers said. Despite Annan's travails, President Bush's administration hasn't withdrawn its backing, so he may feel more inclined to speak. He also could be emboldened by the fact that his second and last term runs out at the end of next year.
Across the organization, too, there have been changes, big and small, in changing the image of the United Nations.
One significant move by Annan was to replace his chief of staff, Iqbal Riza, with the outspoken Mark Malloch Brown. Whereas Riza shied away from news conferences, Malloch Brown has sat for long tete-a-tetes with journalists.
In Colombia, meanwhile, U.N. officials played themselves in a soap opera. Annan also allowed the movie "The Interpreter," starring Nicole Kidman and Sean Penn, to be filmed inside U.N. headquarters in New York, a reversal in policy. The World Food Program, a U.N. agency, just released a video game called "Food Force," in which players join a crack team of aid workers to get crucial aid to hungry refugees.
Annan's outspokenness hasn't been entirely without controversy.
His response - "Hell no" - when he was asked if he would resign over the oil-for-food scandal raised eyebrows.
And in the remarks made Monday, he accused Britain and the United States of turning a blind eye to illegal oil smuggling by Saddam Hussein in the 1990s.
While the accusations were not particularly new, the remarks seemed injudicious at best because they violated an unwritten U.N. rule that high-ranking officials like Annan don't name names or shame nations, even among current and former colleagues.
Officials acknowledged he would have been more delicate had he known the forum was public. Annan had assumed that the event was closed to the media.
"I think it's fair to say that were the secretary-general speaking in a public forum he would have couched his thoughts slightly differently," said Shashi Tharoor, the U.N. undersecretary-general for communications and public information.
In the end, such comments may actually help Annan, who has been frank about the need for reform at the same time that he has defended the United Nations. Last month, he unveiled a plan to overhaul the world body and bring more transparency in what would be the biggest changes in its 60-year history.
That stance got the respect of one longtime U.N. critic, former Republican House speaker Newt Gingrich, suggesting that Annan's tough talk might be working. Gingrich was at the U.N. on Friday in his role as co-chairman of a U.S. congressional task force to examine United Nations reform.
"I know of no occasion where there has been as wide an agreement that the U.N. has to be reformed," Gingrich said after meeting Annan. "I know of no occasion where we've had a secretary-general as open and direct as Kofi Annan has been in the last two months about the need for reform."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NYGB104
 Load-Date: April 16, 2005

 

End of Document
