

In dialogue of the deaf with Davos, anti-capitalists shouted louder
January 29, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 701 words
Byline: By TONY SMITH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PORTO ALEGRE, Brazil
Body




A live debate by satellite between the world economy's elite and opponents of globalization descended into a dialogue of the deaf. But the anti-capitalists shouted loudest.
The idea of Sunday's live "videobridge" was to promote dialogue between the World Economic Forum in the Swiss ski resort of Davos and its self-appointed nemesis, the World Social Forum meeting in Porto Alegre, Brazil.
What happened was quite the opposite, confounding organizers' hopes to launch at the Porto Alegre meeting of 10,000 activists a serious alternative economic platform to unfettered global capitalism.
The debate turned into an insult match, with radicals in Porto Alegre calling George Soros "a hypocrite" and "a monster," and the American financier bluntly telling Africans that much of the blame for their misery lies with their continent's corrupt governments.
The battle lines, drawn early on in the debate, were predictable: the Porto Alegre participants blamed unfettered capitalism, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund for Third World suffering. From Davos came the message that wealth must be created - by capitalism - before it can be redistributed.
In Porto Alegre, the battle cries were debt forgiveness for developing nations and the adoption of the Tobin Tax, a tariff on cross-border financial transactions named for the Nobel laureate in economics James H. Tobin. It is designed to tame rapid international capital flows and protect poor nations from world market crises.
Davos responded, saying that in all recipes for the reduction of poverty, there must be a component of economic growth.
Activists watching the debate here cheered when Walden Bello, representing Focus Global South, told the Davos panel of Soros, U.N. officials John Ruggie and Mark Malloch, and Swedish entrepreneur Bjorn Edlund "you are on the planet of the super-rich … we are on the planet of the poor, the marginalized, the oppressed."
"It would be good for the thousands of businessmen in Davos to be loaded into a space ship and for that space ship to take off," Bello said.
Cheers turned into raucous applause when Soros sidestepped a question on how many Third World children die daily in abject misery.
The answer was 20,000, but the financier didn't know and remained silent.
"You are our enemies, you are a hypocrite, " yelled Hebe de Bona Fini, a headscarf-wearing representative of Argentina's Madres de la Plaza de Mayo. "Answer me, you monster!"
Soros reacted by laughing. "I am looking at your face and all I can do is smile. You have broken off all dialogue. We were here prepared to open a dialogue with you."
He also said Africa's corrupt governments were just as much to blame for the continent's misery as global institutions such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
On Monday, Soros said that he agreed with some of the activists' complaints, even if he disliked their confrontational style.
"My masochism has its limits," the Hungarian-born financier said at a news conference, calling the boisterous video exchange "a very interesting event … that showed it's not very easy to engage in a dialogue."
"Even though one doesn't agree with the methods used by the protesters, I think there is something to protest about," he added.
The Porto Alegre forum has presented itself as legitimizing and formalizing the anti-globalization lobby that has been growing worldwide since protesters disrupted the World Trade Organization meeting in Seattle in December 1999.
But it has come in for criticism as a vehicle for Brazil's socialist Workers' Party, which governs Rio Grande do Sul state and its capital, Porto Alegre. Governor Olivio Dutra and Worker's Party honorary leader Luis Inacio da Silva have made fiery, revolutionary speeches, here.
Earlier Sunday, organizers also found themselves unexpectedly the targets of people power, when a group of demonstrators, singing, dancing and chanting black power slogans, disrupted their news conference.
About 60 black activists from Brazil, Africa and other Latin American countries were protesting to press their complaints that black issues were being sidelined by the forum.
---
On the Net:
http://www.madmundo.com 
http://www.forumsocialmundial.org.br 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos POA101-105, DA106
 Load-Date: January 30, 2001

 

End of Document
