

In the midst of Colombia's war, a mother and her newborn beat the odds
January 10, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 449 words
Byline: By MARGARITA MARTINEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




Ana Maria Montoya had given birth 16 times before - but never like this.
An ambulance carrying the 44-year-old farmer to a hospital for an emergency Caesarean section in rural northern Colombia was stopped Monday by rebels from the country's largest guerrilla group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia.
Rebels ordered her onto the road and set the vehicle ablaze. A hemorrhaging Montoya was taken by a nurse accompanying her to a shack along the highway where she went into labor on the dirt floor. Doctors had said the baby would die unless it was delivered surgically.
Against the odds, Montoya and her son survived. After more than two hours of labor without anesthesia, she gave birth to a healthy, if underweight baby boy.
Her story is giving heart to a country wracked by 36 years of bloody civil war.
"It seems like a miracle to me," said Hugo Nova, Montoya's doctor, adding that the baby, which had been in the breech position, turned around before delivery.
Nova said mother and baby were in stable condition Wednesday in San Juan de Dios hospital in the mountain hamlet of Anori. Montoya has lived in Anori, a village of 16,000 people, all her life.
Nova said the child's chances of survival were considered so slim Monday that Montoya's husband, Miguel Arboleda, had baptized his unborn son in the ambulance minutes before the rebel ambush.
But the trauma of the attack and birth left the parents unable to remember the name the father gave the boy before birth.
"The family has been through a lot," Nova said. "This is information we will sort out."
Montoya, who declined to comment Wednesday fearing retribution from guerrillas, now has six boys and seven girls. Four of the family's children died while toddlers in the rural area some 170 miles northwest of Bogota.
Antioquia, Anori's highland province famed for large families, has been the site of recent clashes between right-wing paramilitary forces and the 15,000-strong rebel group.
Anori hospital director Camila Salazar said her facility is targeted by the rebels, who believe doctors have been too quick to treat soldiers and paramilitary fighters.
"There are threats against this institution and all of the personnel who have attended to anyone who has come here for treatment," Salazar said. Police recently disarmed a bomb rebels stashed near the hospital, she said.
Ambulances and other medical vehicles have been attacked by guerrillas, despite international conventions protecting them.
But Salazar said her staff and her country could find inspiration in Montoya's story.
"In the middle of her labor … in the middle of the incredible situation she was experiencing, a miracle happened," she said. "It was magical human effort."
 Load-Date: January 11, 2001

 

End of Document
