

Iran revives polo in the sport's ancient 'soul'
The Associated Press
October 30, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 583 words
Byline: By BRIAN MURPHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOHAMMAD SHAHR, Iran
Body




In an oasis amid factories and auto shops, something new is being cultivated: Iran's first international polo team in a country that claims ancient birthrights to the sport.
Forget that Iran has only about 50 experienced polo players, including many whose peak playing days were well before the 1979 Islamic Revolution.
Ignore the fact that the core of prime players have to fit practice around their day jobs. Then they must scrimmage among themselves because there is no other competition.
Iran plans to take part in its first international matches in December: a five-nation regional tournament in Lahore, Pakistan, in which the top two teams go to the World Championship next year in France.
"We just want the experience," Hamza Ilkhanizadeh, president of the Iranian Polo Federation, said at a recent practice match at the country's only full-time polo field, about 30 miles from Tehran. "It's a start, but we have high hopes. We have polo in our soul."
Deeply imbedded, it seems.
The precise origins of polo are lost to history, but it's widely accepted that it was shaped by the great cavalry forces of the Persian Empire more than 2,500 years ago.
By the 9th century, it was the subject of Persian verse. Two centuries later, the poet Omar Khayyam used polo, or "chogan" in Farsi, as imagery for life's riddles - much like how many contemporary American writers dissect baseball for deeper metaphors.
In the 16th century, Iran's Safavid rulers built the famous main square in Isfahan around royal polo grounds.
Polo - which takes its name from the Tibetan "pulu" for the willow root once used to make balls - spread through Asia from Turkey to Japan. Its reputation as the "sport of kings" grew because of its attraction for royalty and wealthy families able to maintain stables and expansive polo grounds.
British colonial forces encountered the sport in India in the mid-19th century and brought it back to England. Within decades, it moved across the Atlantic. Countries such as the United States, Argentina and Brazil - the current world champion - have thousands of players.
But in Iran, polo faded almost to obscurity. The overthrow of the Western-oriented monarchy brought strict Islamic codes that left little room for other diversions. Many Iranian polo players left the country. Those who stayed kept the sport barely alive until the late 1990s when reformists started winning battles for greater freedoms.
"The time was right to bring back our national sport," said Siamack Ilkhanizadeh, a member of the national team and son of the federation's president. "It was not natural to have Iran not part of the polo world. We gave the sport to the world. It's part of our cultural heritage."
Reza Behboodi, the team's captain, still senses the military roots of the sport from centuries ago.
"It is beautiful and exciting and tough," he said. "You must concentrate on your horse, yourself and on your rival. All the movements are like a war."
And Iran's chances against the world's best?
"These chaps will do fine," assured Muhammad Tariq Khan Tareen, a retired Pakistani army major recruited to coach the team. "By the grace of Allah, I'm helping them take their first steps."
Others are also looking to the future.
At a riding complex outside Tehran, several dozen children - including some girls wearing head scarves - take classes in equestrian skills and the basics of polo.
"It's like soccer, but more exciting," said 15-year-old Saeed Ala, who began playing four months ago. "It's our national sport."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY156-NY159 of Oct. 30
 Load-Date: October 31, 2003

 

End of Document
