

Is wine above the law in France? Vintners press for special status
The Associated Press
February 26, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 713 words
Byline: By JOCELYN GECKER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




For French winemakers, what they bottle is not to be confused with mere spirits like vodka or brews like beer.
So they claim they deserve exemption from a tough law on liquor advertising that they say is hurting sales of the national drink. Wine, they argue, is not just alcohol but a product of French culture.
From the heart of Burgundy, where winemakers staged a protest Wednesday, to the French capital, where a delegation of wine professionals held crisis talks with the French prime minister - the mood was far from rosy.
"We are facing a crisis," said Guillaume Willette of the Burgundy Wine Association. "Wine is part of our culture - and this is a debate about the place of wine in French society."
Economics is at the heart of the matter. Wine sales are down at home and abroad with no sign of an immediate turnaround. Studies show the French taste for wine is dwindling, down from 26 gallons per person in the 1960s to 15 gallons today. Exports face stiff competition from what the French call "New World wines" - i.e. America, Australia, South America. And a strong euro hasn't helped by making French wines more pricey in non-euro countries.
A government crackdown on drunk driving and alcohol abuse that started last year has only cut deeper into sales.
Industry studies show that over the past 10 months, since the campaign kicked in, sales of wine in restaurants have dropped as much as 15 percent, said Xavier Carreau, president of Vin et Societe, which represents wine professionals.
"Wine has been stigmatized," Carreau said. "People are so scared about drinking and driving that some people are opting for abstinence."
Wine makers say they have always promoted moderate drinking. But they say the government is overreacting when it tells drivers that the safest way to stay out of trouble is not to drink at all.
"We say, when you're in a restaurant, you should consume with moderation," said Carreau, adding that "two glasses of wine or three, if you can handle it, are fine - and you can get on the road without fear."
Carreau led a three-person delegation in closed-door talks with Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin on Wednesday to urge the government to cut winemakers some slack.
"Wine is an important part of our culture, of our history, of French life," he said. "It can't be lumped together with industrial alcohol. It's different. It has a certain nobility."
Primarily, the vintners are asking the government to exempt winemakers from a law that bans all TV advertising of alcoholic drinks and limits print ads to objective information, such as how or where a product is made or its alcoholic content. Enforcement of the law, on the books since 1991, has been stepped up as part of the government's crackdown.
A spokeswoman for the prime minister's office said the government had no immediate comment on the meeting or "on the case of French winemakers."
A Paris court last month caused an uproar in the French wine world when it blocked an advertising campaign by the Burgundy Wine Association and fined it $2,500. The ad, which showed the image of a woman being poured from a wine bottle, was ruled in violation of the law.
Another case is pending against Bordeaux wine ads that show healthy, tanned young couples drinking wine with the slogan: "Drink Less, Drink Better."
"It is not by attacking wine that you reduce alcoholism," said Willette of the Burgundy Wine Association, which organized a rally Wednesday in the central France town of Chalon-sur-Saone that drew some 2,500 people.
Protesters denounced what they called "prohibition," as they sipped cups of white and red Burgundy.
Also Wednesday, winemakers pitched in for full-page advertisements in French newspapers that asked: "Is interdiction the only future for wine in France?"
Since taking office last year, the center-right government has made road safety a priority. Police have stepped up checks and toughened punishment.
The government says road deaths fell in 2003 by more than 20 percent to some 5,700 - still among the highest rates in Europe relative to population size.
The National Association for Prevention of Alcoholism and Addiction, which brought both cases against the advertisements, said it was "surprised" by the uproar among vintners. "No one is above the law," it said in a statement.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos CHA101-103
 Load-Date: February 27, 2004

 

End of Document
