

It's a slow death for Argentina, as Cavallo defends dollar peg to the hilt
December 14, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 788 words
Byline: By TONY SMITH, AP Business Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




Depression, agony, death. Talk to almost any Argentine these days about the health of South America's second-largest economy and those are words you'll likely hear.
Like a terminally ill patient, Argentina clings to the hope of a miraculous cure. But the doctor - in this case Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo - keeps prescribing the same medicine: keep the peso pegged to the mighty U.S. dollar.
Other panaceas for the country's four-year slump could be full dollarization or devaluation, but those are bitter pills to swallow.
"We are suffering a slow agony, awaiting death," said Pedro Silva, a Buenos Aires doctor joining one of the capital's numerous bank lines this week.
Alarmed by cash bleeding from the banking system, the government partially froze accounts Dec. 1, ordering Argentines to do much of their business by check, transfer, debit or credit card. Waiting hours in bank lines are now a fact of daily life.
Gross domestic product shrank by more than 5 percent between September and December alone, according to think-tank Fundacion de Investigaciones Economicas Latinoamericanas. Next year, it predicts the economy will shrink between 7 percent and 9 percent.
Joblessness has spiraled to a near record rate above 18 percent and about 2,000 Argentines a day are estimated to be joining the ranks of impoverished families with monthly incomes below $480.
The government response has been to slash public spending, limit bank withdrawals to $1,000 a month and plead for more cash from the International Monetary Fund to service its $132 billion debt.
Seemingly oblivious to the government's plummeting popularity, Cavallo has introduced, then rolled back, a number of measures to stave off economic meltdown.
But he has held fast to the currency peg he introduced in 1991 that ties the peso at one-to-one with the dollar, calling any move to devalue the currency "unthinkable."
"Convertibility is the monetary system we have in Argentina and I think the people want it to continue that way. Very few people want to abandon it," Cavallo told a news conference Friday. "On the contrary, there's more support for dollarization."
"The government is introducing new measures every day," said economist and former Deputy Economy Minister Eduardo Curia. "But nobody is proposing any alternative to the dollar peg."
Argentines who believe their peso is really worth a dollar are living in "a macabre illusion," Curia said. "We are just buying time, we are in agony, and it is proving to be a long, drawn-out death."
Curia first proposed the linkage to then-President Carlos Menem in 1989 as a way of stopping galloping hyperinflation in its tracks.
Menem rejected the peg, only to embrace it two years later when Cavallo made it the central pillar of his economic policy.
Curia, like a growing number of economists, says the peg makes Argentine goods expensive compared to those produced in, say, neighboring Brazil.
Brazil effectively pegged its real to the dollar in 1994 but then caved into market pressure in 1999 and let the currency float. The economy stalled for a few months but then started to grow again, faster than before.
"How can anyone imagine saying the Argentine economy is the same as the most efficient economy in the world, the No. 1 country?" asked Curia. "Maybe Argentina has enough pride for that, but in the end it spells disaster."
As Argentina limps on, shadowed by the fear of default, the first alternative proposals to Cavallo's convertible peso are emerging.
Menem, who wants to run for President in 2003, would dollarize the economy, as Ecuador and El Salvador have done. After meeting with De la Rua, Menem said they both agreed a "devaluation would be disastrous."
In turn, economists like Curia want to devalue.
Either option would be tough medicine.
"It's like asking a patient if he'd rather die from cancer or AIDS," said Alejandro Sanchez, driving one of the few taxis working during a general strike this week.
As most Argentines' personal and business debts are denominated in dollars, devaluation could cause the banking system to crumble. It could also bring back hyperinflation, if the central bank did not keep a tight lid on how much money it printed.
According to Curia, if the peso was allowed to float, it would be worth about 50 U.S. cents. He opposes dollarization because it would mean effectively handing over monetary policy to the U.S. Federal Reserve.
Back in the bank line, Silva says he favors a system like that in neighboring Uruguay, where financial transactions are done in dollars but a flexible local currency exists alongside the greenback for cash use.
"If we dollarize, we will become a colony again," he said. "We might as well go and hoist the stars and stripes on the Plaza de Mayo."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BAI102-104
 Load-Date: December 15, 2001

 

End of Document
