

Key facts about the Free Trade Area of the Americas
April 21, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 323 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Key facts about the Free Trade Area of the Americas being discussed at the Quebec summit.
What is the Free Trade Area of the Americas?
A U.S.-sponsored proposal to create the world's largest free trade zone, linking 34 countries in a market of 800 million people stretching from Alaska to Argentina. Those countries have a total, annual economic output of $13 trillion, of which $9.2 trillion comes from the United States.
Which countries are involved?
All independent countries in North, South and Central America and the Caribbean except for Cuba. The 34 nations are: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, United States, Uruguay and Venezuela.
How did it start? When will it start?
The project was first floated in 1990 by former President George Bush but it will be his son who finishes the treaty's negotiation by Jan. 1, 2005, at the latest. Countries are expected to ratify the treaty by the end of that year.
What will it mean for the countries involved?
North American business gets duty-free access to South American and Caribbean markets, and those countries can export tariff-free to North America. The deal covers nearly all goods traded.
What are the sticking points?
The United States agrees to lower tariffs but wants to continue protecting its agriculture through subsidies. U.S. negotiators also want to include labor and environmental issues in the treaty, something Latin American countries oppose. Other issues include proposed investment regulations protecting foreign-owned companies from nationalization and other legislation deemed harmful. It is still not clear if the treaty covers services as well as goods.
 Load-Date: April 22, 2001

 

End of Document
