

Key players and their issues at the summit of the Americas
The Associated Press
January 12, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 399 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Some key leaders and their issues at the summit of the Americas in Monterrey, Mexico:
President Bush: Comes to the summit with a new immigration plan that he will use to help smooth strained relations with the region and capture Latin votes in November elections. Faces growing resentment about U.S. anti-terrorism measures, including the fingerprinting and photographing of arriving foreigners.
Mexican President Vicente Fox: Will push Bush for details of his immigration plan. Many Mexican officials have also expressed anger over U.S. concerns with flights from Mexico City to Los Angeles. After one flight was canceled, members of Fox's administration said the United States must provide harder evidence of possible terrorist threats.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez: Has pledged to fight the Free Trade Area of the Americas, saying joining it would be "like committing suicide." Chavez argues the free-trade zone would further impoverish Latin American and Caribbean countries by forcing their industries to compete with U.S. and Canadian products. Venezuela is a major oil supplier to the United States, but relations have been strained under Chavez.
Canadian Prime Minister Paul Martin: In office only a few weeks, the Canadian will use the summit to meet other leaders, including Fox, and to improve U.S.-Canadian relations that were often strained under predecessor Jean Chretien. Martin has said he will push other countries to make AIDS drugs available to poor nations.
Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva: His administration has led a coalition of nations that oppose the U.S. vision of a Free Trade Area of the Americas. The United States has refused to back down on agricultural subsidies for its farmers, and Brazil has said it doesn't want to talk about intellectual property rights.
Bolivian President Carlos Mesa: Struggling to stabilize his country after the violent ouster of his predecessor in October, he will ask for financial help from his counterparts to aid social and political reforms needed to strengthen the country's tenuous democracy.
Argentine President Nestor Kirchner: His administration was angered by recent U.S. criticism over Argentina's warming relations with Cuba and its methods for rebuilding the economy. Kirchner said he would not yield to pressure for policy changes, and predicted he would "win by a knockout" at a face-to-face meeting with Bush.
 Load-Date: January 13, 2004

 

End of Document
