

Leaving home to escape terror, many immigrants only find it in the new world
October 3, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 582 words
Byline: By DIEGO IBARGUEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Victor Paz always wanted his family to follow his lead and trade the violence of their native Colombia for the peace and security of America.
He settled in New York, became a pastry chef at one of the city's premier restaurants and told his sister back home that he would help them to safety.
Instead, the violence he feared was here. Paz died Sept. 11 when American Airlines Flight 11 crashed into the north tower of the World Trade Center.
"The one who was always the safest was my brother who was here," said his sister, Julia Paz. "We never thought he would be the victim of a terrorist attack. Never, never, never."
Each year tens of thousands of people from countries embroiled in civil strife or suffering through natural disasters apply for asylum in the United States, said Bill Strassberger, a spokesman for the Immigration and Naturalization Service in Washington.
For some immigrants, the attack on New York that left more than 5,000 people dead or missing has served as a chilling reminder of the places they left behind. They include people from 80 nations, some from countries like Colombia, Lebanon and Sri Lanka where violence has become a part of life.
"We thought we went so far away from where we were," said Randa Tohme, a mother of three who emigrated to the United States from Lebanon as a teen-ager to continue her studies postponed by civil war.
The attacks "brought everything back to the surface: the terror, the insecurity, the fear, the madness," Tohme said.
Her 43-year-old cousin, Robert Dirani, is among those missing in the disaster. Dirani, who was born in the United States to Lebanese parents, was at a technology conference in one of the towers when it was struck by a jet.
"I did not expect this to happen right outside our doorstep," Tohme said.
Tohme said reaching closure will be difficult without first knowing his remains have been found. The uncertainty, she said, reminds her of a friend who disappeared during the conflict in Lebanon years ago.
"He was kidnapped and we never found his body," she said. "It's another experience I'm reliving. … I don't know if it's easier or not, it's just more familiar. It doesn't make the pain less."
Victor Paz arrived in New York about 15 years ago, before his Colombian hometown of Cali became overrun with violence from drug trafficking. That terrorism claimed the life of one of his brothers a decade ago.
Now three weeks after the Sept. 11 tragedy, Julia Paz is staying in the New York apartment where her brother lived for 10 years, beginning to "take on the pain and take on the reality. That's how life goes on."
Far from the violence in Cali, another immigrant from that city, Luz Piedrahita explained why she came to the United States.
"You seek refuge here in America," she said. "In this country you feel exceedingly safe."
Her son, Wilder Gomez, was a waiter and bartender at Windows on the World, the restaurant where Paz also worked. A father of four, Gomez moved here in 1992 and, with his mother, raised his youngest daughter.
Piedrahita burst into tears as she recounted seeing flames on the towers as she walked in Manhattan. Another son called Gomez's cell phone from Colombia and learned that his brother was trapped in heavy smoke on the 103rd floor of one of the towers, she said.
"Sometimes I think I hear him coming in," Piedrahita said, though she knows it is her imagination.
"New York has changed," she said. "Now it's not the same."
On the Net:
INS: http://www.ins.gov 
New York City: http://www.nyc.gov 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NYR101
 Load-Date: October 4, 2001

 

End of Document
