

Leftist former union boss the front-runner as Brazilians elect a president
October 6, 2002, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 787 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




Mobbed like a soccer hero, the favorite in Brazil's presidential race waded through a crowd to vote Sunday in an election that could give Latin America's largest country its first leftist leader in four decades.
"Lula! Lula!" shouted well-wishers at a schoolhouse in Sao Bernardo do Campo, the gritty Sao Paulo suburb where Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva - commonly known as "Lula" - first rose to fame as a firebrand labor leader who dared to defy Brazil's 1964-85 military dictatorship.
"I have a right to vote if you guys let me!" Silva joked, asking the throng to make way. Then he held up the Brazilian flag and kissed it, as the crowd roared its approval.
The burly former lathe operator, who led his rivals throughout the campaign, surged in the last pre-election poll. The survey indicated a first-round victory was in his grasp and that he would defeat any rival handily in a runoff.
"If he leads the country as he led the unions, he will be a great president," said Joao de Oliveira, a 54-year-old retired metalworker, who also voted at the same school in Sao Bernardo do Campo. "It is time for a worker to lead a country of workers."
By contrast, the celebration was muted for government-backed candidate Jose Serra, Silva's closest rival. Although Serra repeatedly flashed a victory sign with both hands, a crowd gathered outside another school in a more fashionable Sao Paulo neighborhood mustered only sedate applause.
"Thank you!" Serra said.
In his fourth try at the presidency, Silva has softened his radical tone and doesn't alarm Brazil's neighbors. He has promised to honor Brazil's foreign debt and implement no drastic economic policy shifts. He seems more akin to Chile's pragmatic socialist President Ricardo Lagos than to Venezuela's populist leader Hugo Chavez.
"Old style left-wing policies no longer exist, maybe just in words," said Roberto Fantuzzi, president of Chile's Association of Manufacturing Exporters.
Brazilians formed long lines as polls opened at 8 a.m. in Brazil's major cities and two hours later in the remote western Amazon.
For the first time, all voting is computerized, and the government said 90 percent of the votes would be counted by midnight. However, election officials said voters were taking longer than expected, and in some towns the machines didn't work and paper ballots were used.
Voting was peaceful. Soldiers were stationed in 10 states to guarantee order and some 3,000 soldiers reinforced the police force in Rio de Janeiro, where drug gangs have terrorized the city in recent weeks.
More than 115 million voters are registered in the election, unlike any in decades because of the possibility of a leftist victory in the continent's most economically powerful nation.
Respected pollster Ibope released its final pre-election survey on Saturday showing Silva with 50 percent support, a breath away from the majority needed for an outright victory.
Serra had 22 percent of the valid vote, followed by former Rio de Janeiro state Gov. Anthony Garotinho with 17 percent and former Finance Minister Ciro Gomes at 10 percent.
Because of the margin of error of 1.8 percent, it was too close to say whether there would be a runoff on Oct. 27. The poll questioned 3,000 people in 203 municipalities Friday and Saturday.
Silva, 56, has tapped a national impatience for growth after years of stagnation under President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, who was elected in 1994 and re-elected in 1998. Brazilian law prohibits him for running for a third term.
Writing in the daily Folha de S.Paulo, Silva claimed he was the best choice to level Brazil's gaping social inequalities while getting the country's sluggish free markets humming anew in this nation of 175 million people.
Brazil, the world's ninth largest economy, has seen its currency plunge to record lows over financial market concerns about what a Silva presidency would bring.
Brazil's last leftist president, Joao Goulart, was deposed in 1964 by right-wing generals who ruled Brazil until 1985.
Silva was jailed as a subversive for leading strikes protesting the military dictatorship. In this campaign, he has shed his radical image and is now perceived by many as a moderate, attracting votes from the center.
"We offer our clear commitment to responsible macroeconomic policies," Silva promised, adding he would bolster exports and revive a slow-growth economy now nearly standing still.
Serra, backed by the governing Brazilian Social Democracy Party, urged voters in a final appeal to cast a ballot for "experience." The 60-year-old economist served in Congress and the Senate before becoming health minister to Cardoso.
Serra cautioned the electorate to make sound choices and called on Brazilians not to make "a leap into the dark."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos SAOX103, SAO106, RIO102-103, SAOV103-104, DLM103-104,
 Load-Date: October 7, 2002

 

End of Document
