

Long out of politics and the limelight, Mexico's army finds itself facing increasing questions
August 12, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 754 words
Byline: By MARK STEVENSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEXICO CITY
Body




Long in the background, the Mexican army finds itself under increasing scrutiny as it is ordered to take on police work, border patrols, anti-drug raids - tasks that it has neither the training nor the desire to do.
President Vicente Fox has pledged "unconditional support" to the military in asking it to fight crime, but he has also opened secret files that have revived questions about the army's past role in hundreds of deaths.
The combination has brought unusual and uncomfortable exposure to a military that has spent most of the past half century walled off from the scrutiny of politicians, reporters and the public.
"Politics is unfamiliar terrain for us," says Gen. Alvaro Vallarta, who is on leave from the army while serving as a congressman. "The army doesn't want to get into the political game."
Generations of Mexicans saw the army largely during patriotic parades, or when something went wrong - as heroes rescuing the victims of earthquakes, floods and hurricanes.
Unusual for Latin America, Mexico's 240,000-strong military has largely kept out of politics since the 1940s. Politicians, in exchange, kept their hands off the army.
"There has traditionally been a quid pro quo, that the civilians stay out of the military's internal affairs, and the military will subordinate itself to civilian authority," says Roderic Camp, a political science professor at California's Claremont McKenna College who studies the Mexican military.
Traditions, however, are eroding. Fox's July 2000 election was a watershed in a shifting Mexican political scene, the first change of a party in power in 71 years.
"I don't think the military can get away with the standoff of silence that they have prided themselves on for generations," Camp says.
Fox has continued much of the velvet-glove treatment of the army, resisting calls by human rights advocates to restrict the scope of military courts.
But the new president has opened secret files and named a special prosecutor who will look at incidents involving the army, such as the 1968 massacre of about 300 students during a mass protest at Mexico City's Tlatelolco square.
The shock of that massacre helped turn some student activists into guerrillas who used ambushes, kidnappings and bank robberies in battles against the army throughout the 1970s. At least 275 rebels and suspected supporters "disappeared."
The focus on military misdeeds angers those who recall seeing comrades slain by the rebels.
"Many were killed, guerrillas and soldiers. Today, that's neither understood nor accepted," wrote Javier Ibarrola, editor of the magazine Armed Forces and National Security. "Those who defend those criminals want to give the absolute right to kill, rob and kidnap to anyone who rises up against the government."
When human rights lawyer Digna Ochoa was found dead in Mexico City last year, many human rights activists were quick to suggest soldiers killed her. But prosecutors - working for the city's left-wing government - say suicide seems the most likely explanation.
Despite the criticism, 74 percent of Mexicans express confidence in the army, according to a poll by the newspaper Milenio. That was the highest level of confidence for any Mexican institution - higher than the courts, congress, human rights officials or political parties. The poll had a margin of error of 3 percentage points.
Fox has continued the policy of transferring soldiers to police duties. Many are nominally "on leave" in the gray-uniformed federal police.
Soldiers mount anti-drug operations, man highway checkpoints, even patrol city streets. Mexico's attorney general, Rafael Macedo de la Concha, is an army officer.
Critics complain that soldiers are not trained for police work, creating the risk of shoddy investigations and an overly heavy hand against suspects.
But with weak and often corrupt police forces, politicians often see the army as the best available option.
"Fox himself wanted to get the military out of drug enforcement," Camp says, "but then he discovered, like every one of his predecessors, that he didn't have an institutionalized force to perform that task honestly and efficiently."
Vallarta, the general in congress, agrees the army's help is necessary in police work now, but he says the soldiers hope it ends quickly.
What would the army like to do? "Civil defense," Vallarta says, referring to the army's widely praised role of helping after natural disaster. "Reforestation. Literacy work. This is a country that needs (to build) strong institutions, not to attack them."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY446-447 of Aug. 12
 Load-Date: August 13, 2002

 

End of Document
