

Managing Editors:Developments in the news industry for March 3-10;
The Associated Press
March 10, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 15358 words
Body



IRAQ-MEDIA:
 
- Military prepares to take journalists along if war begins
 
>+++++
 
NEWSPAPERS:
 
- Freedom Communications board votes to explore sale or merger
 
- Orlando Sentinel leaves ad agency over charges of racial slurs
 
- Columbus Dispatch establishes online replica of printed paper
 
- Former Tampa editor pleads no contest to assaulting ex-girlfriend
 
- Great Bend (Kan.) Tribune to publish mornings, drop Sunday paper
 
>+++++ GRIDIRON DINNER:
 
- Bush toasts the troops in solemn time-out during annual gathering
 
>+++++ AP-VARIETY PARTNERSHIP:
 
- Associated Press, Variety magazine announce partnership
 
>+++++ BROADCASTING:
 
- Clinton, Dole to debate weekly on CBS newsmagazine '60 Minutes'
 
- Public radio stations see future in acquisitions
 
- Former TV reporter, anchor in Phoenix sues station
 
- Hearing scheduled in slaying of St. Louis radio personality
 
>+++++
 
INTERNET:
 
- Supreme Court considers Internet filters in public libraries
 
- White House objects to Web site lampooning Lynne Cheney
 
- Anonymity of Internet chat rooms argued before Pennsylvania court
 
- Google expands with advertising links tied to Web content
 
- AOL blocks a billion spam e-mails in 24 hours
 
>+++++ AWARDS:
 
- Scripps Howard Foundation announces awards
 
- Israeli journalist wins UNESCO prize
 
- Plain Dealer, Post-Dispatch win top Headliner Awards
 
>+++++ FREE PRESS:
 
- Senators try again to have cameras inside federal courtrooms
 
- Judge bars cameras in courtroom for trial of Malvo
 
- N.C. daily wins request for public disclosure of settlement
 
>+++++
 
INTERNATIONAL:
 
- Spanish government files complaint against Basque journalists
 
- Prince Charles' office complains about tabloid photos of William
 
- President of Colombia's photographers union to flee country
 
- Iranian journalists protest press crackdown
 
- Uzbek crowd assaults reporters from Western media
 
- Serbian journalists concerned about lack of media reforms
 
>+++++
 
PEOPLE:
 
- Oppedahl replaced as San Francisco Chronicle publisher
 
- Kendall leaving Honolulu Star-Bulletin to return to Canada
 
- Ryerson appointed executive editor at The Indianapolis Star
 
- Six to be inducted into Kentucky Journalism Hall of Fame
 
- Evans named AP correspondent in Lexington, Ky.
- Sneed named managing editor of the Opelika-Auburn News
 
- Berg named news director at KSTP-TV in St. Paul
 
- Bauder to retire as business columnist for San Diego daily
 
>+++++
 
DEATHS:
 
- Luis Marden
 
- Kenneth Auchincloss
 
- Rene Maestri
 
- Tom Reeves
 
- Bruce Brown
 
- Warren F. Gardner
 
- Hannah Zemer
 
- Jane K. Horrocks
 
>+++++ NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
 
>+++++
 
IRAQ-MEDIA:
 
 
Military prepares to take journalists along if war begins
 
KUWAIT CITY (AP) - They're journalists in hand-spray-painted desert camouflage - reporters, photographers and camera crews massing outside Iraq for U.S. forces' largest-ever experiment in taking the media along for the fight.
Fully 662 journalists representing news organizations from around the world are going through a process known in military parlance as "embedding," the majority of them assembling in Kuwait.
If war starts, they'll cover it while "embedded" within a military unit - moving with the U.S. Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines.
Embeddees include retired Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North - now with Fox News - and other veterans and journalists who've never been outside their home country, heard a shot or seen a desert.
A First Amendment scholar urged news organizations to push for better access to information in the face of government control and to beware of offers to embed reporters within military units.
As the United States and its allies prepare for a possible invasion of Iraq, Paul McMasters said press freedoms have come increasingly under attack.
"When we wage war, our leaders crave secrecy," McMasters, an ombudsman for the Freedom Forum, told about 40 reporters and editors March 7 at the Virginia Press Association's annual conference.
McMasters said the new "embed" agreement between the military and the media should not replace independent reporting, pool reporting and timely Pentagon news conferences. He said past experience with covering other wars suggests that the military never delivers exactly what news organizations hope.
While news crews wait for the call-up to their assigned units, military field trips for journalists have helped demonstrate the troop build-up. Atypical was a tour of a British regiment, where a serviceman - no insignia visible - wore a green towel and a large embarrassed smile to show off the regiment's new shower units.
Throughout the week, news media members have been arriving by the planeload as the expected call to war nears. At the U.S.-led press-mustering point in a Kuwait City hotel, camouflage-uniformed Army reservists measure journalists' heads for gas masks.
About 300,000 U.S. service members already are in the Persian Gulf or on their way.
Although journalists have worked alongside U.S. military units in previous conflicts, they have never done so in such numbers, in such an organized fashion, and potentially for the length of a war.
The near military-wide opening of units was born partly out of frustrations over coverage of the 1991 Gulf War and other recent conflicts. Journalists complained about being kept far from the action in the Gulf War and last year's fighting in Afghanistan.
In the Afghan conflict, the American public saw little of their troops fighting.
"This is really a concerted effort to try to figure out, 'Is this the best way?"' said Lt. Col. Franklin Childress, who is helping organize the media deployments.
"It's a historic opportunity to see if this can be done" in a way "that doesn't compromise security," he said. "We're going to allow them to cover the war - the good, the bad and the ugly."
To that end, the military provides the embedding journalists with long shopping lists of flak jackets and bulletproof helmets, goggles against the sand, antibiotics against anthrax and the like.
Press crews have bought out the city's supply of spray paint in green, khaki or brown colors - needed to camouflage their helmets in desert hues.
Savvy speculators, meanwhile, have made one-month fortunes cornering the Kuwaiti market on squat, civilian-modified Humvees - initially snapped up by news crews worried about keeping up with the military in the desert.
For their part, the embedded journalists sign ground rules the military says are meant to protect the operations, the troops and the troops' privacy - such as not revealing ongoing rescue operations, or not showing the faces and names of newly fallen service members.
Traveling with the military brings some extra dangers for the media. One newspaper reporter cites the Geneva Convention clause stipulating - in effect - that noncombatants who cannot reasonably be distinguished from combatants shouldn't be surprised to be shot.
The safety benefits, of course, are traveling to the story under U.S military air and ground cover.
"They say, 'Don't worry, man! We're going to look out for you, man!"' photographer John Partipilo of The (Nashville) Tennessean said of the privates in his unit.
Journalists more normally travel with the military for shorter periods - as short as hitching a ride on a plane or car - or eschew the troops entirely to try to get directly to the action, without interference.
How close to the action largely will be the call of each unit's commanding officer.
"If there's flexibility and mobility, then we might have a good chance of doing significant coverage," says James Nachtwey, a prize-winning, contributing photographer for Time magazine who has covered armed conflicts for more than 20 years. He'll be embedding with the 101st Airborne Division.
>+++++
NEWSPAPERS:
 
 
Freedom Communications board votes to explore sale or merger
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Freedom Communications, one of the nation's last family-owned media companies, will explore a sale or merger of all or part of the company as a way to buy out dissatisfied family members.
The decision followed a vote by shareholders in the privately held company. A majority of votes favored the sale or merger option over other options, including incurring debt or taking the company public, Freedom chairman Alan Bell said. The vote was made public March 6.
Freedom's board directed investment bank Morgan Stanley to begin soliciting offers for all or part of Freedom, which owns 28 dailies, including The Orange County Register. It also owns 37 weekly publications and eight television stations.
The outcome of the decision is still uncertain, however. Other options could still be pursued if the offers value the privately held shares lower than family members consider appropriate. Those options could include raising just enough cash to buy out unhappy shareholders.
"We don't know where this is going to lead," Bell said. "The company is worth what someone will pay for it, and if that does not match the expectations of the shareholders, that will be the end of that for a while."
The 50 or so adult descendants of R.C. Hoiles, who bought the Santa Ana Register in 1935 and built it into a privately owned media company, have been feuding for years as some third-generation members began pressuring other shareholders to buy out their interests.
It is a dilemma common among family-owned media companies, analysts say, as the ownership gets more dispersed among people with less connection to the enterprise.
Analysts said Freedom is worth $ 1.5 billion to $ 2 billion.
R.C. Hoiles used his newspaper to promulgate his libertarian political philosophy in Orange County, then a Southern California stronghold of conservatism and the political birthplace of Richard Nixon.
The Orange County Register has grown to a circulation of 315,000 and has won three Pulitzer prizes. The paper is flagship of a group that includes The Gazette in Colorado Springs, Colo., and the Tribune papers in suburban Phoenix.
On the Net:
Freedom Communications: http://www.freedom.com 
>+++++ Orlando Sentinel leaves ad agency over charges of racial slurs
 
ORLANDO, Fla. (AP) - The Orlando Sentinel's parent company has severed ties to an advertising agency because of accusations that the agency's owner, a former mayoral candidate, made racist remarks.
Sentinel Communications made the decision March 5 after the allegations were made last month against Pete Barr during the mayoral race. Barr was soundly defeated by Buddy Dyer in the Feb. 25 runoff election.
Publisher Kathleen M. Waltz said the charges were contrary to the company's core values of promoting diversity and fostering a culture of inclusiveness and nondiscrimination. Sentinel Communications is owned by Tribune Co.
"In keeping with this, we support and do business with organizations that value the same," Waltz said in a letter to the agency.
Sentinel Communications had done business with Fry Hammond Barr for more than two decades. The newspaper had suspended business with the agency before last month's vote to avoid the appearance of a conflict of interest, company spokeswoman Ashley Allen said.
During the campaign, Barr was accused by a City Council member and several former employees of having made racist, sexist and anti-Semitic remarks. He insisted that the allegations were politically motivated lies.
Barr, 69, stepped aside as the ad agency's chief executive officer in November to focus on his political campaign, handing the reins to his 41-year-old son, company President Pete Barr Jr. The elder Barr retained the title of chairman, but his son took over daily operations.
The younger Barr said he was disappointed that Sentinel Communications chose to measure the agency based on allegations against his father and find the agency's 35 employees and current management guilty by association.
"We certainly did not expect that the agency would be judged on anything other than the merit of our work and the character of our current management," Barr wrote March 5 in an e-mail. "We are frustrated with the unjustified, uninformed and unearned bias being shown against the company."
>+++++
 
Columbus Dispatch establishes online replica of printed paper
 
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) - The Columbus Dispatch has become the latest to offer an electronic replica of the newspaper's print edition.
The replica, including comics and advertisements, became available March 3 to subscribers of the Dispatch and its online edition, dispatch.com. Nonsubscribers also have access temporarily.
In a March 2 column, Editor Benjamin J. Marrison said readers complained that the newspaper's online edition lacked context because they could not see where a story was placed on a page, the size of the headline and many of the graphics and photos.
With one click of a mouse, the image of the front page appears. From there, readers can go from page to page and section to section. Freestanding advertising inserts will not appear initially.
Readers also can search by key word to track a certain issue or person.
After a temporary free-trial period, the Dispatch's electronic edition will be free to subscribers. Nonsubscribers can pay $ 4.95 a month for the electronic edition, which also includes access to dispatch.com.
The Dispatch, which is published by the Dispatch Printing Co., has a daily circulation of 253,000 and 378,000 on Sundays.
Last August, the Christian Science Monitor said subscribers and single-copy buyers would be able to receive exact digital replicas of the newspaper the day before publication.
On the Net:
www.dispatch.com 
>+++++ Former Tampa editor pleads no contest to assaulting ex-girlfriend
 
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. (AP) - The Tampa Tribune's former capital bureau chief has been ordered to serve two years of house arrest and pay $ 18,000 in restitution for beating a former girlfriend.
John Wark, 50, pleaded no contest March 3 to a charge of aggravated battery against Dara Kam, a self-employed communications consultant who previously worked for The Associated Press, Gannett News Service and the New York Times Regional Newspaper group in Tallahassee.
As part of the plea agreement, Wark must continue anger management counseling and faces three years of probation after he completes the house arrest. He is also prohibited from contacting Kam.
According to police, Wark drove through Kam's fence in the early morning hours of Aug. 7 and crashed into an iron support on her front porch. During an ensuing altercation, Kam's wrist was broken, and her computer, phones and other possessions were damaged.
Police said Wark then crashed his vehicle into Kam's car.
Kam, 40, told authorities she and Wark, who was separated from his wife at the time, had dated for about three years and that Wark had become jealous and increasingly abusive toward her.
>+++++ Great Bend (Kan.) Tribune to publish mornings, drop Sunday paper
 
GREAT BEND, Kan. (AP) - The Great Bend Tribune will change from afternoon to morning publication beginning March 29.
The newspaper also announced that it will publish Tuesdays through Saturdays, dropping its Sunday and Monday editions.
"With today's busy lifestyles, we have to compete for people's time," Publisher Judy Murphy said March 4. "We want to get the news to our readers earlier so that they can be as informed as they need to be."
Murphy said the Sunday edition will be replaced by a Weekend Edition, to be published Saturdays.
The Kansas Press Association said only 18 of the 44 daily newspapers in the state are published in the afternoon.
The Tribune is the oldest, continually operated business in Great Bend, having published for 127 years.
>+++++
GRIDIRON DINNER:
 
 
Bush toasts the troops in solemn time-out during annual gathering
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - As commander in chief of American troops locked and loaded at a potential war front, President Bush eschewed traditional hijinks of the Gridiron Club to toast the forces as the guardians of the country's security.
"They are prepared if necessary to remove a gathering danger," Bush said March 8 at the annual dinner of journalists and their high-powered guests. "Because they serve, our freedom will be secure and our peace will be safe."
Bush's tribute to the 250,000 troops in the Persian Gulf area, who are ready to disarm Iraq unless President Saddam Hussein quickly does it himself, marked a solemn contrast to the laughs and lampooning of Republicans and Democrats alike at the dinner.
In opening the show, Walter Mears, retired Associated Press special correspondent and vice president, spoke of the sensitivity of dealing with levity during a time when conditions are less than humorous.
"We had some concerns about writing humor in the face of war, threatened terrorism and economic woes," Mears said.
Thankfully, he said, the Bush administration and Congress provided the script: "I mean, no satirist could have dreamed up the duct tape caper."
Sen. John Edwards, a North Carolina Democrat who hopes to replace Bush in the White House in 2004, also remembered the troops in his talk but got in on the Gridiron games as well.
He poked fun at his background as a trial lawyer. "President Bush says frivolous lawsuits have never helped anyone," he said. "Yeah? Tell that to my new house in Georgetown."
The show mined serious subjects for humor set to familiar tunes. One skit portrayed Secretary of State Colin Powell crooning that North Korea's president "has a nuclear bomba … what if he sells it to Osama?" Another had Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen. Richard Myers singing, from the Coasters' 1958 classic: "Yakety Yak, attack Iraq."
The Gridiron Club, comprising 60 Washington newspaper bureau chiefs, columnists, reporters, cartoonists and editors, exists only for the annual roasting of politicos.
Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist, a heart surgeon from Tennessee, used a model and a pointer to demonstrate how the legislative journey compares to the human digestive system - starting at the mouth, where legislation is introduced, and ending at the other end. "As you might imagine, the president often doesn't want anything to do with what comes out down here," he said.
Frist said he often wonders how someone like Democratic Sen. Patrick Leahy from "such a tiny state" - Vermont - "can cause stomach trouble and pain and keep things from passing. Then I remember the little kidney stone. The man is a human kidney stone."
Nor did Frist spare fellow Republicans. He claimed to have given a checkup recently to former Sen. Bob Dole, whom he said is "so proud of the results of that Viagra he takes. … I said, 'Strip to your waist.' Bob took off his pants."
>+++++
 
AP-VARIETY PARTNERSHIP:
 
 
Associated Press, Variety magazine announce partnership
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Variety has signed a distribution deal with The Associated Press designed to increase the entertainment magazine's presence on the Internet.
The agreement announced March 4 makes AP Digital, an Associated Press division, the online distributor of Variety content including market coverage, global reports, box-office charts and reviews. The information will be available for U.S. and international Web sites, corporate portals, wireless services and other Internet-related outlets.
AP Digital also plans to offer the content to the AP's newspaper and broadcast member Web sites.
"Variety's comprehensive entertainment content complements our entertainment news services in multimedia formats with new perspectives and angles from Hollywood and other industry capitals around the world," said Tom Slaughter, vice president and director of AP Digital.
Variety is owned by Reed Business Information, part of the Reed Elsevier Group PLC, an international publisher.
The Associated Press is the world's largest and oldest newsgathering organization, providing news to more than 15,000 news outlets with a daily reach of 1 billion people worldwide. Its AP Digital division distributes news with text, photos, audio, graphics and video to the Web and wireless markets.
>+++++
BROADCASTING:
 
 
Clinton, Dole to debate weekly on CBS newsmagazine '60 Minutes'
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Former President Clinton and his 1996 election opponent Bob Dole have joined the CBS newsmagazine "60 Minutes" for weekly debates on national issues in the show's old "Point-Counterpoint" style.
The two agreed to 10 segments, but CBS executives say the network will consider extending the debates into next season.
In their first televised mini-debate on March 9, Clinton said a tax cut at a time that war is looming in Iraq is "bad economics."
Dole, Clinton's opponent in the 1996 presidential election, said the Bush administration has launched a global war to protect the American way of life, "which means, among other things, the freedom to save or invest our own money."
Since Clinton chose the subject of the first debate, Dole will get to choose the next segment.
After their initial 45-second segments, both politicians received 15 more seconds to make another point.
"Leadership is about choosing," Clinton said. "So let's give up our tax cut."
"The Bush tax cut has barely kicked in," Dole said. "But I'll tell you what. I'll gladly donate my tax cut to a worthy charity, if you will. Maybe even to the Clinton library."
The retired politicians taped their first segment March 7.
Clinton, who has reportedly been offered several television opportunities, said the CBS idea appealed to him because "60 Minutes" is a serious show. "It's just once a week and not too long, so we won't be in anybody's way," he said.
CBS would not say how much he and Dole will be paid.
The segments will revive the "Point-Counterpoint" segments that were popular until they stopped airing in 1979, but will instead be called "Clinton/Dole" one week and "Dole/Clinton" the next week.
Executive producer Don Hewitt said the planned format calls for one debater to pick a topic and write a 45-second script that would be faxed to his opponent. The response would also be 45 seconds. After the initial arguments, the first debater would get 15 seconds to rebut, followed by a final 15 seconds from the opponent.
"It is going to be provocative but not mean or nasty. That would be a first for us," quipped Dole, whose sharp tongue occasionally got him in trouble during his political career.
Clinton said their wives - Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, D-N.Y., and Sen. Elizabeth Dole, R-N.C. - were "both terrified" about what they may say.
"They should be," Dole added.
Clinton said: "All I can do is make a blanket plea that neither of them be held responsible for what we say."
Producers of "60 Minutes" hope the Clinton-Dole debates will boost ratings. The show has been in the top 10 for the past 20 years, but its popularity has dropped recently with the loss of about a million viewers in the last year.
>+++++ Public radio stations see future in acquisitions
 
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - As public radio stations seek to build listenership in an increasingly competitive media marketplace, they're beginning to focus on expansion. One result is that more stations are changing hands today than did just five years ago.
Last year, there were six radio deals that involved a public radio buyer or seller, according to Marc Hand, managing director of Public Radio Capital, a Colorado-based nonprofit that helps public stations raise money to acquire new stations and expand.
From 1998 through 2000, just one public radio station changed hands per year. This year is on pace to exceed previous years, with four deals in the works already, he said.
"Historically, public radio in some ways was almost protected from business and market circumstances," he said. "A lot of stations are realizing that you can principally focus on your mission, but to do that mission, you have to focus on your business."
The business focus is driven by a desire to get more people to listen, according to Mike Janssen, an associate editor at Current, a newspaper that covers public broadcasting. A bigger audience means more pledges for the listener-supported public stations and a healthier bottom line, he said.
Many public radio stations program a mix of music and news. But when a public radio system owns multiple frequencies, it can specialize each spot on the dial - one can program all-news, another can program only jazz or classical music.
A dedicated format can make listeners happier and attract a wider audience, said Tom Thomas of the Station Resource Group, a membership group of leading public radio organizations.
"Radio is a very highly segmented medium," Thomas said. "Even the most hugely successful stations these days are not listened to by 95 percent of the community."
But with a limited number of frequencies and more interests bidding for them, the landscape is becoming more competitive - sometimes pitting public radio systems against each other.
Such a conflict is playing out in Northern California, where the nation's most listened-to public radio station, San Francisco-based KQED, announced in February that it planned to buy a station in Sacramento. KQED plans to broadcast the same schedule of news programming it airs in the San Francisco Bay area, customized with local traffic and weather.
Michael Lazar, president and general manager of Sacramento's Capital Public Radio, complains KQED is moving in on a market that his system has cultivated for 20 years, and plans to air many of the same programs at the same time, including the popular news shows "Morning Edition" and "All Things Considered," produced by National Public Radio.
Capital Public Radio also bid for the frequency, planning to turn it into an all-jazz station. The frequency went to KQED for its bid of $ 3 million, far more than the moderately sized Sacramento group could afford.
"We are in the public service business and duplicating our format doesn't serve the public interest," Lazar said. "They're going to go head-to-head against us."
KQED says listeners will have more choice, and that the expansion will better serve the public. The station's general manager, Jeff Clark, said the competition could help both sides.
Industry watchers say he may be right. In most cases, when multiple public stations compete head-to-head in a market, the audience and pledges for all the public stations increase, they say.
That seems to be the case in Los Angeles.
Three years ago, Pasadena-based KPCC received a $ 1 million cash infusion from the giant Minnesota Public Radio to build up its news department and improve what KPCC management calls an "underperforming" station. MPR is known as one of the early adopters of a more businesslike approach to public radio, building a statewide public radio network that reaches nearly every corner of Minnesota and a successful for-profit company that it spun off.
Its deal with a Southern California station sparked concerns that an expansion-minded out-of state organization might have too much say over a public station that was supposed to serve Californians.
Some also worried that the station would steal listeners and funding dollars from homegrown KCRW, the region's premier public radio station and one of the top five public stations in the country. Santa Monica-based KCRW has a strong emphasis on music, but also carries popular NPR news shows.
Instead, the competition appears to have benefited both stations.
The audience for KPCC, now known as Southern California Public Radio, has grown by more than 150,000 listeners, the station said. KCRW's listenership has also grown, though not by as much as KPCC's. KCRW management said it just concluded its most successful pledge drive ever on Feb. 10, raising $ 2.9 million in less than two weeks.
A similar scenario played out in Washington, D.C., where competing stations WAMU and WETA saw an increase in listenership after adjusting their schedules and placing news shows head-to-head against each other, said Thomas.
In Albany, N.Y., public FM station WAMC recently bought WHTR, on the AM dial, to improve its reach.
>+++++ Former TV reporter, anchor in Phoenix sues station
 
PHOENIX (AP) - A former reporter and late-night anchor for KNXV-TV is suing the television station for breach of contract months after leaving the ABC affiliate in the midst of a flap over Emmy awards.
Cameron Harper, 49, is also accusing the station and its parent company, Scripps Howard Broadcasting Co., of failing to deal in good faith. The suit, filed March 3 in Maricopa County Superior Court, seeks damages estimated to exceed $ 500,000.
Harper left the station in July after a dispute over two Rocky Mountain Emmy awards. Two weeks before leaving the station, Harper won four Emmys, one for investigative reporting and three for investigative writing.
But former KNXV producer C.J. Ward said he wrote two of the stories for which Harper won the investigative writing awards.
Harper said he realized he had made a mistake after reviewing the tapes and acknowledged that Ward had written one of the stories. Harper returned the Emmy and apologized to Ward. He defended his entry for the other story, which he said was a collaborative effort.
Harper said he was forced to resign over the incident. He thinks the station management wanted to get rid of him and the dispute gave it an excuse to get out of paying the remaining four years of his contract, two of which he said were guaranteed.
"As you might expect we'll have very little to say," said John Culliton, general manager at the station. "We believe he has no grounds for the lawsuit."
In December, Harper landed a job as anchor for an ABC affiliate in Memphis, Tenn.
>+++++ Hearing scheduled in slaying of St. Louis radio personality
 
ST. LOUIS (AP) - The husband of Nan Wyatt faces a court hearing March 26 in the murder of the popular KMOX radio personality.
Thomas Erbland Jr., 43, of the St. Louis suburb Twin Oaks, was appointed a public defender on Feb. 26. He is charged with first-degree murder in the Feb. 18 shooting death of Wyatt, 44, at their home. Their 7-year-old son was in the home, but police said he didn't witness the shooting.
Erbland tried to plead guilty at his arraignment last month, but the judge cut him off and automatically entered a plea of innocent on his behalf.
Erbland is jailed under a suicide watch.
Erbland has admitted shooting Wyatt several times with a .357-caliber handgun. Police say the couple had been having marital problems.
Wyatt had hosted St. Louis' top-rated morning radio show, "Total Information A.M.," on KMOX since 1996. She was also a panelist on "Donnybrook," a public television panel discussion of news in the St. Louis area.
>+++++
INTERNET:
 
 
Supreme Court considers Internet filters in public libraries
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - The Supreme Court considered March 5 how the government can protect the public from the seamy side of the Internet without muzzling free speech in public libraries.
Justices will decide before July if Congress can require public libraries to install software to filter out pornography as a condition of receiving federal money.
Paul Smith, an attorney for the American Library Association, told justices that the filters block tens of thousands of non-pornographic Web sites that include important information.
Justice Stephen Breyer said that Web surfers can ask librarians to disable filters to get to a particular site. "You can have it, you just have to go up to the front desk to get it," he said.
But Smith countered that it stigmatizes a person doing legitimate research. "You've got to go up and say 'Please turn off the porn filter."'
The Bush administration argued that just as libraries decline to collect X-rated movies and pornographic magazines, they shouldn't have to offer access to pornography on their computers.
"Public libraries may reasonably conclude that it best furthers their missions to use a resource that is effective in keeping out pornography, even if that resource keeps out some material that is not pornographic," Solicitor General Theodore Olson argued in a court filing.
Olson said the court should recognize the long tradition of libraries deciding what to offer to patrons.
Librarians and civil liberties groups contend that filters are censorship, plain and simple, and that they filter out vast amounts of valuable information along with the dirty pictures.
A three-judge federal panel in Pennsylvania agreed a year ago, ruling that the Children's Internet Protection Act violates the First Amendment because the filtering programs block too much nonpornographic material.
The law would affect more than 14 million people who use public library computers to do research, send and receive e-mail, and, in some cases, log onto adult sites. The law has been on hold since Congress passed it in 2000.
The law would be particularly unfair to lower-income people who cannot afford their own home connections, the library group and its backers claim, and those in rural areas where Internet access may be expensive or difficult.
The lower court judges recommended less restrictive ways to control Internet use, such as requiring parental consent before minors are allowed to log in on an unfiltered computer or having a parent monitor a child's Web use.
Congress has passed three child protection laws since 1996, but the Supreme Court struck down the first and blocked the second from taking effect. Those dealt with regulations on Web site operators. Legislators tried a new approach with the 2000 law, arguing that Congress should be able to regulate government property.
The law governs money from two programs Congress had previously approved to help libraries take advantage of the Internet. One program helps public libraries get affordable Internet access and the other helps link libraries and buy equipment. The government spent about $ 107 million on those programs nationwide in the 12 months that ended in October.
About 17 percent of libraries already use filtering software on at least some of their computers, with varying degrees of success in screening out only objectionable material.
The case is United States v. American Library Association, 02-361.
On the Net:
Supreme Court: http://www.supremecourtus.gov 
American Library Association: http:www.ala.org 
>+++++ White House objects to Web site lampooning Lynne Cheney
 
NEW YORK (AP) - An Internet lampoon of Vice President Dick Cheney's wife is no laughing matter at the White House, which has asked a satirist to remove pictures of her - complete with red clown noses - from his Web site.
But the New York Civil Liberties Union struck back March 5 on behalf of John A. Wooden, 31, threatening a lawsuit to protect his First Amendment rights to parody the White House and Bush officials on his site, whitehouse.org.
The official White House site is whitehouse.gov.
Cheney counsel David S. Addington warned Wooden's Chickenhead Productions Inc. that Lynne V. Cheney's name and pictures - altered to show her with a red clown's nose and a missing tooth - could not be used to make money without her consent, and asked Wooden to delete the photos and "fictitious biographical statement about her."
Instead, Wooden cautioned Web site visitors that the vice president "wishes you to be aware … that some/all of the biographic information contained on this PARODY page about Mrs. Cheney may not actually be true."
And, it added, the editors of the Web site were "confident that any rumors about Mrs. Cheney formerly being a crystal meth pusher are 100 percent likely to be absolutely untrue. Similarly, any stories about her penchant for licking brandy Alexanders off the hirsute belly of her spouse are all lies, lies, lies!"
NYCLU lawyer Chris Dunn wrote the office of the vice president that the material was "fully protected by the First Amendment."
"With everything happening in the world, you'd think the office of the vice president would have something more important to do than sending letters to political satirists," Wooden said.
A spokeswoman for Cheney's office, Jennifer Millerwise, confirmed the letter from Addington was authentic but said she otherwise had no comment.
>+++++ Anonymity of Internet chat rooms argued before Pennsylvania court
 
PITTSBURGH (AP) - Messages about public figures in Internet chat rooms are akin to anonymous pamphlets like Thomas Paine's "Common Sense" and their authors should have the same right to keep their identities secret, advocates told Pennsylvania's highest court.
The American Civil Liberties Union and a number of Internet companies have lined up to protect the identity of a person who alleged in a political online chat room that a state court judge behaved unethically.
The groups argue the Internet is the equivalent of the anonymous sheets patriots once nailed to trees and courthouse doors to criticize the English monarchy before America declared independence. Paine's influential pamphlet, "Common Sense," came out in January 1776.
Attorneys for Superior Court Judge Jane Ore Melvin say the chat-room message, insinuating she illegally lobbied then-Gov. Tom Ridge to appoint a friend to a vacant spot on the Allegheny County bench, was defamatory.
Her defamation lawsuit is pending while her lawyers try to get America Online to disclose the identity of the author. The appeal argued before the state Supreme Court on March 3 was from an appeals court ruling that said the author must be identified.
The high court didn't indicate when it will rule.
Lower courts in four other states - New Jersey, Washington, California, Virginia - have ruled that extreme caution should be used when deciding whether to reveal the identity of Internet users. Similar suits are pending in numerous states, according to the ACLU.
One of Melvin's attorneys, Robert Lampl, argued that although the Internet is a new mode of communication, it should not free individuals to slander public officials.
But Ann Beeson, associate legal director for the ACLU, told the high court that forcing service providers to divulge the identity of chat-room users, who often use pseudonyms, would create a chilling environment and inhibit frank discussion, especially about the government.
"We are not saying that there should be complete immunity from suit whenever someone says something anonymous on the Internet," Beeson said. "We are only arguing that, especially when it's a public official that is criticized, that public official has to show that she actually suffered some harm from the statement before she can proceed to unmask the speaker."
Under the Pennsylvania Constitution, the bar for proving harm to a public official is considerably higher than for others.
>+++++ Google expands with advertising links tied to Web content
 
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - Google Inc. is trying to build upon the Web's most popular search engine to create the Internet's most powerful advertising vehicle.
As part of an expansion announced March 4, Google will draw upon its sophisticated search technology to display the Web links of advertisers peddling products and services related to the content displayed on a Web page.
As an example, a Web user reading about auto transmissions at Howstuffworks.com on March 4 also saw a stack of Google-generated Web links offering transmission coolers from advertiser Bulkpart.com and used transmissions from another sponsor, Cherry-auto.com.
The technique of making ads more relevant to a Web page's content is similar to the method that Google and rivals like Overture Services Inc. use to package paid links with words entered into search engines.
The advertising-driven search results, known as "pay-for-performance," have developed into one of the Web's most profitable niches.
Instead of paying a flat rate, advertisers essentially bid for the right to be displayed in specific categories. Advertisers say the auction-style pricing provides customer leads at lower rates than other traditional marketing channels, such as the Yellow Pages.
Pay-for-performance search ads are expected to generate $ 1.5 billion to $ 2 billion this year, up from $ 100 million in 2000.
Mountain View-based Google says more than 100,000 advertisers have signed up for its pay-for-performance search service. Those same advertisers can now elect to have their Web links displayed to relevant content.
Pasadena-based Overture says about 80,000 advertisers are using its pay-for-performance search engine. The company disclosed last month that it is investing millions to develop a service similar to Google's new content-based program.
Other online businesses have misfired in their efforts to deliver ads relevant to Web content, but Google believes its years of online search experience will enable the company to succeed.
On The Net:
http://www.google.com 
>+++++ AOL blocks a billion spam e-mails in 24 hours
 
NEW YORK (AP) - In a single 24-hour period, America Online says it trashed a billion e-mails offering mortgages and organ enhancement, instead of letting them slip into customers' inboxes.
AOL spokesman Nicholas Graham said the company's software filters snagged the record number of junk, or spam, messages on March 3 and 4.
AOL said its members used "report spam" buttons on their e-mail software 5.5 million times in the period. The largest portion of messages reported - about 10 percent - came from users of Microsoft's Hotmail e-mail service, Graham said.
AOL said it blocks an average of 28 junk e-mails per account, per day.
Graham said "an extremely small fraction" of the messages snagged in AOL's spam filters were legitimate ones. He declined to reveal any figures for that mail.
>+++++
AWARDS:
 
 
Scripps Howard Foundation announces awards
 
CINCINNATI (AP) - Reports examining environmental issues and shortcomings in criminal justice were among the winners of the Scripps Howard Foundation national journalism awards announced March 7.
Cash awards totaling $ 95,000 for work done in 2002 are to be presented to the winners April 4 at the National Press Club in Washington. The foundation is an arm of the E.W. Scripps Co.
The awards recognize excellence in 18 categories including editorial, human interest, environmental and public service reporting, business and economics, commentary, photojournalism, broadcast journalism, college cartooning, Web reporting and editorial cartooning.
The awards also recognize service to literacy and the First Amendment.
The winners are:
Editorial writing: John McCormick, Chicago Tribune, who is to receive $ 5,000 and a trophy for editorials focusing on Chicago's murder rate.
Commentary: Frank Cerabino, Palm Beach (Fla.) Post, $ 5,000 and a trophy for a selection of his columns, including commentary about frivolous lawsuits resulting from the Americans with Disabilities Act, and criticism of the criminal justice system for punishing petty thieves more harshly than corporate criminals.
Human interest writing: Paula Bock, The Seattle Times, $ 5,000 and a trophy for a selection of articles including one about the international AIDS epidemic through the experiences of a woman and her family in Zimbabwe.
Web reporting: The Sun, San Bernardino, Calif., $ 5,000 and a trophy for a series of stories about teen violence. The Web component included court documentation, video confessions and photo archives of cases.
Environmental reporting, over-100,000 circulation: Sam Roe, Chicago Tribune, $ 5,000 and a trophy for his report about the demise of a federally funded project to make a more fuel-efficient automobile.
Environmental reporting, under-100,000 circulation: Canon City (Colo.) Daily record, $ 5,000 and a trophy for its special section about a corporate landowner's plans to serve as a depository for thousands of tons of radioactive soil from a New Jersey Superfund site.
Editorial cartooning: Clay Bennett, Christian Science Monitor, Boston, $ 5,000 and a trophy for cartoons on issues that included the threat of war with Iraq, homeland security and eroded confidence in public securities markets.
Service to literacy: Orlando (Fla.) Sentinel: $ 5,000, a trophy and a $ 5,000 donation from the Scripps Howard Foundation to a literacy program of the newspaper's choice for a continuing review of why almost one-third of Florida's children are not reading by the age of 9.
Service to the First Amendment: Seth Rosenfeld, San Francisco Chronicle, $ 5,000 and a trophy for articles in a special section based on thousands of government documents obtained over 22 years to expose unlawful Cold War intelligence activities by the FBI at the University of California at Berkeley.
Photojournalism: Don Bartletti, Los Angeles Times, $ 5,000 and a trophy for photography involving a story that recounted a Honduran teen's journey from Mexico to North Carolina in search of his mother.
Business/economics reporting: Chicago Tribune, $ 5,000 and a trophy for a four-part series on the downfall of the Chicago-based Andersen accounting firm.
Journalistic excellence in electronic media, small market radio: KOSU-FM, Stillwater, Okla., $ 5,000 and a trophy for a documentary about two decades of delays and problems that blocked reclamation of abandoned lead and zinc mines in Oklahoma.
Journalistic excellence in electronic media, large market radio: Minnesota Public Radio/American RadioWorks, St. Paul, Minn., $ 5,000 and a trophy for a three-part documentary on the private corrections industry's influence on U.S. criminal justice policy.
Journalistic excellence in electronic media, small market TV/cable: KEYE-TV, Austin, Texas, $ 5,000 and a trophy for a six-part series on errors by a Houston crime laboratory and how those mistakes affected the outcomes of criminal cases.
College cartooning: Steven Olexa, Daily Beacon, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, $ 5,000 and a trophy for a selection of his work including a comic strip regularly published in the campus newspaper.
Public service reporting, over-100,000 circulation, The (Baltimore) Sun, $ 5,000 and a trophy for an investigative series that exposed shortcomings in the criminal justice system through an examination of 1,449 homicides over five years.
Public service reporting, under-100,000 circulation, Albuquerque Tribune, $ 5,000 and a trophy for a three-week series on the difficulties and challenges confronting poor children in New Mexico.
On the Net:
http://www.scripps.com/foundation 
>+++++ Israeli journalist wins UNESCO prize
 
PARIS (AP) - An Israeli journalist was awarded the 2003 UNESCO/Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom Prize for her compassionate reports on the lives and hardships of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Amira Hass of the Haaretz newspaper was praised March 6 for "showing outstanding professional commitment and independence, as well as personal courage, over the past decade," UNESCO Director-General Koichiro Matsuura said.
"If peace is to be established between Israelis and Palestinians, it will be thanks to people like Ms. Hass," he added.
Hass moved to Gaza after the signing of the Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement in December 1993, and settled in Ramallah in the West Bank in 1997.
"Her independent and critical reporting on the policies of both Israelis and Palestinians has exposed her to pressure from both sides," the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization said.
A former teacher, Hass began working in journalism as an editor for Haaretz in 1989.
The $ 25,000 prize is named after the Colombian journalist Guillermo Cano, who was murdered in 1987 for criticizing the country's powerful drug cartels.
UNESCO is based in Paris.
>+++++
Plain Dealer, Post-Dispatch win top Headliner Awards
 
ATLANTIC CITY, N.J. (AP) - The (Cleveland) Plain Dealer and St. Louis Post-Dispatch won top honors in the 69th annual National Headliner Awards competition announced March 10.
Also honored were NPR Radio and WYFF of Greenville, S.C.
The Plain Dealer's Connie Schultz won best of show in the print division for "The Burden of Innocence," a five-part series about a wrongly accused man. It also captured first place for news beat coverage by a daily newspaper with circulation of 75,000 or more.
Judges called the entry "a testament to the power of storytelling. Not only did she render a compelling portrait of a man falsely accused of a crime, but her narrative forced the real criminal to come forward after 14 years."
The Plain Dealer's Dale Omori won first place for photographic portfolio.
In photography, Robert Cohen of the St. Louis Post-Dispatch won for "A Family's Decision," a photo essay about a man caring for his wife of 51 years, who has Alzheimer's disease. The entry also won best photo essay.
"The photographer's empathy and dedication to the subject shines through. He has captured the sense of loss, loneliness and love of a husband for his wife," the judges said.
In broadcast, best of show for television went to WYFF of Greenville, S.C., for "Truth Check," a series of reports analyzing the veracity of claims made by political candidates. Reported by Brad Willis, Don Jackson and Lee Brown, the entry was also tops in the public service category.
"It strives to inform and empower voters and it succeeds with flying colors," the judges said. "One judge called it 'exactly what American journalism should be.' Other stations, large and small, should take notice."
In radio, NPR News of Washington won best of show for "Oruzgan Raid," by Steve Inskeep, a story about a raid by U.S. troops in Afghanistan. That also won for continuing coverage of a single news event.
"Inskeep's reporting may have led to the release of 27 prisoners wrongly held by the U.S. It was one of the few instances in which reporters were able to verify claims of civilian casualties in Afghanistan," the judges said.
The results were announced by The Press Club of Atlantic City, N.J., which runs the annual competition.
The four "Best of Show" winners receive $ 1,500 cash prizes, and all awards will be presented at the group's April 26 banquet here at Boardwalk Hall.
Founded in 1934, the National Headliner Awards program is one of the nation's oldest journalism contests.
Since 1935 - when the first awards were given - the National Headliner Awards has presented more than 1,600 medallions to writers, photographers, daily newspapers, magazines, graphic artists, radio and television stations, networks and news syndicates.
Winners, by category, followed by second- and third-place finishers:
PRINT DIVISION
Writing & reporting Spot News, all sizes: Star Tribune of Minneapolis, staff, "Death of Senator Paul Wellstone;" East Valley Tribune, Mesa, Ariz., staff, "Unstoppable;" St. Petersburg (Fla.) Times, staff, "Plane Hits Skyscraper."
News Beat Coverage, circulation up to 75,000: The Charleston (W.V.) Gazette, Eric Eyre and Scott Finn, "License to Steal;" Greeley (Colo.) Tribune, staff, "Worlds Apart - Coming Together;" The Poughkeepsie (N.Y.) Journal, Mary Beth Pfeiffer, "Treatment in State Prisons of Mentally Ill Inmates."
News Beat Coverage, circulation over 75,000: The (Cleveland) Plain Dealer, Connie Schultz, "The Burden of Innocence;" San Francisco Chronicle, David Parrish and Jaxon Van Derbeken, "Police Dead Last in Solving Violent Crime;" The Seattle Times, Hal Bernton, Mike Carter, David Heath and James Neff, "The Terrorist Within."
Local Interest Column on a Variety of Subjects: Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, Eugene Kane; Lexington (Ky.) Herald-Leader, Merlene Davis; The (Portland) Oregonian, Steve Duin.
Special or Feature Column on One Subject: The (Baltimore) Sun, Susan Reimer, "Family Life Column;" The Star-Ledger of Newark, N.J., Valerie Sudol, "Garden Diary Column;" The News & Observer of Raleigh, N.C., J. Peder Zane, "Book Columns."
Editorial Writing: The Star-Ledger of Newark, N.J., Tom Moran; The (Baltimore) Sun, Karen Hosler and Robert Benjamin; the Orlando (Fla.) Sentinel, Marianne Arneberg.
Sports Writing: The Palm Beach (Fla.) Post, Charles Elmore. The Star-Ledger of Newark, N.J., Brad Parks; Chicago Tribune, Rick Morrissey, "In the Wake of the News."
Feature Writing on Variety of Subjects: The (Portland) Oregonian, Tom Hallman; The Palm Beach (Fla.) Post, Michael Browning; The (Baltimore) Sun, Gary Dorsey.
Business News: The Miami Herald, John Dorschner, "Web Pharmacy;" Chicago Tribune, Flynn McRoberts and team, "A Final Accounting;" The Wall Street Journal, staff, "Corporate Greed in America."
Educational Writing: The Times-Picayune of New Orleans, Brian Thevenot, "Leap Year;" The Orange County (Calif.) Register, Keith Sharon, Sarah Tully Tapia, Ronald Campbell and Maria Sacchetti, "Test Scores Unreliable;" Fort Worth (Texas) Star-Telegram, Yamil Berard, "Portfolio: Education, Finance & Business."
Health/Science Writing: The (Baltimore) Sun and the Orlando Sentinel, Walter F. Roche Jr. and Willoughby Mariano, "Indentured in America;" The Orlando Sentinel, Rene Stutzman, "House Arrest: A Public Threat;" Newsday, staff, "Public Land, Private Profits."
Public Service: Pensacola (Fla.) News Journal, Amie K. Streater and staff, "Escambia County Commission;" The Miami Herald, Ronnie Greene and Joe Mozingo, "MIA - Big Airport, Big Bucks;" Albuquerque Tribune, staff, "State of Our Children."
Editorial Cartoons: Star Tribune of Minneapolis, Steve Sack; The Commercial Appeal, Memphis, Tenn., Bill Day; The Record of Bergen County, N.J., Jimmy Margulies.
MAGAZINES
Writing & Reporting Coverage of a Major News Event or Topic: Newsweek, Babak Dehghanpisheh, John Barry and Roy Gutman, "War Crimes of Afghanistan;" Time, Priscilla Painton, Jan Simpson and Eric Pooley, "9/11 One Year Later;" Newsweek, Michael Isikoff and Daniel Klaidman, "9/11 Terrorists the CIA Should Have Caught."
Feature Writing on a Variety of Subjects: Legal Affairs, of Connecticut, Brendan I. Koerner; Time, John Cloud; Newsweek, Evan Thomas.
Special Column: The Hartford (Conn.) Courant, Jenny Blair, "Medical School Columns;" Newsweek, Fareed Zakaria, "International Columns;" Smart Money, Roger Lowenstein, "Unconventional Wisdom Columns."
NEWS SERVICES AND SYNDICATES
Writing & Reporting Feature Writing on a Variety of Subjects: Bloomberg News, A. Craig Copetas, "Boys with Toys;" Newhouse News Service, David Wood; The Associated Press, Helen O'Neill.
Columns or Commentary on either a Single Topic or Variety of Topics: Bloomberg News, Graef Crystal, "Sweetening the Corporate Suite;" Newhouse News Service, James Lileks; The Rick Horowitz Column, Rick Horowitz, "Life & Times."
PHOTOGRAPHY AND GRAPHICS FOR DAILY NEWSPAPER, MAGAZINES, NEWS SERVICES AND SYNDICATES
Newspapers - Spot News: Rocky Mountain News, Matt Inden, "Last Flight;" Rocky Mountain News, George Kochaniec Jr., "Courtroom Disturbance;" Eagle Tribune, of Andover, Mass., Lisa Poole, "Boy Pulled From Frozen River."
Newspapers - Feature Photography: The Denver Post, Karl Gehring, "Security;" The Boston Globe, David L. Ryan, "WTC Memorial Service;" San Antonio Express-News, John Davenport, "Reluctant Snake Handlers."
Newspapers - Sports Photography: Philadelphia Daily News, Steven M. Falk, "Out at Home;" Des Moines Register, Rodney White, "Victory!" The Oregonian, Rob Finch, "Big Punch."
Magazines, News Services, Syndicates - Spot News Photography: The Associated Press, David Guttenfelder, "Grief;" The Associated Press, Jun-Yi Lin, "Boat Fire;" The Associated Press, Jerome Delay, "Early Release."
Magazines, News Services, Syndicates - Feature Photography: The Associated Press, Gregory Bull, "After the Taliban;" The Associated Press, Sergei Grits, "Muslim Madonna;" Sports Illustrated, Ian Jones, "War Games."
Magazines, News Services, Syndicates - Sports Photography: Sports Illustrated, Bob Rosato, "Rising to the Occasion;" Sports Illustrated, Simon Bruty, "Miracle on Ice;" The Associated Press, Gregory Bull, "Mexico Soccer."
Photography Portfolio: The (Cleveland) Plain Dealer, Dale Omori; Rocky Mountain News, Barry Gutierrez; The Denver Post, Craig Walker.
Newspapers - Informational or Illustrative Graphics: Newsday, Gary Viskupic; The Oregonian, Derrick Quenzer; USA Today, Frank Pompa and Karl Gelles.
Photo Essay: St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Robert Cohen, "A Family's Decision;" The Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Paul Joseph Brown, "Puget Sound Environmental Health;" St. Petersburg Times, John Kaplan, "Transcending Torture."
>+++++
BROADCAST:
RADIO STATIONS
Continuing coverage of a Single News Event, all markets: WBAL-AM, Baltimore, Mark Miller, "Serial Snipers: Days of Terror!" WKSU-FM, Kent, Ohio, Vincent Duffy, Kevin Niedermier and Mark Urycki, "Traficant on Trial;" WMAL-AM, Washington, D.C., John Matthews and staff, "The Sniper Attacks."
Documentary or Series of Reports: WKSU-FM, Kent, Ohio, Vincent Duffy and Mark Urycki, "A Place for Me: Adoption & Foster Care in Ohio;" WCPN ideastream, Cleveland, Ohio, Karen Schaefer, "Davis-Besse Nuclear Power Plant;" KCBS, San Francisco, Holly Quan, "Cancer Puzzle."
Feature or Human Interest Story: WBAL-AM, Baltimore, John Patti, "The Hokeyman;" KCBS, San Francisco, Rebecca Corral, "Trauma Unit;" WBAL-AM, Baltimore, Pieter Bickford, "Induction Day."
RADIO STATIONS, NETWORKS & SYNDICATORS
Best Newscast: CBS Radio News, New York, Christopher Glenn and Paul Farry, "CBS World News Roundup;" WBAL-AM, Baltimore, John Patti, Scott Wykoff and Pieter Bickford, "Anniversary;" ABC News Radio, New York, Doug Limerick, "9/11/02 Newscast."
Coverage of a Spot News Event, all markets: ABC News Radio, ABC News Radio Team, "Newscast: Miners Trapped;" CBS Radio News, New York, staff, "9/11/02;"
Continuing coverage of a Single News Event, all markets:
National Public Radio, Washington, D.C., Steve Inskeep, "Oruzgan Raid;" Minnesota Public Radio, Minnesota Public Radio News, "Minnesota Senate Race;" CBS Radio News, CBS News Radio Staff, "Sniper."
Investigative Reporting: National Public Radio, Washington, D.C., John Burnett, "Corruption at the Gates;" American RadioWorks, Durham, N.C., John Biewen and Deborah George, "Corrections, Inc.;"
Documentary or Series of Reports: National Public Radio, Washington, D.C., Mike Shuster, "The Mideast: A Century of Conflict;" Radio Diaries on National Public Radio, N.Y., Joe Richman, "My So-Called Lungs;" Rowan Radio, WGLS-FM, Glassboro, N.J., "It's My Party and I'll Die if I Want To."
Feature or Human Interest Story: National Public Radio, Wayland, Mass., Margo Melnicove and Tom Cole, "Matt Savage: Jazz Pianist;" Common Ground Radio, Muscatine, Iowa, Kristin McHugh, "Kosovo's Pied Piper: The Liz Shropshire Story;" The Infinite Mind, New York, Bill Lichtenstein, Emily Fisher and Devorah Klahr, "Laughter."
TELEVISION STATIONS
Best Newscast: KSTP, St. Paul, Minn., staff, "Wellstone Plane Crash;" KIRO, Seattle, Wash., Dave Humphrey and staff, "Vintage Plane Crash;" WEWS, Cleveland, Ohio, Lynn Heider, "Ohio Tornadoes."
Spot News Event: WTAE, Pittsburgh, Pa., staff, "Pennsylvania Miner Rescue;" KSTP, St. Paul, Minn., Tom Hauser, Bill Kirgiss and Bob McNaney; "Wellstone Plane Crash;" WEWS, Cleveland, Lynn Heider; "Warehouse Explosion."
Continuing Coverage of a Single News Event: WJW, Cleveland, Bill Sheil, Dave Hollis and Greg Easterly, "What the Bishops Knew;" WCVB, Needham, Mass., staff, "Church Sex Abuse Scandal;" WGBH, Boston, Anne-Marie Dorning, Emily Rooney and John Carroll, "Political Coverage Composite."
Feature, Sports or Human Interest Story: WGBH, Boston, Chuck Kraemer and John Carroll; "Chuck Kraemer's Steeplejack;" News 12 Long Island, Michael DelGiudice and Rita Nissan, "Ride for Life: 2002;" WFAA, Dallas, Texas, Sean Hamilton, Arnold Payne, Dale Hansen and Jeff Collette, "On Route 22 - The Emmitt Smith Story."
Public Service: WYFF, Greenville, S.C., Brad Willis, Don Jackson and Lee Brown, "Truth Check;" KMGH, McGraw Hill, Denver, 7 News Investigates Team, "You Paid For It;" WCVB, Needham, Mass., Rhonda Mann, Heather Unruh and Dr. Timothy Johnson, "Playing it Safe."
Documentary or Series of Reports: KIRO, Seattle, Ben Saboonchian, Richard Marshall and Peter Gamba, "War of the Woods: The Last Stand;" WCPO, Cincinnati, Hagit Limor, Michael Benedic and Phyllis Parker, "Critical Condition: Cincinnati's Medical Emergency;" WBAL, Baltimore, staff, "Unitas We Stand."
Investigative Reporting: WTVF, Nashville, Tenn., Phil Williams and Bryan Staples, "Friends in High Places:" KIRO, Seattle, Chris Halsne, "The Final Ride"; KTRK, Houston, Wayne Dolcefino, Steve Bivens & Dave De Franchi, "Hungry for Answers"
TELEVISION AND CABLE NETWORKS, AND SYNDICATORS
Best Newscast: CNN, NewsNight with Aaron Brown, "6 Month Anniversary of 9/11"; NBC News, NBC Nightly News staff, "The Arrest of the Snipers"; NBC News, NBC Nightly News Staff, "9/11/02 Newscast"
Coverage of a Major News Event: NBC News Productions, NBC News Production staff, "Miracle at the Mine, with Stone Phillips"; NBC Nightly News, NBC Nightly News staff, "After the Storms"; MSNBC, Meghan Schaefer & Ashleigh Banfield, "Inside Fresh Kills."
Continuing Coverage of a Major News Event: CNN Productions, CNN Productions staff, "America Remembers"; Dateline NBC, Tom Brokaw & Colleen Halpin, "Controllers"; Dateline NBC, Timothy Gorin, Stone Phillips & Debbie Goodison, "Silencing the Rifle"
Feature, Sports or Human Interest Story: Dateline NBC, David Corvo, Stone Phillips & Carol Gable, "Cardinal Sins"; Dateline NBC, David Corvo, Rob Stafford & Jack Cloherty, "For the Love of Katelyn"; MSNBC Meghan Schaefer & Ashleigh Banfield, "The Lifesaving Flight of 9/11."
Documentary or Series of Reports: NBC News Productions, NBC News Productions Staff, "Behind the Headlines: Understanding Iraq"; CNN, Susan Candiotti & James Polk, "CNN Presents: In the Line of Fire"; NBC News, Tom Brokaw, Mark Lukasiewicz & Philip Alongi, "Inside the Real West Wing."
Investigative Reporting: ABC News, Brian Ross, Brenda Breslauer & Yoruba Richen, "Unsolved Rapes"; KHOU, Houston, Anna Werner, David Raziq & Cristobal Henao, "Evidence of Errors"; ABC News, Brian Ross, Rhonda Schwartz & David Scott, "Nuclear Smuggling."
News Magazine Program: ABC News 20/20, Barbara Walters, Martin Clancy & Katie Thomson, "Fidel Castro"; Dateline NBC, Keith Morrison, Shachar Bar-On, Robert O. Allen, Marc Rosenwasser and David Corvo, "A Separate Peace"; Dateline NBC, Meade R. Jorgensen, Bob McKeown & Allan Maraynes, "Preacher Man."
>+++++
FREE PRESS-COURTS:
 
 
Senators try again to have cameras inside federal courtrooms
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Two senators are trying again to get television cameras inside federal courtrooms, saying it would lead to a better understanding of the federal judiciary.
Sens. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, and Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., said March 6 their bill would not require that federal judges allow cameras into their courtrooms. Instead, it would give judges discretion to allow cameras or other electronic media access if they see fit, the senators said.
Federal courts currently do not allow cameras.
"The best way to maintain confidence in our federal judiciary, which has tremendous power, is to let the sun shine in by allowing judges to exercise their discretion in opening federal courtrooms to public view through the broadcasting and televising of judicial proceedings," said Grassley, chairman of the Senate Finance committee.
The bill would protect the privacy and safety of witnesses by giving them the right to have their faces and voices obscured.
Opponents have argued that courtroom cameras increase sensationalism in the trials, entice lawyers into arguing for the cameras and do little to educate the public about their courts.
But "courts are government agencies. The more the public knows about how the government works, the better," Schumer said. "If there are flaws in our governing institutions, including our courts, we hide them only at our peril."
Forty-seven states permit some form of audio-video coverage in their courtrooms and at least 37 directly televise trials, the senators said.
Grassley and Schumer have been trying to get a version of the bill passed for years.
>+++++ Judge bars cameras in courtroom for trial of Malvo
 
FAIRFAX, Va. (AP) - A Virginia judge has barred cameras in the courtroom for the trial of teenage sniper suspect Lee Boyd Malvo.
Malvo, 18, and John Allen Muhammad, 42, are accused of shooting 19 people - killing 13 and wounding six - in Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland, Virginia and Washington, D.C.
On March 3, Circuit Judge Jane Marum Roush rejected news media requests for cameras in the courtroom, and said she was "concerned with the possible prejudice to Mr. Malvo, whether still cameras or TV cameras."
She approved a request from Fairfax County to allow a closed-circuit broadcast to an overflow courtroom for additional reporters and victims' families.
The prosecution objected only to a televised broadcast, while Malvo's lawyers opposed any cameras, including the closed-circuit broadcast.
The judge also said the defense is entitled to potentially thousands of uninvestigated leads that were reported to the sniper tip line during the shooting spree. Prosecutors have said 50,000 to 70,000 tips were received.
Prosecutors have said that Malvo made multiple confessions to pulling the trigger in some of the shootings, including the Oct. 14 shooting of FBI analyst Linda Franklin, for which he is facing trial.
>+++++ N.C. daily wins request for public disclosure of settlement
 
BREVARD, N.C. (AP) - A judge granted a newspaper's request for public disclosure of the details of a $ 1.8 million settlement for 17 children who sued the Henderson County school system, claiming they had been molested by a reading teacher.
However, Judge Zoro J. Guice Jr. denied the Hendersonville Times-News request for access to documents, depositions, personnel records and other material exchanged by attorneys but not filed in court.
The information the newspaper sought showed that the settlement reached Feb. 26 pays each of the children $ 4,000 a year until age 18, then $ 8,500 a year until age 30. It also pays each family $ 5,000 immediately and establishes a trust fund to pay for counseling and other psychological needs of the children.
The man accused of the crimes, Laurence Freeman McKisson, 54, was convicted in January 2002 of molesting four young boys and sentenced to 62 years in prison.
Between 1995 and 2001, he worked as a volunteer, student teacher, substitute teacher or reading assistant at Etowah, Bruce Drysdale, Dana and Edneyville elementary schools and Apple Valley Middle School.
The settlement amount and general information about the distribution was made public the day of the settlement, but specific information had not been available.
Attorneys for the school board and the plaintiffs wanted to present details of the settlement in a closed courtroom.
>+++++
INTERNATIONAL:
 
 
Spanish government files complaint against Basque journalists
 
MADRID, Spain (AP) - The government filed a complaint against four Basque newspaper executives who had accused police of torturing them, saying the allegations were made on instructions from armed separatists.
Interior Minister Angel Acebes denied the torture allegations March 10 and showed reporters what he said was a manual from the armed Basque group ETA that instructed supporters to claim they had been tortured after any arrest.
He said the four executives from the Basque-language daily Egunkaria, among 10 arrested last month after the paper was shut down on court order, had followed those instructions "to the letter."
The next step is for an investigative magistrate at the National Court, which handles alleged terrorism cases, to decide whether to open a formal investigation.
Five of the 10 detainees spent five days in the custody of the Civil Guard in Madrid, and four later accused that paramilitary police force of torturing them. The force is part of the Interior Ministry.
Editor in chief Martxelo Otamendi, 45, said that among other things, a plastic bag was held over his head repeatedly.
The government had already denied the allegations. But on March 10, Acebes went further.
He said the accusations were not simply false and slanderous - which would land the case in a lower court, not the National Court - but were issued on instructions in the purported ETA manual.
Such allegations are part of a broader ETA strategy "to discredit (Spain's) democratic institutions," the minister said.
Acebes said the manual was seized in a raid on an ETA commando unit in 1998.
He said the four Egunkaria executive who claimed torture have not filed formal complaints in any court.
Egunkaria was closed down on orders from National Court Judge Juan del Olmo, who said ETA financed it as a tool for its commandos to communicate.
Government officials have said the newspaper tipped off ETA operatives about police activities.
Del Olmo said the paper would remain shut for at least six months.
>+++++ Prince Charles' office complains about tabloid photos of William
 
LONDON (AP) - Prince Charles' office said March 9 it plans to contact Britain's press watchdog about photos a tabloid newspaper printed of Charles' son, Prince William.
St. James's Palace said it would speak with the Press Complaints Commission, the industry group that regulates Britain's newspapers, to express its displeasure with the photos of William, 20, walking near his Scotland college.
The News of the World tabloid ran the photos March 9. They show William strolling near the University of St. Andrews in jeans, a green fleece jacket and baseball cap.
The News of the World said all the pictures were taken in public places and their publication followed the letter and spirit of Press Complaints Commission guidelines.
The palace disagreed, saying: "We take a dim view of the publication of these pictures as we thought there was an agreement between the Press Complaints Commission and newspapers not to pursue William at university."
"We acknowledge that William was in a public place but, because of sensitive issues around his privacy at university, we hope newspapers will show restraint," a palace spokeswoman added on condition of anonymity.
In one published photo, William carries two loaded plastic grocery bags. Another shows him leaning on his mountain bike, a backpack over his shoulders, and a third portrays the young prince chatting on a mobile phone as he walks.
An accompanying article says the images demonstrate that the photogenic William has become an unaffected, down-to-earth adult, just as his late mother, Princess Diana, had hoped.
The princess often took William and his younger brother, Prince Harry, on excursions around London, riding public transportation and visiting fast-food restaurants so they would know what life outside the rarefied royal world was like.
>+++++ President of Colombia's photographers union to flee country
 
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - The president of Colombia's photographers union said March 4 she would flee the country because of death threats she and other union members have received.
"I can't eat," Gladys Barajas told the Associated Press. "My life has completely cracked."
Barajas, who works as a photographer for a movie and television company called Raya Productions, had received a series of threats over the last year.
The South American nation is one of the most dangerous places in the world to be a journalist, with at least 114 journalists murdered over the last 14 years, according to the Inter American Press Association.
Barajas has been the president of Colombia's Circle of Graphic Reporters - a 53-year-old organization - for the last five years.
Barajas said she has no idea who might be making the threats.
Colombia is torn by a 38-year civil war that pits leftist rebels against the government and right-wing paramilitary groups. About 3,500 people, mainly civilians, die in the fighting each year.
>+++++ Iranian journalists protest press crackdown
 
TEHRAN, Iran (AP) - Iranian journalists have denounced the hard-line judiciary's press crackdown that has closed about 90 reformist publications and imprisoned dozens of writers and activists.
Around 40 journalists held a protest March 6 at Iran's Press Guild Association against the judiciary's moves.
"We have gathered here today to protest the imprisonment of journalists without trial for their writings and demand freedom for those in jail," said Rajabali Mazrouei, a reformist lawmaker and the press association's head.
Conservative clerics opposed to changes in the Islamic government's social and political restrictions control the judiciary as well as other non-elected levers of power in Iraq.
Mazrouei said the association was considering calling a sit-in to draw attention to the problem.
Other members offered their own ideas. One journalist, Mohammad Aghazadeh, suggested sending flowers as a symbolic protest to judges who ordered newspapers closed or journalists jailed - or collecting signatures on Internet petitions.
Ahmad Zeidabadi, a writer who has been jailed several times on charges of insulting Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, said such methods don't work in a country ruled by hard-line clerics.
"Impolite judges who use off-color language and treat men of pen worse than criminals simply don't understand such gestures," Zeidabadi said.
Zeidabadi, 37, is best known for his strongly worded editorials and analyses in a number of reformist newspapers that were subsequently banned. He has criticized Iran's religious leaders, saying they are unresponsive to the people.
Other journalists blamed President Mohammad Khatami for failing to stand up to hard-liners.
>+++++ Uzbek crowd assaults reporters from Western media
 
TASHKENT, Uzbekistan (AP) - An Uzbek crowd assaulted two reporters from Radio Liberty and Voice of America after they covered an anti-government protest, stealing their recording equipment as police watched.
Khusnudin Kudbidinov of Radio Liberty and Yusuf Rasulov of Voice of America, both from Uzbekistan, said they were at a Tashkent bazaar March 7 to cover a protest by about 40 women calling for President Islam Karimov's ouster. The protesters also demanded an end to torture in prisons, where they said their sons were being held because of their religious beliefs.
The women were arrested and taken away by police, merchants at the bazaar said. Roads around the bazaar were closed for several hours after the protest.
The two reporters had arrived after the protest ended. They interviewed eight demonstrators who had evaded arrest and also spoke to police officers. After they left the immediate area, they were assaulted by about 20 people who and took their equipment, Kudbidinov said. They were not seriously injured, he said.
The State Department expressed concern recently about several cases of harassment against journalists in this Central Asian nation, a key U.S. ally in the war on terror in neighboring Afghanistan.
Public protests are rare in Uzbekistan, where opposition parties are banned and all media is state-controlled. Uzbekistan has drawn international criticism for its human rights record.
>+++++ Serbian journalists concerned about lack of media reforms
 
BELGRADE, Serbia-Montenegro (AP) - A spate of attacks on journalists and lack of media reforms by the new government that ousted former President Slobodan Milosevic prompted concerns by independent groups over threats to press freedom in Serbia.
Editors and journalists of a Vienna-based network for Southeastern Europe sent a letter March 5 to local and Belgrade authorities, protesting attacks against media in Pozarevac.
Pozarevac, Milosevic's hometown that's 50 miles east of Belgrade, served as a symbol of his autocratic rule.
The group, known as SEEMO - or the South East Europe Media Organization, an affiliate of the International Press Institute - said it was "deeply concerned" about an attack on a well-known reporter in Pozarevac and threats against a local radio station there.
Mile Veljkovic, a correspondent for the independent Beta news agency, was slapped by a politician from the Democratic Party of Serbia when he criticized the party for banning reporters from its session last month.
Also, Pozarevac's local Radio Boom 93 reported a Serbian parliament member had repeatedly pressured it, demanding a "change in the station's editorial policy," the group said.
SEEMO's letter, made available to The Associated Press, stressed the need for journalists to work "without obstruction."
It called on authorities to ensure that journalists and media "are not harassed and … press freedoms are upheld."
Meanwhile, Serbia's Union of Independent Journalists appealed to police to investigate death threats made to reporters of a paper in the southern town of Vranje that broke a scandal involving a Serbian Orthodox bishop accused by five boys of sexually abusing them.
After Milosevic's ouster in 2000, press freedom improved in Serbia. But the new government has since failed to upgrade media laws and carry out press reforms. Its long-promised law on media and public information is still a draft.
>+++++
PEOPLE:
 
 
Oppedahl replaced as San Francisco Chronicle publisher
 
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - The San Francisco Chronicle has replaced publisher John Oppedahl in the latest indicator of unrest in northern California's shaky media market.
Chronicle owner Hearst Corp. on March 3 announced that Steven Falk, the newspaper's chief operating officer, was taking the post.
It was not clear whether Oppedahl had resigned or was fired. Neither Oppedahl nor Falk returned calls seeking comment.
Hearst also promoted Gary Randazzo, formerly the paper's associate publisher, to executive vice president and general manager and expanded the duties of Phil Bronstein, the Chronicle's top editor.
Bearing the new title of executive vice president, Bronstein inherited oversight of the editorial page from Oppedahl. Bronstein will continue to run the paper's newsroom.
The change came 10 days after Hearst's former newspaper, the San Francisco Examiner, laid off most of its staff and started printing a smaller, free weekday edition.
Hearst sold the Examiner in November 2000 for $ 100, but has continued to subsidize the paper's new owners, Florence Fang and her sons.
Hearst agreed to pay $ 66.7 million of the Examiner's bills during a three-year period to win the government's approval of its $ 660 million purchase of the Chronicle in November 2000.
As part of the deal, Hearst promised to blend the Examiner staff into the Chronicle's newsroom. Besides saddling the Chronicle with more expenses, the newsroom merger threw together a cast of former rivals who had competed for years.
Hearst hired Oppedahl, former publisher of The Arizona Republic, to oversee the transition.
A slump in northern California's advertising market shortly after the sale pressured the Chronicle and all of its major rivals to trim staff to reduce expenses.
With a daily circulation of 512,000, the Chronicle has a news staff of about 480 workers, Bronstein said. That's down from about 520 reporters, editors and photographers shortly after Hearst merged the Examiner and Chronicle newsrooms.
Falk told staff March 3 that no further newsroom personnel cuts are anticipated, according to Bronstein.
Hearst's other newspapers include the Seattle Post-Intelligencer, the San Antonio Express-News and the Houston Chronicle.
On The Net:
http://www.sfgate.com 
>+++++ Kendall leaving Honolulu Star-Bulletin to return to Canada
 
HONOLULU (AP) - Don Kendall, president and publisher of the Honolulu Star-Bulletin, announced his resignation March 8. He said he and his wife will return to British Columbia to be closer to their five grown children.
"Our decision is strictly personal," said Kendall, who also will step down as president of the newspaper's sister publication, MidWeek, on March 29.
Canadian newspaper executive David Black named Kendall president of the newspapers Dec. 1, 2000, as his Black Press Ltd. was in the process of buying the two publications.
Before coming to Hawaii, Kendall was vice president of Cariboo Press, a Black Press subsidiary that publishes 27 newspapers in British Columbia.
Kendall will continue to work within Black Press, Black said.
Black named another Cariboo Press vice president, Frank Teskey, to succeed Kendall. Teskey has held a number of senior management positions with Canadian major market dailies and national newspapers, including The Toronto Globe and Mail, The Montreal Gazette and The Winnipeg Free Press.
On the Net:
Honolulu Star-Bulletin: http://www.starbulletin.com 
>+++++ Ryerson appointed executive editor at The Indianapolis Star
 
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - Dennis R. Ryerson, editorial page editor and vice president of the San Jose Mercury News, has been appointed editor and vice president of The Indianapolis Star.
Star Publisher Barbara Henry announced the appointment March 5.
Ryerson, 54, will begin his new assignment March 24. He succeeds Terry Eberle, who became executive editor at Florida Today in January.
Ryerson previously was editor of The Des Moines Register in Iowa and executive editor of the Great Falls (Mont.) Tribune. Henry was publisher during Ryerson's time at both newspapers.
Those papers and the Star are owned by Gannett Co.
>+++++ Six to be inducted into Kentucky Journalism Hall of Fame
 
LEXINGTON, Ky. (AP) - Six journalists with Kentucky ties will be inducted into the Kentucky Journalism Hall of Fame at a luncheon in April at the University of Kentucky.
The inductees include Bob Edwards, the host of National Public Radio's "Morning Edition." Edwards graduated from the University of Louisville.
Other inductees are:
-Louise Hatmaker, former editor, publisher and owner of the Jackson Times and Beattyville Enterprise.
-Robert G. McGruder, a Louisville native, who was executive editor of the Detroit Free Press at the time of his death last April. McGruder became the first black reporter for the Cleveland Plain Dealer in 1963.
-Ed Ryan, who died in 1984. Ryan was chief of the Washington and Frankfort bureaus of The Courier-Journal of Louisville.
-Ed Staats, a reporter, editor and administrator in 10 offices of The Associated Press throughout the United States. Staats retired in 2002 after 18 years as chief of AP's Kentucky operations.
-Carl West, editor of The Frankfort State Journal since 1979. West was a former White House and Pentagon correspondent for the Scripps Howard News Service.
The ceremony will be held at the university's Hilary J. Boone Center on April 8.
>+++++ Evans named AP correspondent in Lexington, Ky.
 
LEXINGTON, Ky. (AP) - Murray Evans, a reporter for The Daily Oklahoman, was named correspondent in charge of the Lexington bureau of The Associated Press.
The announcement was made March 4 in Louisville by David Wilkison, AP chief of bureau for Kentucky.
Evans, 35, joined the staff of the Oklahoman in 1988 and covered college and high school athletics for 12 years. In 2000, he left to serve as regional editor for Student Sports Inc., which produced a magazine and Web site dedicated to high school athletics.
He returned to the paper last August as a news reporter based in the Oklahoman's Norman office, where he covered the University of Oklahoma.
Evans is a 1989 graduate of Oklahoma Christian University, where he earned a journalism degree.
>+++++ Sneed named managing editor of the Opelika-Auburn News
 
OPELIKA, Ala. (AP) - Mitch Sneed, enterprise team editor at the Fort Wayne (Ind.) News-Sentinel, was named managing editor of the Opelika-Auburn News.
He previously was city editor of the Kenosha (Wis.) News and managing editor of the Clayton News Daily in Jonesboro and the Daily Herald in McDonough, both in Georgia.
William White, who had been serving as interim managing editor, has resumed his duties as editor of The Auburn Bulletin.
>+++++ Berg named news director at KSTP-TV in St. Paul
 
ST. PAUL, Minn. (AP) - Christopher Berg, news director at KOB-TV in Albuquerque, N.M., was named news director at KSTP-TV.
Both stations are owned by Hubbard Broadcasting Inc., based in St. Paul.
He replaced Scott Libin, who took a fellowship at the University of Minnesota's School of Journalism and Mass Communication.
KSTP has been struggling to move out of third place in the evening news ratings. Berg led KOB from a distant second place at 10 p.m. to first place in Albuquerque.
>+++++ Bauder to retire as business columnist for San Diego daily
 
SAN DIEGO (AP) - Don Bauder, a longtime business columnist for The San Diego Union-Tribune, has retired after 30 years.
In his daily columns, Bauder wrote about everything from local Ponzi schemes to public funding for the baseball park.
Union-Tribune Editor Karin Winner called Bauder a lightning rod in the business community who appealed to some readers through his exposes of business scams, while irking others for his hard line on business investments for professional sports instead of infrastructure improvements. "He will be missed," Winner said.
Bauder, 67, began his career in Chicago at Business Week magazine in 1964 as assistant business editor. He become the magazine's Cleveland bureau chief before joining the San Diego Union in 1973. Bauder became a senior columnist for the paper in 1996.
>+++++
DEATHS:
 
 
LUIS MARDEN, 90, a writer and photographer with the National Geographic Society who found the remains of the HMS Bounty and was a pioneer in underwater photography, March 3 in Washington of complications from Parkinson's disease.
In 1957, Marden discovered the remains of William Bligh's ship Bounty off Pitcairn Island in the Pacific.
During a 64-year career with the society, Marden traveled with Jacques Cousteau and was a pioneer in 35mm underwater color photography.
Working with his wife, Ethel, a mathematician, Marden calculated the route Columbus sailed from Spain's Canary Islands to the Americas. They and National Geographic senior editor Joseph Judge concluded that Columbus landed at Samana Cay, 65 miles southwest of the long-accepted landfall on Watling Island, also known as San Salvador.
Early in his career, Marden spent much of his time in Central and South America. Later he was a leader in National Geographic's space reporting.
In the late 1960s, in Brazil, he discovered a new orchid species, now named Epistephium mardeni after him. In 1972 he found a new species of sea flea deep in the Atlantic. It is now called Dolobrotus mardeni.
He contributed 60 articles to National Geographic as writer or photographer and made 11 films for the society.
Survivors include his wife.
>+++++
KENNETH AUCHINCLOSS, 65, a longtime editor at Newsweek who oversaw the magazine's coverage of the last five presidential elections, March 4 in New York of cancer.
"He was one of the true founding fathers of the modern Newsweek, and he took on every challenge - from guiding the magazine through difficult editorial transitions in the '70s to writing innumerable late-breaking cover stories, to offering wise counsel to top editors and junior staffers alike - with style and distinction," Newsweek Chairman and Editor in Chief Richard M. Smith and Editor Mark Whitaker said in a statement.
Auchincloss joined Newsweek in 1966 as a writer in the international section of the U.S. edition and later moved to the national affairs department, where he rose to senior editor. He later became executive editor of Newsweek's U.S. edition and was managing editor from 1975 to 1996. He was named editor at large in January 1996.
He retired last year during his illness but returned to edit Newsweek's education guides and international special editions.
Survivors include his wife and two children.
>+++++
RENE MAESTRI, 80, a retired Associated Press photographer who chronicled the triumphs and tragedies of the royal family of Monaco, Feb. 27 in Monaco.
Maestri covered Monaco's defining moment: the marriage of American actress Grace Kelly and Prince Rainier in 1956. He also helped document royal benchmarks that followed, including the births of their three children and Princess Caroline's wedding in 1978.
The photographer also covered the family's greatest tragedy, the death of Princess Grace after a car wreck on Sept. 14, 1982.
Maestri also was known as a specialist on the Formula One auto races in Monte Carlo. His photos of the crash of Italian driver Lorenzo Bandini at the 1967 Grand Prix were on the front pages of newspapers worldwide.
Maestri joined AP in 1958 and retired in 1983.
Survivors include his wife and two daughters.
>+++++
TOM REEVES, 67, a former editor and general manager of The Daily Reporter-Herald in Loveland, Colo., March 7 of complications from injuries suffered in a fall.
Reeves was named editor and general manager of the Loveland newspaper in 1969 and held the post until 1981, when he left to serve as general manager of Capital Newspapers in Albany, N.Y.
During his time at the Reporter-Herald, Reeves served as president of the Colorado Press Association and president of the Colorado Bar-Press Association.
Reeves retired and returned to Loveland in 2000, where he was appointed to the Loveland Planning Commission.
He was diagnosed with prostate cancer and chronicled his treatment for readers of the Reporter-Herald last Sept. 29.
Survivors include his wife and a son.
>+++++
BRUCE BROWN, 79, a retired sports writer and columnist with the Spokane Daily Chronicle and The Spokesman-Review, Feb. 26 in Placentia, Calif.
Brown's death came on the 16th anniversary of his retirement from The Spokesman-Review. He spent 18 years with the Spokane newspapers, devoting his first decade to coverage of Washington State University football and men's basketball.
He also wrote a column, "Another View," and spent seven years as executive sports editor of the Chronicle.
In 1986, the Washington Thoroughbred Breeders Association honored him for excellence in continued coverage of horse racing.
Survivors include three stepsons and a stepdaughter.
>+++++
WARREN F. GARDNER, 94, a newspaper editor and columnist for 50 years, Feb. 23 in Mount Horeb, Wis.
Gardner graduated from St. Lawrence University in Canton, N.Y., and started his career as a reporter at the Watertown Times.
Beginning in 1945, Gardner worked at The Meriden Record in Meriden, Conn., and its successor, the Record-Journal, as an editor and columnist for 50 years.
Robert J. Leeney, editor emeritus of the New Haven Register, said: "Warren was one of the last editors who knew the community he covered from one end to another, because of a long and consistent experience in it."
He stopped writing his twice-weekly column, "Of All Things," in 1995 due to failing eyesight.
>+++++
HANNAH ZEMER, 78, an Israeli journalist who was the first female editor of a major Hebrew publication, March 6 in Jerusalem.
Zemer moved up the ranks to become editor in chief of the now-defunct Davar daily. She filled the post from 1970 to 1990 and is credited with opening the door to other female journalists in Israel.
Journalist Daniel Bloch, a colleague of Zemer's at Davar, said Zemer helped advance other female reporters, including hiring the daily's first female military correspondent.
Survivors include a daughter.
>+++++
JANE K. HORROCKS, 90, the fashion editor of two former Columbus, Ohio, newspapers for 33 years, March 2 in Columbus.
Horrocks was hired by The Columbus Citizen in 1946 and remained with the newspaper when it merged with the Ohio State Journal in 1959 and became the Citizen-Journal.
After retiring from the newspaper in 1979, Horrocks reviewed books for the Ohioana Library.
>+++++
 
NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
 
 
CNN has canceled its 9-year-old afternoon show "Talkback Live," which has originated from the Atlanta mall outside the CNN offices. The show will be replaced by an expanded, three-hour edition of "Live From," which currently airs from 1 to 3 p.m. EST and broadcasts from scene of the day's big story. … A man employed by CBS News to speak the words of Saddam Hussein during his recent interview with Dan Rather reportedly adopted a fake Arabic accent. CBS News hired Steve Winfield, a Screen Actors Guild member with no such accent in real life but who is advertised on the Web as a specialist in foreign accents, the Los Angeles Times reported. … She was once known as U.S. Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun, but now the former lawmaker and Democratic presidential hopeful has dropped the hyphen. A spokesman said the decision was made after several media inquiries about how to refer to Braun, who announced in February that she would begin fund raising for a White House bid. … A federal judge in New York dismissed the claims of the publisher of a German erotic magazine who accused Oprah Winfrey of jeopardizing his magazine by launching one with a similar name. Judge John G. Koeltl threw out the accusations brought by Ronald Brockmeyer, German publisher of O Magazine, saying there was no evidence of any actual confusion between his publication and O, The Oprah Magazine, published by The Hearst Corp.

 

End of Document
