

Mandela handed the Olympic flame in South Africa
The Associated Press
June 12, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 456 words
Byline: By ELLIOTT SYLVESTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAPE TOWN, South Africa
Body




Former South Africa President Nelson Mandela was handed the Olympic flame Saturday at the island prison where he spent most of his 27 years in jail during the South Africa leg of the symbolic torch's worldwide relay.
The flame's first trip to South Africa came as the country celebrates its first decade of all-race democracy.
Flag-waving crowds gathered at key points along the 35-mile route to cheer the 125 torchbearers, including sports stars and music legends, school children and a 100-year-old man.
Cape Town Mayor Nomaindia Mfeketo brought the flame to South Africa on a flight from Egypt on Saturday.
It was flown by helicopter to Robben Island, where Mandela waited in a blue and red track suit in a courtyard outside his former cell. Recalling the importance of sports to his fellow inmates, the 85-year-old anti-apartheid hero said he was "happy and honored" that the torch was passing through.
Mandela held the torch aloft before passing it on to another former prisoner to start a relay around the island.
Cape Town lost the bid to host the 2004 games to Athens, but a member of the Greek organizing committee said the two cities were now united by the flame.
"We are coming to a place of pain … to bring a symbol of friendship," Marton Simitsek said at the island ceremony.
The symbolic torch then made its way from impoverished Cape Flats townships to wealthy suburbs, a glitzy shopping mall on the city's waterfront and up a cable car to the summit of the iconic Table Mountain.
Along the way, it passed key landmarks in the struggle against apartheid, including the spot in Gugulethu township where American exchange student Amy Biehl was slain by an angry mob in 1993.
In District Six, a mixed-race neighborhood that was raised by the country's former apartheid rulers, traditional minstrels in white and green sequined suits entertained the crowds. Waiting among them was Lester Abrahams, 23, whose grandfather was forced from his home when the area was declared for whites only.
"This would have been a surprise for the old man, to see the Olympic torch in our city," Abrahams said. "We're on the map" now.
The day ended with the arrival of the flame at the downtown square where Mandela made his first address after being released from prison in 1990. Thousands cheered as soccer star Lucas Radebe lit a cauldron symbolizing South Africa's participation in the games.
Ignited March 25 by the sun's rays in a ceremony at Olympia, Greece - site of the first Olympic Games in 776 B.C. - the flame will travel through 33 cities around the globe before completing its journey in Athens at the opening ceremony Aug. 13. From Cape Town, it heads to Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
On the Web:
Official Athens Olympics Web site: www.athens2004.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: June 13, 2004

 

End of Document
