

Mexican truckers weary of stricter regulations to enter the United States
July 27, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 600 words
Byline: By JULIE WATSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MATAMOROS, Mexico
Body




In a dusty lot only blocks from the U.S. border, Martin Garza watched his mechanic try to perform the equivalent of a triple bypass on his 24-year-old rig.
Garza had hoped the new paint, cushioned seats, rebuilt engine and overhauled body would let his truck would pass inspection to enter the United States - but then he heard the U.S. Congress on Thursday decided to make those checks even tougher, and sighed.
"What are we supposed to do now to get across? Build a bridge under the Rio Grande, or cross late at night when they're tired?" he joked.
The Senate on Thursday shrugged off a White House veto threat and voted to back tougher safety standards than President Bush wants for Mexican trucks entering the United States.
Supporters said the bipartisan 70-30 vote signaled that they could muster the 67 votes needed to override any veto by Bush. Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., said he hoped to complete the legislation by the week's end.
The House last month approved an even more restrictive plan to completely block Mexican trucks beyond a narrow commercial zone at the border. Bush has threatened to veto that measure, too.
For truckers along the Mexican border, tougher inspections mean more headaches and more time waiting in the already long lines at border crossings.
Despite the Mexican government's push to allow Mexican trucks full access to U.S. highways, Mexican trucking associations have said they prefer the status quo: Their trucks now go 20 miles across the border to drop off merchandise at warehouses. U.S. trucks then pick up the goods and carry them further inland.
Mexican trucking firms say they can't keep up with U.S. trucking firms, which have more access to low-interest loans to keep their fleets updated.
Garza, 39, who owns one truck-trailer and a smaller delivery truck, said on a good year he pulls in $50,000 - about half the price of a new semi.
So after being fined on the U.S. side for having bald, wobbly tires and told his truck would probably not pass inspection again, he decided to overhaul his 1977 rig for $2,000.
In addition to replacing the worn parts, Garza added lights and alarms that beep when the truck backs up. His mechanic also was welding on an extension to the rusty bar supporting the trailer.
But Garza admits he has his doubts the makeover will be enough to meet even stricter U.S. inspections.
"It's impossible when you travel long distances to stop and have mechanics check all the lights, the oil, etc.," said the Matamoros businessman whose trucks travel up to 3,000 miles from the Guatemalan border to the U.S. border. "My drivers are also the mechanics because time is money."
Mike Allen of the private McAllen Economic Development Corporation, which promotes trade along the Texas-Mexico border, said delays caused by U.S. inspections along the border has become "the single largest obstacle to trade and commerce."
Jose Garza, 32, waited two and a half hours Thursday to pass through a giant X-ray machine that checks for drugs and migrants at the Brownsville, Texas crossing connecting Matamoros.
"It's already tough but if they get even stricter with this our days are going to be rough," said Garza, who crosses two to three times a day, shuttling air bags and other goods from factories in Matamoros to the U.S. side.
Ernesto Ruffo, director of President Vicente Fox's border commission, said Mexican companies will be able to compete no matter what's thrown their way.
"Truck owners will continue improving their rigs to be able to meet the requirements," said Ruffo in an interview earlier this week. "It's just a matter of time."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BVL101-102
 Load-Date: July 28, 2001

 

End of Document
