

Minister's small, speedy group tends to the world's hungry
September 3, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 891 words
Byline: By WILLIAM L. HOLMES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RALEIGH, N.C.
Body




Hungry people around the world eat because of Ray Buchanan.
Sometimes it's because of a deal he brokered. Or because of money he sweet-talked out of a middle-class church congregation or one rich guy. Sometimes it's because of a ruckus he raises with those who control international food programs.
The bottom line is that people eat, and that's what Buchanan cares about most.
It's what drives him to be a professional hunger fighter.
Buchanan works through Stop Hunger Now, a Raleigh-based nonprofit group established in 1997. The group has five staff workers, but managed to distribute about $10 million in aid to nearly 20 countries last year. Their overhead costs have never exceeded 8 percent of their total budget.
They rarely linger, hopping from Congo to El Salvador and then Afghanistan, pouring their efforts into the places with the hungriest people and the most need.
The need rarely eases. Disasters, drought, war and corruption force the world's poor into starvation as one crisis gives way to the next. The unfortunate cycle results in 24,000 deaths a day, at least half of them children, according to the World Food Program based in Rome.
"That's not only ridiculous," Buchanan said. "That's obscene."
In the past year, Stop Hunger Now delivered about $8 million in aid to Afghanistan, a country torn by war but also one where a hunger crisis had been building for years.
Access to the country was limited until recently, but the toppling of the Taliban regime allowed Buchanan and other relief workers to attend to the needs of an estimated 6 million to 8 million starving people.
For Buchanan, that meant being on the ground, scouting for groups with lean overhead costs and efficient distribution networks. He can't abide those who trade food for political dogma and eschews well-meaning devotees who proselytize by offering food to the starving.
Buchanan, an ordained United Methodist minister, is driven by what he considers a religious imperative.
"The thing about Christianity is you're supposed to be doing instead of talking about it," he said.
Former U.S. Rep. Tony Hall of Ohio, who began work in early August as the United States' ambassador to the United Nations food and agriculture agencies in Rome, said private groups such as Buchanan's are important tools to the World Food Program and other large, government-sponsored programs.
Buchanan and Hall met several years ago when Buchanan taught the congressman and his supporters in Ohio how to develop a "gleaning" network - a system to gather and deliver crops that may otherwise be left in the fields to rot or be plowed under.
"They do work that government can't do sometimes," Hall said. "These private groups go places nobody else goes. There's many of them in the world - and there's not enough of them, to tell the truth."
Buchanan's work with the hungry began in 1979, when he and the Rev. Kenneth C. Horne Jr. started the Society of St. Andrew, a ministry in Bedford County, Va., devoted to feeding people in the United States.
In the 18 years Buchanan and Horne worked together, they expanded the society from a group made up of three families to a 16-state network that specialized in gleaning. The group buys truckloads of imperfect potatoes rejected by food companies and distributes them to the needy.
It sends out 46 million pounds of food a year - the equivalent of three tractor-trailer loads a day.
But Horne said his partner was always more interested in international hunger issues. While hunger touches about 30 million people in the United States for just three to six days a month, it's more prevalent internationally, according to Horne. Some estimates show that 815 million people in the world go to bed hungry each night.
So, when John Hewitt, a millionaire entrepreneur from Virginia Beach, Va., offered Buchanan $250,000 to start an organization that focused on international hunger, Buchanan left the Society of St. Andrew. He moved to Raleigh in September 1999 for access to its international corporate community and its airport.
Stop Hunger Now's reach and budget have grown steadily. In the past five years, Buchanan has worked in about 45 countries.
His contacts and dealmaking prowess helped him connect a relief group working in Haiti with the owners of a 40-foot freight container filled with surplus high-protein bars. The relief workers got $440,000 worth of food for $2,000.
During a statewide drive in North Carolina, Buchanan met Mike Ward, the state superintendent of public instruction whose wife, Hope, a United Methodist minister, helped coordinate the collection of 40,000 blankets to send to Afghanistan.
Not long after, the state's schools and Stop Hunger Now had started an effort to gather kits of school supplies for Afghani children who lacked most of the basics, including desks. Each of the 10,000 kits gathered to date - enough to fill a cargo container - contain paper, tape, glue, chalk, pens and a clipboard that will serve as a lap desk.
Students should have their supplies in time for the start of school in March.
On the Net:
Stop Hunger Now: http://www.stophungernow.org 
Student to Student: North Carolina Reaches Out to Afghanistan: http://www.ncpublicschools.org/afghanistan 
Society of St. Andrew: http://www.endhunger.org 
World Food Program: http://www.wfp.org/index2.html 
Congressional Hunger Center: http://www.hungercenter.org 
 Graphic



 
APN SUNDAY ILLUSTRATIONS: Subscribers get 1 photo, NY367 of Sept.
 Load-Date: September 4, 2002

 

End of Document
