

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
August 12, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 763 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




AUSTIN, Texas (AP) - Lance Armstrong's adopted hometown toasts the Tour de France champion Friday night with a downtown parade and musical performances.
More than 60,000 people were expected to attend the festivities, which will feature a concert by the Steve Miller Band on a giant outdoor stage.
Austin Mayor Will Wynn encouraged those who plan to attend to wear yellow, the signature color for the Tour de France winner. The city took a yellow hue as Armstrong raced to his win last month, with signs of "Go Lance!" hung in store windows and on balconies around town.
Armstrong is expected to ride his bike in the parade and speak to the crowd. City officials hosted victory celebrations for Armstrong in 1999, after his first Tour win, and in 2001, after his third.
Armstrong, who has won the Tour de France a record six straight times, has not yet said if he'll race in cycling's showcase event in 2005.
---
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Allen Iverson owes more than $1,700 in parking fines.
The Philadelphia 76ers star received four tickets - each more than $300 - when he left his Rolls Royce in a handicapped spot at an airport parking garage for a week in late May, Clorise E. Wynn, director of the city's Bureau of Administrative Adjudication, told The Associated Press on Thursday.
Since March 2001, Iverson has received at least 65 parking tickets for $4,500 on his cars, the Philadelphia Daily News reported Thursday. He already paid $2,800.
Iverson is in Athens to play in the Olympics. His personal attorney, Larry Woodward, declined comment.
Also, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation is investigating whether the star's uncle, Greg Iverson, was properly given a handicapped placard. His cars have been seen in handicapped spots at Philadelphia International Airport, outside the 76ers' practice facility and a downtown apartment building garage.
Joan Nissley, a PennDOT spokeswoman, said the agency's medical unit was looking into the placard. Greg Iverson, 41, defended parking in handicapped spots, noting he had the placard. He didn't answer when asked about his handicap by a Daily News reporter.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Diego Maradona met with Argentina's president Thursday amid efforts to continue his drug rehab treatment outside the country.
Maradona met with President Nestor Kirchner at the presidential palace for 20 minutes in a rare public appearance by the soccer great, who entered rehabilitation at a psychiatric hospital this year.
The closed-door meeting came after Maradona's personal physician said Maradona was seeking government help to continue his treatment abroad.
Maradona is prohibited from abandoning his rehab program after several family members sought an injunction preventing him from leaving the country without their consent. He and his medical team have expressed interest in continuing treatment in Cuba or Switzerland.
Neither Maradona nor Kirchner made any public comments after the meeting. Maradona, an admitted cocaine addict, was accompanied by his medical staff and one of his two daughters.
The 43-year-old former star has been receiving treatment in Buenos Aires since early May, after he was rushed twice to a clinic for heart and lung problems.
---
ELIZABETH CITY, N.C. (AP) - Former Tennessee Titans kicker Al Del Greco will tee it up on the upcoming ASGA Tour.
The intermediary tour for players with a low handicap begins this month outside Atlanta and culminates with the national championship in Las Vegas in February 2005.
Del Greco, who was named the best golfer among athletes in other professional sports by Golf Magazine in 1994, has played on the Celebrity Players Tour since 1991, winning six times and ranking fourth all-time with $542,736 in career earnings.
"With football, the more opportunities I had a kicking the ball in pressure situations, the easier it became for me. And I feel it's the same in golf," Del Greco said. "You have to be in those situations, competing for the lead in tournaments time after time, to gain that experience. Tournament golf is like nothing else."
A zero-handicap, Del Greco will be competing in the Tour's Pro-Championship Division in a select number of the 15 ASGA tournaments.
---
PRAGUE, Czech Republic (AP) - Detroit Red Wings defenseman Jiri Fischer will replace Tampa Bay's Pavel Kubina on the Czech team for the World Cup of Hockey.
Kubina sustained a concussion during the Stanley Cup finals and still is not feeling well.
Fischer has never played for the Czech national team. He has played 283 regular-season NHL games with Detroit, scoring eight goals and assisting on 44.
 Load-Date: August 13, 2004

 

End of Document
