

Names In The Game Jacksonville Jaguars, Life After Hockey Program.
September 24, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 693 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LONDON (AP) - Denys Smith, a top trainer in British horse racing for more than 40 years, will retire at the end of the current season.
The 78-year-old Smith has saddled nearly 1,700 winners in his career, including Red Alligator, the winner of the Grand National in 1968.
In 1969, he saddled Foggy Bell, the winner of the Lincoln Handicap at Doncaster.
"Time is catching up with me," Smith said. "I've had a great life and a lot of good winners - a lot of good horses - in my time."
---
DENVER (AP) - Former U.S. Olympic Committee president William J. Hybl will receive the 2003 Citizen of the West award.
The award presentation on Jan. 15 will kick off the National Western Stock Show in Denver.
Hybl is the 25th recipient of the award. Previous Citizen of the West award recipients include former Supreme Court Justice Byron White and Vice President Dick Cheney.
---
BERLIN (AP) - Luizao, a member of Brazil's World Cup championship team, has landed on the bench for Hertha Berlin in the Bundesliga.
The German club's management said Tuesday the 26-year-old will sit, while veteran Michael Preetz - whom he was supposed to replace at striker - will be the starter for the foreseeable future.
Luizao, who had two appearances at the World Cup replacing Ronaldo, hasn't scored in five league matches.
Berlin manager Dieter Hoeness defended the signing of Luizao, which was regarded as coup in Germany when the former Gremio Porto Alegre player was brought to the city without a transfer fee.
"We've acquired him for four years. I'm sure we'll get a lot of pleasure from him in the future," Hoeness said. "And Michael Preetz's career is coming to an end."
---
JACKSONVILLE, Fla. (AP) - The Jacksonville Jaguars plan to honor missing Navy pilot Scott Speicher before Sunday's game against the New York Jets.
The ceremony will include a 90-second video tribute to the Jacksonville native.
About 30 of Speicher's former classmates at Forrest plan to take part in the ceremony and present plaques of appreciation to Jaguars' owners Wayne and Delores Weaver.
Speicher's fighter jet was shot down over Iraq on the first night of the Gulf War in 1991. He was presumed dead, but his status was changed last year to missing in action.
A CIA report concluded he survived the crash and was probably captured by the Iraqis. Intelligence sources have reported seeing Speicher imprisoned in Baghdad as recently as a year ago.
"The fact that we have one missing in action/prisoner of war from Desert Storm and he happens to be from Jacksonville … that makes it especially important," said Mark Eisenstadt, coordinator of special events for the Jaguars.
---
TORONTO (AP) - The NHL's alumni association and the NHL Players' Association have joined forces to create the Life After Hockey Program.
Former New York Islanders captain Patrick Flatley, the director of alumni relations for the NHL, is chairman of the program that helps players find out what they can or want to do, such as get a university degree or undergo career counseling.
A pilot project involving 22 players started last year, and the formal program, in conjunction with Quinnipiac University in Hamden, Conn., and human resources firm Drake Beam Morin, was officially announced last week.
Former players, even those who had standout careers and found work afterward, say it is crucial.
Hall of Fame defenseman Bobby Orr retired at age 30 because of knee injuries. Orr said friends helped him become a player agent, and that others need help.
"It's a hard thing to go through, whether it's financial or just the fact that the game is no longer there," he said. "What do you do?"
Stu Grimson, the NHL enforcer facing likely retirement at 37 due to post-concussion syndrome, has decided to resume college studies with the help of the program.
Mike Gartner, director of business relations at the NHLPA, also sits on Life After Hockey's committee and called Grimson with information on what help was available.
"When he told me about it, it was something that made perfect sense for me," said Grimson, who started his economics degree at the University of Manitoba but now lives in Nashville, where he remains part of the Predators organization.
 Load-Date: September 25, 2002

 

End of Document
