

Names In The Game and Palestinian coaches, Pele's jersey, Tom Johnson, Olga Korbut
February 7, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 682 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




BURLINGTON, Vt. (AP) - A group of 16 basketball coaches from Israel and the Palestinian territories have come together at the University of Vermont despite increasing political tension at home.
The eight Palestinians and eight Israelis are at the end of a weeklong trip to Vermont. They were brought here by the Israel-based Peres Center for Peace to play basketball and experience American culture.
"Nobody here is so naive to think that bringing (these) coaches here for a week will solve the Middle East crisis," Jeff Schulman, Vermont's assistant director of athletics, told the Burlington Free Press.
"The idea for this is to remove them from the politics of the region and give them the opportunity to interact with each other in a neutral setting."
The two groups built friendly relationships as soon as they met.
"Sports is a language everyone speaks," said Yair Galily, an Israeli. "Now it is not 'us' and 'them' here, it is just 'us.' It is a small step, but an important one."
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Former Brazil national team coach Mario Zagallo cast doubt on the authenticity of a Pele jersey that Christie's plans to auction next month.
The jersey, said to have been worn by Pele in Brazil's 1970 World Cup final victory over Italy in Mexico, is believed to be worth at least $42,000.
Zagallo, who coached the team that year, told the O Globo newspaper that he had the jersey Pele wore during the first half of the final, and team fitness trainer Admildo Chirol had the jersey the star wore in the second half.
"At halftime, Pele gave me his shirt. After, Chirol got the other. This is some kind trickery, there's some trickster in England," Zagallo was quoted by O Globo.
According to O Globo, Pele doesn't remember what he did with his jersey after the game.
According to Christie's, the jersey belonged to Italian international Roberto Rosato, who said he traded jerseys with Pele after Brazil's 4-1 victory at the Azteca stadium.
Rosato, 58, was quoted in Italy's sports daily Gazzetta dello Sport Wednesday as saying he got the jersey after the match.
"There was a lot of confusion but pushing and elbowing I managed to get close to Pele I asked him to trade jerseys," Rosato was quoted as saying. "He took off his jersey, I got it and I hid it in my pants. Match lost, but jersey won. I preserved it for 31 years, without washing it."
In London, a spokesman for Christie's said the auction house was aware of the Brazilian press reports, but said it was satisfied with the authenticity of the shirt and would push ahead with the March 27 auction.
---
ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates (AP) - American distance runner Tom Johnson edged top endurance horse Al Baraaq in a Man versus Horse challenge race covering 50 miles.
Johnson, who holds the course record for the 62-mile run in the United States, was timed in 5 hours and 45 minutes to edge the horse ridden by Jennifer Nice by 10 seconds.
Johnson said he was surprised with Wednesday's result.
"I never thought I could cover the distances under 6 hours, even after I was on target in the first 12 miles of the race," he said.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - Former Olympic gymnast Olga Korbut had nothing to do with counterfeit bills found at her former suburban home, her manager said Wednesday.
"She doesn't know anything about it. She wants to do a polygraph," said Kay Weatherford, who owns the gym where the four-time gold medalist coaches gymnastics.
Bill Creel, assistant special agent-in-charge of the Secret Service in Atlanta, confirmed that the money was found Dec. 5 at the abandoned Duluth house of Korbut and her ex-husband, Leonid Bortkevich.
Weatherford told the Atlanta Journal-Constitution that the couple moved out in 2000 after they divorced.
Bortkevich is now said to be living in his native Belarus, and the couple's son, Richard, 22, and a roommate last lived at the house, said Korbut's lawyer, Howard J. Weintraub.
Gwinnett County sheriff's deputies found counterfeit $100 bills strewn about the house while serving an eviction notice. The door was open, and the home was heavily vandalized, according to an incident report.
 Load-Date: February 8, 2002

 

End of Document
