

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
November 13, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 718 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK (AP) - Part of a collection of nearly 300 pieces of Mickey Mantle memorabilia went on display Thursday as Guernsey's prepares for an auction expected to be one of the largest in the company's history.
"When people see … these treasures we've been granted temporary custodianship of, it's awesome," said Arlan Ettinger, president of the auction house.
The collection is being put up for sale by Mantle's family. In a statement, Mantle's widow, Merlyn, and sons, David and Danny, said they assembled the collection together.
"We well recognize Mickey's unique place in history," they said. "With that in mind, and after much soul searching, we decided to share some of our memories.
"As the three of us spent time putting together this collection and catalogue, we recalled wonderful times and were overwhelmed by memories. Some made us cry, some made us laugh. In the end, we knew that we had made the right decision."
Ettinger said the Mantle auction is one of the first done by Guernsey's dedicated to a single sports figure.
"From a collecting perspective, baseball clearly rules," he said. "Despite the popularity of other sports, baseball is far and away the most popular for collectors.
"Within baseball, the Yankees rule and you've got four major figures - Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, Joe DiMaggio and Mantle. I doubt we'll be seeing any Ruth or Gehrig collections on the market. DiMaggio is somewhat oversold. That leaves Mickey."
Included in the auction are Mantle's first passport, two of his three MVP trophies and 20 contracts, including a blank one he never signed when he decided to retire in 1969.
The auction will be conducted in two sessions at Madison Square Garden on Dec. 8.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Hip-hop entrepreneur Sean "P. Diddy" Combs gave the city $1 million he raised for public schools by running the New York City Marathon.
The money will be used to support school libraries and technology.
Combs, who completed the marathon in 4:14:54, raised $2 million overall. The other $1 million will go to other charitable causes.
At a City Hall news conference to announce the donation Thursday, Combs and members of his entourage, met with Mayor Michael Bloomberg.
"It's an honor and blessing," said Combs, whose own children attend private schools, "to do something good for the city."
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Real Madrid striker Ronaldo is divorcing his wife, Milene Domingues, ending their four-year marriage.
"Divorce proceedings are nearly concluded," said Ronaldo spokesman Rodrigo Paiva.
He said the couple, who married Dec. 1999, would continue living in Spain and that Domingues would have custody of their 3-year old son, Ronald.
Paiva would give no further details on the divorce.
LONDON (AP) - Italian jockey Frankie Dettori reached the 100-victory mark for the 10th time in his British horse racing career.
Dettori, who last reached the 100-win plateau four years ago, rode Rendezvous Point to victory in the first race at Lingfield Park, just outside London.
Dettori celebrated by making his trademark flying dismount and spraying the crowd with champagne.
"I am so relieved that is over," he said. "I had visions of going through today and not doing it, then having to go to Wolverhampton on a Saturday night to get there."
Dettori said he might have had more 100-win seasons were it not for multiple injuries sustain in a small plane crash in June 2000.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Tennis Hall of Famer Mats Wilander will be in New York next week for some pricey tennis lessons.
Wilander will give six lessons to donors who contributed $3,000 each to DebRa of America, an organization dedicated to curing a rare genetic skin disease.
Wilander's youngest son, Erik, was born with the disorder called epidermolysis bullosa, which causes widespread blistering on the skin.
DebRa believes that 100,000 Americans are stricken with EB.
---
MADRID, Spain (AP) - Spanish cyclist Joseba Beloki signed a two-year contract with the French team La Boulangere.
Beloki, one of Spain's top cyclists, finished second in the Tour de France once and placed third twice.
He underwent a physical Thursday to check his recovery from the nasty fall and leg injury he sustained in this year's Tour while riding for ONCE-Eroski, the news agency Efe reported.
The deal also calls for the French team to sign Beloki's brother, Gorka.
 Load-Date: November 14, 2003

 

End of Document
