

Names In The Game Real Madrid, Nigeria sports minister.
May 8, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 626 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Argentina is set to retire Diego Maradona's national team jersey.
Julio Grondona, president of the Argentine soccer association said the move to retire Maradona's No. 10 jersey would take place at the World Cup.
The move was proposed last year, when it was expected that the jersey would be withdrawn after Maradona's farewell game on Nov. 10.
However, FIFA, of which Grondona is a vice president, said it would not allow the move.
On Wednesday, Grondona said that "there will be no difficulty" in retiring the jersey now, though he admitted FIFA has not yet formally given its approval.
Some former national team players criticized the move as excessive when the idea was first introduced, while others, including Maradona, said it was a fitting tribute for the player, who led Argentina to the 1986 World Cup title and a second-place finish four years later.
Maradona began his international career in 1977 and scored 34 goals in 91 games. After testing positive for drugs during the 1994 World Cup, Maradona was banned from soccer for a second time.
Maradona, currently undergoing drug rehabilitation in Cuba, retired from professional soccer in 1997.
---
AKRON, Ohio (AP) - LeBron James was selected as USA Today's boys high school basketball player of the year.
James, from St. Vincent-St. Mary High School in Akron, Ohio, became the first high school junior named Gatorade's national basketball player of the year last month.
In March, he won Ohio's Mr. Basketball award for the second straight year. He also became the first high school underclass basketball player to be pictured on the cover of Sports Illustrated.
The 6-foot-7 James averaged 29 points, 8.3 rebounds, 5.7 assists and 3.3 steals last season while leading St. Vincent-St. Mary to the state tournament for the third straight year.
---
MONTREAL (AP) - Kristi Yamaguchi gave the Carolina Hurricanes a boost at the Molson Centre.
When the Hurricanes arrived at the arena on Tuesday for the third game of their playoff series against Montreal, they were greeted by a number of handwritten signs that read "Go Hurricanes."
Yamaguchi, the wife of Carolina defenseman Bret Hedican, was at the arena with the Stars on Ice tour a week earlier and left the signs in every corner of the visitors' locker room, including the training room and coach's office.
"She told me she did it, but there was no way I expected them to still be here," Hedican said. "To come walking in here and see that was good for everyone."
Yamaguchi and the Stars on Ice were in Montreal on April 30. The Canadiens' last game at the Molson Centre was April 29, and no one had been in the locker room since the Boston Bruins lost that night.
The Hurricanes lost 2-1 in overtime Tuesday as the Canadiens took a 2-1 lead in the best-of-seven series.
---
TOKYO (AP) - Real Madrid will celebrate its centennial anniversary with a match against a world select team on Dec. 18 at Bernabeu Stadium.
The winning World Cup coach will lead an 18-player team, which will include a player from World Cup co-hosts South Korea and Japan, FIFA technical director Walter Gagg said.
Real Madrid, playing without top stars Zinedine Zidane and Raul Gonzalez, beat Japan 1-0 at home on Tuesday.
---
ABUJA, Nigeria (AP) - Police Affairs Minister Steven Akiga will oversee Nigeria's Sports and Social Development Ministry, succeeding Mark Aku, who was killed in a plane crash on Saturday.
Also, the Nigeria Football Association announced that its World Cup friendly in China this weekend was canceled out of respect for the late sports minister.
The organization said the Chinese "showed tremendous understanding for our decision."
Aku was one of 77 passengers and crew aboard a private EAS Airlines flight that crashed shortly after takeoff.
 Load-Date: May 9, 2002

 

End of Document
