

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
March 26, 2005, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 557 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




BOSTON (AP) - Boston's springtime baseball shrine could soon be open for winter sports.
The owners of the Boston Red Sox hope to bring ice skating to Fenway Park as a way to squeeze more revenue out of the smallest ballpark in the major leagues.
A seasonal rink built on top of the playing surface during the offseason would host college hockey games and public skating. The team plans to apply to the city soon for a license for the rink, said the team's chief operating officer, Mike Dee. The rink could be open as early as the end of this year, he told The Boston Globe.
The rink proposal is the latest in a series of ideas from ownership designed to keep the 93-year-old ballpark active year round, revitalize the Fenway neighborhood, and find new revenue streams.
The Red Sox earlier this week announced that they intend to keep playing at Fenway, putting to rest talk of a new stadium.
There are several hurdles that must be cleared before the team can go through with the rink plan. First, the team has to be sure that the rink can be constructed and taken down without damaging the baseball playing surface, including new turf installed this winter, Dee said.
The team also needs permission from the city and plans to present its proposal to neighborhood groups as well. Currently, the team only has a license that allows it to hold baseball games.
---
PITTSBURGH (AP) - An online betting company said it will bid on the Pittsburgh Pirates' 1979 World Series trophy at a bankruptcy auction in hopes of being able to return it to the team.
"It would be a shame for this piece of Pittsburgh history to get locked up in some collector's trophy case," said Kevin King, managing partner of Costa Rica-based Royal Sport. "This is something we would be happy to do for our thousands of Pennsylvania clients."
The Allegheny Club, which has possession of the trophy, declared bankruptcy in 2002 and its memorabilia collection might be sold to pay its debts.
The club, which has since merged with the HYP Pittsburgh Club and is now known as The Allegheny HYP Club, says a New York collector has already offered $100,000 for its collection, but King said he doesn't believe the offer exists.
Meanwhile, the Pirates are also seeking the trophy.
The team is trying to prove that its former owners, the Galbreath family, only loaned the trophy to the club, spokeswoman Patty Paytas said.
A hearing is scheduled Tuesday in U.S. Bankruptcy Court on the team's emergency motion to prevent an auction before it can present its argument.
 
---
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. (AP) - Former New Mexico State coach Lou Henson, stricken with viral encephalitis six months ago, no longer needs a wheelchair to get around.
Henson, who retired in January just 21 wins shy of becoming the fifth coach in Division I to win 800 games, said Saturday he uses a cane or a walker for most activities. He had no mobility in his right leg for months after contracting the virus and was confined to a wheelchair.
"I got rid of the wheelchair about two weeks ago," Henson said in a telephone interview Saturday, adding that he uses it only if he has been on his feet for long periods of time.
In recent years, the 73-year-old Henson also has battled non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a form of cancer. He didn't coach this past season because of his health, but continues to work with the Aggies' athletic department.
 Load-Date: March 27, 2005

 

End of Document
