

Names in the Game
December 3, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 694 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LONDON (AP) - Lleyton Hewitt and Serena Williams were honored as world champions for 2002 by the International Tennis Federation on Tuesday.
Hewitt won the award for the second straight year, and Williams was cited for the first time.
Hewitt captured his first Wimbledon title and earned the season-ending No. 1 ranking for the second straight year by retaining his Masters Cup title in China last month.
The men's doubles world champions are Mark Knowles of the Bahamas and Canada's Daniel Nestor. The women's doubles award went to Argentina's Paola Suarez and Spain's Virginia Ruano Pascual.
---
LONDON (AP) - Olympic and world champion Gezahegne Abera of Ethiopia will challenge Khalid Khannouchi in the London Marathon next spring.
Organizers also said Paul Tergat, the second fastest marathoner ever, will be in the April 13 race. The Kenyan was 10 seconds slower than Khannouchi in this year's race.
Abera was injured and did not run in the past London race in which Khannouchi broke his own world mark. He won in 2 hours, 5 minutes, 38 seconds.
On Sunday, Abera won the Fukuoka Marathon for the third time. He will be joined in the London field by 2001 winner Abdelkader El Mouaziz of Morocco and three-time winner Antonio Pinto of Portugal.
Organizers are waiting to hear if Paula Radcliffe will defend her title. U.S. runner Deena Drossin, who finished sixth in this year's Boston Marathon, has been added to the women's lineup.
---
STILLWATER, Okla. (AP) - Oklahoma State's Les Miles was chosen Tuesday by The Associated Press as Big 12 coach of the year after guiding the Cowboys to a 7-5 record and a probable bowl berth.
The Cowboys went 5-3 in the Big 12 and beat Nebraska and Oklahoma in the same season for the first time. They finished tied for third in the South Division after being picked to finish next to last. The Cowboys have not been to a bowl since 1997.
"There is a belief in this football team that they can play better and they can be better, and they've kept working at it," Miles said.
Miles received eight votes in the media balloting. Gary Barnett of Colorado received six votes. Bill Snyder of Kansas State, Mike Leach of Texas Tech and Bob Stoops of Oklahoma also received votes.
---
CHESTER, W.Va. (AP) - Former Pittsburgh Steelers star L.C. Greenwood has joined the board of directors of the MTR Gaming Group.
Greenwood, a defensive end who played for the Steelers alongside Joe Greene in the 1970s, is the president of several Pittsburgh-area businesses.
The six-member board oversees Mountaineer Race Track & Gaming Resort and other gambling and hotel ventures.
---
LONDON (AP) - The Arrows team plans to appeal its Formula One ban for next year.
Arrows missed the final seven races of last season because of financial problems and was excluded from the entry list for 2003 by the sport's governing body Monday.
The team paid the $341,000 entry fee for next year.
Arrows, owned by Tom Walkinshaw, has failed to win a race in 382 attempts. He has been trying to sell the team for months.
---
WARSAW, Poland (AP) - Zbigniew Boniek resigned as Poland's national soccer coach after nearly five months on the job.
Boniek, who played for Poland in three World Cups, replaced Jerzy Engel as coach in July. Engel resigned after the team's poor showing at the 2002 World Cup.
Neither Boniek nor Polish soccer authorities gave a reason for the decision, but national team has not played well. During qualifying for the 2004 European championships, favored Poland is second to group leader Latvia, which beat the Poles 1-0 in Warsaw on Oct. 12.
The Polish Soccer Union said a coaching replacement will be decided after a Dec. 20 meeting.
---
LONDON (AP) - Mitsubishi has withdrawn from next year's World Rally Championship to spend a year redeveloping its car. The team plans to return to the circuit in 2004.
Andrew Cowan, chairman of Ralliart Europe, which runs Mitsubishi's world rally program, said Tuesday the company was not happy with how the Lancer Evolution car was performing.
He said drivers Jani Paasonen, Francois Delecour and Alister McRae would spend next season testing for Mitsubishi.
Mitsubishi finished last of the six teams in this year's championship.
 Load-Date: December 4, 2002

 

End of Document
