

Names In The Game Oliveira, East Asian Games, Sporting News Awards, Mike Dunleavy,
May 22, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 994 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MONTE CARLO, Monaco (AP) - Olympic and world 400-meters champion Cathy Freeman is targeting next year's Commonwealth Games for her return to international competition.
The 28-year-old Australian is taking a year off after winning the 400 and lighting the flame at the Sydney Olympics.
"After last year, I have just been having fun," she said. "The biggest change for me has been my self confidence, both in terms of my mental and my emotional strength."
Freeman said she would return to Australia in October to train and would race in Europe in June next year before competing at the Commonwealth Games in Manchester, England, July 25-Aug. 4.
"I want to run the 200 meters in Manchester - I just love competition and I love running," she said.
---
ROME (AP) - Roma fans will have to wait a few more hours Sunday to see if their team clinches the Italian soccer league championship.
Because of mayoral runoff elections, the afternoon matches have all been changed to night games.
The soccer league said the Interior Ministry, which controls police forces as well oversees elections, had decided on the change in a meeting Tuesday.
There are three matches Sunday that could decide the championship.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Fluminense chose Oswaldo de Oliveira as its new coach Tuesday.
Oliveira who led Corinthians to victory in the Club World Championship last year is the third prominent coach to head Fluminense in recent years following Carlos Alberto Parreira, who led Brazil to the 1994 World Cup victory, and Valdyr Espinosa, who led Gremio to an international club championship in 1983.
Espinosa was fired earlier this month.
---
OSAKA, Japan (AP) - China's athletes, preparing for swimming, diving and gymnastics world championships, dominated competition at the East Asian Games on Tuesday.
World 1-meter springboard champion You Zhuocheng and Olympic synchronized platform gold medalist Li Na sparked Chinese gold and silver doubles in the opening men's and women's diving finals.
World record holder Qi Hui set a games record, leading Luo Zeujuan in a 1-2 Chinese finish in the 200-meter breaststroke and Yang Yu took the 200 freestyle to give China's swim team five golds in two days.
In men's gymnastics, Olympic gold medalist Yang Wei finished 1.125 points ahead of countryman Li Dezhi in the individual all-around final.
Yang Wei amassed a total of 56.925 points. Li took silver with 55.850 and Japan's Hiroyuki was third with 55.350.
Dong Fangziao led a Chinese medal sweep of the women's all-around, taking gold with 37.150 points. Qi Linzi took the silver and Bai Chunyue the bronze.
At completion of the day's schedule in swimming and gymnastics, China had amassed 21 gold medals, nine silver and 14 bronze. Host Japan had 12 gold, 19 silver and 13 bronze, while Taiwan had three gold and Kazakstan and Hong Kong had one apiece.
---
ST. LOUIS (AP) - Colorado Avalanche center Joe Sakic is The Sporting News NHL player of the year.
Sakic, whose overtime goal Monday gave the Avalanche a 4-1 series win over the St. Louis Blues in the Western Conference finals, received 268 votes from fellow players, easily outdistancing Pittsburgh teammates Mario Lemieux (34 votes) and Jaromir Jagr (23 votes).
Jagr won the award the previous two seasons.
Rookie-of-the-year honors went to San Jose goaltender Evgeni Nabokov with 162 votes. Tampa Bay's Brad Richards was second and Ottawa's Martin Havlat third.
Scottie Bowman, who led Detroit to the league's second-best regular-season record, 49-20-9-4, won coach of the year, edging Ottawa's Jacques Martin.
The executive of the year was Vancouver's Brian Burke. New Jersey's Lou Lamoriello and Ottawa's Marshall Johnston tied for second with six votes each.
The Sporting News' first-team All-Stars were Sakic at center, Jagr at right wing, Alexei Kovalev of Pittsburgh at left wing, Rob Blake of Colorado and Nicklas Lidstrom of Detroit on defense, and New Jersey's Martin Brodeur in goal.
 
---
PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) - Former Portland Trail Blazers coach Mike Dunleavy says he's in no rush to find a new NBA job and plans to move to Texas and maybe take the next year off to spend more time with his family.
"Basically, after talking to my family and looking at the options, I'm pretty sure I'm going to take the year off," Dunleavy told The Oregonian. "I'm like Michael Jordan, 99 percent sure."
Dunleavy, 47, was fired April 30 after the Blazers ended the season on an 8-17 slide, which included a first-round playoff sweep by the Los Angeles Lakers. He had a 190-106 in four regular seasons in Portland, but his teams were just 18-18 in the playoffs.
---
LONDON (AP) - Triple Olympic champion Marion Jones will warm up for this summer's World Championships by competing at the British Grand Prix meet in London on July 22.
Jones, who won gold medals in the 100, 200 and 1,600-meter relay at the Sydney Games, will be making her third consecutive appearance at Crystal Palace.
"London is always the first place I choose when I sit down with my agent to map out the season ahead," Jones said in a statement released Tuesday by meet organizers. "The fans are awesome and the atmosphere is wonderful."
Jones won the 100 in her two previous appearances in London, clocking 10.80 seconds in 1999 and 10.78 last year.
This summer's appearance will be one of her last races before the Aug. 3-12 World Championships in Edmonton.
---
SAN DIEGO (AP) - Laura Granville of Stanford University, who went undefeated in Pac 10 Conference singles tennis and helped the 30-0 Cardinal to the 2001 NCAA championship, is winner of the Honda Award as the top woman collegiate athlete in her sport for the 2000-01 collegiate year.
The award comes from NCAA member schools.
Granville, a sophomore from Chicago, posted Pac 10 records of 22-0 in singles and 20-2 in doubles competition. Her 58 consecutive victories, dating back to last season, set an NCAA record.
She will defend her national singles title this week at the NCAA Championships at Stone Mountain, Ga.
 Load-Date: May 23, 2001

 

End of Document
