

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
May 26, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 619 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Ronaldo went to Rio's most notorious slum Wednesday, pledging more than $30,000 to help renovate a theater that will be the centerpiece of a cultural center.
"I feel very proud because I'm doing something for lots of children," the Brazilian soccer great said from the "City of God" district. "When I was child I had very little opportunity for recreation and I had to make the opportunities for myself."
The money for the renovation comes from a December charity game. Ronaldo's team won 4-3 in the UN-sponsored event, dubbed "The Match Against Poverty." He said money from the exhibition would also be used in similar projects in Brazil and around the world.
Thousands of fans mobbed the boxy concrete building, with children looking through windows in hopes of catching a glimpse of Ronaldo. He had to leave the building tugged by bodyguards through the crush of fans.
"This won't solve all of City of God's problems," said Brazilian rapper MV Bill, who presided over the ceremony. "But I'm sure a lot of stories with happy endings will pass through here."
"City of God" is the title of an Oscar-nominated film set in the slum.
---
VIRGINIA WATER, England (AP) - Vijay Singh's ambition is clear: He wants to overtake Tiger Woods for the top ranking .
"I've made it a goal that I want to finish my career having been ranked No. 1 in the world at least once," he said.
The 41-year-old Singh, who is ranked No. 2 and has won three times on the U.S. tour this year, is competing at this week's Volvo PGA Championship. He says he feels stronger now than he did at 25.
"I don't have that many years to go, maybe five or six," he said Wednesday. "But I'm playing good enough and I feel maybe this is the year I could achieve that."
Singh trails Woods by 2.27 points. Because of the complex calculations tied into the ranking system, not even a victory this week would propel him past Woods.
Instead, he will have to try to beat the best Europe can offer - including No. 3 Ernie Els - when play opens Thursday in the flagship event of the European tour.
Singh has played this tournament 10 times with a best finish in his last appearance - seventh place in 2001. He has also played several times at Wentworth in the autumn World Match Play Championship, winning in 1997 when he beat Els in the final.
Singh led the U.S. tour in earnings last year, though Woods was voted Player of the Year by his peers.
"That was a disappointing loss, you can say," Singh said. "I thought I did enough to win that and everybody said they thought I should have won. At the same time, they (players) are the ones who voted."
---
ST. LOUIS (AP) - Tampa Bay's Martin St. Louis was honored as player of the year Tuesday by The Sporting News, which also gave top honors to the Lightning's coach and general manager.
St. Louis led Tampa Bay to the best record in the Eastern Conference and a spot in the Stanley Cup finals against the Calgary Flames.
The diminutive wing had an NHL-best 94 points during the regular season and tied for the league lead in assists with 56. He had a league-high 18 points in the first three playoff rounds.
Lightning coach John Tortorella was named coach of the year, and Tampa Bay GM Jay Feaster was cited as the top executive.
---
MILAN, Italy (AP) - Ukrainian striker Andriy Shevchenko, the top scorer in Italian soccer this season, will remain with league champion AC Milan until 2009.
He signed a three-year extension to a contract that would have expired in 2006, the team said Wednesday. The extension came amid reports that Chelsea was trying to lure the 27-year-old star to the English club.
Shevchenko joined Milan in 1999 and scored 24 goal this season in helping his team win the Serie A title.
 Load-Date: May 27, 2004

 

End of Document
