

Names In The Game Crew.
April 9, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 575 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




HILTON HEAD ISLAND, S.C. (AP) - A week of NAACP protests at the PGA Tour's Worldcom Classic is scheduled to begin Monday with picketing and culminate Saturday with a march.
The aim of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People is to bring a national spotlight to its tourism boycott in South Carolina.
Ken James, president of the NAACP's Hilton Head-Bluffton Chapter, said there would be close to 100 for picketing and 500 for the march.
Greg DeLoach, Hilton Head Island's assistant town manager, said he spoke with state NAACP executive director Dwight James and "did not get the impression that there would be 500 people on Saturday."
DeLoach said he was expecting about 35 people for picketing on Thursday, when the first round of the tournament begins at Harbour Town Golf Links.
The tournament, featuring PGA stars Greg Norman, Davis Love III and Ernie Els, runs through Sunday.
The NAACP has boycotted the state since Jan. 1, 2000 in protest of the Confederate flag on Statehouse grounds.
---
ZURICH, Switzerland (AP) - FIFA, world soccer's governing body, banned an Argentinian player from all matches until June 6 for playing under a false passport.
"Following up on a request by the French Football Federation, FIFA has extended a ban against the Argentinian, Hector Diego Garay on worldwide level," a FIFA statement said.
The French soccer federation issued a three month suspension on Garay for using a fake Italian passport while with Strasbourg last season. Garay was trying to skirt limits on the number of players from non-European Union countries eligible to play for French professional teams.
Garay currently plays with Argentina's Talleres Cordoba.
Four other players in France also received suspensions for using phony papers.
European soccer authority UEFA says it wants to clamp down on clubs fielding players with false passports to circumvent limits on foreign players.
---
SAN DIEGO (AP) - A nine-year championship reign by the University of Washington women's crew team ended Sunday when Southern California won the Jessop-Whittier Cup with a come-from-behind victory in the 28th San Diego Crew Classic.
The Trojans covered the 2,000-meter course race in 6 minutes, 52.51 seconds - ahead of Washington at 6:53.03 - after trailing by one boat length at the midpoint of the race.
"We thought we had a shot, but beating Washington is a monumental task," Southern California coach George Jenkins said. "This is the first time we've beaten them, so it's really special."
Southern Cal's women pulled even with Washington with 400 meters left and went ahead with less than 100 meters to go.
"We just knew that we were able to take them on. We wanted to shoot them down," Trojans coxswain Jenny Lysaght said. "We had worked on that (finish). We're not known for our fast starts."
In the men's competition, California won the Copley Cup for the third straight year with an eight-second victory over Washington.
The Cal team, which includes five rowers from the 2000 U.S. Olympic team, led throughout the race on the way to winning the Copley Cup in 6:01.9. Washington finished second at 6:10.2, followed by Penn at 6:14.83 and Wisconsin at 6:16.85.
"It was a strong performance," Cal's Luke Walton said. "Obviously, we're satisfied. But we want to keep pushing forward. We don't want to sit back."
Each of the Cal crews that won the Copley Cup the last two years also finished the season by claiming the national collegiate championship.
 Load-Date: April 10, 2001

 

End of Document
