

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
October 28, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 659 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK (AP) - Ridiculous hair. A talent for overstatement. There was more than enough of both to go around Friday as Donald Trump led a roast of Don King at the Friars Club.
The boxing promoter merrily withstood a barrage of jabs, hooks and uppercuts. While King's electrified hairdo seemed the obvious avenue of attack for Trump and the 12 roasting friends and comics, they instead began with a smoking gun.
"I have a catch phrase: 'You're fired,"' Trump said. "Don King has a catch phrase: 'Not Guilty."'
In 1954, King shot a man who was trying to rob one of his gambling houses and it was ruled a justifiable homicide. In 1966, he was convicted of killing an employee who owed him money, but his sentence was reduced to non-negligent manslaughter.
Comedian Colin Quinn said the hair of King, Trump and Rev. Al Sharpton "look like the three stages of a forest fire."
All the while, the 72-year-old King chuckled along. When it came time for him to take the podium, King lapsed into his trademark flurry of adjectives, including claims that he was "the father of hip-hop" and that "George Walker Bush is a revolutionary."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Stephon Marbury is helping his Knicks' teammates dress for success.
In an effort to comply with the NBA's new dress code, Marbury will outfit each in a Joseph Abboud custom-designed suit.
The Knicks point guard appeared in the Joseph Abboud Spring 2005 ad campaign. Players will be invited to make an appointment with the showroom to be personally fitted for a suit.
"We understand that some players may disagree with the new changes, however I think Joseph Abboud can help them look stylish, young and successful without wearing their father's suit," Marty Staff, president of JA Apparel, said Friday.
Boston Red Sox center fielder Johnny Damon is the newest addition to the Joseph Abboud roster.
---
HAVANA (AP) - Diego Maradona made a late night visit to his old friend and high-jump champion Javier Sotomayor, who promised to join him next week at a march against President Bush's visit to Argentina.
"I'm really impressed and happy to see Diego like this, with such strength and goodwill," Sotomayor said Thursday night.
Sotomayor, who has retired from competition, said he would fly to Argentina on Sunday ahead of the protest of the summit at the seaside resort of Mar del Plata.
"We will head the march," Maradona said. "(Bush) is going to be very poorly received."
Earlier Thursday, Maradona told Cuban President Fidel Castro during a television appearance that he would lead the anti-Bush march.
---
LONDON (AP) - Prince William challenged schoolchildren to "bring it on" during a soccer scrimmage Friday at Charlton Athletic Football Club.
The 23-year-old prince will take over the presidency of Britain's Football Association from his uncle, Prince Andrew, in May.
William said his goal is to get more kids involved in soccer, also know as "football."
"The power of football is huge," he said. "I think it needs to be harnessed, and at the same time the sportsman side of football is a key issue to focus on. I just want to be helpful."
William wore Eton's colors, royal blue and tan, during the game. He let four balls into the back of the net, but did manage three saves.
William received a red Charlton football shirt with Wales W and the No. 2 on the back.
--
SOTOGRANDE, Spain (AP) - Darren Clarke withdrew after the second round of the Volvo Masters on Friday to return to England and his wife, Heather, who is battling cancer.
Clarke shot rounds of 76 and 75, and said he had difficultly keeping his mind on the game.
"Valderrama is not the course to be playing when your mind is elsewhere," he said. "I have decided that I will be better off at home."
Clarke said he had entered the tournament because he did not want to let down the sponsor, Volvo.
"They are such great sponsors that I didn't want to let them down by pulling out before their flagship event started, even though I knew I was going to struggle," he said.
 Load-Date: October 29, 2005

 

End of Document
