

Names in the Game
March 12, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 955 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Ronaldo will now get a chance to show if he's ready for World Cup competition.
The Brazilian star was the last name on a list of 12 players announced Tuesday for a World Cup warmup against Yugoslavia on March 27 in Fortaleza.
More than two years after a knee injury threatened to end his career, the two-time FIFA Player of the Year needs to show he can play when the World Cup begins May 31 in South Korea.
"He is totally in physical and technical conditions to take part in practice and games," national team coach Luiz Felipe Scolari said. "We need an idea, almost definitive, whether he can participate in the Cup with us or not."
Ronaldo played with pain in his right knee at the 1998 World Cup and the 1999 Copa America. His last appearance with Brazil's No. 9 jersey was in a 2-2 tie with the Netherlands in September 1999.
---
SEOUL, South Korea (AP) - Kim Un-yong, an IOC member plagued by scandals and a speedskating dispute at the Salt Lake City Olympics, resigned as head of South Korea's sports governing body and Olympic committee.
The 70-year-old executive, South Korea's most influential sports figure for a decade, has led the two organizations since 1993.
Kim will retain his IOC membership and will continue to work as head of the World Taekwondo Federation, spokesman Park Pil-soon said.
Kim was reprimanded by the IOC in 2000 for his involvement in the Salt Lake City bribery scandal.
He was criticized for failing to take a firmer stand on the disqualification of a South Korean short-track skater during the Olympics.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - It's off to Congress for Colombia's only Olympic gold medalist.
Weightlifter Maria Isabel Urrutia was elected to Colombia's 166-member House of Representatives on Sunday.
She said Tuesday she will use her seat to advocate for the country's poor black minority - and to put sports higher on the government's agenda.
Urrita won Colombia's first gold medal ever at the 2000 Sydney Olympics. She was a guest at the presidential palace and triumphantly toured her country.
"What I learned in sports has applied in normal life and will also carry over to working in the Congress," Urrutia said.
Urrutia also hopes to return to international competition. She is appealing a two-year suspension she received in October. She tested positive for the stimulant ephedrine and the steroid nandrolone.
---
BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - Next stop, Eddy Merckx station.
A Brussels subway station will be named after the cyclist, Belgium's greatest sports star, newspapers reported Tuesday. This is the first time a Brussels Metro station is named for a living person.
"I hope I may live a long life because normally only the deceased get the honor," he said.
The 56-year-old Merckx won the Tour de France and the Giro of Italy five times each. Between 1961 and 1977, he won four world championships. The international cycling federation honored him as the cyclist of the 20th century.
---
NICOSIA, Cyprus (AP) - At least 1,000 officers, including an anti-terrorist unit, have been assigned to the UEFA Cup quarterfinal Thursday between Israel's Hapoel Tel Aviv and Italy's AC Milan.
European soccer's governing body last week moved the game to Cyprus after ruling international soccer games could not be played in Israel because of Israeli-Palestinian violence.
The security arrangements are unprecedented for Cyprus. Barbed wire has been erected around the recently built, 25,000-seat GSP Stadium on the outskirts of Nicosia.
Authorities expect about 8,000 fans from nearby Israel to attend.
---
LONDON (AP) - A puck shot by Maurice Richard in 1952 was among the gifts presented to Queen Elizabeth II that went on display Tuesday to celebrate her 50 years as head of the Commonwealth.
Gifts from each of the 54 Commonwealth nations were displayed in the palace's picture gallery, including some retrieved from palace storerooms or museums.
Richard, the Montreal Canadiens great, used the puck to score his 325th goal on Nov. 5, 1952. The gold-coated puck was presented to the queen in 1955 by the Montreal Ice Hockey Club.
---
SOUTHEND, England (AP) - Former super middleweight champion Steve Collins of Ireland was acquitted Tuesday of a road rage attack on a 70-year-old truck driver.
The 37-year-old Collins was cleared of assaulting David Kimpton by magistrates in Southend.
Kimpton had contended that Collins punched him in the face after forcing his truck to stop in Southend in October.
"Thankfully for me my version of the story came out," Collins said. "And I am just glad that I have kept my good name."
---
SOUTH BEND, Ind. (AP) - Dallas Cowboys receiver Raghib Ismail, the 1990 Heisman Trophy runner-up from Notre Dame, will return to South Bend on April 10 for the College Football Hall of Fame's Gridiron Legends event.
Ismail was on Notre Dame's 1988 national championship team. He played two years in the Canadian Football League before starting his NFL career with the Los Angeles Raiders in 1991. He later played with the Carolina Panthers and went to the Cowboys four years ago.
Among other Legends speakers this year is San Diego Chargers quarterback Drew Brees, who played at Purdue. He is scheduled for May 31.
---
TOKYO (AP) - Two million paper cranes will descend on the field as part of the closing ceremony for soccer's World Cup.
The Japanese organizing committee will ask schoolchildren throughout Japan to make the traditional origami paper cranes for the title game.
Organizers also announced plans for a concert tour in Tokyo and five of Japan's World Cup cities. The tour will feature cellist Yo-Yo Ma, who performed with Sting at the opening ceremony of the Salt Lake City Olympics.
The World Cup, with Japan and South Korea the co-hosts, runs from May 31 to June 30.
 Load-Date: March 13, 2002

 

End of Document
