

Names in the Game
December 10, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 862 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) - Boston Red Sox owner John Henry was among the baseball figures honored by President Hipolito Mejia at the National Palace.
The president acknowledged U.S. baseball officials and Dominican players of the past and present.
"You are my ambassadors and the country can't do enough to thank you for all that you have done," Mejia said.
Peter O'Malley, former owner of the Los Angeles Dodgers, and Pat Gillick, general manager of the Seattle Mariners, were in attendance.
Mejia awarded certificates to major leaguers Vladimir Guerrero, Bartolo Colon, Miguel Tejada and Jose Mesa.
Also cited were Juan Marichal, the only Dominican in the Hall of Fame; Felipe Alou, manager of the San Francisco Giants; Omar Minaya, general manager of the Montreal Expos; and Ozzie Virgil, the first Dominican to play in the majors.
Sandy Alderson, a vice president for major league baseball, noted Latin America's presence in baseball.
"The major leagues and the Dominican Republic have a relationship that will keep growing stronger each day," he said.
---
MELBOURNE, Australia (AP) - IOC president Jacques Rogge calls the Sydney Games the model for future Olympics.
The Sydney organizers returned a profit and the games were staged without major disputes. Also, a system was set up so Australian officials can assist organizers of the 2004 Athens Games.
"We're looking at the Sydney model as being the benchmark for the future," Rogge said Tuesday as he visited the Melbourne Cricket Ground, main venue for the 1956 Olympics.
Rogge again urged that the cost and scale of the Olympics be contained. He said the scope of the Olympics makes it virtually impossible for each continent to stage the games. The Olympics have never been held in Africa or South America.
---
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - The Indianapolis Colts are trying to build their fan base.
The team met with a group of about 90 business leaders Tuesday in hopes of increasing revenue and community support.
"When you're a smaller market, you can be very successful, but you have less room for error," Colts vice president Ray Compton said. "We have to go out and uncover every potential client we can."
The Colts have said their revenues are among the bottom third of the league, and their current lease to play in the RCA Dome, which runs through 2014, requires the city to make payments to bring revenue up to the league's median average within the next two years.
Mayor Bart Peterson began talks last month with Colts owner Jim Irsay on the possibility of a new stadium, a renovation of the RCA Dome or a city subsidy to increase the team's revenue.
The business alliance was formed in response to comments by NFL Commissioner Paul Tagliabue, who in October urged greater community and business involvement.
---
VANCOUVER, British Columbia (AP) - Utah Gov. Mike Leavitt says his state would host another Winter Olympics in a heartbeat.
Leavitt appeared at a meeting Tuesday as Premier Gordon Campbell continued to promote British Columbia's bid for the 2010 Winter Olympics.
Leavitt said the games produced many benefits as well as a net surplus of more than $100 million.
"Traffic systems got better, our law enforcement learned to work together better, the service in our restaurants got better," he said.
"It was not an easy experience. It stretched us, but in the final analysis I think Utahns would overwhelmingly look for an opportunity to do it again at any point in their lifetime."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Tiger Woods, Lance Armstrong, Serena Williams and Ronaldo are among seven sports stars nominated for the American-International Athlete Trophy.
Also nominated are auto racing's Michael Schumacher, swimming's Ian Thorpe and track's Tim Montgomery.
The trophy honors the athlete who best demonstrates excellence in competition and promotes worldwide understanding among people.
The winner, to be selected by an international panel, will receive the award in New York on Feb. 18.
---
TAMPA, Fla. (AP) - The Tampa Tribune signed a $20.1 million, 10-year extension of its sponsorship with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
The agreement extends the paper's five-year contract as a sponsorship partner. The deal, which was to expire in January, gives the Tribune exclusive rights to sell newspapers at home games, added stadium signage and the right to participate in other team marketing programs.
"We're thrilled about the relationship," said publisher Steven M. Weaver, who called the Buccaneers the "absolute No. 1 sports interest in the Tampa Bay area." The Tribune is one of 18 sponsors.
The deal includes promotional appearances by Bucs players and the right for the Tribune to use the Bucs' logo. The agreement does not include a suite at Raymond James Stadium, which the newspaper pays for separately, Weaver said.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Sheryl Crow will sing at an outdoor concert on Feb. 2 in Sunrise, Fla., as part of the NHL's weekend festivities for its All-Star game.
The eight-time Grammy winner will perform songs from her latest album, "C'mon, C'mon."
The concert at Center Ice Stage will be held after the game, the finale to a weekend that includes a game featuring the NHL's top young players and a skills competition.
 Load-Date: December 11, 2002

 

End of Document
