

Names in the Game doubles luge team, Michael Owen, Ronaldo.
April 16, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 754 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




ST. PAUL, Minn. (AP) - The XFL paid plenty for the commentary of Minnesota Gov. Jesse Ventura.
Ventura received $320,000 in expenses during 13 weeks as a TV commentator for the defunct XFL.
Ventura, required by Minnesota state law to report charter flights, limousine rides, meals and lodging he received in connection with XFL broadcasts, was not obligated to report the income he earned.
Ventura reported that the XFL paid $310,052 for charter flights to games, $3,779 for lodging and meals and $6,023 for limo rides.
Ventura also reported receiving $3,895 worth of expenses from NBC for an appearance on "The Tonight Show."
Ventura has refused to disclose how much he has earned from private moneymaking ventures, including two books, a one-night return to wrestling as a referee in 1999 and his stint as the XFL's celebrity commentator from January through April 2001.
---
VIRGINIA BEACH, Va. (AP) - Washington Redskins defensive end Bruce Smith has ended a charity golf tournament that bore his name for more than a decade.
Smith's decision to cancel the tournament followed an investigation by The Virginian-Pilot of Norfolk that revealed shoddy bookkeeping, questions about how much money charities received, and failure to file federal tax returns. Smith said he was not aware of the problems.
"It's a shame it has to end. It saddens my heart," Smith said.
The 13th edition of the tournament had been scheduled for June 10.
Smith said he plans to donate money out of his pocket to some of the charities that were to have benefited.
---
LAKE PLACID, N.Y. (AP) - The U.S. doubles luge team of Mark Grimmette and Brian Martin, silver medalists at the Salt Lake City Olympics, dispelled retirement rumors by saying they'll compete in the upcoming World Cup season.
"There had been some talk between the two of us about retirement, but it just came down to the fact that we still like what we're doing," said Grimmette, a three-time Olympian. "We're not ready to retire just yet. We have our sights set on 2006 and Turin (Italy), but will stay focused on one season at a time."
Grimmette, of Muskegon, Mich., and Martin, of Palo Alto, Calif., also won bronze at the 1998 Winter Games in Nagano, Japan.
The 2002-03 World Cup season will mark the pair's sixth together.
Grimmette, 31, and Martin, 28, have become the U.S. team's all-time leaders in World Cup victories with six, captured the overall World Cup title in 1998, and won bronze in each of the last three World Championships.
---
LONDON (AP) - Michael Owen was selected team captain for England's World Cup warmup against Paraguay, replacing injured David Beckham and becoming the second-youngest to hold the title.
Owen, last season's European player of the year, was surprised when England coach Sven-Goran Eriksson knocked on the shower room door at the team training center and asked him to captain the side.
Owen takes the place of Beckham, who broke a bone in his left foot in Manchester United's Champions Cup win over Deportivo La Coruna last Wednesday and remains uncertain for the World Cup.
At 22 years and four months, Owen is the youngest player to be captain since Bobby Moore led England against Czechoslovakia in 1963 at 22 years, one month and 17 days.
"It's obviously a great honor, a very proud moment," Owen said. "It was a complete surprise, but obviously a very pleasant surprise."
"It's definitely something I've always dreamed of," he added. "To get it when I was 22 was a bit sooner than I imagined. To be captain at Anfield completes it all, playing in front of the home fans on the pitch you know best."
---
LISBON, Portugal (AP) - Ronaldo will return - for only 45 minutes - in Brazil's World Cup warmup against Portugal on Wednesday.
Brazilian coach Luiz Felipe Scolari says the limit on Ronaldo's time was an agreement his Italian club, Internazionale.
"I think he'll be ready for the (World Cup) finals. He just needs to get match fit," Scolari said.
The 25-year-old, two-time FIFA player of the year has been troubled by a string of muscle problems this season after his return from a two-year absence due to a torn ligament in his right knee.
Ronaldo scored two goals in four minutes for Internazionale on Sunday, wowing fans and stoking optimism that he is back to stay. The weekend game was the striker's first full league game since December.
"The most important thing is to play well in this game. The result isn't as important," Ronaldo said. "We have to go into the game knowing that we need to start meshing as a team because the World Cup finals are close."
 Load-Date: April 17, 2002

 

End of Document
