

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
May 7, 2005, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 799 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Former Brazil striker Romario will be the main attraction at FIFA's inaugural beach soccer World Cup, which begins Sunday in Rio de Janeiro.
The 39-year-old star will lead fan-favorite Brazil against 11 other nations in the weeklong tournament at Rio's famed Copacabana beach.
Romario, the hero of Brazil's World Cup-winning team in 1994, will not play Brazil's opener against Thailand on Sunday, but is expected to compete after that.
He will be absent because he still plays for Vasco da Gama, which on Sunday faces rival Botafogo in the Brazilian league. The striker has said he intends to pursue a career at the beach competitions in the near future.
Brazil is the defending world champion of beach soccer and has won nine titles in 10 championships. The competition previously was played under Beach Soccer Worldwide, not FIFA.
---
CATANIA, Sicily (AP) - AC Milan owner Silvio Berlusconi has a team in the Champions League final and on top of Italy's Serie A. That doesn't mean he's happy.
Berlusconi said Saturday that coach Carlo Ancelotti was too cautious in playing a single striker in recent games.
Berlusconi blamed Ancelotti's past as a defensive midfielder for AC Milan.
"I let him know that, if he doesn't change, I'll send him home," joked Berlusconi, according to Italian news agency ANSA.
Berlusconi, who is still club owner even after his recent resignation as president, has often been critical of Milan, even though it is one of the most successful teams in Europe.
Berlusconi considers himself a soccer expert and likes spectacular play.
Earlier this week, he said Milan was "lucky" to reach the Champions League final against Liverpool. Milan advanced on away goals after a 3-1 loss at PSV Eindhoven in the semifinal second leg tied the score at 3 over two games.
Milan hosts Italian league co-leader Juventus on Sunday in a match likely to decide this year's title.
---
KABUL, Afghanistan (AP) - The U.S. military hosted a half-marathon in the Afghan capital on Saturday.
About 270 runners, most of them American but including troops from a dozen other nations, competed in the 13.1-mile race round a military base in Kabul.
A French Warrant Officer called Marc Lenoble won in a time of 1:09:33, officials said, while the first woman over the finish line was Krista Jakobsen of Denmark.
---
METAIRIE, La. (AP) - The New Orleans Saints expect No. 1 draft choice Jammal Brown to start at right tackle as a rookie, lofty hopes for even the Outland Trophy winner and 13th pick in the NFL Draft.
But Brown has always pushed himself to exceed expectations.
On the first day of his junior year of high school, Brown became a father. He took an after-school job to support his daughter. The last day of that school year, his mother died after a long battle with lupus.
His only brother is in prison for drug trafficking. Neither of his sisters made it past the eighth grade. Brown himself had to go to night school to get his grades up and take the ACT seven times before he scored high enough to make it into Oklahoma as a partial qualifier.
"My siblings didn't do too well, so the people back home expected the same from me," Brown said during the Saints' rookie minicamp this weekend. "They didn't think I'd do too good.
"I easily could have taken that way, but God had a plan for me. He chose me to do something good."
New Orleans thought enough of him to trade its No. 3 in next year's draft to Houston to move up three spots and ensure that they got Brown, even though he's still a relative newcomer to his position.
"Obviously they thought a lot of me to make the trade to get me," Brown said. "Now I've got to prove myself. I've got to prove I can learn the system and prove that I can play in this league."
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Doctors were scrambling Saturday to pinpoint the stomach illness that has prompted former Brazil player and coach Mario Zagallo to remain hospitalized for five days.
Zagallo, who was admitted to Hospital Samaritano in Rio de Janeiro on Tuesday with severe abdominal pain and vomiting, was expected to stay under observation at least throughout the weekend, hospital spokeswoman Elisa Nunes said.
The 73-year-old coach underwent a series of exams since being admitted, but all have turned out inconclusive.
Local media on Friday said intestinal surgery was planned for sometime next week, but the doctor attending Zagallo, Marcelo Tayah, said there was no need for surgery at the moment.
"Zagallo remains in good condition," Nunes said. "But the doctors will not release him until they find out what is wrong."
Doctors had already said that the illness was not related to the irregular heartbeat Zagallo had suffered in the past.
Zagallo, who led Brazil to the 1970 World Cup title, is an assistant to Brazil coach Carlos Alberto Parreira.
 Load-Date: May 8, 2005

 

End of Document
