

Names in the Game Reese-Robinson statue, Macalester College, Juan Montoya, sled dog
September 21, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 790 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LAS VEGAS (AP) - Andre Agassi and Steffi Graf want to wait at least until their son is born in December before they marry.
Agassi told The Associated Press he and Graf will hold off on a wedding "until the little one is around and everybody (has) kind of recovered."
The couple live in Las Vegas and recently bought a $23 million home in the San Francisco Bay area. They announced in July they were expecting a baby, the first for both.
"It's a stage of life I've always looked forward to," Agassi said.
Agassi, 31, and Graf, 32, began dating after each won the French Open in 1999.
As for baby names, Agassi said he and Graf don't have any in mind.
"That's something that we're kind of going to wait for a moment of inspiration," he said.
Agassi will be holding a charity concert Sept. 29 in Las Vegas, featuring Elton John, Tim McGraw, Dennis Miller and Ray Romano. The event will raise money for Agassi's foundation, which was founded in 1994 to help at-risk Las Vegas children.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Two years and two knee operations later, Ronaldo is back on Brazil's national soccer team. And maybe just in time.
Just 28 minutes of play for Internazionale was enough to convince Brazilian coach Luiz Felipe Scolari. He included the two-time FIFA Player of the Year among the 14 named Friday for Brazil's World Cup qualifier against Chile on Oct. 7.
"He's in excellent physical condition and with a desire to play soccer that overcomes difficulties," Scolari said.
Ronaldo returns at a delicate moment. Brazil is tied with Uruguay for fourth place in the South American qualifying group and faces the prospect of not qualifying for next year's World Cup for the first time.
Only the top four teams are guaranteed a spot. The fifth-place team plays Australia in a two-leg series for the final berth.
---
LOUISVILLE, Ky. (AP) - A sculptor who hopes to create a statue of Brooklyn Dodger teammates Pee Wee Reese and Jackie Robinson was to have met with New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani on the morning the World Trade Center was destroyed.
Sculptor Ed Hamilton was in his hotel when he learned of the terrorist attacks.
He is one of five finalists chosen to create a statue depicting the day Reese, of Louisville, quieted a jeering crowd by crossing the infield to put his arm around the black rookie.
Also scheduled to meet with the mayor at City Hall that day were Reese's widow, Dotty Reese, and Robinson's widow, Rachel. Dotty Reese and son Mark Reese were already there when they heard the explosion.
"I think what Pee Wee Reese and Jackie Robinson faced is what we face now - an evil that has no boundary and no face," Mark Reese told The Courier-Journal. "It means pulling together as Americans, and as human beings. No one statue represents it more, and boy do we need it now."
---
ST. PAUL, Minn. (AP) - For years, Macalester College has had one of the worst teams in small college football. Now its president is willing to get rid of the team.
President Michael McPherson wrote a letter to students Thursday, saying he plans to form a panel to decide whether the school should keep the team. He expects to rule by the end of the fall semester.
The Scots have played football since 1886. Between 1974-80, they set a national record with a 50-game losing streak. They went 7-2-1 in 1986 but haven't had a winning season since. Last season, they finished 1-9.
This year's team is 0-2 and has only 38 players. McPherson says high academic standards crimp the number of players qualified to attend.
"It's demoralizing - it really is," middle linebacker Nick Kraemer said. "The letter makes me feel like I've been a burden at Macalester since I walked on the campus."
---
ROCKINGHAM, England (AP) - Juan Montoya celebrated his 26th birthday by getting engaged.
The Colombian driver won the Italian Grand Prix on Sunday for his first Formula One victory. He said he proposed on Thursday - his birthday - to Connie Freydel.
Montoya, who drives for BMW-Williams, arrived on Friday at the Rockingham Speedway in central England with his Colombian girlfriend on his arm.
Montoya came to the CART race - the Rockingham 500 on Saturday - to visit friends from his former Chip Ganassi team. Montoya won two season championships in CART and also won the Indianapolis 500 in 2000.
---
BEND, Ore. (AP) - A new sled dog race in Oregon will be part of a Triple Crown for the sport, ending with the Iditarod in Alaska.
The Atta Boy 300 Race for Vision, founded by longtime Bend musher Jerry Scdoris, will run Jan. 5-13, starting at Mount Hood and finishing at Mount Bachelor.
The race will offer a purse of $50,000, and will be the first leg of a three-race series that includes the Wyoming 500 Stage Stop in February. The Iditarod, the most famous sled dog race, is in March.
 Load-Date: September 22, 2001

 

End of Document
