

Names in the Game Hamilton, Clarence Moore, Chris Myers
December 2, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 746 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LONDON (AP) - Britain's Princess Anne has backed London's proposed bid for the 2012 Olympics.
Anne, an IOC member, broke with royal protocol by speaking out before the government has decided whether to go ahead with a bid.
"The sports are unanimous about supporting a bid and, as the British Olympic Association president, I am happy to go along with that," she said in interviews in three British newspapers Monday.
The proposal is to be debated in parliament this month. Prime Minister Tony Blair's government is expected to announce in January whether to proceed.
A recent financial study calculated that staging the Olympics in London would cost nearly $3 billion. Most of the money would come from the private sector, but the government would have to underwrite additional infrastructure costs.
The deadline for submission of bids to the IOC is July 15, and the host city will be selected in 2005.
So far, New York is the only official candidate. Bids are also expected from Moscow, Madrid or Seville in Spain and one of five German cities. Other potential candidates include Paris; Budapest, Hungary; Istanbul, Turkey; and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
---
FAIR HILL, Md. (AP) - Hall of Fame jockey Jerry Bailey broke one record and moved within striking distance of another.
On Sunday, Bailey broke his single-season purse record in the $500,000 Hollywood Derby at Hollywood Park. His third-place finish aboard Royal Gem earned $60,000 and improved his season purse total to $22,632,509, breaking the record of $22,597,720 he set last year.
The two-time Kentucky Derby winner is the only jockey to surpass $20 million in purses.
A day earlier, Bailey's victory aboard Congaree in the Cigar Mile at Aqueduct was his 64th stakes win of the season, putting him within three of Mike Smith's season record of 67 set in 1994.
---
MINNEAPOLIS (AP) - Vikings owner Red McCombs says building a new stadium in the suburbs is a top priority..
"I'm here waiting for a suburb to jump up and say, 'We want the Vikings,"' McCombs said Sunday before Minnesota's 30-24 loss to Atlanta. "Nobody has stepped up just yet."
Last week, the Vikings rejected a site on the University of Minnesota campus.
McCombs said he had been intrigued by a downtown Minneapolis site that eventually was designated for the new Guthrie Theater.
"But really for us, where the actual site is doesn't matter," McCombs said. "You could put it in a cornfield. It wouldn't matter, just so long as it has good access."
The team plans to try to get a stadium bill passed in the next Legislative session, which begins in January. The Twins had a bill passed last year without securing a site.
---
CLEVELAND (AP) - Former Olympic figure skater Scott Hamilton has started an Internet site to help newly diagnosed cancer patients find information about chemotherapy.
Chemocare.com features offers information about chemotherapy and includes inspirational stories of Hamilton and other cancer survivors.
Hamilton, a four-time world and U.S. national champion, is a TV commentator.
He was diagnosed with testicular cancer five years ago. He underwent chemotherapy and surgery at The Cleveland Clinic Taussig Cancer Center and says he is now cured.
"We need to really let people know what it is, to give people the information they need in a language they understand," Hamilton said.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - Clarence Moore has returned to practice at Georgia Tech after quitting the basketball team in August.
He sat behind the bench this week during games against Georgia and Gardner-Webb.
The 6-foot-5 forward approached coach Paul Hewitt a few weeks ago about coming back. The coach said if the other players agree, Moore could return this month.
"It was his decision," guard B.J. Elder said. "You have to respect that. He had his own reason. We were a little disappointed, but I think everyone would welcome him back."
Moore started 29 games last season and averaged 9.4 points and 5.4 rebounds. Without him, Georgia Tech has won its first three games, including an 83-77 victory over No. 18 Georgia.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The Tennis Channel announced its second original series, "Center Court with Chris Myers."
Chris Myers, a former host of ESPN's "SportsCenter" and "Up Close" programs, will host the 24-hour, all-tennis network's signature interview series beginning in 2003 from Los Angeles.
The Tennis Channel will broadcast half-hour "Center Court" episodes showcasing interviews by Myers. Upcoming episodes feature Pete Sampras, Jack Kramer and Tracy Austin.
 Load-Date: December 3, 2002

 

End of Document
