

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
December 11, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 751 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




FLOWERY BRANCH, Ga. (AP) - His short braids peeking below an Atlanta Falcons cap, 17-year-old Kenny Gibson sat in his wheelchair, nervously chewing gum. He looked across the field at the man whose phone call turned around his life.
"What's up, Kenny?" quarterback Michael Vick asked the beaming teenager, whose misty eyes belied his cool "What's going on" reply.
Gibson traveled overnight from his hometown of Diamond Bar, Calif., to meet Vick on Sunday morning as the Falcons prepared for Monday night's game against New Orleans.
Almost a year had passed since Vick's phone call helped the high school defensive back emerge from the depression that engulfed him after a broken neck during a game left him a quadriplegic.
The California nonprofit group When U Dream a Dream, which brings children and teens in wheelchairs to celebrity events, arranged the phone call a month after the accident.
The teen, in a hospital bed and on a diet of water and applesauce, didn't know who was on the line until the caller started talking about Virginia Tech, Vick's alma mater.
"I said, 'Hold it, hold it - you're Michael Vick?"' Gibson recalled Sunday. "He told me to keep my head up and that I was an inspiration to him."
Said father Rodney Gibson: "Watching my son smile in the hospital, I was ready to break down."
Kenny Gibson, a straight-A senior who had hoped to earn a football scholarship, plans to study business at the University of Southern California and to eventually open a restaurant.
---
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - Ronaldo not only wants to win another World Cup, he wants to win the Nobel Peace Prize.
Ronaldo, a three-time FIFA Player of the Year, is a goodwill ambassador for the United Nations.
"I will work my entire life for this, and battle very hard to win a Nobel Peace Prize," he said in Sunday's edition of the Brazilian news magazine Epoca. "It would be very satisfying, worth the sacrifice."
Ronaldo plays for Real Madrid and toured Israel and the West Bank in May as part of his campaign against poverty.
Ronaldo already has won two World Cups and will lead Brazil again when the tournament is held in Germany in June. He said it is too early to say whether he will play a fifth World Cup in 2010 in South Africa, surpassing Pele's total of four.
"Time will tell, I want to keep playing as long as it gives me pleasure," Ronaldo said. "I'm 29 years old, just a boy in life, but not in soccer."
---
LEIPZIG, Germany (AP) - German chancellor Angela Merkel is certain her country will make the knockout phase of the World Cup.
Germany is the seeded team in Group A, which includes Costa Rica, Poland and Ecuador.
"You would have to invent some new excuses if Germany didn't advance out of this group," Merkel said Sunday.
Coach Juergen Klinsmann is "very satisfied" with the draw.
"Naturally that is a group in which we have to advance as the home country," he said.
Klinsmann lives in California and is under pressure to move back to Germany. Critics contend he is too far away to keep in touch. But he said he's already seen Costa Rica play three times.
"It's not very far from California," Klinsmann said.
---
LONDON (AP) - England coach Sven-Goran Eriksson is set on his roster for the World Cup, but wouldn't mind seeing another Wayne Rooney come along.
"If I had to pick the squad tomorrow, I would be pretty clear on who the 23 are," Eriksson told BBC Radio on Sunday. "But the World Cup is still six months ahead and some things can change - a young player can come through like Wayne Rooney did."
The 20-year-old Rooney came to prominence during last year's European Championship and is an integral part of the team.
Eriksson said England had a great chance to win the World Cup for the second time since 1966.
"We have been fighting very hard to have four weeks preparation instead of three, which was what we had at the last World Cup and we've achieved that," Eriksson said. "That will be very important. We have one more week to rest and prepare and that's very important."
---
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates (AP) - Nicolas Lapierre of France won the feature race in the A1 Grand Prix on Sunday.
Lapierre completed the 30 laps in 56 minutes, 17.068 seconds. Robbie Kerr gave the British team its third second-place finish in six feature races.
South Africa, which will host the eighth leg of the A1 GP in Durban on Jan. 27-29, received a boost when Stephen Simpson finished third.
France won its ninth race in 12 starts and has 106 points halfway through the 12-leg inaugural season. Switzerland trails by 31 points.
 Load-Date: December 12, 2005

 

End of Document
