

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
March 15, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 755 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - Pele plans to create a fund to help keep Brazil's promising young soccer talent in the country.
The Brazilian soccer star has talked to bankers and businessmen who approved of his initiative, his former club, Santos, said in a statement released Friday.
Pele believes the next generation of Brazilian talent is vital for the future of soccer in the country that has won the World Cup five times.
Among the brightest young stars are 17-year-old Diego and 18-year-old Robinho, who led Santos to a national title last year, the team's first since Pele retired.
The teenagers are reportedly being coveted by European clubs.
"Youngsters like Robinho cannot leave Brazil this early. This generation has everything to shine at the next World Cup," Pele said.
Brazilian clubs usually can't compete with the multimillion-dollar offers from European teams. Nearly all of Brazil's 2002 World Cup champions play in Europe, including Ronaldo, Rivaldo, Ronaldinho, Cafu and Roberto Carlos.
Pele, now 62, played nearly his entire career with Santos and won three World Cup titles in 1958, '62 and '70. He left Santos for the now-defunct New York Cosmos in 1974 and retired as a player in 1977.
Pele has also served as goodwill ambassador and Brazil's Minister of Sports. The fund could be his last contribution to the sport, he said.
"For me, this would be retirement," Pele said in the statement. "I've done everything I've had to do. This would be a reward from God."
---
SALZBURG, Austria (AP) - Salzburg's bid to host the 2010 Winter Games could be helped by the childhood memories of International Olympic Committee official Gerhard Heiberg.
Heiberg, the head of a committee evaluating the bid, spent his youth in the city.
"I remember my time here very well. It was wonderful, especially the cultural festival and the food," Heiberg said Saturday, the third day of a four-day inspection by a 15-member IOC evaluation team.
The committee won't comment on the bid until Sunday.
Bid spokesman Michael Schuen was confident Salzburg will receive high marks.
"We are also counting on the fact that Mr. Heiberg has spent some time in Salzburg and has shown his affection for the city and our idea," he said.
Bid organizers are trying to cater to Heiberg's tastes and have discussed making chocolate-marzipan Olympic medals similar to the Salzburg Mozartkugel chocolates favored by the official.
Robert Kaspar, the head of Salzburg's bid office, said the "most difficult topics of finance and security went really well."
Vancouver, British Columbia, and Pyeongchang, South Korea, also are competing to host the games. Bern, Switzerland, had been in the competition until its citizens voted to withdraw last summer.
The IOC will make a decision July 2 in Prague, Czech Republic.
---
BERLIN (AP) - All 15 global sponsors have signed up for the 2006 World Cup, just six months after the final whistle in the last tournament.
FIFA said signing the sponsors so quickly was a record. Soccer's world governing body was still searching for sponsors the year before the 2002 World Cup, which was played in South Korea and Japan.
The 2006 World Cup in Germany is expected to be a financial hit.
"This ought to be the granddaddy of them all, a record one," said John Stuart, world wide marketing manager of MasterCard, which has signed on as a global sponsor.
Germany appears poised to take advantage of the interest in the event, which drew 28.8 billion television viewers worldwide in 2002, and 1.1 billion for the final, a record for a single sports event.
Matches in Germany will be broadcast in prime time in Europe, soccer's most lucrative market.
In other important regions, such as North and South America, the games will also be shown at more favorable times, starting midday instead of early morning hours.
FIFA president Joseph Blatter has no doubt this will be the most lucrative World Cup.
"Definitely, definitely," he said. "We should break all records."
FIFA has sold the global television rights to the 2006 World Cup for $1.13 billion, a 20-percent increase over Japan and South Korea. Sponsorship money is also up 20 percent, $600 million.
---
JYVASKYLA, Finland (AP) - Olympic star Hayley Wickenheiser won 11 of 15 faceoffs Saturday, but was held without a point for the first time in three games as Salamat beat Diskos 3-1 for its fourth straight Finnish playoff victory.
Wickenheiser, Canada's top female player, played 10 1/2 minutes and had three shots on goal in her first game in a Finnish championship league Arena, the "Hippos" in Jyvaskyla.

 

End of Document
