

Names in the Game Edwards and Daijiro Kato, Franziska van Almsick.
August 4, 2002, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 823 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MILAN, Italy (AP) - Brazilian soccer star Ronaldo will not be traded, Internazionale of Milan's president insisted, quashing reports that the striker could be headed to Real Madrid.
President Massimo Moratti said there were no talks on moving Ronaldo, saying that the player's contract with Inter lasts until 2006.
"Ronaldo is an Inter player, and Ronaldo is not on the market. I want to believe that all that's happening is nothing more than a passing summer storm," Moratti told Sunday's La Gazzetta Sportiva newspaper.
Ronaldo's agent, Alexandre Martins, in comments published Sunday, said the player wants to leave Inter after a number of bad experiences, including injuries and losing the league championship on the last day of last season.
"It wasn't me who pushed Ronie toward Madrid," Martins told Gazzetta. "It is he who wants to leave Inter. For some time, he's said that his Italian period is over."
"Italy represents sadness for Ronie. Here, he lived through the worst injury of his career. Here, he cried for the championship lost terribly last year."
Real Madrid has denied they approached Ronaldo, but sports director Jorge Valdano confirmed that he held talks with Ronaldo's manager.
Ronaldo, 26, led the World Cup in scoring with eight goals, including two against Germany in the final.
---
YEKATERINBURG, Russia (AP) - Detroit Red Wings center Pavel Datsyuk brought the Stanley Cup to this Ural Mountains city on Sunday, the first stop on the trophy's tour of Russia.
The Cup made a symbolic visit to the border between Europe and Asia, the first time it has been displayed in Asia.
Datsyuk, a native of Yekaterinburg, said he was taking the Cup on tour to encourage more Russian children to take up the sport.
"Russian hockey should be helped, and as many children as possible should go in for sports to that they do not roam about in the streets," he said.
Datsyuk and teammates Igor Larionov and Maxim Kuznetsov will be the hosts for a number of charity and social events during the tour of Russia.
On Monday, the players were scheduled to bring the Cup to Moscow, where it was to be displayed in the office of Russian President Vladimir Putin.
The Stanley Cup first visited Russia in 1997 after another championship season by the Red Wings.
Following the trip to Russia, the Cup will travel to Sweden with Detroit players Nicklas Lidstrom and Tomas Holmstrom, then to the Czech Republic with Dominik Hasek.
---
FLORENCE, Italy (AP) - An Italian footwear mogul is taking over the new Fiorentina soccer team.
Diego Della Valle, owner of the Tod's and Hogan shoe brands, agreed Saturday to give $7.5 million to help the team get started.
"I bought myself a piece of Florence - not just a glorious, noble soccer team, not just a piece of sporting history, but a real piece of one of the most famous cities in the world," Della Valle was quoted in Sunday's La Repubblica newspaper.
The old Fiorentina squad, which was relegated from Serie A last season, was excluded by Italian soccer officials from the second division because of financial woes.
A new team called Fiorentina 1926 Florentia will enroll in Italy's Serie C league.
"We want to get back into Serie A in three years and then win the championship," Delle Valle said.
Soccer authorities excluded the old Fiorentina after club owner Vittorio Cecchi Gori failed to meet a deadline for paying about $22 million and avoid possible bankruptcy.
The old Fiorentina, founded in 1926, won the Italian league twice and was a Champions league participant just two years ago.
---
SUZUKA, Japan (AP) - Defending champion Colin Edwards of the United States and Japan's Daijiro Kato combined to win an eight-hour endurance world championship road race Sunday.
The Honda team members dominated from the early stages and completed 219 laps at the 3.6-mile Suzuka circuit with an average speed of 98.3 mph.
Japan's Makoto Tamada and Tadayu Okada finished second, and the team of Brazilian Alex Barros and Japan's Yuichi Takeda were third.
---
BERLIN (AP) - Franziska van Almsick is considering retirement after an improbable comeback at the European Swimming Championships.
Van Almsick, of Germany, set two world records and won four gold medals at the championships.
Van Almsick's world record in the 200-meter freestyle erased the record she set eight years ago at the World Championships.
"It's a good time to think of retiring - I've accomplished so much," van Almsick said. "I've learned that I'll always be measured by what I've accomplished and now I've set the bar even higher."
In the years between her record-setting swims, Van Almsick dropped in the rankings. Her struggles in the pool and with her private life have been a staple of Germany's tabloids since she won six gold medals at the 1993 European championships at age 15.
"With all this success, I can forget how much it hurt sometimes these past seven years," van Almsick said. "But if I hadn't had those experiences, I wouldn't be where I am now."
 Load-Date: August 5, 2002

 

End of Document
