

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
November 16, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 677 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




SHANGHAI, China (AP) - American twins Bob and Mike Bryan clinched the year-end No. 1 doubles ranking on Wednesday.
The Bryans, who are seeking the third straight Masters Cup title, are guaranteed a No. 1 finish in the ATP doubles race after second-ranked Jonas Bjorkman and Max Mirnyi lost their second round-robin match on Wednesday.
For the fourth consecutive year, the brothers won at least five titles, including their second career Grand Slam crown at the U.S. Open.
They made history as the second team in 50 years to reach the final in all four Grand Slam tournaments in the same year. Mahesh Bhupathi and Leander Paes of India did it in 1999.
The Bryans, who play their final round-robin match on Thursday against Paes and Nenad Zimonjic, are bidding to become the first team to win three straight doubles titles at the year-end championships since John McEnroe and Peter Fleming won the Masters title seven straight years from 1978-84.
---
BELGRADE, Serbia-Montenegro (AP) - Former NBA star Vlade Divac has been charged with evading the military draft, the Serbia-Montenegro army said.
The 37-year-old Divac was obliged by law to join the compulsory six-month military service by the age of 35, the state prosecutors' office said Wednesday.
It asked Serbia-Montenegro's foreign ministry "to determine Divac's citizenship and his home address" to be able to carry out the legal proceedings and hand him the draft notice.
Divac, who lives in Los Angeles, could face a one-year prison sentence in his native country if he does not join the army soon, legal experts said.
Divac ended his 16-year NBA career last month, taking a job with the Los Angeles Lakers as a liaison and scout in Europe.
---
CLEMSON, S.C. (AP) - Arnold Palmer's grandson will tee it up for Clemson.
Sam Saunders, the grandson of the four-time Masters champion, has signed with the Tigers, golf coach Larry Penley said Wednesday.
Kyle Stanley of Gig Harbor, Wash., also signed with Clemson. Stanley and Saunders, of Orlando, Fla., are ranked among the top 11 junior players, according to Golfweek/Titleist World rankings.
"This might be the best pair of incoming freshmen we have ever had," said Penley, whose team won the NCAA championship in 2003.
Saunders was the stroke play medallist at the U.S. Junior Amateur earlier this year. He advanced to the second round of match play before losing. Stanley won the MCI Junior Heritage tournament on Hilton Head Island.
---
TURIN, Italy (AP) - The Turin city council has voted to ban Coca-Cola products from its offices because of alleged worker abuse by the company in Latin America, Turin officials said Wednesday.
The vote was taken Monday against Coca-Cola, one of the top sponsors of the Olympics. Turin will host the Winter Games from Feb. 10-26.
A small neighborhood association in Rome said last week it would block passage of the Olympic torch through its streets because the relay is sponsored by Coca-Cola.
Rome Mayor Walter Veltroni met with an Italy-based representative of Coca-Cola, Nicola Raffa, to smooth out the issue. The torch route will not change.
"We don't have anything to hide, we operate with the utmost transparency," Raffa said last week.
The leader of the neighborhood association has been invited to visit Coca-Cola's facilities in Colombia in March.
Turin Mayor Sergio Chiamparino is scheduled to meet with Raffa on Monday and "reiterate Turin's faith in Coca-Cola as a top Olympics sponsor," his office said Wednesday.
---
BOSTON (AP) - Red Sox designated hitter David Ortiz won the top awards given by the Boston chapter of the Baseball Writers Association of America.
Ortiz won the Ted Williams Award as the top batter in the major leagues and the Yawkey Award as the Red Sox most valuable player on Wednesday.
Ortiz will receive the awards at the Boston BBWAA's annual dinner on Jan. 12. Earlier this week, he finished second in the MVP voting to Alex Rodriguez of the New York Yankees.
Ortiz batted .300 with 47 homers and a major league-leading 148 RBIs this season. He also had 34 RBIs that put his team ahead, the most in the AL.
 Load-Date: November 17, 2005

 

End of Document
