

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
May 16, 2004, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 654 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MACON, Ga. (AP) - Bob Feller never thought of himself as a hero. The Hall of Fame pitcher reserves that distinction for Pat Tillman.
Tillman, a former safety with the Arizona Cardinals, turned down a multimillion-dollar NFL contract to enlist in the Army. He was fatally shot April 22 in Afghanistan, the first NFL player to die in combat since the Vietnam War.
Feller, who was 266-162 in an 18-year career with the Cleveland Indians, received eight battle stars during World War II. He enlisted in the Navy two days after the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor.
"I'm no hero, I'm a survivor," Feller said Saturday at the Georgia Sports Hall of Fame, The Macon Telegraph reported. "There are two different types of soldiers: those who survive and the heroes. The survivors come here. The heroes don't."
Feller, 85, spends most of his time traveling the country to promote baseball and to visit veterans' hospitals. He remains a staunch supporter of the military.
"We should teach more American history in our schools," he said. "So many students nowadays are looking out the windows when they are being taught.
"Freedom is not free. It costs a lot."
---
MILAN, Italy (AP) - Roberto Baggio said goodbye to Italian soccer.
One of Italy's most popular soccer stars left the field with six minutes to go in his final game in Italy's top league, drawing a standing ovation from the San Siro crowd of 80,000. Both teams applauded him and there were laudatory banners all over the stadium as his Brescia team lost 4-2 to AC Milan, the Italian champions.
"Yes, it was my last match," the 37-year-old ponytailed forward said. "I would hardly change my mind about retirement. It's a pity I could not score one goal to celebrate my retirement in the right way."
Baggio, who retires with a record of 205 career goals in the Serie A, nearly scored in the second half when his curling free kick struck Milan's post. He did make decisive moves in the two goals scored by Brazilian Matuzalem for Brescia.
"My career has been plagued by injuries, but pain helped me to grow stronger and keep on playing in the difficult moments," Baggio said.
Baggio also played with Fiorentina, Juventus, Inter and AC Milan during his 19-year career in Serie A. His three goals in five games led Italy to the 1994 World Cup final against Brazil. But he missed a penalty kick in the shootout that decided the title.
"My career has been plagued by injuries, but pain helped me to grow stronger and keep on playing in the difficult moments," Baggio said.
AC Milan's president, Italian premier Silvio Berlusconi, said he invited Baggio to join the Milan team tour in China and other countries this summer.
---
LONDON (AP) - Tens of thousands of Arsenal fans took to the streets Sunday to celebrate the team's Premier League title and undefeated season.
The London borough of Islington, home to the club's Highbury stadium, was a sea of red and white. The players and manager Arsene Wenger were paraded in three open-topped buses. Pictures of the players were emblazoned on the buses.
"I'll keep it simple," said star striker Thierry Henry, the league's player of the season. "In the season 2003-04, a team went unbeaten in the league. That team is Arsenal."
Sky Sports reported that 250,000 people attended. London's Metropolitan Police said no arrests were made as part of the parade.
Captain Patrick Vieira was the first player to hoist the Premier League trophy Sunday.
"It has been a fantastic season," Vieira said. "We achieved something unbelievable."
Arsenal finished with a 26-0-12 record. The previous time a topflight English club went undefeated was in the 1888-89 season, when Preston did it in 22 games.
Wenger got one of the loudest cheers. He was mocked by the media last season when he suggested the Gunners could go unbeaten in the league.
"I was just a season too early," he said. "But, seriously, at the beginning of this season, I never felt that we were capable of doing it."
 Load-Date: May 17, 2004

 

End of Document
