

Names in the Game
July 6, 2002, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 641 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MUNICH, Germany (AP) - Oliver Kahn, Germany's goalie in the World Cup, will be sidelined for six weeks with a finger injury sustained in the tournament's final against Brazil.
Kahn, voted the best player of the tournament, tore a ligament in his little finger early in the second half of Germany's 2-0 loss to Brazil. The injury includes damage to the joint.
"Oliver is just going to have to wait patiently for the damaged joint to heal," said Hans-Wilhem Mueller-Wohlfart, a doctor for the German Soccer Federation.
Kahn is expected to return in time for Bayern Munich's Aug. 10 Bundesliga opener against Moenchengladbach.
---
WIMBLEDON, England (AP) - The Tennis Masters Cup will be played in 2003 and 2004 at the Westside Tennis Club in Houston, Texas, site of the recent U.S. Davis Cup match with Spain.
The International Tennis Federation and the ATP Tour announced at Wimbledon on Saturday that the tournament, featuring the top eight singles players, will be combined with the World Doubles Championships for the first time since 1985.
A new 8,500-seat outdoor stadium will be built to accommodate the $3.7-million event, which will be held on a hardcourt surface. The stadium will also be lighted.
The last time the event was held outdoors was in Melbourne, Australia, in 1974.
After moving from its base at New York's Madison Square Garden to Frankfurt, Germany, the ATP Tour Masters event was combined with the ITF's Grand Slam Cup and renamed the Tennis Masters Cup before its 2000 staging in Lisbon, Portugal.
Last year, the event was held in Sydney, Australia. This year, the tournament will be held in Shanghai, China, beginning Nov. 12.
---
GSTAAD, Switzerland (AP) - Defending champion Jiri Novak has withdrawn from next week's Gstaad Open because of a high fever, organizers said Saturday.
The Czech player's withdrawal means that Spain's Alex Corretja will take the eighth and final seeded place in the tournament. French Open champion Albert Costa is the top seed.
Novak was unseeded and ranked 65th in the world when he won last year's tournament, beating second seed Juan Carlos Ferrero of Spain in the final. He is now ranked 32nd and would have been the third seed in Gstaad. He went out in the second round of Wimbledon last month.
---
PITTSBURGH (AP) - Baltimore Mayor Martin O'Malley made good on a football wager, delivering a box of frozen crabs and a case of DeGroen's beer to Pittsburgh Mayor Tom Murphy.
The mayors wagered before the Pittsburgh Steelers and Baltimore Ravens played a divisional playoff game Jan. 20.
"It's really great to be back in Pittsburgh!" O'Malley said Friday night as he held up a frozen crab at a bar. He was in Pittsburgh for a family reunion.
O'Malley said the bets are "kind of a pain, but it's a lot more fun when your team wins."
---
PORTO CERVO, Sardinia (AP) - The Costa Smeralda Yacht Club signed an agreement Saturday to team up with the New York Yacht Club for joint regattas, training and other activities.
The New York Yacht Club, holder of the America's Cup for 132 years, has similar agreements with three other clubs, two in Britain and one in San Francisco. But this was the first with a Mediterranean club, and the signing brought the New York club's commodore to this port in northern Sardinia.
"If we didn't think we had a great future together, we would not be here," commodore Charles Dana III said.
---
LYON, France (AP) - Claude Simonet, the head of French soccer's governing body, said Saturday he hopes to name Roger Lemerre's replacement as national team coach by July 20.
Lemerre was fired Friday after refusing to resign following France's failed World Cup title defense. Les Bleus were eliminated from the first round of the tournament without winning a game or scoring a goal.
France's next match is an Aug. 21 friendly against Tunisia. It plays Cyprus in a Euro 2004 qualifier on Sept. 7.
 Load-Date: July 7, 2002

 

End of Document
