

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
May 31, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 565 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MINNEAPOLIS (AP) - Longtime public-address announcer Bob Casey and former outfielder Bob Allison were inducted into the Minnesota Twins Hall of Fame before Saturday's game against Seattle.
Flanked by former Twins greats and family members, Casey and Allison's son, Mark, watched as the two newest Hall of Fame banners were unveiled over the Metrodome's right-field wall. Casey and Allison, who died in 1995, became the Hall's 11th and 12th members.
Casey and Mark Allison were joined on the field by former Twins Kirby Puckett, Harmon Killebrew, Tony Oliva, Herb Carneal and Tom Kelly.
Casey, the Twins' announcer for 43 years, was introduced by Puckett.
"I love you very much, we love you very much," Puckett told Casey.
Allison is third on the team's career home run list with 256 after 13 seasons with Minnesota and the Washington Senators from 1958-70.
"I wish Bob could be here today and enjoy this day and this celebration," said Killebrew, who introduced Mark Allison.
The hall was created in 2000 to honor players, coaches, front office and media personnel who have contributed to the organization's growth and success since the team arrived in 1961.
 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Commissioner Bud Selig will receive an Urban Hero Award at a dinner Monday for his support of various youth initiatives.
The eighth annual Urban Heroes Awards Benefit honors 10 "Urban Heroes," inner city youth who have overcome challenges through hard work to become leaders in their communities. The benefit also honors adult "Urban Heroes" from the corporate and government sectors.
Selig said major league baseball is committed to improving the lives of inner city youth through programs that promote teamwork, education and positive self-esteem.
Since becoming commissioner in 1998, Selig has overseen the development and growth of several urban youth efforts, including Reviving Baseball in Inner Cities (RBI), Breaking Barriers: In Sports, In Life and the Major League Baseball Urban Youth Initiative.
 
---
TOKYO (AP) - Yokohama city officials want to sell the naming rights for International Stadium Yokohama, site of the 2002 World Cup final between Brazil and Germany.
The city said it was looking to sell the naming rights of the 70,000-seat stadium, the largest in Japan, for $4.2 million.
International Stadium Yokohama has struggled financially since the end of the World Cup. Operating costs for 2003 have been estimated at $6.7 million.
Corporate naming of stadiums in Japan is rare. Kobe Green Stadium was branded Yahoo BB Stadium before the start of the 2003 baseball season, but few venues in Japan bear company names.
 
---
CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va. (AP) - Virginia's new 15,000-seat special events center will be called John Paul Jones Arena for the father of the project's largest donor, businessman Paul Tudor Jones.
Jones wanted to honor his father, who was a 1948 graduate of Virginia's law school.
The younger Jones is founder of a money-management group in Greenwich, Conn., and pledged $35 million to the $129.8 million project. That gave the 1976 graduate naming rights.
The elder Jones is not related to John Paul Jones, the father of the American navy.
The building is scheduled to open in the summer of 2006.
 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Apprentice jockey Luis Chavez has been suspended for 10 days by NYRA stewards for "careless riding" during the third race at Aqueduct last December.
Chavez's suspension starts June 2.

 

End of Document
