

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
July 21, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 707 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - Tennis ace Lleyton Hewitt and soap star Bec Cartwright completed their love match Thursday - getting married in a lavish ceremony at the landmark Sydney Opera House.
Hewitt, the world's No. 2-ranked tennis player, proposed to Cartwright just hours after losing the Australian Open final in January.
The couple had been dating for six weeks before Hewitt proposed. The 24-year-old Hewitt had been engaged to Belgian tennis player Kim Clijsters until last October.
Cartwright is a longtime cast member of the Australian soap opera "Home and Away."
Hewitt and Cartwright, 21, have bought a multimillion dollar home on one of Sydney's northern beaches and are expecting their first child.
Hewitt's former Davis Cup mentors or teammates - John Newcombe, Tony Roche, Todd Woodbridge and Wayne Arthurs - were among the estimated 180 guests.
---
PITTSBURGH (AP) - Double Yoi! There's a mini-Myron waddling around Pittsburgh.
The Pittsburgh Zoo & PPG Aquarium named its newest arrival, a fluffy gentoo penguin, after retired Pittsburgh Steelers radio announcer Myron Cope.
The chick had gone nameless since it hatched June 28. On Thursday, the zoo said it would honor Cope, the one-of-a-kind, screechy-voiced broadcaster who recently retired after 35 years of calling Steelers games.
The zoo doesn't know the chick's sex yet. If it turns out to be a girl, the zoo will call her Myra.
"I am thrilled to have this penguin named after me, it's almost like being knighted," Cope said.
Cope used an assortment of odd phrases, from "Yoi!" to "Garganzola" to "Cincy Bungles" - his name for the Cincinnati Bengals.
Wild gentoo penguins can be found in the Antarctic Peninsula, the sub-Antarctic Islands, the Falkland Islands and the Iles of Kerguelen.
---
SALT LAKE CITY (AP) - Salt Lake City officials are delivering a fossil-fuel free message about "peace, youth and the environment" to the host of the 2006 Winter Olympics.
They are headed to Turin, Italy, as part of a tradition started by 1994 Winter Olympic host Lillehammer, Norway.
The message was biked to the Atlantic coast, placed aboard a yacht to Belgium and picked up by the Salt Lake City deputy mayor. The Salt Lake City entourage will bike this week from Lyons, France, and deliver the letter to Turin Mayor Sergio Chiamparino on July 28.
The Norwegians sent the first message to the host of the 1998 Nagano games in Japan. Nagano then delivered one to Salt Lake City in 2002.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Buck O'Neil will be at the Dodgers-Mets game on Saturday, along with a traveling exhibit of the Negro Leagues Baseball Museum.
The 93-year-old O'Neil, a former player and manager of the Kansas City Monarchs, serves as the museum's chairman and goodwill ambassador.
The traveling exhibit "Times of Greatness," features historic photos, video, uniforms and other memorabilia from the Negro Leagues of the 1920s through the 1960s.
The exhibit will travel to Yankee Stadium on July 30 and make stops in various cities through Oct. 1.
---
ANKARA, Turkey (AP) - Turkey will not bid for the 2014 Winter Olympics after all.
On Wednesday, officials in the culture and tourism ministry said Anatolia was a possible venue. A day later, Togay Bayatli, head of the national Olympic committee, said Turkey was unprepared and would not make a bid.
"There is nothing apart from a ski facility, which is not enough," he said Thursday.
Bayatli said the decision rested only with Turkey's Olympic committee.
---
CHARLESTON, S.C. (AP) - Richard Pitino will serve as an administrative assistant under coach Tom Herrion at the College of Charleston.
The son of Louisville coach Rick Pitino replaces Troy Wheless, who was promoted to a full-time assistant coach last month. Mark Byington will return to the Cougars as an assistant coach, Herrion said.
Richard Pitino graduated in May from Providence, where he was a basketball manager the past two seasons. During his freshman and sophomore years, he was an assistant coach at St. Andrew's School in Barrington, R.I.
"I am grateful to have been given this chance at such a young age and am eager to be able to help the program in any way," Pitino said.
Charleston finished 18-10 last season, losing to Appalachian State in the quarterfinals of the Southern Conference tournament.
 Load-Date: July 22, 2005

 

End of Document
