

Names in the Game
May 16, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 885 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




WAUKESHA, Wis. (AP) - Milwaukee Brewers radio announcer Bob Uecker and his wife have gotten a divorce.
Uecker and his wife attended a hearing in Waukesha County Circuit Court by telephone Tuesday. Uecker, who lives in Menomonee Falls, was in Philadelphia, where the Brewers opened a series against the Phillies. Judy Uecker, 56, was in Scottsdale, Ariz., where she recently moved.
They testified their marriage was irretrievably broken.
The two married in 1976 in Louisiana. It was the second marriage for both.
The couple's case was scheduled to go to trial Tuesday, but they settled a dispute over maintenance payments during the phone hearing.
Judy Uecker waived her rights to the payments and instead will receive income from $4.27 million in assets expected to produce $200,000 in annual interest, attorneys said in court.
The 66-year-old former major-leaguer also played the father on the TV comedy "Mr. Belvedere" from 1985-90.
---
TOKYO (AP) - Ivan Cruz hit a solo home run as the Hanshin Tigers edged the Central League's front-running Yomiuri Giants 5-4 in Japanese baseball on Wednesday. It was the seventh home run of the season for Cruz, formerly with the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Robert Petagine's RBI single off Eric Ludwick helped the Yakult Swallows to a 3-0 victory over the Hiroshima Toyo Carp.
Ludwick, formerly with the Toronto Blue Jays, gave up six hits and three runs over five innings and dropped to 0-2.
Petagine formerly played with the Cincinnati Reds.
---
ZURICH, Switzerland (AP) - World and European champion France has overtaken Brazil atop the FIFA world rankings, ending Brazil's seven-year domination of world soccer.
France had 796 points in the rankings released Wednesday, two more than Brazil. Argentina was third at 763, followed by Italy in fourth with 748 points.
The United States improved from 18th to 15th.
France joined Germany, Italy and Brazil as only the fourth team to top the standings since they began in 1993.
 
---
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. (AP) - Former University of New Mexico quarterback Jeremy Denson is leaving the Lobos for Florida A&M.
"It's pretty much a done deal," he said. "I just have to get them all the paperwork."
Denson was a junior college All-American at Navarro (Texas) College but struggled in his two starts with New Mexico last season, completing only 11 of 32 passes for 105 yards and two interceptions and rushing for minus-16 yards on 24 carries. He was pulled midway through the second game.
His only other action came in a backup role four weeks later, in which he tore a ligament in his knee.
---
MONTE CARLO (AP) - Gabriela Szabo's 3,000-meter world indoor record was ratified Wednesday by the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
The 25-year-old Romanian clocked 8 minutes, 32.88 seconds at a Birmingham, England, meet Feb. 18, bettering the 12-year-old record of Elly van Hulst of the Netherlands.
Szabo won gold in the 5,000 and bronze in the 1,500 at the Sydney Olympics.
---
COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. (AP) - Four-time world champion Michelle Kwan was honored with the Readers Choice Award as Figure Skater of the Year for 2001 by Skating Magazine, official publication of the United States Figure Skating Association.
Kwan, a five-time U.S. champion, also won the award in 1994, 1996, 1998 and 1999, and is the only multiple winner of the award. The award was presented to Kwan at the 2001 USFSA Governing Council Meeting on May 12 in Las Vegas.
Kwan, 20, swept both the world and U.S. titles in 2001 and became the first back-to-back ladies world winner since Kristi Yamaguchi claimed titles from 1991-92. She also became the first woman to win four World titles since Katarina Witt of Germany won in 1984-85 and 1987-88.
 
---
CHARLOTTE, N.C. (AP) - Joe Nemechek, injured Tuesday in a testing crash in Delaware, will not compete in this weekend's all-star events.
He will be replaced by Bobby Hamilton Jr., a Busch Series regular, who will drive his car and attempt to qualify for Saturday night's all-star race at Lowe's Motor Speedway.
Nemechek broke his right shoulder and bruised his lungs in a crash at Dover Downs International Speedway. He was testing a Busch Series car when he apparently cut a right front tire between the third and fourth turns on the high-banked Monster Mile, and his Chevrolet slid up into the wall. No other cars were involved.
Nemechek, whose brother died during a truck series race in Homestead, Fla., in 1997, is expected to be back in the car for the Coca-Cola 600 on May 26.
 
---
CAMP PENDLETON, Calif. (AP) - Marine Capt. Eric Kapitulik, who survived a Dec. 9, 1999, helicopter crash off the coast of San Diego, will compete in Ironman California on Saturday, Armed Forces Day.
Kapitulik will swim 2.4 miles, cycle 112 miles and run 26.2 miles in honor of his comrades and to raise money for the trust funds of their families.
---
COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. (AP) - Orlando Magic coach Doc Rivers, Michigan State coach Tom Izzo and Dayton coach Oliver Purnell were picked Wednesday by USA Basketball as assistant coaches for the 2001 Goodwill Games.
Minnesota Timberwolves coach Flip Saunders was chosen earlier as head coach of the 12-member team of NBA players who will represent the United States at the Goodwill Games for the first time.
The basketball competition of the Goodwill Games is scheduled for Sept. 3-9 in Brisbane, Australia.
 Load-Date: May 17, 2001

 

End of Document
