

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
September 27, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 528 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




ANAHEIM, Calif. (AP) - Even with the Angels on the verge of securing their second straight division title, Anaheim mayor Curt Pringle is boycotting his hometown team.
The Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim moved within a victory of clinching the AL West with a win over Oakland on Monday, but Pringle is finding it difficult to attend games.
The city sued the team after owner Arte Moreno changed the club name from the Anaheim Angels to the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim, and Pringle has not attended any Angel games this season.
He won't divulge his postseason plans.
"It's important for the community to support the team, but I'm personally not attending," Pringle said in Tuesday's Los Angeles Times. "It's a challenge to be there when you're suing the team."
Pringle and council members Richard Chavez and Harry Sidhu have avoided games, donating their complimentary tickets to nonprofit groups and relatives.
Council members Lori Galloway and Bob Hernandez have put aside their differences and attend games in the city's suite.
"I don't want the lawsuit to affect my support of the team," Galloway said. "It's not the team's fault. I'm very proud of the Anaheim Angels."
The trial is scheduled for Jan. 9.
---
PARIS (AP) - Zinedine Zidane reportedly will return from injury to play for France in its World Cup qualifier next month against Switzerland.
The Real Madrid midfielder said Tuesday he expects to return for the Spanish club's match against Mallorca on Sunday.
"That match, plus five or six days of training with France, will allow me to be up to speed for the match in Switzerland," Zidane told the sports daily L'Equipe. "Except for a last-minute catastrophe, I will be able to play."
He hasn't played since pulling a muscle in France's 1-0 away win at Ireland on Sept. 7.
"I've run and played with the ball," he said. "I didn't feel any pain."
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - Diego Maradona has started a weight-loss trend.
Impressed by the way weight-reduction surgery in Colombia transformed Argentine soccer icon Diego Maradona, overweight Colombians are flocking to doctors for the same procedure - and want the government to pay for it.
Maradona weighed 266 pounds before he had the surgery in March. Since losing the weight, he's been jetting around the world, showing off his new body.
At least 14 Colombians have filed lawsuits to have government-provided health insurance pay for the same surgery. The cases have already become known as "Maradona lawsuits," Gina Magnolia Riano, director of the Ibero-American Social Security Organization, said at a medical forum on Monday.
A judge recently ruled in one man's favor, and his surgery is scheduled for Wednesday.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Skater Rena Inoue will be sworn in as a U.S. citizen on Wednesday.
Inoue, a former Olympian from Japan, is training with partner John Baldwin for a shot at the 2006 Winter Games. Citizenship will make her eligible to compete in Turin, Italy.
The pair won the 2004 State Farm U.S. Figure Skating Championships.
"I'll be proud to represent the United States at the Olympic Games," Inoue said. "Of course, we have to make the team first."
The citizenship ceremony will be held in Montebello, Calif.
 Load-Date: September 28, 2005

 

End of Document
