

Names in the Games
August 7, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 605 words
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




Shawn Bradley of the Dallas Mavericks was granted German citizenship, allowing the 7-foot-6 center to play for his new national team.
Bradley was born in Germany and will join Dallas teammate Dirk Nowitzki on the national team, a pairing that could make the German squad a threat at major championships.
The German basketball federation said it must still notify U.S. officials but regards such a step as a formality.
Bradley is expected to join the German team for the European Championships in Turkey starting Aug. 31 - if he has completed a rehab for a knee operation at the end of the NBA season.
"Getting him citizenship is just the first step," German national coach Henrik Dettmann said. "Now he's got to get healthy, then he can help us."
The Germans finished last a week ago at a tuneup for the European Championships.
---
FLAGSTAFF, Ariz. (AP) - His finger hurt plenty, but Dave McGinnis stuck to business.
The Arizona Cardinals' coach broke his right pinkie Saturday when it got caught in a player's pads during an argument between teammates at a training camp scrimmage.
After Justin Lucas was knocked out of bounds, he went after the player who belted him. McGinnis reached for Lucas, wanting to tell him about the new penalty for such confrontations. Then his finger got twisted.
"I wanted to cry, it hurt so bad," he said.
McGinnis laughed when asked if he would go on injured reserve.
"I stayed through the scrimmage, didn't I?" he said Monday, holding up the splinted finger. "And I'm out here today."
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Pele will now be accompanied by his own museum during his globetrotting.
The soccer great signed a promotional deal with Coca-Cola for an undisclosed that runs through 2003. As part of the arrangement, a traveling museum will be dedicated to his achievements.
"I was very happy about the proposal because I have lots of trophies, and we've had lots of discussions about the museum but it hasn't happened," he said.
The exhibition will open next April 2002 in Sao Paulo and then travel throughout Brazil.
Pele said the advertising campaign would also involve him recreating some of his more famous goals - those that no longer exist on film or video - with the help of computer technology.
---
BATON ROUGE, La. (AP) - Billy Cannon can keep his horses where they are.
The Heisman Trophy winner was accused of violating a city ordinance that prohibits people from keeping livestock that cause a nuisance to others. Cannon keeps horses on leased land in Baton Rouge.
People near the property had complained of flies and strong odors. Cannon maintained the nuisance claim was vague and the case belonged in civil court, not criminal court.
Judge Yvette Alexander threw out the complaint. She said what she considers a nuisance might not be a nuisance to someone else.
Cannon, a dentist, won the Heisman Trophy with LSU in 1959.
---
VERONA, Italy (AP) - Boris Becker will play tennis next month at a venue better known for summertime operas and concerts.
The former German star, retired since 1999, will compete in a four-player exhibition next month at the Roman arena of Verona. The matches will be played on a hard court in the center of the amphitheater.
Joining Becker will be Spain's Carlos Moya, Italy's Andrea Gaudenzi and Switzerland's Roger Federer, organizers said Tuesday.
On Sept. 15, it will be Becker vs. Federer and Gaudenzi vs. Moya. The winners will play for the trophy the next day.
The 33-year-old Becker won Wimbledon three times. He came out of retirement this week to play doubles with Wimbledon champ Goran Ivanisevic. They lost their opening match at the Masters Series event in Cincinnati.
 Load-Date: August 8, 2001

 

End of Document
