

Names in the Game
January 29, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 859 words
Dateline: KIEV, Ukraine
Body




Sergei Bubka is running in a parliamentary election, but the Ukrainian pole vault great needs to get his paperwork in order.
The Central Elections Commission warned it might have to exclude Bubka from the March 31 race because he listed three addresses on his application form instead of one. The commission press service said it was reviewing Bubka's documents.
Bubka is listed as running in the For United Ukraine bloc led by Volodymyr Lytvyn, chief of the presidential administration.
Bubka retired a year ago, ending a career in which he won six straight world titles, an Olympic gold medal and broke the world record 35 times. He has been a member of the IAAF ruling council since August.
---
SEATTLE (AP) - Curt Schilling completed a Triple Crown of humanitarian awards for baseball players.
The Arizona Diamondbacks ace was honored Monday with the Hutch Award by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. He previously won the Roberto Clemente and Branch Rickey community service awards.
The Hutch Award is given to the player who exemplifies the "fighting spirit and competitive desire" of Hutchinson, a major league manager who died of cancer in 1964.
"It's hard to say just how important something like this is to me," Schilling said. "It's humbling."
Schilling helped lead the Diamondbacks to the World Series title with a 4-0 postseason record last fall.
After the Sept. 11 attacks, he wrote a "Letter to America" in which he urged major leaguers to donate a day's pay to relief efforts.
He has helped raise more than $1.5 million to fight Lou Gehrig's disease.
---
HONOLULU (AP) - Before he wore No. 50 as a pro baseball player, Benny Agbayani was No. 28 for Hawaii Pacific.
The university honored the Hawaiian and Colorado Rockies outfielder Monday by retiring his college jersey.
Hawaii Pacific president Chatt Wright thanked the outfielder for his contributions to the school and the state. Agbayani has said he wears No. 50 to honor the nation's 50th state.
Before being traded to the Rockies this month, Agbayani spent his entire major league career with the New York Mets since he was called up in 1998.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Of all the problems facing Brazil's national team, the biggest is a player who isn't even there.
As Brazil got ready for a World Cup warmup against Bolivia this week, fans showered abuse on coach Luiz Felipe Scolari for failing to summon the nation's eternal favorite, Romario.
"Hey, hey, hey, Romario is our king," chanted legions of the striker's fans. Others held up his No. 11 jersey. On Tuesday, Scolari barred fans from practice.
The 36-year-old Romario led Brazil to a fourth World Cup in 1994. He was hurt in 1998 and cut from the squad on the eve of the tournament. Last season he led all scorers in the Brazilian national championship.
Brazil made the World Cup after its worst qualifying performance, losing six games. Scolari says he wants to test other players before setting the team for the tournament.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The right song for the right city.
Elton John will sing "Philadelphia Freedom" before the start of the NBA All-Star game on Feb. 10 in Philadelphia.
At halftime, John will perform his new song, "This Train Don't Stop There Anymore" and his classic, "I'm Still Standing."
The game will be televised in 210 countries.
---
PARIS (AP) - Defending champion France will feature the team of Arnaud Clement, Nicolas Escude, Sebastien Grosjean and Fabrice Santoro for its first round of the Davis Cup.
The French will play the Netherlands on Feb. 8-10.
Captain Guy Forget will have Cedric Pioline as a replacement.
---
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) - Mark Santel of the Kansas City Wizards is retiring from pro soccer after six seasons.
The Wizards acquired the 33-year-old midfielder from the Dallas Burn before the 2001 season. He played in 21 games for the Wizards and had one goal and one assist. He had a career total of six goals and 23 assists.
He was voted to the MLS All-Star team in 1996, and appeared in eight games for the U.S. national team.
---
BERLIN (AP) - Former IBF super middleweight champion Graciano Rocchigiani on Tuesday began serving his one-year sentence in a low-security prison.
The 38-year-old former boxer was on probation when he got into a fight in a disco in 2000.
On Dec. 16, the boxer fell asleep in a woman's car and attacked police officers who were called to wake him. Police said he also vandalized the car's interior.
Rocchigiani beat Michael Nunn in 1998 to win what was then the open WBC light heavyweight title. Roy Jones Jr. was given back the crown when he decided not to move up to heavyweight.
---
TORONTO (AP) - Retired broadcast executive Jim Thompson was appointed chief executive officer of the Canadian Olympic Association on Tuesday.
The job had been vacant for almost a year since the death of Carol Anne Letheren last February. Thompson's appointment takes effect March 4.
"I honestly planned to stay retired," Thompson said. "I was happy, I was having a ball."
Thompson is the former president of TSN and NetStar Communications. He was a founder of TSN in 1984 before stepping down in 2000. He was executive producer of CBC's coverage of the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics.
 Load-Date: January 30, 2002

 

End of Document
