

Names In The Game hockey fans, Gerhard Aigner, Hansie Cronje.
October 17, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 839 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - Diego Maradona underwent arthroscopic knee surgery in Colombia in preparation for a celebrity soccer game in Argentina next month honoring his career.
The surgeon who operated on Maradona Tuesday night said the former World Cup star is still on track to play in the Nov. 10 tribute match in Buenos Aires.
"Diego is not incapacitated, his activities are merely restricted," said Dr. German Ochoa of Cali's Sebastian de Belalcazar clinic in Cali.
Maradona, who led Argentina to a World Cup title in 1986 and a second-place finish in 1990, is scheduled to remain in Colombia this week before traveling to Germany for additional help losing weight before the match.
---
WETHERBY, England (AP) - Quixall Crossett, British horse racing's most celebrated loser, stretched his record to 101 defeats in a row on Wednesday, losing a race named after him.
Still looking for his first victory at age 16, Quixall was a 500-1 shot in the Reliant Reva Electric Car Quixall Crossett Maiden Chase over 3 miles, 200 yards at Wetherby.
He was the last of the six finishers behind Ballygarvan, a comparative youngster at age 6, and was just reaching the final fence by the time the winner was crossing the finish line. Three other horses failed to finish.
"I did not expect him to win anyway," said trainer and owner Ted Caine, a pig farmer. "But he has jumped round the big Wetherby fences and he kept going to the line. Some horses don't when they get behind.
"It is getting a bit doubtful whether he will ever win a race, but I will be pleased if he can get placed a few times. We will run him again I think, but we will take things one day at a time and see how he is."
---
BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - International Olympic Committee president Jacques Rogge urged the European Union to do more to promote and protect sports from commercial pressures.
"We expect the EU governments … to improve the promotion of sports (and) to stand for the protection of sports interests," Rogge said Wednesday at a conference organized by the EU.
He also told sports ruling bodies they had to adjust to a fast-changing world.
"Problems arrive when governing bodies in sports do not adapt their structures to new realities," he said.
Leading administrators from many sports attended the EU's conference, which touched on issues ranging from doping to TV rights and the promotion of school sports.
---
GRAND FORKS, N.D. (AP) - Students have agreed to try to be more accommodating to other fans at hockey games in the University of North Dakota's new Engelstad Arena.
Some season ticket-holders and those with suites have complained that the students stand up too much in their section near ice level, blocking the view. They also say some of the students use too much profanity.
At a 90-minute forum Tuesday night, UND Athletic Director Roger Thomas implored students to be less disruptive.
"We don't want to wreck your enthusiasm," he said. "We have one of the biggest arenas (and) we could blow the top off it if we could all do it together. The fans who want to see the game are as loyal as you. All they want to do is see the game."
More than 150 students attended the forum, though they represented only a fraction of the students who attend hockey games.
They reached a consensus to stand up only during exciting parts of the game, or to rouse the crowd. Students who agreed with that approach indicated it by standing.
---
BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - The head of the European Soccer Federation expressed confidence Wednesday that insurance problems following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks will be resolved to allow soccer's World Cup to go ahead as planned next year.
"I do not believe this is really a situation where we have to speak about the World Cup being at risk. It's a matter of adaptation … I think this will all settle into place again," Gerhard Aigner said in a telephone interview.
The French insurance company AXA has pulled out of a contract to cover the monthlong tournament next June in Japan and South Korea, citing the increased risks since the attacks in the United States.
---
PRETORIA, South Africa (AP) - A South African court upheld a lifetime ban for cricketer Hansie Cronje on Wednesday, but said he could still seek work as a coach or commentator in certain situations.
The Pretoria High Court ruled the United Cricket Board of South Africa had acted within the law when banned Cronje last year. Cronje had asked the court to overturn the ban.
Cronje sparked a match-fixing scandal last year after Indian officials said they had tapes of him talking with an Indian bookmaker during the team's tour of the subcontinent.
Several teammates later told a government commission that Cronje conveyed to them an offer in 1996 of up to $350,000 to lose a one-day game against India.
Cronje denied that, but admitted receiving $100,000 from gamblers in exchange for match information and conveying other offers from gamblers to teammates to perform badly.
His lawyers argued the cricket board violated his rights by not giving him a hearing before banning him.
 Load-Date: October 18, 2001

 

End of Document
