

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
August 8, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 662 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MOSCOW (AP) - Yevgeny Kafelnikov is trading in his tennis racket for a set of golf clubs.
The former No. 1 player retired last year and will make his golf debut Thursday when the Cadillac Russian Open begins at Moscow's Le Meridien Country Club.
The 31-year-old Kafelnikov will play on a wild-card entry in the $500,000 event.
With most of Europe's top players in the United States for the PGA Championship, the field combines the rest of the European Tour and the feeder Challenge Tour.
Kafelnikov won the French Open in 1996 and the Australian Open in 1999. He was ranked No. 1 in 1999 and won about $24 million on the ATP Tour.
---
MADRID, Spain (AP) - Real Madrid has turned down more than 300 requests from families of fans to have their ashes scattered at the club's Santiago Bernabeu stadium.
Faced with a mounting pile of applications, the soccer giant turned to Madrid's city hall for advice on whether there was any legal barrier to scattering the ashes, daily newspaper El Mundo reported on Monday.
City hall officials told the club that they had no problem with the idea, but the club remained uncomfortable with the idea of ashes being scattered on its field, El Mundo said.
The paper added that Real Madrid turned down the requests in hopes of preventing the stadium from becoming a "place of pilgrimage."
Real Madrid had no immediate comment on the report.
---
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - Pele's son must remain in jail pending trial on drug charges, a Sao Paulo court ruled on Monday.
A three judge panel from Sao Paulo's criminal court voted 2-1 to reject Edson Cholbi Nascimento's appeal pending his trial on drug-related charges that could lead to a 15-year prison sentence.
A former professional soccer player known as Edinho, the 34-year-old Nascimento was one of 50 people arrested on June 6 in a sting to dismantle a drug gang operating in and around the port of Santos.
The decision leaves Nascimento jailed in a maximum security prison. No date was set for his trial.
Shortly after his arrest, Nascimento issued a statement saying he was a drug user, not a drug trafficker. Nascimento was a second-string goalkeeper for eight years at Santos, his father's former club. He retired from professional soccer in 1999.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Shannon Briggs looks to keep his heavyweight championship hopes alive with a bout against Ray Mercer.
The "Heavyweight Heat" matchup is Aug. 26 at the Seminole Hard Rock Hotel and Casino in Hollywood, Fla.
Briggs is 42-4-1 with 36 knockouts, and has won six straight fights since a loss to Jameel McCline at Madison Square Garden.
Mercer (34-5-1) with 25 knockouts, has won 11 of his last 12 fights, losing only to Wladimir Klitschko. He was understated at a press conference with Briggs in New York on Monday.
"I can sit here and talk to you all night, but I am going to let Shannon have the stage," he said. "He's going to do all the talking. I will see you on the 26th."
Briggs' most recent win, a third-round knockout of Abraham Okine, came on June 10.
"I know when guys step up to fight Shannon Briggs, they are coming to beat (me)," Briggs said. "Because I am the guy with the locks, I am the guy who's done the modeling, who's been in movies, who's out there in the hip-hop world.
"I put myself out there. If I don't, who will? We are not like the NFL, the NBA, this sport itself is not promoted. So, I am trying to get myself out there. And a lot of fighters are envious of that, they get jealous."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Ivy League football and basketball games will be featured on SIRIUS Satellite Radio this fall.
SIRIUS will broadcast a "Game of the Week" for both sports, plus a select number of men's hockey and other Ivy League sports, the league announced Monday.
"SIRIUS Satellite Radio offers an outstanding sports lineup and we're very excited to be a part of it," said Jeff Orleans, Ivy League executive director. "Joining with SIRIUS gives us a wonderful opportunity to provide Ivy League sports to a national and growing audience."
 Load-Date: August 9, 2005

 

End of Document
