

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
October 29, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 695 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




BOSTON (AP) - Basketball great Julius Erving, who put his education at the University of Massachusetts on hold to play professionally, has been appointed to the school's board of trustees.
Gov. Mitt Romney announced the appointments of Erving and two others on Friday.
"I view my appointment to my alma mater's board of trustees as a high honor and a great challenge," Erving said in a statement. "Recently, I have had numerous occasions to interact with the university and reflect on my undergraduate years on the Amherst campus.
"Now, we will entrench ourselves in the collective effort to bring the University of Massachusetts system closer to its full potential as an institution of higher learning."
Erving spent three seasons at UMass, leaving in 1971 to play pro basketball. In 1993, Erving was elected to the Basketball Hall of Fame.
Erving resumed his studies and received his bachelor's degree from UMass in 1986. He also received an honorary doctor of law degree from the school.
---
MONTREAL (AP) - The hiring of driver Jacques Villeneuve for the final three races of the Formula One season was a mistake, the president of Renault Sport said Friday.
"We have to live with that," Patrick Faure told Eurosport television.
Renault hoped to beat out BAR-Honda for second place in the F1 constructors standings by hiring Villeneuve, the 1997 champion, to replace Jarno Trulli for races in China, Japan and Brazil.
But Villeneuve, idle for nearly a year after his contract with BAR-Honda expired in 2003, was unable to score a single point for Renault, which finished third this season to his former team.
Faure said he and Renault team boss Flavio Briatore "probably underestimated the consequences of a 10-month layoff, even for a past series champion with experience and talent.
"I don't think his main problem is readapting to F1," Faure said. "I just think that physically, he needs a few more months to get into optimum shape. He was the first to admit that when we spoke."
---
TOKYO (AP) - World Series MVP Manny Ramirez and teammate David Ortiz head the roster for baseball's tour of Japan next month.
The eight-game trip from Nov. 5-14 is the second in three years for the major leaguers. They'll play an All-Star team from the Japanese leagues.
Los Angeles Dodgers infielder Alex Cora and Montreal Expos outfielder Brad Wilkerson were added to the roster on Friday. Cora, Wilkerson and Minnesota Twins pitcher Kyle Lohse were chosen after Baltimore Orioles star Miguel Tejada was forced to pull out due to injury along with pitcher LaTroy Hawkins of the Chicago Cubs.
Pitchers Jason Marquis and Ray King of the NL champion St. Louis Cardinals also are on the team.
---
ROME (AP) - Former Chelsea soccer star Gianfranco Zola has been chosen by Queen Elizabeth II to become an honorary citizen of Great Britain.
Sir Ivor Roberts, the ambassador to Italy, will present Zola with the honor on Monday "for his service to British football."
Before returning to his native Cagliari last season, Zola spent five years at Chelsea, where the Italian became one of the best players in the English Premier League.
A statement released by the British embassy in Rome on Friday said that Zola "represented an inspiration for thousands of supporters and fellow players" and that he should be "recognized as an excellent ambassador of football and a role model for many young fans."
---
MILAN, Italy (AP) - Sprinter and former world champion Mario Cipollini brushed aside speculation that he was retiring, announcing Friday that he has joined the Liquigas-Bianchi team for the next cycling season.
The 37 year-old "Lion King" will be joined by Stefano Garzelli, Dario Cioni, Danilo Di Luca and Franco Pellizotti on the new team, which has a license for the Pro Tour that will define the sport next year.
Also known as "Super Mario," Cipollini is famous for his ferocious sprints and outrageous outfits.
In May, Cipollini surpassed Alfredo Binda's 70-year-old record for the most stage victories in the Giro d'Italia with 42.
Liquigas announced that Cipollini will make the Giro his priority for next season. And with a license for the Pro Tour, it also is possible he could return to the Tour de France.
 Load-Date: October 30, 2004

 

End of Document
