

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
February 11, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 638 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




FIORANO, Italy (AP) - Michael Schumacher has set another record.
This one came Tuesday when the Formula One champion drove Ferrari's new car on a test track for the first time.
Schumacher completed the 1.85-mile Fiorano circuit in 57.045 seconds behind the wheel of the F2003-GA model. That was 0.431 seconds faster than the track record of 57.476 seconds, established in July with the old F2002 model.
The "GA" stands for Gianni Agnelli, the former Fiat chairman and car tycoon who died last month.
Schumacher will be chasing an unprecedented sixth individual title this season. The new car features a more powerful and lighter engine and is expected to make its race debut in April at the San Marino Grand Prix.
 
---
ANAHEIM, Calif. (AP) - Mary Lou Retton, Peter Vidmar and coach Bela Karolyi will serve as honorary co-chairs of the world gymnastics championships to be held at Anaheim Arena on Aug. 16-24.
Retton won the all-around gold medal at the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles.
"This is such an important event," she said. "As an athlete, it's bigger than the Olympics."
Retton has been away from the sport while having four daughters and said the meet is her chance to get involved again.
"Now, Mary Lou is back in the gym," she said.
Vidmar helped the men's team win the gold and he won an individual gold on the pommel horse and silver in the all-around in 1984.
Karolyi coached Nadia Comaneci in 1976, Retton in '84, and Kerri Strug in '96.
The world meet, which is the qualifier for the 2004 Olympics, returns to the United States for the first time since 1991.
 
---
GUATEMALA CITY (AP) - Los Angeles Galaxy star Carlos Ruiz - the top goal-scorer for Guatemala - has been confined to home by a court order while the rest of the national soccer team prepares for a major regional tournament.
Ruiz's former wife Laura Mendez Urizar obtained the family court order after accusing him of failure to pay child support.
Ruiz was unable to accompany the national team when it flew to Panama on Monday to take part in Central America's six-country Cup of Nations competition.
"It's a shame this happens just when all Guatemala needs him," said Gerardo Ortega, head of the national selection commission.
Ruiz has not commented on the issue. It was not clear if he would be able to resolve the issue and join the team before Guatemala's first match Saturday against Panama.
 
---
DUBLIN, Ireland (AP) - Roy Keane, who left the Ireland national soccer team on the eve of last summer's World Cup, announced his retirement from the international game on Tuesday.
The 31-year-old Manchester United midfielder was ordered off the team after a run-in with then-coach Mick McCarthy and said he would never play for him again. He met last week with new Ireland manager Brian Kerr to talk about returning to the team.
Keane, who underwent recent hip surgery, said he hoped to play for Ireland again but his doctors advised him to cut back his playing schedule. He announced his decision in a fax that was sent to Kerr on Tuesday.
 
---
LYNNFIELD, Mass. (AP) - The Football Network has obtained movie rights to "Miracle in the Making: The Adam Taliaferro Story," written by Scott Brown and Sam Carchidi for Triumph Books.
The book details the story of Taliaferro, a 19-year old freshman cornerback for Penn State, who was paralyzed making a tackle against Ohio State in only his fifth college game.
For 10 days, he couldn't move anything except for his eyes and mouth. But after six months of grueling rehabilitation at Magee Hospital in Philadelphia, Taliaferro led his teammates out of the tunnel and on to the field at Beaver Stadium for the opening game of the 2001 season.
He is now a student coach with the Nittany Lions and involved in the Adam Taliferro Foundation, which raises money to help football players at all levels of the game, who suffer spinal injuries.

 

End of Document
