

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
October 31, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 600 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




TOKYO (AP) - Former major league manager Bobby Valentine is expected to arrive in Japan on Saturday to discuss becoming manager of the Lotte Marines of the Pacific League.
Lotte deputy owner Akio Shigemitsu said he would like to reach a deal with Valentine as early as Sunday, according to Kyodo News Service.
Valentine guided the Marines to second place in 1995, the team's best finish since 1985. He also has been mentioned as a possible candidate to replace Grady Little, dismissed this week as manager of the Boston Red Sox.
Valentine managed the Texas Rangers from 1985-92 and the New York Mets from 1996-2002. He led the Mets to the 2000 World Series. Last season, he was a baseball analyst for ESPN.
 
---
ATHENS, Greece (AP) - Australian Olympic champion Cathy Freeman - the last torchbearer at the Sydney Games - will be the first to carry the flame on its global journey back to Greece.
Freeman, the 400-meter gold medalist in 2000, will receive the flame in Australia at the start of a worldwide relay.
The flame will first be carried across southern Greece following the traditional lighting ceremony at Ancient Olympia in May.
The addition of Freeman is the latest surprise in the 65-day itinerary planned for the Athens flame, which will be carried by 10,000 torchbearers through all the continents except Antarctica - with groundbreaking stops in Africa and South America.
Earlier this month, officials announced that Istanbul, Turkey, will be the flame's last stop before it returns to Greece for the Aug. 13-29 Games.
 
---
BRYAN, Texas (AP) - The author of a best-selling book about former Texas A&M football coach Bear Bryant's demanding 1954 training camp has been sentenced to eight years in prison for a probation violation.
Jim Dent, author of "The Junction Boys," was sentenced Thursday under a plea agreement with prosecutors. He could have faced up to 10 years in prison.
Dent, accused of violating his probation for a drunken-driving conviction, was at large for about a year before he was caught in Las Vegas in June.
"I've done some bad things, and pride has gotten in the way in past years," he told state District Judge Rick Davis, vowing not to drink alcohol again. "I plan to get straightened out."
Dent was arrested in Brazos County for felony drunken driving in 1999 and was sentenced in 2002 to 10 years probation. He served 40 days of the probation sentence in jail. The day after his release, he was pulled over in Oklahoma City on suspicion of drunken driving.
Dent failed to make his court appearance and did not report to his probation officers. Police caught with him months later in Arkansas. He fled again after an Arkansas judge reduced his bail from $1 million to $5,000. Las Vegas authorities arrested Dent on June 12 after the author again was pulled over on suspicion of drunken driving.
The book became a New York Times best seller and was turned into an ESPN movie.
 
---
COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. (AP) - Pro bull rider Justin McBride plans to return to competition at the series world finals in Las Vegas, Nov. 6-9 - a month after breaking ribs and puncturing a lung during the Grand Rapids Invitational.
McBride was thrown, then stepped on by Mission Pack in the Grand Rapids event.
His injury adds suspense to the yearlong battle between McBride and standings leader Chris Shivers for the $1 million bonus. They go into world championship race 723 points apart with 1,500 points available during the event.
"I am a little sore, but I feel good enough ..." McBride said, "I probably won't be 100 percent by then, but I will be 95 percent, and I am geared up to participate."
 Load-Date: November 1, 2003

 

End of Document
