

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
February 13, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 704 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - Bernie Williams says he's far from retirement and confident he's ready for a strong season with the New York Yankees.
The 36-year-old Williams discussed the season during a weekend visit to Venezuela that included a clinic for young players.
"I'm still not thinking about retirement," Williams told players between the ages of 4 and 16 who attended the event set up by the U.S. Embassy in Caracas.
"I'm going to play as long as my physical abilities allow me to. I still feel very good physically," Williams said Saturday. "I'm not the same as I was when I was 21, but I think experience counts a lot. Now I do things I didn't used to do. It will help me stay in the major leagues a little longer."
The five-time All Star and four-time Golden Glove award winner acknowledged he has struggled a bit in the last two years, with knee troubles and an operation to have his appendix removed.
"Now I feel fine," Williams said. "If I'm able to stay healthy, there is no doubt I will have a better season than the last one."
Williams hit .262 in 2004.
Williams also urged youngsters not to take steroids, saying "that's bad for your health."
Maria Gonzalez, the mother of one of the boys, said: "It's marvelous to hear someone like Bernie Williams advising the boys not to use steroids. For us as parents, it's sometimes difficult explaining to them that it's bad to use them, when their idols use them."
 
---
ZAGREB, Croatia (AP) - Janica Kostelic had the flu, so she canceled a welcome home party to celebrate her three skiing titles at the Alpine World Championships in Italy.
Kostelic was grateful to officials and thousands of her home fans who planned to stage a huge welcome in Zagreb's main square. She asked for their understanding, her spokesman, Ozren Mueller, said.
"She urgently needs to rest and recuperate and prepare for the rest of the season," Mueller said.
Kostelic became the first woman in 23 years to win three ski titles at the championships. She won the slalom Friday, adding to her earlier titles in the downhill and the combined. She skipped the giant slalom because of a high fever and cough.
Kostelic was sidelined last year after surgery to remove her thyroid gland and several knee operations. She won three gold medals at the Salt Lake City Olympics in 2002.
 
---
BERLIN (AP) - FIFA president Sepp Blatter said Sunday that the game-fixing scandal in Germany was a "warning shot" for soccer around the world.
Attending a conference of 2006 World Cup referees, Blatter said preventive measures against fixing games would be discussed at the next meeting of FIFA's executive committee March 7-8.
"I don't think it is only a national problem when a bribery affair involving a referee is uncovered," Blatter said. "FIFA is called upon - we have to take a stance."
Blatter didn't rule out the possibility that game-fixing could be taking place outside of Germany's borders. FIFA, soccer's world governing body, has 720,000 referees around the globe.
"It's always possible that a black sheep is found," Blatter said. "Soccer will survive this case."
So far, the German soccer scandal is believed to involve 10 games, mostly in lower divisions.
 
---
PARIS (AP) - Paris hasn't always been a happy place for Brazilian soccer star Ronaldo. But that could change Monday, when he hosts a Valentine's Day party for model Daniella Cicarelli in a castle just outside the city.
Ronaldo has invited Real Madrid teammates Zinedine Zidane, Raul, David Beckham and up to 250 friends to the bash at Chantilly castle.
A fleet of cars will transport the guests, where they will be given Cuban cigars sporting an extra band with a red heart and the letters "R" and "D" embossed.
The cost of the party, details of dress attire, the food menu and complete guest list, were not immediately known - although Formula One champion Michael Schumacher is expected to attend.
Ronaldo is expected to marry later this year. Under Spanish law, the 28-year-old Ronaldo cannot remarry for at least one year after a divorce. Ronaldo has split with his first wife, Milene Domingues.
"Ronaldo and Daniella wanted to do something special on Valentine's Day," Ronaldo's press attache David Espinar added. "They will consider it as their wedding day."
 Load-Date: February 14, 2005

 

End of Document
