

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
June 14, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 727 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




BELGRADE, Serbia-Montenegro (AP) - Diego Maradona arrived in Belgrade on Tuesday to re-create one of his most famous goals.
The 44-year-old Maradona, who won the World Cup with Argentina in 1986, scored a spectacular long-range goal for FC Barcelona from midfield during a 1982 Cup Winners' Cup match against Red Star Belgrade. Barcelona won the game 4-2.
A re-creation of that goal will be featured in a film on Maradona's life, directed by two-time Cannes Film Festival winner Emir Kusturica.
Maradona, who retired in 1997 amid struggles with obesity and cocaine addiction, also met Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica.
---
NYON, Switzerland (AP) - Liverpool will receive $36.9 million for winning last season's Champions League.
The underdogs beat AC Milan in Istanbul last month to secure the trophy and the biggest share of the $501.3 million purse, UEFA said Tuesday.
UEFA splits revenue from TV rights and sponsorship according to teams' performances, while TV revenue comes from broadcasters in the teams' countries.
Chelsea received the second-highest share at $33.8 million, despite only reaching the semifinals. Milan collected $31.6 million, while Arsenal, eliminated in the second round, pulled in $28.2 million.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The New York City Marathon has bumped the women's champion's purse to $130,000, the largest jackpot in marathon history.
The men's prize will stay at $100,000.
"We believe this to be the first time that any major sports event has put up more money for the women's winner than for the men's," New York Road Runners president Mary Wittenberg said Tuesday. "So we are breaking ground not only in the sport of long-distance running but in all of sport."
The New York City Marathon is Nov. 6.
---
OAKFIELD, N.Y. (AP) - While most young ballplayers dream of making it to the big leagues, 11-year-old Katie Brownell already has Cooperstown calling.
Brownell, the only girl in her little league, made national headlines last month when she tossed a perfect game by striking out every batter she faced.
Now, the National Baseball Hall of Fame wants to put her jersey on display in the same shrine that includes items from Babe Ruth, Joe DiMaggio and Hank Aaron. In fact, the hall will host a program for Katie and her Dodger teammates July 7, when the young pitcher will donate her jersey.
"I thought, this tops everything, this is amazing. That's when it finally clicked: This is bigger than I thought," said Katie's mother, Denise Bischoff.
Katie, however, wasn't fazed. When her mother told her the Hall of Fame wanted her jersey, the youngster balked at the request.
"She's like, 'No, I'm keeping my jersey,"' Bischoff said.
But after being assured another jersey would be made for her, Katie finally relented.
---
PARIS (AP) - Beach volleyball is coming to the Eiffel Tower, with about 3,300 tons of imported sand to be laid at the foot of the Paris monument for next month's Grand Slam tournament.
The July 25-31 event marks the first time the French capital will host a Beach Volleyball Grand Slam, the sport's top event after the world championships.
Eight volleyball courts will be built in the Champ de Mars, the park at the base of the Eiffel Tower, for the 174 matches scheduled during the six-day event.
The venue will cover a surface of 36,000 square yards and have seats for 6,000 spectators.
"It's an old dream coming true to have the beach volleyball World Tour coming to the foot of the Eiffel Tower," FIVB president Ruben Acosta said.
---
SYRACUSE, N.Y. (AP) - Former Syracuse basketball player Billy Edelin, part of the Orange's 2003 national championship team, is taking classes at Mountain State University, according to a report Tuesday in The Post-Standard of Syracuse.
Edelin, a 6-foot-4 point guard, averaged 4 points and 1.7 assists in 20 games for Syracuse last season but sat out the last seven games. He did not make the trip to the NCAA regionals in Worcester, Mass., where Syracuse lost in overtime to Vermont.
As a freshman, Edelin played a vital role on Syracuse's 2003 national title run, averaging 11 points and 2.6 assists a game in the NCAA tournament.
In 2003-04, Edelin started the first 16 games, averaging 13.8 points and a team-high 5.4 assists before suddenly leaving the team for what coach Jim Boeheim termed "personal issues."
Mountain State won the 2004 NAIA championship after losing in the finals in 2003.
 Load-Date: June 15, 2005

 

End of Document
