

Names in the Game
December 5, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 601 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) - Boston Red Sox ace Pedro Martinez received a plaque from the Dominican Republic consulate in Puerto Rico for being an "idol" in Latin America.
"It's a recognition for Pedro's effort, sacrifice and perseverance that has taken him to the top of the sport," said Dominican Consul Rolando Acosta Trinidad. "He's not only an idol in his home country of the Dominican Republic, but in all of Latin America."
The right-handed pitcher was visiting Puerto Rico to participate in "Dominican Night," a promotional event Friday sponsored by the Bayamon Cowboys, a team in Puerto Rico's winter league.
The three-time Cy Young Award winner said he will not play in the Caribbean Series to be held in Puerto Rico in February, despite rumors the Dominican Republic plans to field a "dream team" for the series.
Martinez, 30, has a 153-63 record, a 2.62 ERA with 2,220 strikeouts in his 11-year career with the Red Sox, the Los Angeles Dodgers and Montreal Expos.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The NFL and NFLPA have created USA FOOTBALL, the first national advocacy organization representing all levels of amateur football.
USA FOOTBALL will be based in Washington and endowed by the NFL Youth Football Fund, a foundation created by the NFL and NFLPA to provide support for organizations involved in youth and high school football.
Dave Ogrean, a former executive of the College Football Association and a 25-year sports industry veteran, has been appointed the first executive director of the new organization.
The group will focus on promoting the sport, chartering and standards for leagues, development of competition and awards, education and training, research, grant-making, communication, and licensing.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Renowned figure skating coach and choreographer Tatiana Tarasova, who coaches Olympic champion Alexei Yagudin, has ended her affiliation with four-time U.S. ice dance champions Naomi Lang and Peter Tchernyshev.
Tarasova also will no longer coach Canadian ice dance champions Shae-Lynn Bourne and Victor Kraatz, the current world silver medalists.
Tarasova has been coaching Bourne and Kraatz since summer 2000. Under her guidance, they won the 2002 Grand Prix finals.
Lang and Tchernyshev have worked with Tarasova since August.
Tarasova and her assistant, Maya Usova, a two-time Olympic medalist and 1993 world champion in ice dance, will continue coaching Yagudin, U.S. rising star Sasha Cohen, and Ukraine's Elena Grushina and Ruslan Goncharov.
She also is a consultant and choreographer for world pairs champions Xue Shen and Hongbo Zhao of China.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Even though the Los Angeles Lakers are struggling, their jersey remains the most popular based on combined sales from the NBA Store in New York City and NBA.com since the start of the 2002-03 season.
Boston's Paul Pierce has the top-selling player jersey, and former Washington Bullets' star Wes Unseld has the most popular retired player jersey.
Also in the top 10 for most popular teams are the New York Knicks, Boston Celtics, Philadelphia 76ers, Washington Wizards, New Jersey Nets, Chicago Bulls, Orlando Magic, Dallas Mavericks and Sacramento Kings.
Philadelphia's Allen Iverson has the second-best selling jersey, followed by Kobe Bryant, Michael Jordan, Jay Williams, Tracy McGrady, Jalen Rose, Reggie Miller, Shaquille O'Neal and Latrell Sprewell.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - New York Yankees manager Joe Torre is the winner of the Dick Schaap Lifetime Award to be presented at the 2002 Michael S. Modell Awards Dinner on Dec. 11.
The dinner benefits the Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America's Greater New York Chapter.
 Load-Date: December 6, 2002

 

End of Document
