

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
April 29, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 919 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




SUNSET, S.C. (AP) - After an offseason of recruiting, spring practice and more player problems than you can count, South Carolina coach Steve Spurrier finally found time for a little golf.
"I got some golf events this summer, nothing that's going to make or break me," Spurrier said at the Nationwide Tour's BMW Charity Pro-Am on Friday. "My interests are with the Gamecocks."
That's surprising to some who figured the Palmetto State's great golf courses were a big reason why Spurrier came back to college football. Last fall, officials at nearby Augusta National denied that a coveted membership to their club was part of Spurrier's Gamecock deal.
After hiring his coaching staff, luring a top 25 class of recruits to South Carolina and handling the aftermath of 11 player arrests since November, Spurrier returned to another game he loves.
But there's a little rust on his 8-handicap skills.
He picked up on the 12th green - Spurrier's group began on the 10th hole at The Cliffs at Keowee Vineyards - after missing a 10-footer for bogey. Spurrier followed that with another double bogey.
"Can you putt for me?" Spurrier asked the gallery. "I'm pitiful."
Hockey star Wayne Gretzky, actor Kevin Costner, former Gamecocks coach Lou Holtz and 1980 Heisman Trophy winner George Rogers also took part in the event.
---
LONDON (AP) - David and Victoria Beckham are suing their former nanny for claiming in the British press that the couple's six-year marriage is on the rocks.
The nanny, Abbie Gibson, was paid $225,000 by the News of the World tabloid for her story about the soccer star. On Friday, Gibson promised the British High Court she wouldn't say anything further about the couple's marriage or spend the money until the suit is decided.
Justice David Eady said Gibson should not be barred from repeating information already in the public domain following Sunday's story.
"Unfortunately, publication of the material has taken place on such a wide scale that it would be futile to try and prevent publication of these matters," he said.
The Beckhams had sought a court order preventing the News of the World from publishing Gibson's allegations.
Gibson, who worked for the Beckhams from May 2003 until her resignation in March, had signed a confidentiality agreement as required by the Beckhams, the couple's lawyer Hugh Tomlinson said.
The Beckhams also are suing the News of the World over Sunday's story, plus articles published last year on Beckham's alleged affair with former personal assistant Rebecca Loos.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Diego Maradona has been offered a job as talent scout for the Argentine soccer club Boca Juniors.
Boca President Mauricio Macri is awaiting Maradona's decision, he said Friday.
"We hope this is the start of a deeper relationship," Macri said. "Diego is like a member of the family, and there is no better place for him than here. Boca is his home."
The 44-year-old Maradona, reportedly traveling to Cuba, had recently floated the idea of a managerial role at the club where he starred in the 1980s.
If he accepts the Boca job, it would mark his first return to the sport since his retirement in 1997.
Maradona played at Boca in 1981, scoring 28 goals in 40 games, and returned in 1995. He led Argentina to the 1986 World Cup championship and 1990 World Cup final.
---
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) - There is little to prevent World Cup tickets being offered on eBay, according to organizing committee president Franz Beckenbauer.
"We are looking at legal steps, but I don't think we'll find any," Beckenbauer told Friday's edition of the Rheinische Post newspaper.
The organizers wrote a letter to eBay asking to stop the trade in World Cup tickets, Beckenbauer said.
Nerses Chopurian, spokesman for eBay, said there were no legal grounds to stop the trade but that the company would be ready to talk to the organizing committee to find a solution.
Organizers have warned fans against buying tickets on eBay. Each tickets bears the name of the purchaser, and organizers said random checks will be conducted in front of stadiums. Fans with tickets not in their name won't be allowed to games.
The sale of the first batch of 812,000 tickets ended March 31. Tickets were offered on eBay within hours.
---
LONDON (AP) - Injured Arsenal striker Thierry Henry is unlikely to play in the FA Cup final against Manchester United.
Henry has been sidelined with a groin injury since April 15, making him doubtful for the May 21 match in Cardiff, Wales.
"Thierry is 30-70 for the Cup final - that's a realistic view," manager Arsene Wenger said Friday. "He's not in training and he's not played for three weeks. We are three weeks away from the final and we are short of time."
Midfielder Fredrik Ljungberg, recovering from a hip injury, is questionable against United. He will not play against West Brom on Monday or in next weekend's game against Liverpool.
---
PARIS (AP) - French Filmmaker Luc Besson will direct a video promoting the Paris bid for the 2012 Olympics.
Besson's short clip will be shown during Paris' official presentation to the International Olympic Committee, Paris bid member Arnaud Lagardere told RTL radio Friday.
The 46-year-old Besson directed "The Fifth Element," "The Professional," and "La Femme Nikita," and is working on a computer-animated version of his children's book, "Arthur and the Minimoys."
Paris is competing against London, Madrid, Moscow and New York for the Olympics. After each city makes its official presentation on July 6 in Singapore, IOC members will vote on a winner.
 Load-Date: April 30, 2005

 

End of Document
