

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
June 24, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 720 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia (AP) - David Beckham's whirlwind, four-nation tour of Asia made a brief stop Tuesday in Malaysia, where the English soccer star was again besieged by fans and media.
After arriving from Thailand, Beckham headed to the Kuala Lumpur Badminton Stadium for promotional functions. He then visited the Petronas Twin Towers, the world's tallest buildings.
About 2,000 people outside the stadium caught a glimpse of Beckham as he arrived in a motorcade guarded by police.
Inside, about 5,000 fans who had paid about $1.60 for tickets saw Beckham watch part of an indoor soccer game and take part in a brief kicking session with local players.
Beckham will be joining Real Madrid next season after a $41 million sale from Manchester United. His arrival in Malaysia came a day after Real Madrid fired coach Vicente del Bosque, who was dismissed a day after the team won the Spanish title.
"It has come as a shock to me, that is all I can say," Beckham said.
Beckham and his pop star wife, Victoria, spent the previous two days in Thailand, shooting a commercial and spending time at a beach resort, following a visit to Japan. Beckham is to stop in Vietnam and return to Thailand before leaving the region.
---
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) - Pedro Martinez and Alfonso Soriano are to carry a torch in Boston and New York in ceremonies leading to the Pan American Games in August.
The torch was lit in Mexico on Monday and will be displayed in the United States this week, Pan Am organizers said Tuesday.
Martinez, an ace for the Boston Red Sox, is to carry the torch Thursday during a ceremony at Fenway Park. Soriano, the second baseman for the New York Yankees, is to hold the torch at Yankee Stadium on June 29.
Neither Dominican star will participate in the Pan Am Games, which begin Aug. 1.
The torch also is to appear in New Jersey, Florida and Puerto Rico before returning July 6 to the Dominican Republic.
---
PARIS (AP) - IOC president Jacques Rogge thinks Paris has the basics in place for hosting the 2012 Olympics: a stable democracy, strong economy and experience with international competitions.
Rogge met Tuesday with French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin and was to see Paris Mayor Bertrand Delanoe on Wednesday.
France was home to soccer's World Cup in 1998 and Paris will hold the track and field world championships in August. Paris was the host of the Summer Olympics in 1900 and 1924.
Besides Paris, the declared bidders for 2012 are London; New York; Moscow; Madrid, Spain; Leipzig, Germany; Havana, Cuba; and Istanbul, Turkey. Brazil plans to enter Rio de Janeiro or Sao Paulo. Toronto is expected to be a candidate if Vancouver, British Columbia, is not selected host of the 2010 Winter Games next month.
The IOC will select the 2012 host in 2005.
---
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - "Disgraceful" and "shameful" were two of the words used to describe Brazil's ouster from the Confederations Cup in France after a 2-2 tie with Turkey.
"A Historically Disgraceful Performance," read the headline in the Folha de Sao Paulo newspaper. "A historical fiasco," said Folha de Sao Paulo sports writer Paulo Cobos.
Juca Kfouri, one of Brazil's most respected sports columnists, assailed the Brazilian soccer federation for fielding a "mediocre team … that is more and more exposed to embarrassment."
"Having been ousted from a group that included Turkey, Cameroon and the United States does not deserve any comment other than to say that it was shameful," said sport columnist Renato Mauricio Prado in Tuesday's O Globo newspaper.
---
ATHENS, Greece (AP) - Ticket orders for the 2004 Olympics were nearly double expectations and a lottery will be needed to award tickets for competitions with heavy demand.
A total of 591,112 individual tickets worth just under $54.5 million were ordered during a monthlong sales drive that ended June 12, Marton Simitsek, an executive director at the Athens organizing committee, said Tuesday.
Organizers had aimed to sell 300,000 of the 3 million tickets available to the public and gross $23.2 million.
Another 2.3 million tickets have been available to Olympic sponsors and sports officials.
Demand exceeded the number of tickets available for opening and closing ceremonies and 12 sports events, including track and field and weightlifting, where Greece has a strong presence.

 

End of Document
