

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
November 20, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 640 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




BEIJING (AP) - President Bush showed off his biking skills in China.
Bush, sporting a sweater with a "Beijing 2008" logo, pedaled with China's Olympic mountain bike hopefuls on Sunday.
The hourlong spin around dusty trails was the second bike excursion of Bush's eight-day trip through Asia. He rode Thursday at a military base in Busan, South Korea.
About 15 minutes into the ride, the pack - with Bush at the front - emerged from around a sharp corner, riding fast down a hill on a narrow trail through scrubby, brown brush.
"Remind you of Crawford?" a reporter yelled, referring to Bush's ranch in Texas. That's where Bush took seven-time Tour de France winner Lance Armstrong for a two-hour ride in August.
"Better than Crawford," Bush shouted back over his shoulder.
Later, the president clarified his comment.
"Compared to Crawford, this trail is a great bike trail and really difficult," he said. "It is clear I couldn't make the Chinese Olympic cycling team."
---
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. (AP) - Garrett W. Johnson, a part-time aide to Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and a college track star, was among 32 students selected Sunday as Rhodes Scholars for 2006.
A collegiate shot putter and discus thrower, Johnson becomes Florida State's first Rhodes Scholar in more than three decades. He was runner-up in the Atlantic Coast Conference meet in his two field events in the spring, finishing 16th in the NCAA finals in the shot and 13th in the discus.
Johnson, who was redshirted with a medical hardship in 2004 when stricken with life-threatening blood clots, holds the Florida State indoor and outdoor records in the shot.
He's now a graduate student working in the governor's legislative affairs office, where he is a special assistant to the Haiti advisory team.
"He is a true public servant," Bush spokeswoman Deena Reppen said. "He's always seeking ways to give back to the community and the less fortunate."
Winners are selected based on academic achievement, personal integrity, leadership potential and physical vigor.
---
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - Cy Young Award winner Johan Santana envisions big things for his country at next year's World Baseball Classic.
"I'll be there. Venezuela has a great opportunity because of the quality of its baseball players at the moment," the Minnesota Twins left-hander told the state-run Bolivarian News Agency.
New York Yankees coach Luis Sojo has been chosen to manage the Venezuelan team, which is considered among the top teams for the tournament in March.
The lineup will be bolstered by Miguel Cabrera of the Florida Marlins and Bobby Abreu of the Philadelphia Phillies.
Venezuela will be playing in the first round in Florida, together with Australia, Italy and the Dominican Republic.
---
MADRID, Spain (AP) - Ronaldinho made his case for European player of the year - and even rival Real Madrid fans applauded.
He played a spectacular game Saturday in leading FC Barcelona to a 3-0 win over its traditional foe in the Spanish league. Madrid fans cheered after the Brazil forward's outstanding solo goals in the 59th and 78th minutes. This was the defending champion's biggest victory at Santiago Bernabeu stadium since the 1984-85 season.
"The crowd is intelligent," Barcelona midfielder Xavi Hernandez told the El Pais newspaper. "Ronaldinho had a great game and they realized. If anyone had any doubts about whether it was right that he should win the Golden Ball, I suppose they'll be sure now."
The Golden Ball will be awarded Nov. 28. The Brazilian was voted FIFA's world player of the year last season.
Ronaldinho said he had been told the previous Barcelona player to win applause from Madrid fans was Diego Maradona in the early 1980s.
"It was lovely to receive the affection from some of the supporters of our biggest rival," Ronaldinho told the news agency Efe. "It doesn't happen to you very often in your career."
 Load-Date: November 21, 2005

 

End of Document
