

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
June 10, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 676 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




WESTBURY, N.Y. (AP) - Fresh off his first career Grand Slam victory Sunday, French Open champion Juan Carlos Ferrero has committed to the TD Waterhouse Cup, the final tune up for the U.S. Open in August.
Ferrero, the ATP Champions points leader who is ranked third in the world, will join 11th-ranked Paradorn Srichaphan of Thailand, the defending champion, and U.S. Davis Cup team member James Blake in the field.
The Spaniard, a winner of three clay court titles this year, has two victories in four career hardcourt finals. In his only other appearance on Long Island in 2000, Ferrero lost in the third round to Richard Krajicek.
---
MIDDLESBROUGH, England (AP) - Michael Owen will be the youngest player to appear in 50 games for England when he takes the field Wednesday in a qualifying game for next year's European championships.
Owen, 23, was appointed captain in place of the injured David Beckham for the game against Slovakia at Riverside Stadium. The Liverpool star is expected to be paired in the attack with 17-year-old Wayne Rooney.
Previous to Owen, Bobby Moore at 25 was the youngest player to make 50 appearances for England. Moore was a star of the English team that won the World Cup in 1966.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Becky Hammon of the New York Liberty is the winner of the WNBA's offseason Community Assist award.
The four-year veteran was cited for taking part in more than 15 community sponsored events. They included one dedicated to improving after-school programs and conducting basketball clinics.
Each month, the women's basketball league recognizes one player for the award. The league donates $5,000 to the charity of the player's choice.
---
SEOUL, South Korea (AP) - South Korea's military said Tuesday it will give World Cup star Ahn Jung-hwan leave to join the national soccer team's battle against Argentina on Wednesday.
Ahn, who is undergoing four weeks of basic training, missed an exhibition against Uruguay on Sunday. South Korea lost that match 2-0 and fans clamored for Ahn.
The South Korean army gave Ahn special leave from boot camp to join a training session Tuesday and play in the exhibition on Wednesday.
Ahn, 27, scored in South Korea's 1-0 win over Japan last week. After that match, he had his trademark long flowing hair shaved off and joined the military for the four-week basic training required of World Cup players.
All eligible South Korean men must serve in the military for 26 months. The World Cup Squad is exempt from the lengthy service.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Bill Murray will co-host NBA TV's pre-game show for Game 4 of the finals Wednesday night along with regular host Ahmad Rashad.
Among their guests will be Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Bill Russell and Amare Stoudemire of the Phoenix Suns.
KC and the Sunshine Band will perform during halftime of Game 4 of the NBA Finals 2003 on June 11. Phish will sing the national anthem.
---
ATHENS, Greece (AP) - Chief organizer Gianna Angelopoulos-Daskalaki gave new assurances Tuesday that all facilities should be ready when the 2004 Olympics begin.
"In exactly 64 days, we will be in the last lap," Angelopoulos-Daskalaki said. "We will have one year before the 2004 Games begin."
To be ready, she said, "we must develop abilities and performance even more, to be ready with the infrastructure, to test our systems, plans and our people, and to prepare the country."
The Olympic Games will take place Aug. 13-29, 2004.
Organizers will hold seven test events in August to try out the facilities.
Athens' preparations have faced years of delays, which forced some test events to be pushed back.
---
BERLIN (AP) - FIA president Max Mosley is urging the adoption of a demotion system similar to soccer for Formula One racing.
The president of Formula One's governing body said he envisioned a return of a Formula Two racing circuit instead of the four different tours racing at levels under Formula One.
"I can imagine a system like soccer. The best Formula Two team climbs into Formula One, the worst team there drops into Formula Two," Mosley told the trade magazine Auto, Motor and Sport.

 

End of Document
