

Nations air local disputes at the U.N. forum, despite the dominance of the Iraq issue
The Associated Press
September 27, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 531 words
Byline: By BARBARA BORST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Even violence in Iraq and uncertainty over the U.N. role in that country cannot keep world leaders from dwelling on the hot topics of their national politics when they take the podium at the annual General Assembly debate.
On Friday, the fourth day of debate, Turkey issued warnings about Cyprus. Zimbabwe railed against Western countries that have slapped it with sanctions. The United Arab Emirates and Iran sparred over Persian Gulf islands. Cuba accused the United States of imperialism.
The speeches started out similarly, with congratulations to the new General Assembly president, Julian Hunte of the Caribbean island of St. Lucia. They moved on to condolences for U.N. staff killed in Iraq, reminders of the dangers of terrorism and calls for structural reform of the U.N. system. But soon, politics became local again.
Zimbabwe's President Robert Mugabe defended the land reform program that is widely blamed for his country's political and economic crisis. The program has seized hundreds of farms owned by whites and given the land to blacks.
Mugabe said the program has created "a new sense of empowerment … yielding a happy sense of ownership, which has brought thousands upon thousands of hitherto marginalized families back into the economic mainstream."
The United States and the 15-nation European Union, critics of Mugabe's crackdown on the opposition and his flawed re-election in 2002, have imposed sanctions against him and senior officials in his government.
Cuban Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque, meanwhile, criticized the 40-year-old U.S. embargo of his country, saying Cuba was "condemned to die for wanting to be free."
In their speeches, the United Arab Emirates and Iran clashed over three Persian Gulf islands - strategic territory over which Iran claimed sovereignty in 1992.
The United Arab Emirates repeated its long-standing claim that the islands belong to the Arab country and that Iran's control was an "occupation."
Iran responded by rejecting the "unacceptable claims against the territorial integrity of my country."
The clash recalled harsh exchanges earlier in the week between Israel and many Arab governments; Pakistan and India; North Korea and Japan, and Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Turkey's Deputy Prime Minister Abdullah Gul talked of the "mutual confidence" growing between Turkey and its neighbor and longtime rival, Greece.
But regarding Cyprus, where Turkish troops back a Turkish Cypriot leader whose government is not recognized by other states, he warned that "attempts to distort the facts" hurt efforts to reach a lasting settlement. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan has taken an active role in trying to resolve differences in Cyprus, which has been divided for 40 years.
At the end of a full day of speeches, Venezuela's Foreign Minister Roy Chaderton Matos condemned the opposition movement in his country, which he said had "resorted to the military coup, to oil sabotage, to financial panic and to media terrorism" in its efforts to unseat President Huga Chavez's government.
The opposition, which briefly ousted Chavez in a 2002 coup, shut down the country's economy with weeks of strikes earlier this year and has petitioned for his recall.
 Load-Date: September 28, 2003

 

End of Document
