

Nations vow to fight urban blight and house the poor at U.N. conference
June 8, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 597 words
Byline: By MATT CRENSON, AP National Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Differences between Israeli and Palestinian officials dragged negotiations late into the night Friday at a U.N. meeting on improving conditions in the world's cities.
More than 150 countries had agreed even before the conference began Wednesday on all but seven points in a declaration to move forward the U.N. Habitat Agenda, adopted at a 1996 conference in Istanbul.
But two additional paragraphs submitted by Palestinian supporters at the opening session Wednesday morning turned what would have been a diplomatic cake walk into a grueling marathon.
The two paragraphs called on nations to "emphasize the illegality" of foreign settlements in occupied territories and to cooperate in the repatriation of refugees. The obvious reference to Israeli settlements in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank raised hackles in the Israeli delegation, and sent the negotiations into the United Nations' version of overtime.
Nevertheless, U.N. officials expressed satisfaction at the proceedings and confidence that they would be resolved by some time early Saturday.
"I have been encouraged by what I saw here," said Anna Tibaijuka, director of the U.N. Center for Human Settlements. "The last three days have seen quite a successful international dialogue."
Five years ago in Istanbul, an international agreement dubbed the Habitat Agenda spelled out a plan for attacking urban woes. This week, negotiators from more than 170 nations have been putting the final touches on a conference declaration that reaffirms their commitment to the agenda's principles - adequate housing for all and sustainable development of the world's cities.
Many countries openly admit that they have made little progress in the five years since the Istanbul meeting. More than 1 billion people still lack adequate housing worldwide. Fast-growing slums are common on the outskirts of Asian, African and Latin American cities.
"These social policy actions have failed to reverse the trend toward the deterioration of many urban areas," said Uruguayan housing vice-minister Ricardo Gorosito.
Some observers complained that the latest declaration would do little to help.
"It is one of the weakest texts that I have seen," said Miloon Kothari, an official with the U.N. Commission on Human Rights. "There are no concrete commitments."
Activists accused the United States of watering down the declaration by refusing to allow reaffirmation of adequate housing as a human right. But such a statement is not necessary, U.S. diplomat Michael Snowdon said, because the 1996 Habitat Agenda already commits countries to "the full and progressive realization of the right to adequate housing" and other international agreements protect the right to an adequate standard of living.
Kothari suggested that the U.S. delegation's real motivation was an attempt to avoid legal responsibility for homelessness and racial segregation.
"As an American I would definitely say that my government has been a very difficult voice in the process," said Jan Peterson of the Huairou Commission for Women, Homes & Community, an advocacy group for women worldwide.
But she also expressed happiness with the conference's willingness to hear the views of grass-roots activists.
Many nations will have a difficult time achieving the twin goals of the Habitat Agenda because they lack amenities and rights that citizens of the United States and Western Europe never even think about.
Some slums in Bombay, India, have one toilet for hundreds of people. In some countries half the population is forbidden to own land or inherit property simply because they are women.
 Load-Date: June 9, 2001

 

End of Document
