

Nations vow to fight urban blight and house the poor at U.N. conference
June 9, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 535 words
Byline: By MATT CRENSON, AP National Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Negotiators from more than 170 nations declared victory Saturday in their effort to forge a battle plan against the slums, poverty and unsanitary conditions plaguing cities worldwide.
But their war is far from over. Governments must successfully implement the program they outlined at U.N. headquarters this week if the U.N. Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium is to improve life for the world's 3 billion urbanites.
Even reaching agreement required unusual dedication. More than 150 countries had agreed even before the conference began Wednesday on all but seven points in a declaration to move forward the U.N. Habitat Agenda, adopted at a 1996 conference in Istanbul.
But two additional paragraphs submitted by Palestinian supporters at the opening session Wednesday morning turned what would have been a diplomatic cake walk into a grueling marathon.
The two paragraphs called on nations to "emphasize the illegality" of foreign settlements in occupied territories and to cooperate in the repatriation of refugees. The obvious reference to Israeli settlements in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank raised hackles in the Israeli delegation, and sent the negotiations into the United Nations' version of overtime.
As dawn broke over U.N. headquarters Saturday, the two sides agreed "to take further effective measures … to the realization of the rights of the peoples living under colonial and foreign occupation."
"I have been encouraged by what I saw here," said Anna Tibaijuka, director of the U.N. Center for Human Settlements. "The last three days have seen quite a successful international dialogue."
Five years ago in Istanbul, an international agreement dubbed the Habitat Agenda spelled out a plan for attacking urban woes. This week, negotiators have been putting the final touches on a conference declaration that reaffirms their commitment to the agenda's principles - adequate housing for all and sustainable development of the world's cities.
Many countries openly admit that they have made little progress since the Istanbul meeting. More than 1 billion people still lack adequate housing worldwide. Fast-growing slums are common on the outskirts of Asian, African and Latin American cities.
"These social policy actions have failed to reverse the trend toward the deterioration of many urban areas," said Uruguayan housing vice-minister Ricardo Gorosito.
Some observers complained that the latest declaration would do little to help.
"It is one of the weakest texts that I have seen," said Miloon Kothari, an official with the U.N. Commission on Human Rights. "There are no concrete commitments."
Activists accused the United States of watering down the declaration by refusing to allow reaffirmation of adequate housing as a human right. Kothari suggested the U.S. delegation's real motivation was an attempt to avoid legal responsibility for homelessness and racial segregation.
But U.S. diplomat Michael Snowdon said such a statement is not necessary, because the 1996 Habitat Agenda already commits countries to "the full and progressive realization of the right to adequate housing" and other international agreements protect the right to an adequate standard of living.
 Load-Date: June 10, 2001

 

End of Document
