

New 'freedom rides' call attention to the plight of immigrant workers
The Associated Press
September 23, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 793 words
Byline: By MELANTHIA MITCHELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEATTLE
Body




Suely Ngouy came to the United States as a refugee from war-ravaged Cambodia 20 years ago. Her family struggled to adjust to a new home, a new language and endure unfair labor conditions.
With that history in mind, Ngouy boarded a bus Tuesday, joining some 900 others on a cross-country ride to raise awareness about undocumented immigrants and labor issues in the United States.
"I understand what it's like to be an immigrant struggling with a new culture and new language and learning to assimilate. I want to support the immigrants who struggle, making it easier to live here," said Ngouy, 22, who was born in a refugee camp in Thailand.
Taking a page from the civil rights movement of the 1960s, the Immigrant Workers Freedom Ride kicked off Saturday in 10 cities around the country, with 18 buses making planned stops in more than 100 communities.
Mako Nakagawa, 66, of Seattle, whose father came to the United States from Japan in 1913, said she wanted to ride to support immigrants who are fighting for a better life here.
"This government put my father in a concentration camp for two years," she said. "People are being detained today without being charged. This is so close to what happened to my family in 1942."
Participants want improved workplace protections and recognition of immigrants' civil rights, regardless of their legal status. Buses are leaving from Seattle; Portland, Ore.; San Francisco; Los Angeles; Las Vegas; Houston; Minneapolis; Chicago; Miami; and Boston.
Destinations include Washington, D.C., for meetings with members of Congress on Oct. 1, and New York, where organizers plan an Oct. 4 rally.
"We're trying to bring attention to the whole struggle of having rights, justice on the job. People work hard, there should be justice for everyone," said Bob Gorman, an AFL-CIO spokesman in Seattle.
The freedom rides were criticized by the Federation for American Immigration Reform, which seeks to sharply reduce immigration. It encouraged its supporters to demand that authorities arrest illegal immigrants participating in the freedom rides.
"We think that they fly in the face of the opposition of the vast majority of the American public," said Jack Martin, the organization's special projects director.
David Koff, national spokesman for the freedom rides, said opposition was expected. "This is really the first time immigrants and immigrant rights supporters have stood up and said, 'We want to be heard,"' he said.
At a rally in San Francisco on Saturday, Maria Perla said she left her three young children 14 years ago in El Salvador to come to the United States.
She said she hopes the bus trip will help make it easier for immigrants to stay connected to their families.
"I cry every week when I talk to them on the phone," she said. "I am not prepared to wait another 14 years to be a family again."
The idea for the ride was developed in July 2001 by the Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees International Union. After decades of considering new arrivals as adversaries, many unions now organize even illegal immigrants, whose lower pay and lack of worker protections threaten to reduce standards across the board.
The Urban Institute, a policy research group in Washington, D.C., estimates the number of undocumented immigrants in the United States at 8.5 million, although the number is debated.
Ngouy recalls her father toiling for 11 years in a Los Angeles garment factory where the ventilation was poor, hours were long and the breaks were few. She sees the freedom ride as a way to help bring about changes for those who continue to struggle.
Protection on the job should be a given, she said, but immigrants - even those who have entered the country legally - may not share those rights.
"They're not even treated as human beings, they're treated as animals," said Ngouy, who worked in the garment shop with her father at age 9.
The original Freedom Ride, organized by the Congress of Racial Equality, left Washington on May 4, 1961. Whites and blacks rode together through the South, protesting segregation and facing angry mobs and mass arrests.
Today's freedom riders - representing 17 countries - say they're anticipating more favorable receptions.
"There's always fear when you're raising up an issue that's not on the agenda. But I think their desire for justice gives them courage to overcome the fear," said Kim Bobo, executive director of the National Interfaith Committee for Worker Justice in Chicago.
The cost of the drive is expected to exceed $1 million, with contributions from the AFL-CIO, the Service Employees International Union, United Farmworkers of America and the National Council of La Raza, along with several churches and foundations.
On the Net:
The Immigrant Workers Freedom Ride: http://www.iwfr.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo LA101 of Sept. 22
 Load-Date: September 24, 2003

 

End of Document
