

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
March 15, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1201 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




William Bellano
TUCSON, Ariz. (AP) - William Bellano, former president of Occidental Petroleum Corp., died March 8, his family said. He was 91.
Bellano, a son of Italian immigrants who was orphaned at age 6, was a decorated Marine during World War II and went on to become chief executive of one of the world's largest oil companies.
Bellano worked in Peru's high mountain mines before joining the Marines after the attack on Pearl Harbor, where he volunteered to work in bomb demolitions. He became an expert in the field, receiving a Silver Star in 1944 for gallantry in the Marshall Islands.
He later received two bronze stars for heroism.
Bellano returned to the mining industry after the war and advanced through the corporate world as a miner, engineer and supervisor.
Bellano retired in 1972, but continued as an industrial consultant as well as for members of the U.S. Senate and served on the President's Energy Advisory Council until 1984.
---
Ewald W. Busse
DURHAM, N.C. (AP) - Ewald W. Busse, an early leader in the field of geriatric psychiatry, died March 7, his daughter said. He was 86.
Busse was chairman of the psychiatry department at the Duke Medical School in 1954 when he started a long-term program to study how people aged in familiar surroundings. He recruited healthy people older than the age of 60 for the project and established the Center for Aging and Human Development at Duke in 1957.
The study eventually involved 800 people over 25 years who submitted to rigorous medical and psychological examinations. His findings increased understanding of the physical, mental, social and economic aspects of aging.
Busse was born in St. Louis and graduated from Westminster College in Fulton, Mo., and the Washington University School of Medicine. He was a former president of the American Psychiatric Association, the American Geriatrics Society and the Gerontological Society of America.
He received the highest honor given by the American College of Physicians, the William C. Menninger Award, for his contributions to mental health. He retired from Duke in 1987.
---
John Harrison Goldie
SEATTLE (AP) - John Harrison Goldie, a former Boeing Co. executive vice president and chief engineer on one of the nation's early space programs, died Thursday following a heart attack at his vacation home in Palm Desert, Calif., relatives and friends said. He was 77.
He was hired by Boeing in 1949, worked on a missile program and for years directed the X-20 Dyna Soar project, one of the first U.S. space programs to advance to the contract development stage.
A full-scale mock-up of the space plane, designed to be launched into orbit from a Titan II missile, was produced before the program was canceled in December 1963.
In 1971, Goldie was named to help run Boeing Computer Services but had to slow down following a heart attack in the 1970s and retired from Boeing in 1982.
A native of Detroit, Goldie moved to Seattle with his family as a boy and earned a bachelor's degree in electrical engineering from the University of Washington and a master's degree from the California Institute of Technology.
His book, "R & D Sweepstakes: Winning Government Research and Development Contracts," was published in 1988.
---
James Reed Holton
SEATTLE (AP) - James "Jim" Reed Holton, a University of Washington professor of atmospheric sciences and member of the National Academy of Sciences, died March 3, relatives said. He was 65.
He lectured around the world on climate and weather research and was "a giant in this field," said Dennis Hartmann, a longtime friend and chairman of the school's Atmospheric Sciences Department.
"An Introduction to Dynamic Meteorology," a textbook Holton wrote in 1972, remains a standard at universities worldwide. He also was editor of the six-volume "Encyclopedia of Atmospheric Science."
A native of Pullman, Holton earned an undergraduate degree in physics at Harvard University and doctorate at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
He spent a year in a postdoctoral position at Stockholm University in Sweden before joining the faculty in Seattle.
His research helped to explain wind patterns, weather predictions, climate change and ozone depletion. Over the last 15 years or so most of his research funds were provided by the National Aeronautics and space Administration.
For years Holton also was board president of New Hope Farms in Goldendale, a group home for developmentally disabled adults.
---
Keith Hopkins
LONDON (AP) - Keith Hopkins, a historian who brought an innovative sociological approach to the study of ancient Rome, died March 8, his college said. He was 69.
Born in London in 1934, Morris Keith Hopkins studied classics at King's College, Cambridge, then taught sociology at Leicester University, the London School of Economics, the University of Hong Kong and Brunel University before returning to King's College in 1985.
There he brought his background in sociology to the study of ancient history. Books such as "Conquerors and Slaves" and "Death and Renewal" used sociological techniques, including the study of patterns of behavior and demographic and economic models, in a bid, Hopkins, wrote, "to reveal how Romans thought."
"A World Full of Gods," a study of the rise of Christianity in the Roman Empire, used elements of fiction and reportage to bring the ancient world to life. In the book Hopkins depicted ancient Pompeii through the eyes of two 21st-century time travelers, and scripted a mock television docudrama about a 2,000-year-old Jewish sect.
---
Ustad Vilayat Hussain Khan
CALCUTTA, India (AP) - Ustad Vilayat Hussain Khan, one of India's leading sitar players, died Saturday. He was 76.
Khan died in Bombay's Jaslok Hospital. He had lung cancer, diabetes and hypertension, the Press Trust of India reported.
He was born into a family of musicians who trace their lineage six or seven generations back to the Moghul courts and ultimately to Miyan Tansen, the court musician of the Emperor Akbar of the late 16th century.
Khan was credited with creating his own style of playing sitar, a traditional Indian string instrument popularized worldwide by Ravi Shankar.
He turned down national awards in 1964 and 1968, saying that members of the award committees were not competent to judge his music.
Khan made the United States his second home and was a frequent guest lecturer at Ali Akbar College of Music in San Rafael, Calif., and composed music for films.
Though he told his pupils he was born in 1928, others say he was born as early as 1924.
---
Charles Levendosky
CASPER, Wyo. (AP) - Charles Levendosky, the Casper Star-Tribune's opinion editor for more than two decades, died Sunday after a long battle with cancer. He was 67.
Levendosky helped launch the Star-Tribune's letters section, encouraging writers of all stripes to contribute.
He was a vigorous defender of the First Amendment and devoted many of his weekly columns to that topic.
Syndicated by the New York Times, his work appeared in many newspapers across the country and in the International Herald Tribune.
He also served as the Wyoming State Poet.
Though struggling with his disease the past four years, he continued to write his opinion columns from home, assisted by Dale Eckhardt, his wife.
 Load-Date: March 16, 2004

 

End of Document
