

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
April 27, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1335 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Hasil Adkins
CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) - Rock-a-billy artist Hasil Adkins, a one-man band whose screaming vocals and freestyle approach to rhythm landed a cult following, has died. He was 67.
Adkins' body was found Tuesday at his home, where he lived alone. The cause of death had not been determined but it did not appear to be suspicious.
Known to his fans as The Haze, Adkins struggled for decades to be noticed. In a 2002 interview, he said he mailed out thousands of tapes and records over a 30-year period while fishing for a record deal.
Adkins was the original star of Norton Records, a label built around the primal recordings he produced in his mountain home, beginning in the Eisenhower era.
Adkins, who claimed to have written more than 7,000 songs, first emerged hooting and wailing in the 1950s, only to disappear again. European fans kept the rock-a-billy rage alive, and when the Cramps did an early 1980s remake of Adkins' "She Said," his records suddenly became hot again.
His "Chicken Walk" and "The Hunch" became two short-lived dance fads.
---
Augusto Roa Bastos
ASUNCION, Paraguay (AP) - Augusto Roa Bastos, one of South America's most celebrated novelists whose fictional writings often examined Paraguay's social and political struggles, died Tuesday. He was 88.
Roa Bastos, the 1989 winner of the prestigious Cervantes Prize for Literature in Spanish, suffered complications from surgery following a fall last week in his Asuncion home, authorities said.
A former journalist, poet, and writer of short stories, Roa Bastos is best known for his book "I, The Supreme," a novelized version of the career of Gaspar Rodriguez de Francia, who ruled Paraguay with an iron fist from 1814 until 1840.
Hailed as Paraguay's most important contemporary writer, Roa Bastos lived in exile for 42 years, voluntarily leaving his homeland during political upheaval before returning for good in the mid-1990s.
He returned briefly in 1982, only to be expelled by the government of former dictator Alfredo Stroessner, who had labeled Roa Bastos a "subversive" for his candid writings on Paraguay's political scene. Stroessner's 35-year rule ended in 1989.
An oft-mentioned candidate for the Nobel Prize for Literature, Roa Bastos published more than 20 works of books, poems, plays and screenplays, many of them translated into dozens of languages.
Among them were "El Hijo de Hombre" or "Son of Man", a collection of short stories first published in 1960, and "El Baldio" or "Vagabond", a narrative chronicling the social and political problems plaguing his homeland, one of South America's poorest countries, published in 1966.
In 1992, to mark the 500th anniversary of Columbus' discovery of the Americas, Roa Bastos wrote "Vigilia del Almirante," a novel about the explorer. The work typified the Paraguayan writer's style of adding fictional elements to historical accounts to enrich his stories.
---
Tunney Hunsaker
FAYETTEVILLE, W.Va. (AP) - Tunney Hunsaker, who lost to Muhammad Ali in the boxing great's first professional fight, died Monday. He was 75.
Hunsaker was Fayetteville's police chief when he fought then-Cassius Clay at Louisville's Freedom Hall on Oct. 29, 1960. Hunsaker was a journeyman heavyweight who had fought more than 30 bouts. Clay was 18.
By the end of the sixth and final round, both of Hunsaker's eyes were swollen shut. Clay won by unanimous decision.
Hunsaker won a Golden Gloves title while stationed at Lackland Air Force Base in Texas.
In Hunsaker's final fight in April 1961 in Beckley, Joe "Shotgun" Sheldon of Cleveland landed a 10th-round punch that sent Hunsaker into a coma for nine days and required two operations on his brain.
Hunsaker and Ali stayed in contact throughout the years and Ali attended Hunsaker's police retirement party in Fayetteville.
---
John Marshall
BOSTON (AP) - John K. Marshall, who made dozens of documentary films about the lives of the bushmen of the Kalahari Desert in Africa, died Friday of cancer. He was 72.
Born in Cambridge, Marshall was the son of Laurence Marshall, a founder of Raytheon. He became interested in the bushmen's lives when he joined his father on a research expedition to Africa in 1950.
Using a 16mm camera, he began interviewing the bushmen in what would be the start of a 50-year relationship. His first film about them, "The Hunters," was released in 1957.
Marshall lobbied the Namibian government to make conditions better for the bushmen.
Marshall was also the cameraman for "Titicut Follies," a 1967 expose of the poor conditions at the state psychiatric hospital in Bridgewater.
He was given a lifetime achievement award in 2003 by the Society for Visual Anthropology.
---
Johnny Sample
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Johnny Sample, a defensive back who was on the winning side in two of the NFL's landmark games, died Tuesday. He was 67.
His death was confirmed by Jeff Moran, a spokesman for the medical examiner's office. Details were not immediately available.
Sample had an interception for the New York Jets in their 16-7 upset of the Baltimore Colts in the third Super Bowl in 1969. That game, for which the Jets' Joe Namath "guaranteed" victory, established the old AFL on a par with the NFL after the two leagues had merged.
Earlier, Sample played for the Colts in the 1958 NFL championship game against the New York Giants that is still often described as "The Greatest Game Ever Played." The Colts won 23-17 in overtime.
In all, Sample played 11 seasons for the Colts, Pittsburgh Steelers, Washington Redskins and the Jets. The 1958 title game was as a rookie and the 1969 game was his last.
Known as a fierce hitter from his cornerback position, he had 41 interceptions during his career, returning four for touchdowns, and also returned one punt and one kickoff for a TD.
---
Maria Schell
VIENNA, Austria (AP) - Maria Schell, an icon of the German-speaking film world who also achieved international fame, died Tuesday in her sleep in the town of Preitenegg, Mayor Franz Kogler said Wednesday. She was 79.
Schell, sister of the actor Maximilian Schell, was best known for her role as the enigmatic Grushenka in Richard Brooks' 1958 movie "The Brothers Karamazov." Schell starred in dozens of popular German language films in the 1950s. She later made hundreds of television appearances to become an idol to the postwar generation in Austria, Germany and Switzerland.
Schell was recognized for best actress at the Cannes film festival in 1954 for her portrayal of Helga Reinbeck in "Die Letzte Bruecke" ("The Last Bridge.")
Schell last appeared publicly in February 2002 at a presentation of the film "Meine Schwester Maria" ("My Sister Maria") produced by Maximilian Schell, when she was greeted by minutes-long applause.
Her last years were spent isolated from public view - close associates said she surrounded herself in her home in southern Carinthia province with television sets for video replays of her own favorite starring roles.
---
J.B. Stoner
ATLANTA (AP) - J.B. Stoner, an unrepentant white supremacist and anti-Semite convicted in the civil rights-era bombing of a black church, died Saturday of complications from pneumonia. He was 81.
A Georgia native, Stoner was one of the angriest voices in opposition to the civil rights movement. At age 18, he revived a dormant chapter of the Ku Klux Klan in Chattanooga, Tenn. A few years later he headed the Stoner Christian Anti-Jewish Party.
Stoner was a suspect in the 1958 bombing of Bethel Baptist Church in Birmingham, Ala., but he wasn't indicted until 1977. The church was empty at the time of the bombing.
At his trial, he was convicted in part on the basis of venomous statements he made at the time.
When asked if he made a hateful quotation found in an old newspaper clipping, Stoner replied, "I don't think I said that, but I wish I had." A mostly white jury found him guilty in 90 minutes.
But Stoner appealed the verdict and vanished for several months in 1983 when his appeals ran out. Stoner ultimately turned himself in and served 3 1/2 years in prison before he was paroled in 1986.
 Load-Date: April 28, 2005

 

End of Document
