

Obituaries in the news - Correction Appended
The Associated Press

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1000 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Jose Beyaert
PARIS (AP) - Jose Beyaert, the 1948 Olympic gold medalist in road racing and a longtime coach of Colombia's national team, died Saturday in a hospital where he had been treated for various health problems, his son said. He was 79.
At the 1948 Olympics in London, Beyaert won a bronze medal in the team time trial for France as well as his gold in road racing, a cycling event. He was well-known in Colombia for winning that nation's tour in 1952.
Beyaert stayed in Colombia for most of his life, working as a coach and radio commentator, his son said.
The Beyaert family remained in Colombia until nearly five years ago, when they fled that country's conflict, which pits leftist rebels against right-wing paramilitary factions and government forces.
---
Ghena Dimitrova
SOFIA, Bulgaria (AP) - Bulgarian opera singer Ghena Dimitrova, an internationally renowned soprano with a lyrical voice whose career spanned four decades, died Saturday in a hospital in Milan, Italy, according to the Bulgarian National Opera. She was 64.
Dimitrova studied voice at the Sofia Music Academy and made her professional debut in 1965 as a soprano at Sofia's National Opera.
In subsequent years she performed at Milan's La Scala, the Vienna State Opera, the Paris Opera, Berlin's State Opera, London's Covent Garden and New York's Metropolitan Opera.
When Dimitrova first appeared at the Metropolitan Opera in 1987, it was in the title role of Puccini's "Turandot," a part that requires tremendous vocal power and high notes that can cut through the heavy orchestration.
Dimitrova also will be remembered for her performances in "Aida," "Il Trovatore," "Tosca," "Cavalleria Rusticana," "Manon Lescaut," "Macbeth" and "Othello."
One of the highlights of her career was her appearance as Abigaille in Giuseppe Verdi's "Nabucco."
Dimitrova was considered a national hero in Bulgaria, and the state news agency BTA reported that a fund would be established in her name to support young opera talents.
---
Jim Exon
LINCOLN, Neb. (AP) - Jim Exon, a Democrat who served two terms as governor and three terms in the U.S. Senate for Nebraska, died at a hospital Friday of natural causes, his family said. He was 83.
The broad-shouldered senator, nicknamed "Big Jim," started in the Nebraska Democratic Party as a precinct worker and was its chairman when he made his first bid for public office, winning the governor's election in 1970.
Exon was elected to the Senate in 1978, serving through 1996.
He was the only Nebraskan besides George Norris, the architect of the state's one-house Legislature, to win five consecutive statewide elections.
Exon remained a familiar face on the campaign trail in his later years, throwing his endorsement behind his party's top candidates.
After retiring, Exon served on the Deutch Committee, which was created by Congress to study the threat of weapons of mass destruction. He warned of terrorism in the committee's 1999 report and recommended the creation of a federal agency like the new Department of Homeland Security.
---
Vasco Goncalves
LISBON, Portugal (AP)- Vasco Goncalves, a former prime minister who played a key part in the 1974 April revolution that toppled 30 years of right wing dictatorship in Portugal, died Saturday, the Portuguese government said. He was 83.
Gen. Goncalves was prime minister of four socialist provisional governments between 1974 and 1975 before being ousted by a more moderate wing in late 1975.
A controversial politician, he was responsible for nationalizing banks and insurance companies following the April revolution.
----
Hamilton Naki
CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) - Hamilton Naki, a former gardener who was so skilled in complicated surgery that he helped in the world's first heart transplant - but had to keep his work secret in apartheid South Africa - has died. He was 78.
Naki, a black man who left high school because his family couldn't afford the fees, took his first job at the age of 14, cutting grass at the University of Cape Town. The university, where he worked until his retirement in 1991, announced his May 29 death on its Web site. No cause of death was listed.
In 1954 Naki was promoted to helping care for laboratory animals and progressed from cleaning cages to more advanced lab work after a professor at the university asked him to help anesthetize animals used to train students in surgery.
Dr. Christiaan Barnard asked Naki to be on the backup team in what became the world's first successful heart transplant, in December 1967. It was in violation of the country's laws on racial segregation, which dictated that blacks should not be given medical training, nor have contact with white patients.
---
Curtis Pitts
MIAMI (AP) - Curtis Pitts, who created the popular aerobatic biplane known as the Pitts Special, died Friday of complications from a heart valve replacement, his daughter said. He was 89.
In 1943, Pitts built the first Pitts Special - described by the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum as "revolutionary because of its small size, lightweight, short wingspan, and extreme agility."
Each part of the plane can be broken down and shipped in pieces as a kit, allowing it to be reassembled at home by the owner.
The museum said the Pitts Special is still the most successful and recognized American-built aerobatic design, and it continues to dominate aerobatic competitions.
---
Kenneth Taylor
WHEATON, Ill. (AP) - Kenneth Taylor, the founder of a leading Christian publishing house, died Friday at his home, his son said. He was 88.
Taylor was best known as the creator of The Living Bible, published by his Tyndale House Publishers. The Living Bible, which put scriptures into simple, easy-to-understand English, has sold more than 40 million copies to date, according to a statement from Tyndale.
He founded Tyndale House Publishers in 1962, naming the company after 16th-century Christian reformer William Tyndale, who was burned at the stake for translating the Bible into English.
A cause of death was not given.
Correction



In a June 11 obituary for Vasco Goncalves, The Associated Press reported erroneously that Goncalves was prime minister of four socialist provisional governments after the 1974 revolution. Instead, he was prime minister of four revolutionary provisional governments. The story erroneously reported that Goncalves' Socialists won elections held in April 1975. The Socialists did win but were led by Mario Soares.
Goncalves, a leader of the Movement of the Armed Forces, stood left of the Socialists and was allied with the Communists. He lost power in August 1975 when ousted by moderates in the Movement of the Armed Forces, not a moderate wing of the Socialists as the story incorrectly stated.
*
In obituaries of Hamilton Naki on June 11-12, The Associated Press erroneously reported that Naki helped Dr. Christiaan Barnard perform the world's first heart transplant. This was based on AP articles, including comments from Naki and Barnard, on April 4, 1993, and June 20, 2003.
Doctors from the University of Cape Town say this widely reported story of his involvement in the operation has gone uncorrected since 1993 and is not true. In published letters to leading British medical journals, Prof. David Dent, acting dean of the faculty of health sciences at the University of Cape Town, said Naki was a skilled surgical assistant but was not present at the hospital when the world's first heart transplant was performed in 1967. The university says Naki assisted with the research on animals which lay the groundwork for the transplant. In interviews before Barnard's death, Barnard frequently spoke of Naki's great surgical contribution. Correction-Date: June 21, 2005, Tuesday / August 27, 2005, Saturday
 Load-Date: June 12, 2005

 

End of Document
