

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
August 1, 2004, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1064 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Thelma Kaualulehuaoaiku Sproat Bugbee
HONOLULU (AP) - Thelma Kaualulehuaoaiku Sproat Bugbee, the songwriter known as "Auntie Thelma" who also was one of the few remaining "manaleo," or native speakers of Hawaiian, died July 26, family members said. She was 93.
A retired teacher and social worker, Bugbee co-wrote songs with her close friend, the late "Auntie" Irmgard Aluli. Those songs included "Hana No E Ka 'Oi" and "Ka Waimea Swing."
Months before she died in October 2001, Aluli wrote her last composition in Bugbee's honor.
Bugbee's love of her heritage showed through in her oral histories and in interviews she gave for documentaries about Hawaiian culture, said her daughter, L. Puaala Fisher.
Bugbee was a member of Ahahui Olelo Hawaii, the Hawaiian language professional organization, and also pioneered an early form of what became the Hawaiian studies program.
Her career also included stints as head of psychiatric social work at what was then the territorial mental hospital and teaching at Waimanalo Elementary and Intermediate School.
She also was active with the fledgling Democratic Party of Hawaii 50 years ago and as a legislative liaison for the teachers' union.
---
Ricardo Correoso
MIAMI (AP) - Ricardo Correoso, a music executive who helped oversee marketing and development for record labels in Central America, Venezuela and Miami, died Friday of a heart attack, his family said. He was 57.
Born in Camaguey, Cuba, Correoso came to the United States at age 13. Known by his friends as "Ricky," he began his career in entertainment as a midnight host at a Miami radio station, and later worked at the Diario Las Americas newspaper.
Correoso landed a job at RCA Records and worked for a few other labels before he was called upon to head Sony Music's Central American operations based in Costa Rica.
He moved on to Sony Music Venezuela as managing director before an economic and political crisis there forced him to transfer to Miami as vice president of business development for Latin America for Sony Music International.
Correoso's last executive position was at Universal Music Latino as vice president of marketing.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Sam Edwards, a character actor who made scores of appearances on such TV shows as "Gunsmoke," "Barnaby Jones," "McCloud" and "Happy Days," as well as portraying the town banker on "Little House on the Prairie," has died at age 89.
Edwards, who also appeared on radio and in films, died Wednesday after suffering a heart attack, said his stepson, William Edwards.
Edwards made his stage debut as a baby when his mother, actress Edna Park, held him in her arms during a scene for the play "Tess of the Storm Country."
He appeared on radio with his family in the 1930s in "The Adventures of Sonny and Buddy," in which he played a boy who runs away to join a traveling medicine show, and later as himself in "The Edwards Family," a program that also featured his brother, sister and parents.
He worked regularly in TV into the 1980s, appearing on such shows as "The Streets of San Francisco," "The Dukes of Hazzard," "Wonder Woman," and "Dragnet." On "Little House on the Prairie," he portrayed Mr. Anderson the town banker from 1978 to 1983.
His film credits included "Twelve O'Clock," "Hello Dolly!" and "The Postman Always Rings Twice."
He also supplied the voices for several children's productions and appeared on "Winnie the Pooh" records as Owl and Tigger.
---
Peter Leentjes
MONTEREY, Calif. (AP) - Peter Leentjes, a retired Canadian army officer and authority on international peacekeeping operations, died Wednesday of a heart attack, a family friend said. He was 58.
The Honolulu resident, who had extensive experience in United Nations peacekeeping duties, was in Monterey to participate in a peacekeeping conference.
Leentjes was born in the Netherlands and emigrated with his parents to Ontario, Canada, in 1952. He graduated from the University of Western Ontario in 1967 and was commissioned in the Royal Canadian Armored Corps.
He served in Germany, Cyprus and France, and in 1992 was named operations officer for the multi-national force in Bosnia. In 1995, he was selected to command a new United Nations peacekeeping training unit, which drew officers from the United States, Sweden, Zimbabwe, Italy, Austria and Singapore.
Leentjes retired from the Canadian army in 1999 and moved to Hawaii to work with the Center of Excellence in Disaster Management and Humanitarian Assistance.
For the past four years, he led a team of representatives from non-governmental relief, medical and human rights organizations to Thailand to train U.S., Thai and Singaporean forces in simulated humanitarian operations.
---
Absamat Masaliyev
BISHKEK, Kyrgyzstan (AP) - Absamat Masaliyev, former leader of Kyrgyzstan who headed the Central Asian nation's Communist Party both before and after the Soviet collapse, died Saturday of a heart attack, the government said. He was 71.
In 1985, he became the first secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party in Kyrgyzstan after changes in the Soviet Communist leadership that saw Mikhail Gorbachev take power in Moscow.
He remained in office until 1990 when he lost elections in the country's first-ever presidential elections, as the Soviet republics sought to assert their sovereignty in moves that led the next year to the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
After the election loss, Masaliyev took control of the surviving Communist Party, and in 1995 he won a seat in the upper chamber of parliament representing his southern home region of Osh.
In 2000, he won a lower parliament seat and held that post until his death.
In 1953, he began studies at the Kyrgyz Mining Technical School in southern Kyrgyzstan, and continued in 1956 at Moscow Mining Institute where he earned a degree in mine engineering.
He started his career as a deputy chief engineer at Kyzyl-Kiya mine in southern Kyrgyzstan. In 1961, he became an instructor at the Osh regional branch of the Communist Party and worked his way up the ranks.
---
Randy Waddill
TAMPA, Fla. (AP) - Randy Waddill, a longtime scout who spent the last 12 seasons with the San Francisco Giants, died Friday of hypertensive heart disease, the team said. He was 59.
He was in baseball for 38 years as a player, coach and scout.
Waddill, who pitched in the minor leagues, worked as a scout for Atlanta and Philadelphia before joining San Francisco in 1993.
 Load-Date: August 2, 2004

 

End of Document
