

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
July 28, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1142 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Richard Cushing
MILL VALLEY, Calif. (AP) - Richard Cushing, an Associated Press war correspondent in Asia during World War II and later the head of the Voice of America, has died. He was 87.
Cushing died in his home in Mill Valley on July 23, according to his son Lincoln.
Cushing, who worked for the AP in San Francisco for 15 years, was sent to the Pacific in the final year of World War II as a correspondent in the Philippines and Japan. He and two other correspondents were the first Americans to enter Tokyo when the war ended, Lincoln Cushing said.
He covered the Japanese surrender to General Douglas MacArthur on the deck of the battleship Missouri and then flew to Shanghai, where he reopened the AP bureau.
Cushing was the acting director of the Voice of America in 1968-69, and also served as a foreign service officer in Chile, Cuba, Mexico, Venezuela and Kenya.
Carmine G. De Sapio
NEW YORK (AP) - Carmine G. De Sapio, who revived the once politically powerful Tammany Hall then oversaw its downfall as its last boss, died Tuesday, said his daughter. He was 95.
Tammany Hall, as the Manhattan Democratic Party was once known, had declined precipitously in the 1930s after being a political force for nearly a century.
De Sapio revived Tammany after World War II. He successfully promoted the election of Robert F. Wagner Jr. as mayor in 1953 and W. Averell Harriman as governor in 1954. He became such a power broker that Time magazine put him on its cover.
De Sapio's leadership, however, came under increasing attack from reformers in the Democratic party. He was denounced as corrupt and abandoned by allies. In 1969, he was convicted of petty bribery and later sent to prison.
As Tammany Hall boss, De Sapio pushed a progressive agenda. He supported legislation such as the Fair Employment Practices Law pushed by President Truman and endorsed rent control and lowering the voting age to 18.
---
Fred LaRue
BILOXI, Miss. (AP) - Fred LaRue, a Watergate figure and Nixon administration official who once was rumored to be Deep Throat, died of natural causes. He was 75.
His body was discovered Tuesday in his hotel room, Coroner Gary Hargrove said.
LaRue was known as the "bagman" who delivered payoffs to keep participants in the Watergate break-in quiet. He served 4 1/2 months in federal prison for conspiracy to obstruct justice.
LaRue was special assistant to John Mitchell, the former attorney general who later headed President Nixon's re-election committee.
LaRue was present at a 1972 meeting with Mitchell and Nixon aide Jeb Stuart Magruder at Nixon's home in Key Biscayne, Fla., where the plan to break into the Watergate complex in Washington allegedly was hatched. The building housed Democratic Party headquarters. LaRue said he advised against the burglary.
LaRue discounted rumors that he was Deep Throat, saying the mysterious source for Washington Post reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein on the Watergate story was not one person, but probably a combination of several people.
---
Tom Misczuk
HARTFORD, Conn. (AP) - Tom Misczuk, an Emmy award-winning investigative reporter for WTIC-TV, died Tuesday in his sleep, the station's news director said. He was 48.
Misczuk was a reporter at WTIC for 11 years, covering everything from a scandal involving New Haven's police chief to the attacks on the World Trade Center.
He also worked as a general assignment reporter for stations in Burlington, Vt., Kingston, N.Y., and in Norwalk.
In 1997, Misczuk reported that New Haven Police Chief Nicholas Pastore had fathered an illegitimate child with a prostitute, a story that led to Pastore's resignation. In 2001, the station sent Misczuk to New York City for 10 days to cover the aftermath of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
Misczuk received an Emmy Award for investigative reporting and the New York Film Festival Award for documentary reporting and producing.
---
William A. Mitchell
STOCKTON, Calif. (AP) - William A. Mitchell, the food scientist who invented Pop Rocks candy and discovered a substitute for tapioca, died Monday of congestive heart failure, his daughter said. He was 92.
Mitchell, who worked as a chemist for General Foods Corp. in White Plains, N.Y., for 35 years until his retirement in 1976, held over 70 patents, including inventions related to Cool Whip, quick-set Jell-O Gelatin and the drink mix Tang.
While working briefly for Eastman Kodak Company, Mitchell helped design a chemical process to develop the color green. He developed the tapioca substitute during World War II when tapioca supplies were running low.
Mitchell's most famous invention was Pop Rocks - the exploding candy that became a cultural phenomenon after it hit the market in 1975. He made the discovery accidentally, while trying to design an instant soft drink, when he put some sugar flavoring mixed with carbon dioxide in his mouth.
For years, Mitchell, who patented Pop Rocks in 1956, fought to dispel the myth that the carbonated candy was deadly if eaten while drinking carbonated drinks.
Mitchell moved to Stockton in 1999 after his wife died and developed food products for his daughter's Stockton research company.
---
Joseph Teller
HENDERSON, Nev. (AP) - Joseph Teller, the father of magician Teller and subject of a 2000 memoir by the silent half of the comedy-magic act Penn & Teller, died Friday of cardiac failure, his family said. He was 91.
Teller, who legally dropped his first name, said he loved his father's wry sense of humor.
Joseph Teller and his wife, Irene, were the subject of a 2000 memoir by Teller, their only child. The title is a quote from Joseph Teller, a commercial artist, about their basement clutter: "When I'm Dead This All Will Be Yours!"
The book chronicles Joseph Teller's travels as a teenage hobo, the cartoons he drew on the road and in 1930s- and 1940s-era Philadelphia, and his life with Irene.
Joseph Teller studied art at what is now the Fleischer Art Memorial. The Rosenfeld Gallery hosted a show of Joseph Teller's paintings when he was 88.
---
Irvin Shortess "Shorty" Yeaworth Jr.
MALVERN, Pa. (AP) - Irvin Shortess "Shorty" Yeaworth Jr., who directed the 1958 cult movie "The Blob" and later made hundreds of films with religious and social messages, died July 19 in a car accident in the Middle East. He was 78.
Yeaworth was traveling in Jordan when his vehicle went off the road near Petra, his wife Jean Bruce Yeaworth said.
Yeaworth was completing a major entertainment complex in Jordan called Jordanian Experience at the Aqaba Gateway, which was set to open next month.
He often struggled with his legacy as director of the camp sci-fi classic, much of which was filmed in his Chester County backyard.
But fan adoration of the film endured. Last week, the annual "BlobFest" tribute was held at Phoenixville's Colonial Theatre where a scene was filmed of moviegoers screaming and fleeing the phlegmatic monster.
 Load-Date: July 29, 2004

 

End of Document
