

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
May 31, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 856 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Martin Durkan Sr.
SEATTLE (AP) - Former state Sen. Martin Durkan Sr., a longtime political powerhouse in Washington state, died Sunday at Maui Memorial Medical Center in Hawaii, where he and his wife had a vacation home, relatives said. He was 81.
Durkan, a Democrat who was conservative on social issues but liberal on environmental and economic matters, had been in failing health for some time.
After a two-year term in the state House, he spent 18 years in the state Senate starting in 1958 and was chairman of the budget-writing Senate Ways and Means Committee in the late 1960s.
He helped to write some of the early state legislation on oil spills and sponsored the bill that established the state Ecology Department.
Durkan voted against the Equal Rights Amendment, but on labor and economic issues was known for caring about the disadvantaged and forgotten.
Durkan ran for governor in 1968 and 1972, but lost both times in the Democratic primary and met the same fate when he ran for Congress in 1977.
---
Shirley Eder
DETROIT (AP) - Shirley Eder, a longtime Detroit Free Press reporter whose journalistic coups included interviews with the likes of Brigitte Bardot and Bob Dylan, died Saturday from complications of Alzheimer's disease at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, the paper reported. She was 85.
She began writing a regular column for the Free Press in the 1960s after moving to Detroit with her husband and kept it up until 1993. After retiring, she wrote for other newspapers as well as women's and celebrity magazines. She returned to New York following her husband's death in 2003.
Known for her nonconfrontational style, Eder recounted her adventures - including visits to Vietnam with Bob Hope and trips to the Pyramids with Frank Sinatra - in a 1973 book called "Not This Time, Cary Grant."
When Free Press colleagues had trouble finding former President Gerald Ford for a 1981 story about the opening of his library in Grand Rapids, Eder phoned his guest - Hope - and asked him to hand the phone to the former president.
---
Don McGaffin
SEATTLE (AP) - Don McGaffin, a TV newsman known by friends and colleagues as a fearless "reporter's reporter," died Sunday after a fall in his home. He was 78.
McGaffin worked as a reporter, commentator and consumer advocate for KING Television, the local NBC affiliate, in the 1970s and early '80s. He played a key part in what many recall as the heyday of broadcast news in Seattle.
In the late 1970s, he traveled to El Salvador with his cameraman, Randy Partin, to cover the war for KING-TV. The two survived capture by local rebels who snagged them while they were interviewing residents in a bombed-out area.
In Seattle, McGaffin's consumer reporting led to regulations on flammability in children's pajamas, and he exposed the capture and killing of orcas for aquarium displays.
---
George Rochberg
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Composer George Rochberg, credited with some of the more emotionally visceral pieces of the late 20th century, died of complications following May 2 surgery. He was 86.
His wife, Gene, said he died peacefully Sunday at Bryn Mawr Hospital.
Rochberg began composing in the footsteps of modernists but eventually found their music "gray and dull" and moved to a more expressive mode attacked by avant-garde intellectuals.
While some found his multiplicity bewildering, others, such as James Freeman, founder of Orchestra 2001, found it "some of the most extraordinary music I had heard, mind-bending and certainly trendsetting."
One of the most successful composers of the 1970s and '80s, Rochberg's Violin Concerto was performed 47 times by Isaac Stern from 1975 through 1977, his Symphony No. 5 was premiered in 1986 by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, and his Concerto for Clarinet and Orchestra was premiered in 1996 by the Philadelphia Orchestra.
Seven string quartets, six symphonies and a full-length opera, "The Confidence Man," were among his nearly 100 published works.
Born in Paterson, N.J., Rochberg was educated at Mannes School of Music in New York. He taught at the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia, and at the University of Pennsylvania from 1960 to 1983, and continued composing into the late 1990s following his retirement from Penn.
---
Herbert Warren Wind
Herbert Warren Wind, the writer who coined the term "Amen Corner" at Augusta National, died of pneumonia at a nursing facility Monday, his family said. He was 88.
Wind, a master of exquisite golf prose for more than four decades, was renowned for his lengthy profiles during two stints with The New Yorker (1948-53, 1960-90) and for Sports Illustrated (1954-60).
The Masters was an annual stop for Wind, who traveled the world profiling the legendary players and moments in the sport. While working for Sports Illustrated in 1958, he dubbed the 11th, 12th and 13th holes at Augusta National as "Amen Corner."
He was on a first-name basis with the legends of the game: Bobby Jones, Sam Snead, Gene Sarazen, Nicklaus and Ben Hogan.
Wind considered Hogan the best player ever, and teamed with him to write the still-popular instruction book "Five Lessons: The Modern Fundamentals of Golf."
 Load-Date: June 1, 2005

 

End of Document
