

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
April 11, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 823 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Andrea Dworkin
NEW YORK (AP) - Andrea Dworkin, a feminist who viewed pornography as a violation of women's civil rights and a direct cause of rape and violence, died Saturday, her agent and family said Monday. She was 58.
Dworkin died at her home in Washington, D.C., said John Stoltenberg, who married Dworkin in 1998 after living with her for three decades. She had been ill several years, and suffered from ailments including osteoarthritis.
Dworkin's first book, "Woman Hating," published when she was 27, launched her lifelong advocacy on the ways pornography harms women. She campaigned frequently on the subject, helping to draft a 1983 law that defined pornography as a civil rights violation against women, her agent, Elaine Markson, said in a statement.
The law was inspired by the case of Linda Marchiano, who as Linda Lovelace appeared in the pornographic film "Deep Throat," the statement noted.
Dworkin, originally from Camden, N.J., wrote more than a dozen books, including "Scapegoat: The Jews, Israel, and Women's Liberation," which won the American Book Award in 2001. She was working on a book with the working title "Writing America: How Novelists Invented and Gendered a Nation," when she died, Stoltenberg said.
---
Maurice Hilleman
TRENTON, N.J. (AP) - Maurice Hilleman, a pioneer in vaccine research who helped develop vaccines for mumps, measles, chicken pox and other childhood diseases, died Monday of cancer. He was 85.
Hilleman worked for Merck & Co. Inc., based in Whitehouse Station, for nearly 30 years before retiring in 1984 as senior vice president of Merck Research Labs in West Point, Pa., the pharmaceutical giant said.
Over his career, he led or began the development of vaccines against diseases that once killed or hospitalized millions, including measles, German measles, meningitis, pneumonia and hepatitis A and B. He began work on the mumps vaccine after his daughter developed the illness at age 5 in 1963.
Hilleman joined Merck in 1957 as head of its new virus and cell biology research department, after a decade as chief of respiratory diseases at Walter Reed Army Institute of Research.
Hilleman was a longtime adviser to the World Health Organization, the U.S. National Vaccine Program and the National Institutes of Health's Office of AIDS Research Program Evaluation. He was a member of several prestigious scientific groups, including the U.S. National Academy of Science, and was awarded the National Medal of Science by President Reagan in July 1988.
---
Archbishop Geron Iakovos
STAMFORD, Conn, (AP) - Archbishop Geron Iakovos, the spiritual leader of the Greek Orthodox Church of North and South America for 37 years until his retirement in 1996, died Sunday. He was 93.
Iakovos died at Stamford Hospital from a pulmonary ailment, according to the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America.
"I have had the great honor and joy to know Archbishop Iakovos for more than fifty years. He has been a superb archbishop who offered to the church an intense, continuous, multifaceted and creative pastoral activity," Archbishop Demetrios, Primate of the Greek Orthodox Church in America, said in a statement.
Iakovos marched with the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. in Selma, Ala., and received a Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Carter in 1980. In 1959, he became the first Greek Orthodox emissary in more than 400 years to meet with a Roman Catholic pope, Pope John XXIII.
A former president of the World Council of Churches, Iakovos was regarded as a dean of religious leaders in the United States.
Born on the island of Imbros, Turkey, and ordained a priest in Lowell, Mass., in 1940, Iakovos became a bishop in 1955 and was elevated to the title of metropolitan in 1956. He became archbishop of the Americas in 1950.
---
Thomas F. Kinder Sr.
CINCINNATI (AP) - Thomas F. Kinder Sr., the Cincinnati Bengals' only public address announcer since their inception in 1968, died Sunday. He was 78.
Family members said he suffered complications from a recent surgery.
Kinder met Bengals founder Paul Brown while stationed at a naval base near Chicago, where Brown was the head football coach. Brown sought out Kinder to be the Bengals' public address announcer when the team started play.
Unlike most stadium public address announcers, Kinder preferred to work from the sideline rather than the press box.
---
Curtis Rochelle
CHEYENNE, Wyo. (AP) - Curtis Rochelle, a rancher, businessman and philanthropist who was perhaps the biggest individual donor to the University of Wyoming, died Saturday in Phoenix. He was 89.
Rochelle herded sheep to earn money for college and graduated from the University of Wyoming with a degree in agriculture in 1941.
University of Wyoming president Philip L. Dubois called Rochelle and his wife Marian "the most generous donors to the university in its 119 year history," citing more than $6.6 million in gifts, including an endowed chair in animal science and a landscape endowment.
---
 Load-Date: April 12, 2005

 

End of Document
