

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
August 17, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1274 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Constance Bannister
WOODBURY, N.Y. (AP) - Constance Bannister, whose photographs of babies for calendars, advertisements and books reached a worldwide audience in the 1940s and 1950s, died Wednesday of natural causes at a nursing home, her daughter, Lynda Hatcher, said. She was 92.
Bannister, who lived in Laurel Hollow on Long Island, was the second of 17 children and was inspired toward baby pictures by her 15 younger siblings, Hatcher said.
Bannister claimed she had more than 100,000 shots of babies, her daughter said.
Many of the photos were published in humor books, paired with amusing captions written by Bannister to fit the baby's expression. For example, in "We Were Spies Behind The Iron Curtain," a book satirizing the Soviet Union, a bare-bottomed baby looks over its shoulder and says, "latest five-year plan is a little behind."
Born Constance Louise Gibbs in 1913 in Ashland City, Tenn., Bannister came to New York City as a teenager and studied photography after receiving a camera from a boyfriend. Her first job was with The Associated Press, where she earned $40 a week as a society photographer in Palm Beach, Fla., in 1937 and 1938.
She returned to New York, opened a studio on Central Park South and became a photographer of Broadway plays, ballet companies and the Ice Capades.
Bannister gradually focused on babies, and "Bannister Babies" helped sell war bonds for World War II. The books of babies and captions sold well and were featured on several television shows.
The books often focused on a topical subject as in "Senator, I'm Glad You Asked Me That," a political satire.
---
Ellsworth Culver
PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) - Ellsworth Culver, co-founder and senior vice president of the Mercy Corps humanitarian organization, died Monday of complications following cancer surgery, the group said. He was 78.
Culver and partner Dan O'Neill established Mercy Corps in 1982. For the next decade, Culver oversaw the organization's expansion of international relief and development programs into Africa, Asia and Central America. It is now a $173 million-a-year operation that reaches people in 35 countries.
Early in his career, Culver moved to Taiwan and then the Philippines, starting Overseas Crusades, a church-related service organization. He became executive vice president of World Vision International in 1958, later running a public relations firm and managing organizations that included Food for the Hungry, International.
During the civil rights struggle, he designed and ran Involvement Corps, which formed corporate-employee task forces to work on inner-city projects.
---
Armand Deutsch
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Armand Deutsch, a film producer for Metro Goldwyn Mayer and a member of the Presidential Task Force on the Arts and Humanities, died Saturday of complications from pneumonia at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, according to his grandson, Donald Granger. He was 92.
Deutsch came to Hollywood in the mid-1940s and produced a number of films, including "Ambush," "The Magnificent Yankee" and "Carbine Williams," starring James Stewart.
He and his wife, Harriet, also struck a lasting friendship with former actor Ronald Reagan and his wife, Nancy. Deutsch was appointed to the arts and humanities task force by President Reagan in 1981.
Deutsch later wrote a memoir called "Me and Bogie, and Other Friends and Acquaintances From a Life in Hollywood and Beyond."
---
Bruce Dortin
ATLANTA (AP) - Bruce Dortin, an award-winning journalist who was a long-time presence on Atlanta radio, died Monday of apparent natural causes, according to the Fulton County medical examiner's office. He was 62.
Dortin covered news all over the world as a broadcaster in the U.S. Air Force. During the Cold War, he anchored television broadcasts that went out every evening to West Berlin.
For the past five years, Dortin was a business and general assignment reporter for WABE, the National Public Radio affiliate in Atlanta. He was news director at Georgia's Peach State Public Radio in the mid-1990s, and before that at KUHF, the NPR station in Houston.
Dortin also was part of a team honored for "Best Documentary" by the Society of Professional Journalists and the Atlanta Association of Black Journalists.
---
James Dougherty
LEWISTON, Maine (AP) - James Dougherty, a retired Los Angeles detective who was the first man to marry Norma Jeane Baker - before she went off to Hollywood and took the name Marilyn Monroe - died Monday of complications of leukemia, in San Rafael, Calif., his stepdaughter, Annie Woods of Sabattus, told the Sun-Journal of Lewiston. He was 84.
Dougherty married Baker in 1942, before he went to sea as a merchant mariner. She was 16 at the time.
Baker set out to pursue a Hollywood career while Dougherty was gone, and the two were divorced in 1946. Dougherty remarried twice.
Dougherty worked for the Los Angeles police department for 25 years, serving as a detective and training the department's first Special Weapons and Tactics group. After his retirement in 1974, he moved to Arizona and later to Maine, living in the small town of Sabattus.
Dougherty refused for years to talk about his time with Monroe, but after his second divorce he was more comfortable with the subject. In 1997, Dougherty wrote a book titled "To Norma Jeane with Love, Jimmie."
---
John McLaughlin
MORRIS TOWNSHIP, N.J. (AP) - John McLaughlin, a longtime political columnist, died Wednesday at his home after a battle with cancer and Parkinson's disease. He was 70.
McLaughlin, a native of Philadelphia, worked for newspapers in Pennsylvania, New York and New Jersey, spending the last 24 years of his career at the Star-Ledger of Newark.
In the late 1970s, McLaughlin was chief political correspondent for the New York Daily News, covering the foibles of mayors, governors and presidents.
He joined the Star-Ledger in 1981, writing the "New York, New York" column for many years before returning to cover the New Jersey political scene in 1995.
McLaughlin also gained recognition for his "Lanes of Pain" columns in 1998, which showed that the state's touted high-occupancy vehicle lanes made traffic and pollution worse, not better.
---
Viki Moscholiou
ATHENS, Greece (AP) - Singer Viki Moscholiou, whose hoarse voice became a trademark of popular Greek music in the 1960s, died Tuesday of cancer at a hospital. She was 62.
Officials at private Ygeia Hospital in Athens confirmed Moscholiou's death and said she had suffered from cancer for two years.
"We grieve the loss of one of the greatest representatives of Greek music," Prime Minister Costas Caramanlis said in a statement. "Throughout her life, she showed great courage and determination."
---
Esther Wong
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Esther Wong, who booked a who's who of punk rock and new wave bands at her popular Madame Wong's clubs in the 1970s and '80s, died Sunday at her Los Angeles home, her daughter, Melinda Braun, said Wednesday. She had suffered from emphysema and cancer. She was 88.
Wong, who earned the nickname the "godmother of punk," showcased such popular groups as the Police, X, the Go-Gos, Oingo Boingo, the Motels, the Knack, the Textones and Plane English early in their careers, giving many groups their first major break.
As her clubs flourished, Wong quickly became known as a no-nonsense proprietor. She once halted a performance by the Ramones until the band members left the stage and cleaned up the graffiti they had put on a bathroom wall. She rarely booked female singers, calling them "no good, always trouble," and she was known to go into the audience to try to sniff out marijuana smokers.
She closed the original Madame Wong's in 1985 and Madame Wong's West in 1991.
 Load-Date: August 18, 2005

 

End of Document
