

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
September 1, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 885 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Ernesta Drinker Ballard
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Ernesta Drinker Ballard, a founding member of the National Organization for Women and a horticulturist who helped build the Philadelphia Flower Show into a world-renowned event, has died. She was 85.
Ballard died of complications following a stroke on Aug. 11, her family said.
Heavily involved in feminist and civic causes, Ballard marched on Washington, lobbied for the Equal Rights Amendment, and raised money for female candidates.
She also was a founding member of the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, and was chairwoman of NARAL from 1989 to 1991.
Ballard closed a thriving horticultural business in 1964 to head the Pennsylvania Horticultural Society and supervise its annual extravaganza, the Philadelphia Flower Show, expanding the organization from four staffers to more than 100.
---
Rabbi Balfour Brickner
NEW YORK (AP) - Rabbi Balfour Brickner, an activist and rabbi emeritus of the Stephen Wise Free Synagogue, died Monday. He was 78.
Brickner died of lung cancer at Mount Sinai Hospital.
Brickner was the former host of a nationally syndicated radio program, "Adventures in Judaism," and appeared regularly on local and national radio and television programs.
For more than half a century, Brickner was an activist in the civil rights movement, protested the Vietnam War and supported a woman's right to an abortion, founding a group called Religious Leaders for a Free Choice.
A supporter of the state of Israel, he was named for Lord Balfour and the Balfour Declaration, in which Britain supported a Jewish homeland in Palestine. Brickner was a published author of books, pamphlets and newspaper columns. His books included "Searching the Prophets for Values."
---
Cecily Brownstone
NEW YORK (AP) - Cecily Brownstone, who wrote cookbooks and twice-a-week feature articles on food for The Associated Press for 39 years, died Tuesday. She was 96.
She died at St. Vincent's Hospital, said a nephew, author Jonathan Ned Katz. The immediate cause was pneumonia.
Brownstone became interested in food at an early age and devoted most of her life to writing about it, becoming a leading figure in New York's circle of cookbook authors and restaurant critics and one of the nation's most widely published food writers.
Her close friends in the field included Irma Rombauer and Marion Rombauer Becker, authors of the "Joy of Cooking" books.
From 1947 until she retired in 1986, Brownstone churned out two columns on cuisine and five recipes a week for the AP, an estimated 14,200 articles.
She also was food editor of Parents magazine and child care editor of Family Circle magazine. Her own cookbooks included "Cecily Brownstone's Associated Press Cookbook" and "Classic Cakes and Other Great Cuisinart Desserts," co-authored with Carl Sontheimer, founder of the Cuisinart company.
---
Rafael Cabrices
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - Rafael Cabrices, a militant backer of Venezuelan leader Hugo Chavez who became a political symbol after he was caught on video firing a handgun at unseen enemies shortly before a 2002 coup, died Tuesday of a heart attack. He was 60.
Chavez eulogized Cabrices on Wednesday, a day after his death, saying he was "a good revolutionary."
To some other Venezuelans, Cabrices was one of the "gunmen of Llaguno Bridge" in Caracas, who fired from that spot during a protest by opposition marchers demanding Chavez's resignation.
Chavez was driven from office shortly after that April 11, 2002, protest, but within two days was restored to power with the help of loyalist military officers.
Images of Cabrices firing from the bridge were repeatedly played by Venezuelan television stations in the days of the coup.
The opposition said they showed Chavez's loyalists were firing on protesters. Many government supporters said Cabrices and the others were firing in defense against opposition-allied police officers.
Cabrices and three other Venezuelans were imprisoned after the shootings on suspicion of intentional homicide. An appeals court absolved them, ruling they were acting in self-defense against police firing indiscriminately at pro-government protesters.
---
Joseph Rotblat
LONDON (AP) - Joseph Rotblat, who was the only scientist to resign from the Manhattan Project and later received the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to rid the world of atomic weapons, died Wednesday. He was 96.
Rotblat and the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs, the group he founded to promote nuclear disarmament, received the prestigious prize in 1995.
Rotblat died in his sleep in London.
His penchant for holding science accountable began early in his career, when he was a part of the Manhattan Project that was seeking to build an atomic bomb. He resigned from the project after it became clear that Germany was not developing its own nuclear weapon.
On July 9, 1955, Rotblat and 10 other scientists, including Albert Einstein, Bertrand Russell, Frederic Joliot-Curie and 1962 Nobel peace laureate Linus Pauling, issued a manifesto in London declaring that researchers must take responsibility for their creations, such as the atomic bomb.
Rotblat's other honors included a knighthood in 1998, the Albert Einstein Peace Prize in 1992, the Copernicus Medal of the Polish Academy of Scientists in 1996, and the Jamnalal Bajaj Peace Award in 1999.
 Load-Date: September 2, 2005

 

End of Document
