

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
February 24, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 934 words
Body




Pedro Bloch
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Brazilian playwright Pedro Bloch, who was also a physician and author of 100 books, died Monday, his family said. He was 89.
Bloch died of a lung disorder at his Rio de Janeiro home, his family said Tuesday.
Known mainly as a playwright, Bloch was the first Brazilian of his generation with a play on Broadway, with the 1952 production of "Conscience." He wrote 20 other plays, one of which - "The Hands of Eurydice" - was translated into a dozen languages and performed in 40 countries.
Many of his dramatic works were monologues, often dealing with the psychological isolation of modern life.
In all he published more than 100 works, ranging from drama to speech theory and children's stories.
---
Randolph Crossley
MONTEREY, Calif. (AP) - Former Hawaii businessman and Republican gubernatorial candidate Randolph Crossley died Monday, family members said. He was 99.
Crossley and his wife, Florence, went to Hawaii in 1929 and started several businesses, including Hawaiian Tuna Packers, and later, Hawaiian Fruit Packers.
In 1953, President Eisenhower nominated Crossley for governor of the Territory of Hawaii, but political infighting in the Senate led to withdrawal of the nomination. Hawaii became a state in 1959.
Crossley ran for governor in 1966 and 1974 but came up short both times.
---
Jenkin Lloyd Jones Sr.
TULSA, Okla. (AP) - Jenkin Lloyd Jones Sr., former editor and publisher of the now-defunct Tulsa Tribune, died Tuesday, his family said. He was 92.
Jones, also a syndicated columnist, died at his Tulsa home, said his son, David Jones.
Jones began working for the afternoon daily, which was owned and published by his father, in 1933 as a reporter.
He served as the paper's editor from 1941 to 1988 and was publisher until 1991. The paper folded the following year after a 51-year joint operating agreement with the morning Tulsa World collapsed.
Jones was president of the American Society of Newspaper Editors in 1956 and was elected to the Oklahoma Journalism Hall of Fame in 1972. Jones was also president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce in 1969.
His Saturday column, written from a moderately conservative perspective, appeared in more than 100 papers nationwide, his family said.
As a reporter, Jones covered the Nuremberg Trials and interviewed the missionary Albert Schweitzer in Africa.
---
Norval Morris
CHICAGO (AP) - Norval Morris, a former dean of the University of Chicago Law School and internationally recognized expert on criminal justice and prison reform, died Saturday, the university said. He was 80.
Morris died at Chicago's Mercy Hospital shortly after collapsing at a restaurant, the school said.
Morris, a professor of law and criminology, wrote extensively about criminal justice reform, worked with the United Nations on issues involving the treatment of criminals, and advocated education and training programs for prison inmates.
Morris directed the university's Center for Studies in Criminal Justice from 1965-75 and served as dean from 1975-78.
Morris was born in Auckland, New Zealand, and graduated from Melbourne University and London University. He also was a visiting professor at several U.S. universities, including Harvard Law School.
---
Frederick Booker Noe II
BARDSTOWN, Ky. (AP) - Frederick Booker Noe II, overseer of the bourbon that is the namesake of his grandfather, Jim Beam, died Tuesday. He was 74.
Noe died at his home in Bardstown after an extended illness, according to a statement from Jim Beam Brands Co.
Noe entered the family business in 1950 as an assistant distiller. He directed the production and aging of bourbon at the Jim Beam distillery in Boston, Ky., and later in neighboring Clermont.
He was named master distiller in 1965 and oversaw production of Jim Beam Bourbon, and production increased twelve-fold during his tenure, according to the company's statement.
The company named one of its brands after Noe, Booker's Bourbon, which was billed as the world's only straight-from-the-barrel bourbon.
Noe retired in 1992 as "master distiller emeritus." Three years later, the company honored him by placing his photo on the bottle labels alongside the family distillers who preceded him.
---
David Pinkston
COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. (AP) - David "Pappy Dave Stone" Pinkston, a founder of what is believed to be one of the first all-country music radio stations, has died. He was 90.
Pinkston died Feb. 18 in Colorado Springs, where he lived, family members said.
Noting the popularity of country music shows, he and friend Leroy Elmore launched KDAV in 1953 as a full-time country music station, said his son, James Pinkston. He also opened a country music club.
Pinkston is credited with helping the careers of Buddy Holly, Loretta Lynn and Waylon Jennings, who was one of his disc jockeys, according to Pinkston's family and the Country Music DJ Hall of Fame.
Pinkston also was a DJ on KPIK in Colorado Springs in the 1960s.
---
Thomas Soffron
BOSTON (AP) - Thomas Soffron, a clam digger and entrepreneur who created the "clam strips" that brought low-priced fried clams to restaurants nationwide, died Saturday, the Boston Globe reported. He was 96.
Soffron and three siblings owned the Soffron Brothers Clam Co. in Ipswich, which once had an exclusive deal to provide clam strips to the Howard Johnson's restaurant chain for their "Tendersweet Fried Clams."
The clam strips were made from hard-shelled sea clams dredged from the ocean bottom offshore, and traveled better than soft shell clams dug by hand closer to shore.
Thomas Soffron and his brother once operated seven processing plants from Maryland to Nova Scotia.
 Load-Date: February 25, 2004

 

End of Document
