

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
March 6, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1273 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Harold Brooks-Baker
LONDON (AP) - Harold Brooks-Baker, publisher of the aristocratic genealogy guide Burke's Peerage and a much-quoted authority on royalty, died Saturday, friends and family said. He was 71.
The American-born Brooks-Baker was a lifelong sufferer of polio and had never fully recovered from a fall last year.
In a 2004 interview with The Associated Press, before the wedding of Prince Charles and Camilla Parker Bowles was announced, Brooks-Baker discussed the increasing number of European royals who were marrying commoners.
On the completion of his studies at Trinity College in Connecticut and Harvard Law School, Brooks-Baker took a job with the Washington Observer as a reporter.
After working as a bonds dealer in Paris and Geneva, he came to London, where he headed up a business group that took over Debrett's Peerage & Baronetage - publishers of a guide to royal lineage.
He left Debrett's and transferred to Burke's Peerage, where he became publishing director and developed the company's blue blood genealogy service.
He was quoted extensively in British and foreign press, most recently providing comment on the forthcoming marriage of Prince Charles and Parker Bowles and the royal ancestry of Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry.
---
Sergiu Comissiona
OKLAHOMA CITY (AP) - Sergiu Comissiona, the Romanian-born conductor known for the spontaneity and flair that he brought to orchestras in more than 25 countries, died of an apparent heart attack Saturday, officials said. He was 76.
He died hours before he was to serve as guest conductor for Oklahoma City's philharmonic.
Comissiona held music directorships with some of North America's leading ensembles, including the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra, the Houston Symphony and the Vancouver Symphony. He also was music director of the New York City Opera.
Comissiona became principal conductor of the Romanian State Opera in his early 20s.
After communists took over Romania in 1945, Comissiona emigrated to Israel in the 1950s. He was music director of the Haifa, Israel, Symphony from 1960-66; of the Goteborg, Sweden, Symphony from 1966-77; and chief conductor of the Radio Philharmonic in Hilversum, Holland, starting in 1982.
Comissiona and his wife, the former Robinne Florin, became American citizens at Fort McHenry in Baltimore Harbor on July 4, 1976.
In recent years, he was conductor laureate of the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra and music director of the Asian Youth Orchestra.
In the United States, Comissiona spent 15 years with the Baltimore orchestra, transforming it from a little-known ensemble into a nationally respected orchestra. He led the symphony on its first international tour and was at the helm when it made its first recordings.
---
Gladys Marin
SANTIAGO, Chile (AP) - Gladys Marin, the combative leader of the Chilean Communist Party who became a symbol of resistance against the dictatorship of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, died Sunday after suffering from brain cancer for more than a year, the party announced. She was 63.
After she went into hiding, the party ordered her to seek asylum at the Dutch Embassy. While there, she saw her husband, Jorge Munoz, for the last time, as he walked slowly in front of the embassy. Months later, Munoz was arrested by Pinochet's security service and never seen again. The couple had two children.
An implacable foe of Pinochet's 1973-90 dictatorship, Marin was one of the leaders of the first large protests against Pinochet in the 1980s, often facing the police tear gas and water cannons in the streets.
In 1998, she filed the first lawsuit against Pinochet for human rights violations during his regime, starting the former dictator's legal troubles, which include two indictments and house arrest.
Marin was elected to congress for three consecutive terms before the 1973 coup in which Pinochet toppled Marxist President Salvador Allende. Marin remained a dedicated communist and refused to support the center-left civilian governments that succeeded Pinochet in 1990.
---
Trude Rittmann
LEXINGTON, Mass. (AP) - Trude Rittmann, dance and vocal arranger for such Broadway giants as Rodgers and Hammerstein, Lerner and Loewe, Irving Berlin, Jule Styne, Jerome Robbins, and Agnes de Mille, died Feb. 22 of respiratory failure, family friends said. She was 96.
During her career, she was entrusted by composers and choreographers to create dance and/or vocal arrangements for such legendary musicals as "Carousel," "South Pacific," "The King and I," "My Fair Lady," "Brigadoon," "Finian's Rainbow," "Gentlemen Prefer Blondes," "Peter Pan," "Camelot" and "The Sound of Music."
Born in Mannheim, Germany in 1908, Rittmann immigrated to the United States in 1937, where she was hired by Lincoln Kirstein as a concert accompanist and pianist for George Balanchine's American Ballet Caravan, the precursor to the New York City Ballet.
As musical director for the troupe, she worked with such composers as Aaron Copland, Elliott Carter, Virgil Thomson, Leonard Bernstein and Marc Blitzstein.
In 1941, Rittmann became a concert accompanist for de Mille, who invited her to be dance arranger for the 1943 Kurt Weill musical "One Touch of Venus," which de Mille choreographed.
Rittmann also composed music for television programs as well as several original ballets.
---
David Sheppard
LONDON (AP) - David Sheppard, the former Anglican Bishop of Liverpool and an ex-captain of England's cricket team, died at his home Saturday of bowel cancer, a spokesman for his diocese said. He was 75.
Sheppard served as Liverpool's bishop from 1975 to 1997.
Sheppard was ordained in 1955 and initially served as a curate of St. Mary's Church in Islington, then a deprived area of north London.
In 1969, he was appointed Bishop of Woolwich, another disadvantaged district in southeast London, where he served for six years before moving to Liverpool in northwest England.
Sheppard also had a noteworthy career as a cricketer. He played for Sussex County before graduating to the England team, which he captained in 1954. He ended his international cricketing career in 1963.
He became influential in the Church of England's response to the problems of Britain's run-down inner cities and was made a life peer in 1998, becoming Baron Sheppard of Liverpool.
---
Chuck Thompson
BALTIMORE (AP) - Hall of Fame broadcaster Chuck Thompson, whose deep voice and enthusiasm for the job entertained Baltimore sports fans for more than 50 years, died Sunday after suffering a massive stroke, hospital officials said. He was 83.
Thompson called Baltimore Orioles games for the better part of five decades and served 30 years as the play-by-play announcer of the Baltimore Colts. He took pride in his professional approach to the job but never apologized for an obvious bias toward the home team.
When the Orioles got a clutch home run or the Colts scored a pivotal touchdown, Thompson would often exclaim on the air, "Ain't the beer cold!" That phrase became the title of his autobiography, published in 1996.
Thompson was 71 when named the 1993 recipient of the Hall of Fame's Ford C. Frick Award for broadcasting, but the ceremony in Cooperstown did not mark his retirement. He continued to call up to 25 Orioles games per season through the end of the decade.
Thompson began his run in Baltimore in 1949 as radio announcer with the city's International League franchise and joined the Orioles in 1955, a season after the St. Louis Browns moved to Baltimore. He came aboard following a handshake agreement with Orioles owner Jerry Hoffberger.
Thompson left the position after the 1956 season to broadcast Washington Senators' games and rejoined the Orioles in 1961.
 Load-Date: March 7, 2005

 

End of Document
