

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
October 25, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1215 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Maurice Carter
GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. (AP) - Maurice Carter, who spent 28 years behind bars for shooting a police officer before his life sentence was commuted for medical reasons, died Sunday. He was 60.
Carter died of complications from hepatitis C and liver damage, said a friend, Doug Tjapkes.
Carter was released from prison three months ago and had hoped to receive a liver transplant. He was hospitalized four times after his release, Tjapkes said.
Tjapkes, who led the effort to free Carter, said he will continue to try and clear his name. Carter had maintained his innocence.
A jury convicted Carter in 1976 of shooting and wounding an off-duty Benton Harbor police officer.
Carter claimed he was innocent but his efforts to get a new trial were denied. As his health declined in recent years, his friends started a grass-roots movement to get him freed from prison.
Carter received the support of several individuals and organizations, including the University of Wisconsin Law School's Wisconsin Innocence Project and Northwestern University's Center on Wrongful Convictions.
---
Harry Ellen
MESA, Ariz. (AP) - Harry Ellen, a longtime intelligence operative who aided and then publicly clashed with the FBI, died Friday. He was 56.
Ellen died at University Medical Center in Tucson after complications from a heart attack suffered several weeks ago, said Joe Abodeely, a lawyer and friend of Ellen.
Ellen spent more than 20 years as an American agent in Latin America, Africa and the Middle East.
Between 1995 and 1999, he made four trips to the Gaza Strip, where he established a charitable foundation and met with top Palestinian officials. He also met with five major terrorist groups in the region, seeking guarantees that doctors he brought to the region would not be targeted for violence.
His relationship with the FBI, however, soured in early 1999 over a separate investigation of a Chinese woman whom the FBI suspected was a spy. Agents disclosed Ellen's relationship with the bureau to the woman, who never faced any charges and was allowed to stay in the country.
The Justice Department was investigating Ellen's complaints.
---
Donald Crawford McCoy
SAN RAFAEL, Calif. (AP) - Donald Crawford McCoy, the owner of the houseboat where Otis Redding purportedly wrote "The Dock of the Bay," died Oct. 11. He was 72.
McCoy, who was known as "Papa Don" and ran a commune in Marin County in the 1960s, died of a heart attack.
A fourth-generation Californian who could trace his genealogy back to the Revolutionary War, he was, at first glance, an unlikely candidate for his counterculture role in the 1960s.
In 1961, the family moved to Marin County, where McCoy and his brother, Douglas, developed the first modern houseboat marina at the Sausalito heliport.
Some of the most popular musicians and performers of the day lived in the eclectic houseboat community, including comic Bill Cosby.
"He loved Bill Cosby, and he loved Otis Redding," said his longtime companion, Sheila McKendrick. "They all became buddies."
---
Dorothy Comstock Riley
GROSSE POINTE FARMS, Mich. (AP) - Dorothy Comstock Riley, former chief justice of the Michigan Supreme Court, died Saturday of complications from Parkinson's disease. She was 79.
Riley served on the court from 1982-83 and 1985-97 and was chief justice from 1987-91. In 1976, she became the first woman justice on the Michigan Court of Appeals.
Republican Gov. William Milliken appointed Riley on Dec. 9, 1982 to fill the vacancy created by the death of high court Justice Blair Moody Jr. Democratic Gov.-elect James Blanchard, who was taking office the following month, argued he should have chosen Moody's replacement.
In February 1983, shortly after Blanchard took office, her colleagues voted 4-2 to oust Riley from the court. Riley, however, won election to the Supreme Court in 1984, and was re-elected in 1992.
---
Charles Seaver
NEW YORK (AP) - Charles Seaver, the father of Hall of Fame pitcher Tom Seaver and a top amateur golfer in the 1930s, died Monday. He was 93.
He died in Pebble Beach, Calif., after a short illness, the New York Mets said.
Charles Seaver played on the 1932 Walker Cup team and won both his matches in the 8-1 victory by the United States over Britain at Brookline, Mass. The Seaver Cup, an amateur golf tournament in California, is named in his honor.
"My dad was my hero," said Tom Seaver, a former Mets star and now a broadcaster for the team. "All of my competitiveness on the playing field came from him. He always came to as many games as possible, and it was so important to me that he was there when I was inducted into the Hall of Fame (in 1992). I wouldn't have gotten where I am without his instruction and guidance."
Charles Seaver competed in 39 consecutive Bing Crosby National Pro-Am tournaments. He often paired with movie stars including Douglas Fairbanks and Randolph Scott and business mogul Howard Hughes.
---
George Silk
NEW YORK (AP) - George Silk, a photojournalist who spent 30 years with Life magazine, earning fame for coverage of World War II and later pioneering the use of a special camera for depicting athletes in motion, died Saturday. He was 87.
Silk died at a Norwalk, Conn., hospital of congestive heart failure, family members said Monday.
Silk joined the Life photo staff in 1943 and spent the next two years covering the war on the Italian front, the Allied invasions of France and the Pacific. He shot the first pictures of the atom-bombed city of Nagasaki and Japanese war criminals awaiting trial in postwar Tokyo.
The strip camera, in which film was exposed as it rolled past a hole, helped Silk become a leading sports photographer. He put cameras on skis and surfboards, photographed the America's Cup yacht races and shot a memorable photo of a baseball stadium even though, his wife said, "he did not appreciate the game - or American football, either."
In December 1972, he was in Nepal, shooting an assignment on Himalayan game parks when he received news that the magazine had folded. According to the 1977 book "That Was the Life," Silk replied by saying, "Your message … badly garbled. Please send one-half million dollars additional expenses."
---
Dennis Nicholas Skiotis
WATERTOWN, Mass. (AP) - Dennis Nicholas Skiotis, longtime Harvard University faculty member, former president of Athens College in Greece and noted Middle East expert, died Oct. 19 of complications from pneumonia. He was 67.
Skiotis had leukemia and died at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
Skiotis was at Harvard for 22 years. He was associate director of Harvard's Center for Middle Eastern Studies from 1976 to 1985, and then director of undergraduate studies at Harvard's history department until 1998.
From 1974 through 1976, he led a U.S. mission to Cyprus, investigating refugees and other issues surrounding Turkey's invasion of part of the island. His linguistic skills in both Turkish and Greek proved invaluable in collecting information from both sides.
From 1998 to 2003, Skiotis was president of Athens College in Greece, nearly 50 years after he had won a scholarship to that school.
Skiotis, who received his doctorate in history and Middle Eastern studies in 1971 from Harvard, was an expert in military history, and provided commentary on military affairs at various times for the BBC, CNN, PBS and NPR.
 Load-Date: October 26, 2004

 

End of Document
