

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
July 1, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1346 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Renaldo Benson
DETROIT (AP) - Renaldo "Obie" Benson, a member of the legendary Motown singing group the Four Tops, died Friday at a Detroit hospital. He was 69.
His death was confirmed by Craig Hankenson, president of Producers Inc., one of the agencies that books dates for the Four Tops.
"It was not unexpected. He has been ill," Hankenson said.
The Four Tops sold more than 50 million records and recorded hit songs such as "Baby I Need Your Loving," "Reach Out (I'll be There)," "I Can't Help Myself" and "Standing in the Shadows of Love."
Benson's death leaves two surviving members of the original group: Levi Stubbs and Abdul "Duke" Fakir. The fourth original Top, Lawrence Payton, died of liver cancer in 1997.
They are members of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
The Four Tops began singing together in the 1950s under the name the Four Aims and signed a deal with Chess Records. They later changed their names to the Four Tops. The group signed with Motown Records in 1963 and produced a string of hits over the next decade.
---
Richard Brown
SANTA ANA, Calif. (AP) - Richard "Doc" Brown, an expert in the safety of amusement park rides, died June 23 after suffering a severe head injury in a fall at his Huntington Beach home, his family said. He was 64.
Brown helped design more than 100 rides for Disney, Cedar Fair, Six Flags and Universal Studios. He did extensive research on how the speed and g-force of roller coasters and "pod-based" rides impact the human body.
Brown consulted on the design, construction and operation of such popular rides as "Back to the Future" at Universal Studios, colleagues said.
In one of his first ride-related jobs, Brown helped Cedar Point Amusement Park in Sandusky, Ohio, redesign a roller coaster that was breaking the collar bones of some riders.
---
Ed Chopot
SPOKANE, Wash. (AP) - Ed Chopot, who grew up poor before becoming a multimillionaire high-stakes gambler, was found slain in Costa Rica. He was 76.
His body was found last week in an apartment complex in the village of Escazu, near the Costa Rica capital of San Jose, a family spokesman said Wednesday.
Chopot was $12 million in debt to Las Vegas casinos when he disappeared from Spokane in about 2003, according to court records.
Chopot was a recognized big-stakes regular at the gambling tables in Nevada. The casinos would send their private jets to Spokane to pick up Chopot and his friends for trips to Las Vegas in the 1990s, friends and associates have said.
But shortly after 2000, he started running up unpaid gambling debts at five casinos, including $3.5 million at the MGM Grand Hotel and Casino, public records show.
Four years ago, the records also show, Chopot went to the Venetian in Las Vegas where he was given a $1.8 million line of credit that remains unpaid.
---
Max Coffman
GARDNER, Mass. (AP) - Max Coffman, a one-time grocery store delivery boy who founded the Mammoth Mart discount store chain, died Monday at his home in Brockton. He was 95.
The son of Russian immigrants, Coffman grew up in Quincy where he worked as a delivery boy and boxed for nickels donated by passers-by. After attending Northeastern University, he went to work for Stop and Shop supermarket in 1937.
In 1956, he opened Mammoth Mills, a no-frills factory store offering discount merchandise in a former foundry in Framingham. At its peak, the Mammoth chain had nearly 90 stores along the Eastern Seaboard. In 1974, the chain filed for bankruptcy protection, though it emerged from Chapter 11 the following year.
In 1977, when the Mammoth chain had $17 million in cash and $42 million in assets, Coffman sold it to King Department Store.
---
Michael W. Donnelly
HARTFORD, Conn. (AP) - Retired Maj. Michael W. Donnelly, an Air Force fighter pilot who became a spokesman for sick Gulf War veterans, died Thursday after a decade-long battle with Lou Gehrig's disease. He was 46.
The South Windsor native contracted amyotrophic lateral sclerosis during the Gulf War. His personal crusade and 1998 memoir, "Falcon's Cry," contributed to the federal government's 2001 decision to pay medical and disability benefits to hundreds of Gulf War veterans with the disease.
He retired with military honors in 1996 after a 15-year career. During Operation Desert Storm, he flew 44 F-16 combat missions over Iraq as a member of a fighter squadron stationed in Germany.
The government initially denied a link between Gulf War service and the disease. But in 2001, Veterans' Affairs Secretary Anthony Principi acknowledged that scientific data showed Gulf War veterans are more than twice as likely as others to develop Lou Gehrig's.
---
Oliver Jensen
CHESTER, Conn. (AP)- Oliver Jensen, one of the founders of American Heritage magazine, died at an assisted-living facility Thursday, according to his stepdaughter, Penelope Hargrove. He was 91.
Jensen, along with Joseph Thorndike and James Parton, founded American Heritage in 1954. It now has a circulation of 340,000 and is part of the American Heritage Publishing Co., a division of Forbes Inc.
Oliver Ormerod Jensen was born in Ithaca, N.Y., on April 16, 1914. He earned a bachelor's degree from Yale in 1936, and during World War II served in the United States Naval Reserve.
Jensen joined Life magazine as a writer in 1940 and, after the war, was an editor there.
With Thorndike and Parton, he founded Thorndike, Jensen & Parton, a custom publishing concern, in 1950.
From 1959 to 1976, Jensen was the editor of American Heritage.
From 1981 to 1983, he was chief of the division of prints and photographs at the Library of Congress.
Jensen's was married five times, including a brief marriage to the novelist Jean Stafford that ended in divorce.
---
Bruce Malmuth
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Bruce Malmuth, an actor and writer who directed such films as "Nighthawks" and "Hard to Kill" and played bit parts in "The Karate Kid" and other films, died Tuesday of esophageal cancer. He was 71.
Malmuth died at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, said his brother Daniel Malmuth.
Malmuth was best-known for directing Sylvester Stallone in the 1981 thriller "Nighthawks" and Steven Seagal in the 1990 political action film "Hard to Kill," as well as "Where Are All the Children," with Jill Clayburgh.
He also worked on documentaries, including "Baseballs or Switchblades?" and the Emmy-winning "A Boy's Dream," which featured Darryl Strawberry.
An avid sports fan, Malmuth played the role of ring announcer in 1984's "The Karate Kid," among other small film roles.
---
Luther Vandross
NEW YORK (AP) - Grammy award winner Luther Vandross, whose deep, lush voice on such hits as "Here and Now" and "Any Love" sold more than 25 million albums while providing the romantic backdrop for millions of couples worldwide, died Friday at John F. Kennedy Medical Center in Edison, N.J., said hospital spokesman Rob Cavanaugh.
He did not release the cause of death but said in a statement that Vandross "never really recovered from" a stroke two years ago. He was 54.
After suffering the stroke in his Manhattan home in April 2003, the R&B crooner stopped making public appearances but managed to continue his recording career. In 2004, he captured four Grammys as a sentimental favorite, including best song for the bittersweet "Dance With My Father."
Vandross battled weight problems for years while suffering from diabetes and hypertension.
Vandross was a four-time Grammy winner in the best male R&B performance category, taking home the trophy in 1990 for the single "Here and Now," in 1991 for his album "Power of Love," in 1996 for the track "Your Secret Love" and a last time for "Dance With My Father."
In 2005, he was nominated for a Soul Train Music Award for a duet with Beyonce on "The Closer I Get To You."
A career in music seemed predestined for the New York native; both his parents were singers, and his sister, Patricia, was part of a 1950s group called the Crests.
Over the years, Vandross would emerge as the leading romantic singer of his generation, racking up one platinum album after another and charting several R&B hits, such as "Superstar," "Give Me The Reason" and "Love Won't Let Me Wait."
 Load-Date: July 2, 2005

 

End of Document
