

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
June 22, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1349 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Leonel Brizola
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Leonel Brizola, the former populist governor of Rio de Janeiro state and one of Brazil's most notable leftist politicians, died Monday of a heart attack. He was 82.
Brizola had been hospitalized with a serious cold when he died, according to the Democratic Labor Party, which Brizola founded more than 20 years ago.
Some observers said the fiery leftist leader was the real target of the 1964 coup by the armed forces that ousted leftist President Joao Goulart and ushered in a military dictatorship. Brizola had been widely viewed as Goulart's successor.
Brizola returned to Brazil in 1979, when then-president Joao Figueiredo signed an amnesty law.
He quickly returned to politics, founding the Democratic Labor Party. He was elected governor of Rio de Janeiro state in 1982 and 1990.
Early in his career, he had served as a state legislator, federal congressman and mayor of Porto Alegre. In 1958, he won the governorship of Rio Grande do Sul state and during his four-year tenure expropriated - without compensation - U.S.-owned utilities.
---
Herman Heine Goldstine
BRYN MAWR, Pa. (AP) - Herman Heine Goldstine, a mathematician involved in the development of the first electronic computers, died June 16 of Parkinson's disease, a funeral home said. He was 90.
Goldstine persuaded the military to back the development of the ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer) to calculate artillery firing tables.
He lobbied the Army to provide $500,000 for research carried out at the University of Pennsylvania's Moore School, where the 80-foot-long computer with 18,000 vacuum tubes was created.
Goldstine then served as associate director of an electronic computer project at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J., where he collaborated on the design of a second generation computer called EDVAC (Electronic Differential Variable Computer).
He was hired by IBM in 1958 and stayed with the company for 26 years. After he retired in 1984, IBM established a Herman Goldstine Fellowship in mathematical sciences.
In 1985, Goldstine was awarded the National Medal of Science.
---
Clayton Kirkpatrick
GLEN ELLYN, Ill. (AP) - Clayton Kirkpatrick, the former editor of the Chicago Tribune who was credited with overseeing vast changes in the paper in the 1970s, died Saturday of congestive heart failure, his family said. He was 89.
Kirkpatrick's first lead editorial, on Jan. 1, 1969, signaled that the paper formerly known as the "Republican bible" would aim for more balanced coverage.
He angered his opponents on the Tribune Co. board in 1974 with a series of decisions related to the Watergate scandal, including an editorial that called for President Nixon's resignation.
Kirkpatrick also oversaw changes in the paper's design, increasing the use of photos and graphics.
After years as a reporter at the paper, Kirkpatrick began an apprenticeship in editing at the Tribune in 1954, working first on the copy desk. He was appointed city editor in 1961, assistant managing editor in 1963, managing editor in 1965 and executive editor in 1967.
In 1979, he was promoted to president and chief executive officer of the Chicago Tribune Co. He retired in 1981.
---
Betty Engle LeVin
ST. PAUL (AP) - Betty Engle LeVin, the first female news photographer hired by the St. Paul Pioneer Press and Dispatch, died Saturday of complications from Alzheimer's disease, her sister said. She was 85.
LeVin was hired at the paper right after graduating from college in 1941. Her male colleagues were initially skeptical, but she earned their respect when she waded through mud and rode a rickety rowboat to cover a flood.
She quit the newspaper in 1946 and quickly became St. Paul society's first lady of wedding photography, capturing more than 5,000 Twin Cities weddings on film. Instead of the studio shots that were the custom of the time, LeVin focused on candid photographs.
---
Virgilio Lopez Irias
TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras (AP) - Bishop Virgilio Lopez Irias of Trujillo was killed in an automobile accident Tuesday along the Atlantic coast of Honduras, authorities said. He was 67.
Police said the bishop was forced to veer sharply to avoid a speeding, oncoming car. The bishop's vehicle overturned and he died of a fractured skull in a hospital. A passenger in the bishop's car suffered minor injuries.
Police were seeking the driver of the other vehicle, who allegedly fled the scene.
Lopez was assigned to the diocese in northern Honduras in 1987. He was a member of the Franciscan order.
---
Nathan Note
MAJURO, Marshall Islands (AP) - Nathan Note, who convinced many fellow Bikini Islanders that it was unsafe to return home to the site of numerous nuclear bomb tests, died Saturday, the consul general for the Marshall Islands in Honolulu said. He was believed to be about 85.
Inhabitants of Bikini were removed in 1946 before the United States launched a series of 23 atomic and hydrogen bomb tests that lasted until 1958.
Bikini was declared safe for habitation in 1969, but Note tried to convince his fellow islanders that it was still unsafe to return. About 100 moved back to the island, but most stayed away because of Note's warnings, said Jack Niedenthal, who works for the Bikini Council.
Those who returned were evacuated in 1978 when new data showed high levels of residual radioactivity.
Bikinians remain in exile, dispersed through the Marshall Islands and the United States.
---
Ben Shabalala
DURBAN, South Africa (AP) - Ben Shabalala, a longtime member of South Africa's most famous a cappella ensemble, Ladysmith Black Mambazo, was shot and killed on June 16. He was believed to be in his late 40s.
Shabalala, whose brother Joseph founded and still leads the group, was killed in a Durban suburb under unknown circumstances, said Mike Wilpizeski, a spokesman for the U.S.-based Heads Up International record label. Police were investigating Tuesday.
Ben Shabalala first joined the band in 1979, lending his voice to Paul Simon's "Graceland" album, which captivated world audiences and won the Grammy Award for album of the year in 1986.
He was also part of Ladysmith Black Mambazo's "Shaka Zulu" recording, which picked up a Grammy for best traditional folk album the following year.
Shabalala retired from the band, which fuses Zulu and gospel music traditions, in 1993.
---
Mattie Stepanek
WASHINGTON (AP) - Mattie Stepanek, the child poet whose inspirational verse made him a best-selling writer and a prominent advocate for muscular dystrophy, died Tuesday from complications of the disease. He was 13.
Mattie died at Children's National Medical Center, the hospital said.
"His example made people want to reach for the best within themselves," Muscular Dystrophy Association National Chairman Jerry Lewis said in a statement.
Mattie had dysautonomic mitochondrial myopathy, a genetic disease that impaired almost all of his body's major functions, such as heart rate, breathing, blood pressure and digestion, and caused muscle weakness.
His mother has the adult-onset form of the disease, and his three older siblings died of it in early childhood.
Mattie began writing poetry at age 3 to cope with the death of a brother. In 2001, a small Virginia publisher issued a slim volume of his poems, called "Heartsongs." Within weeks, the book reached the top of The New York Times best-seller list, the MDA said. It was followed by three others.
---
Pir Vilayat Inayat-Khan
PARIS (AP) - Pir Vilayat Inayat-Khan, who headed an international order of Sufis and wrote books about his mystical offshoot of Islam, died Thursday, his group said. He was 87.
Pir Vilayat died at his home in the Paris suburb of Suresnes, said Donald Graham, an official with the Sufi Order International.
A teacher and lecturer, Pir Vilayat was the son of Hazrat Inayat Khan, who helped bring Sufism to the West and created the Sufi order. He allowed followers to keep practicing their own religions as they explored Sufi mysticism, though traditional Sufism is a form of Islam.
Pir Vilayat's books included "Toward the One" and "The Call of the Dervish." His works were translated into several languages.
 Load-Date: June 23, 2004

 

End of Document
