

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
March 10, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 860 words
Body




Abul Abbas
BAGHDAD, Iraq (AP) - Abul Abbas, the Palestinian who planned the 1985 hijacking of the Achille Lauro passenger ship in which a wheelchair-bound American tourist was killed and thrown overboard, died of natural causes Monday in U.S. custody, coalition officials said. He was 56.
He was captured by U.S. forces in April, nearly two decades after being convicted in absentia by an Italian court and sentenced to life in prison for the hijacking.
Abbas' small Palestine Liberation Front commandeered the Italian cruise ship, demanded the release of 50 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails and threw an elderly Jewish American tourist, Leon Klinghoffer, overboard after shooting him.
Abbas was not on the ship at the time.
The other passengers were released after a two-day ordeal and the commandos surrendered to Egyptian authorities, who put them on a flight to PLO headquarters in Tunisia.
U.S. Navy fighters forced the flight down in Sicily. The Italians, to the Americans' dismay, allowed Abbas to flee to Yugoslavia before a U.S. warrant could be served. His arrest came 18 years after seizing the Achille Lauro off Port Said, Egypt.
Abbas was born in 1948 in the Yarmouk Palestinian refugee camp in Syria after his family fled from their home near Haifa when the state of Israel was created.
He graduated with a degree in Arab literature from Damascus University. He joined George Habash's Marxist Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine in 1967, forming the Palestine Liberation Front in 1976.
---
Jim Baker
BEAUMONT, Texas (AP) - Jim Baker, a journalist for newspapers and The Associated Press, died Monday of complications from prostate cancer, The Beaumont Enterprise said. He was 64.
Baker spent the past five years as the night city editor at The Beaumont Enterprise and was the newspaper's employee of the year in 2003.
He was a reporter and editor for the AP in Atlanta before transferring to Dallas as assistant bureau chief in 1972. He later worked as city editor at the Dallas Times Herald and Austin American-Statesman and covered the capital for Cox Newspapers.
Baker later worked a year at the Texas Railroad Commission before spending a decade in political consulting and public relations in Austin.
---
George Brand
SAN LUIS OBISPO, Calif. (AP) - George Brand, who was editor of a daily newspaper in San Luis Obispo for 20 years and taught journalism at two colleges, died Monday of cancer, The Tribune said. He was 80.
Brand was editor of the Telegram-Tribune, which later became The Tribune, from 1963 to 1983. His editorials often called for preserving land rather than developing it.
Brand spent six months as the director of information with the Department of Health, Education and Welfare under the Nixon administration in 1969.
---
Paulo Niemeyer
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Paulo Niemeyer, Brazil's most renowned neurosurgeon and brother of architect Oscar Niemeyer, died Wednesday. He was 89.
Niemeyer died of complications following heart surgery, doctors at the Samaritan hospital said.
A member of the National Academy of Medicine since 1981, Neimeyer was pioneer in Latin America developing techniques to stop involuntary movements in patients with Parkinson's disease.
He also treated many well-known Brazilians like ex-President Joao Batista Figueiredo.
---
Mary Lindsay
PALM BEACH, Fla. (AP) - Mary Lindsay, the wife and trusted adviser of former New York Mayor John V. Lindsay, died Tuesday of cancer, her daughter said. She was 77.
Lindsay was described as bringing elegance, energy and political acumen to her husband's campaigns.
She vigorously campaigned for him in his bids for Congress, where he served three terms from 1959 to 1965. He was mayor of New York from 1966 to 1973.
Lindsay met her husband in her last year at Vassar when they were members of the wedding party of Nancy Walker Bush, sister of former President George Bush, and Alexander Ellis.
Before she was married, she taught at the Mary C. Wheeler School in Providence, R.I., and at the Buckley School in New York.
---
Susan Okin
LINCOLN, Mass. (AP) - Susan Okin, a feminist political theorist whose work focused on the exclusion of women from western political thought, died March 3, apparently of natural causes, police said. She was 57.
Okin, a Stanford University professor since 1990, held a visiting professorship at Harvard University's Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at the time of her death.
Okin argued that gender issues belong at the core, not at the margins, of political philosophy. Her 1979 book, "Women in Western Political Thought," is considered a cornerstone of research on women in politics.
Okin also wrote "Justice, Gender and the Family," in which she examined whether the principles of justice should be applied to the family, said Rob Reich, assistant professor of political science at Stanford.
In recent years, Okin focused on the plight of women in undeveloped countries and became a staunch supporter of the San Francisco-based Global Fund for Women.
Okin earned a master's degree in philosophy from Oxford in 1970 and a doctorate from Harvard in 1975.
She also taught at the University of Auckland in New Zealand, Vassar and Brandeis.
---
 Load-Date: March 11, 2004

 

End of Document
