

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
May 7, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1322 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Khazen Abboud
BALLOUNEH, Lebanon (AP) - Khazen Abboud, a renowned Arab poet and a longtime translator and radio monitor for The Associated Press, died Friday after a lengthy illness, his family said. He was 80.
Abboud, who was born in Sakhnine, Palestine, joined the AP in Beirut, Lebanon, and transferred to the AP bureau in Nicosia, Cyprus, when a monitoring station was established there during Lebanon's 1975-1990 civil war.
In addition to translating breaking news reports for AP staffers, he was a mainstay of the AP's Arabic Language Feature Service and composed several volumes of Arabic poems.
Abboud retired in 1994 after 35 years of AP service and returned to Lebanon with his wife, Helen, to live in Ballouneh, in the mountains north of Beirut.
---
Abe Caylor
ORTING, Wash. (AP) - Abe Caylor, an Army cavalry soldier during World War I and one of the nation's oldest military veterans, died Wednesday, relatives said. He was 104.
Enjoying the attention in his final years but tired of being asked his secret to growing old, Caylor once replied, "Work hard and mind your own damn business."
On his 100th birthday, his photograph was shown on national television and he received a congratulatory telephone call from the White House. The next spring was honored at a concert and Memorial Day ceremonies on the Capitol lawn in Washington, D.C.
Lying about his age, he enlisted in the Army in 1915 and was assigned to Troop D, 12th Horse Cavalry, with a saber, rifle and horse named "Old Dusty." During World War I his 120-member unit was sent to Panama to guard the canal.
Caylor later got married, worked as a truck driver and dispatcher, went to business school and moved west to work for Boeing Co.
After his wife died in 1974, he lived alone, did his own cooking, washing and cleaning and continued to drive until he was 99, when he reluctantly moved into the Washington Soldiers Home.
---
J. Calvitt Clarke Jr.
VIRGINIA BEACH, Va. (AP) - Retired U.S. District Judge J. Calvitt Clarke Jr., who oversaw the salvage rights of the Titanic shipwreck, died Thursday after a long illness, according to a funeral home. He was 83.
Clarke was nominated to the bench by President Ford in 1974. His notable cases in 24 years on the court included the 1985 espionage trial of Arthur James Walker and the James River pesticide Kepone pollution litigation of the late 1970s.
He had supervised the salvage of the historic shipwreck since 1992. In 1994, Clarke granted Atlanta-based R.M.S. Titanic Inc. sole salvage rights. He continued to oversee dives, salvage reports and preservation of artifacts after his 1999 retirement.
He also presided over the ownership and salvage rights of the Lusitania wreckage, early asbestos damage lawsuits and highway construction bid-rigging cases.
Before being named to the bench, Clarke was Richmond city attorney for 30 years. He was a former chairman of the city Republican committee and in 1954 made an unsuccessful bid for Congress.
---
Nelson Gidding
SANTA MONICA, Calif. (AP) - Nelson Gidding, who co-wrote the Academy Award-nominated screenplay for 1958 movie "I Want to Live!" died Sunday, according to Santa Monica-UCLA Medical Center. He was 84.
"I Want to Live!" earned Gidding and Don Mankiewicz Oscar nominations for best adapted screenplay.
Gidding went on to work on four other screenplays for Robert Wise: "Odds Against Tomorrow" (1959), "The Haunting" (1963), "The Andromeda Strain" (1971) and "The Hindenburg" (1975).
During World War II, Gidding was a navigator on a bomber that was shot down. During 18 months as a prisoner of war in Italy and Germany, he began writing a novel based on his POW experiences, using smuggled pencils and paper that he hid from guards, his son told the Times.
He finished the novel, "End Over End," after the war and it was published in 1946.
After the war, Gidding wrote for radio shows such as "Sergeant Preston of the Yukon" and later for television and then for motion pictures.
For more than a decade, he taught a University of Southern California course on screen adaptations.
---
Clifford Holliday
GARDENA, Calif. (AP) - Clifford Holliday, the last surviving Canadian combat veteran of World War I, died Tuesday, according to Veterans Affairs Canada. He was 105.
Holliday, who was a U.S. citizen, died Tuesday at his home here.
Only eight of the 650,000 Canadians who served in the war remain and Holliday was the last who fought in combat, according to the Canadian minister of veterans affairs.
Holliday enlisted in the Canadian Army at age 16 and was sent to the front lines for two years, serving as a private with the 43rd Battalion, Camrom Highlanders.
Holliday fought in some of the fiercest battles of the war, including Ypres, Vimy Ridge and Belgium's Hill 60, where his battalion virtually was wiped out.
He was shot through the legs in Belgium and his jaw was shredded by shrapnel in France. After his second injury, he was sent to England for surgery. A doctor who doubted his age offered to send him to the Boys Battalion there.
Eighty years later, he was honored for his World War I service with the French Legion of Honor and the Canadian McCrae Medallion.
After the war he returned to Manitoba as an electrician's apprentice. In 1922 he moved to California in search of a better job.
He installed the first sound system in Columbia Studios and wired silent movie theaters for sound when "talkies" arrived.
He retired in 1970 but became active in senior citizen programs. He served as state president of the Congress of California Seniors and was a board member of the National Council of Senior Citizens. He was a U.S. citizen.
In 1998, President Bill Clinton thanked him during a National Council of Senior Citizens convention in Washington.
---
Rudy Maugeri
LAS VEGAS (AP) - Rudy Maugeri, co-founder of the 1950s doo-wop band The Crew-Cuts and co-writer of the hit "Crazy 'Bout Ya Baby," died Friday of cancer, his longtime band manager said. He was 73.
The Crew-Cuts band was formed in the early 1950s by a group of friends who grew up together in Toronto, Canada. "Crazy 'Bout Ya Baby" was released in 1954 and quickly climbed the charts. The song became part of the Broadway show "Forever Plaid."
After signing with Mercury Records, The Crew-Cuts recorded a series of rock 'n' roll covers of R&B songs. While the practice of white artists covering songs by black artists would draw criticism in later years, the group's version of the Chords' "Sh-Boom" began a string of Top 10 hits.
Maugeri sang lead vocals on the group's cover of The Penguins' "Earth Angel." Other hits included "Gumdrop," "Angels in the Sky" and "Ko-Ko-Mo (I Love You So)."
After the band broke up in 1964, Maugeri worked in broadcasting with radio stations in New York and Los Angeles.
In 1984, The Crew-Cuts band was inducted into the Juno Hall of Fame by the Canadian Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences.
---
Daniel Thompson
CLEVELAND (AP) - Daniel Thompson, a poet who gave readings at venues ranging from jazz clubs to jails, died Thursday of leukemia. He was 69.
Major D. Ragain, who has taught poetry at Kent State University since 1981, called Thompson a poet of uncommon tenderness and predicted that his work will become more important over time.
"The power of his poems was overshadowed by his personality and his marvelous presence. He was subtle, intricate and wonderfully lyrical," Ragin said.
Homelessness was Thompson's major cause. He petitioned city and county officials to install public drinking fountains for people living on the streets.
For more than 40 years, Thompson promoted poetry as performance art in Cleveland, often reading his poems or the works of others at coffeehouses and taverns.
Thompson compiled two books: "Famous in the Neighborhood," printed in 1989, and "Even the Broken Letters of the Heart Spell Earth" in 1998.
A proclamation declaring Thompson the Cuyahoga County poet laureate was presented at a ceremony in the Virgil Brown Human Services Building in 1992.
 Load-Date: May 8, 2004

 

End of Document
