

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
March 5, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1330 words
Body




Carlos Arosemena
GUAYAQUIL, Ecuador (AP) - Carlos Arosemena, one-time president of Ecuador whose term ended in a 1963 military coup, died Friday after a lengthy illness, family members said. He was 84.
Elected vice president in 1960, Arosemena rose to the presidency following the ouster of President Velasco Ibarra a year later in a military coup.
He continued an unpopular economic austerity program implemented by Ibarra, which resulted in a positive trade balance for Ecuador. After Arosemena survived two attempts to impeach him, the military overthrew him and sent him into exile in Panama.
A colorful, outspoken politician who sported a mane of white hair, he was criticized for his leftist rhetoric and his heavy drinking.
The son and grandson of former presidents, Arosemena founded Ecuador's Nationalist Revolutionary party.
A lawyer by training, he also served as a diplomat, university professor, senator, congressman and minister of defense.
---
Albert Axelrod
NEW YORK (AP) - Albert Axelrod, a champion fencer, died of a heart attack Feb. 24 at a hospital. He was 83.
Axelrod won an Olympic bronze medal in 1960 and was a member of five consecutive Olympic fencing teams in the foil, the lightest of competition swords. He was the best in the United States in 1955, 1958, 1960 and 1970.
He won 15 United States National Gold Medals and was the only men's foil fencer in the country's history to reach the world championship finals.
Axelrod became known for his long life in a sport dominated by people half his age. He won his Olympic medal at 39 and won his last national championship at 49.
Professionally, Axelrod worked as an engineer for the Grumman Corp. But he would drive to Manhattan to practice fencing two or three nights a week.
---
Dana Broccoli
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Dana Broccoli, the widow of movie producer Albert R. "Cubby" Broccoli and the president of the company that owns the film rights to Ian Fleming's James Bond novels, died Sunday of cancer. She was 82.
Dana Broccoli, who was a novelist and theatrical producer, became president of the Los Angeles-based Danjaq, which produces the Bond films and co-owns them with MGM, after her husband died in 1996.
Dana Broccoli also was the creative force behind turning "Chitty Chitty Bang Bang" into a musical, for which she served as lead producer. The musical opened in London's West End in 2002 and is scheduled to open on Broadway in spring 2005.
When Cubby Broccoli was searching for the actor to play Bond, he asked his wife's opinion of a young Scot actor, Sean Connery, who had impressed him.
Dana Broccoli wrote two novels, "Scenario for Murder" and "Florinda." The latter was adapted as a musical, "La Cava," for which she wrote the book. It opened in London's West End in 2000.
---
Nicholas C. Dattilo
HARRISBURG, Pa. (AP) - Bishop Nicholas C. Dattilo of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Harrisburg died overnight, a spokesman said early Friday. He was 71.
Dattilo had been at the helm of the Harrisburg diocese for 14 years. The 15-county diocese has about 235,000 Roman Catholics, 89 parishes and about 135 active priests, according to its Web site.
During his tenure, he was known for consolidating parishes and overseeing the construction of a diocesan hall and a priest retirement home, Fr. T. Ronald Haney said.
A native of New Castle in western Pennsylvania, Dattilo studied at St. Vincent Seminary in Latrobe and St. Charles Borromeo Seminary in Philadelphia. He was ordained in the Pittsburgh diocese on May 31, 1958.
On Nov. 21, 1989, Pope John Paul II named Dattilo the eighth bishop of Harrisburg.
---
Jorge Guinle
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Jorge Guinle, a once wealthy playboy who claimed to have romanced Jayne Mansfield, Lana Turner and Rita Hayworth, died Friday after refusing to undergo surgery to remove an aneurism in his aorta, said officials from Ipanema Hospital. He was 88.
A scion of one of Brazil's wealthiest families, Guinle squandered his fortune and spent his final years scraping by on a government pension and with the help of friends.
"The secret of living well is to die without a cent in your pocket," he once said. "But I miscalculated, and the money ran out too early."
In the 1940s, Guinle took one of his rare jobs, working for his friend Nelson Rockefeller. Guinle reviewed Hollywood scripts to make sure they did not mistakenly place the Brazilian capital in Buenos Aires or have Brazilians speaking Spanish, rather than Portuguese.
During his time in Hollywood, Guinle was friendly with such stars as Orson Welles, Ronald Reagan and Errol Flynn, who he roomed with for a time.
---
Marlin Maddoux
DALLAS (AP) - Marlin Maddoux, the founder of USA Radio Network and host of the Point of View radio talk show, died Thursday of complications from heart bypass surgery. He was 70.
Maddoux died at a hospital in Irving, said Bob Morrison, news director at USA Radio Network. Maddoux's wife of 49 years, Mary, and other relatives were by his side.
Maddoux founded International Christian Media and the National Center for Freedom and Renewal.
Maddoux began Point of View in Dallas in 1972. He founded USA Radio Network, a for-profit company, in 1985. The network now has more than 1,300 affiliated radio stations across the nation. Point of View has more than 360 affiliates.
Maddoux also wrote several books, including "America Betrayed," "What Worries Parents Most," "Free Speech or Propaganda?" and "A Christian Agenda: Game Plan for a New Era."
---
Joe Moshay
BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. (AP) - Joe Moshay, a music coordinator for hundreds of debutante and charity balls, birthday parties and weddings for Los Angeles' rich and famous, died Sunday. He was 95.
Moshay also was the music director for nine Academy Awards Governors Ball events. The bandleader coordinated music for the final docking of the Queen Mary in Long Beach and for Ronald Reagan's inaugural ball when he was the governor of California.
In 1928, Moshay began playing with a six-piece orchestra at Morey's Old Time and Modern Dance Hall in Los Angeles, and eventually became the band's leader. By day, he worked as a truck driver for the Los Angeles Herald-Express.
He also was a musician for movie studios MGM, Columbia and Paramount for 20 years, writing songs that included "There's Something About Her" and "Josie."
---
Mike O'Callaghan
LAS VEGAS (AP) - Mike O'Callaghan, a popular former Nevada governor and executive editor of the Las Vegas Sun, died Friday of an apparent heart attack, his longtime executive secretary said. He was 74.
O'Callaghan was attending morning Mass at St. Viator Catholic Church when he collapsed, said Sheila Dillon, . He died at a hospital.
Republican Gov. Kenny Guinn praised O'Callaghan for tackling tough issues as governor, including the welfare of disadvantaged children, the preservation of Lake Tahoe and affordable housing in Las Vegas.
A Democrat, O'Callaghan served eight years as governor beginning in 1971.
He was a Korean War veteran.
He later became a teacher in Nevada, and one of his students was U.S. Sen. Harry Reid. He was the state's first health and welfare director, and a regional director in the federal Office of Emergency Preparedness before turning to politics.
---
Stephen Sprouse
NEW YORK (AP) - Stephen Sprouse, a fashion designer and artist who mixed a cosmopolitan, punk and pop styles, died Thursday of heart failure at St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center. He was 50.
Sprouse's style mixed the polar worlds of uptown and downtown fashion and became known as a kind of "punk couture," said Simon Doonan, creative director of Barneys New York.
He was known for his edgy look that was popular with punk rockers but was also fashionable for the well-to-do chic crowd.
Sprouse started designing clothes at age nine and by the time he was 12, he had met fashion industry heavyweights like Bill Blass, Geoffrey Beene and Norman Norell.
As a teenager, Sprouse sketched for Blass and then Halston before coming to New York and eventually designing clothes for Blondie lead singer Debbie Harry.
 Load-Date: March 6, 2004

 

End of Document
