

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 26, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News; International News
Length: 795 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Nicholas Mavroules
PEABODY, Mass. (AP) - Former Rep. Nicholas Mavroules, who served seven terms in Congress before being voted out of office during a corruption scandal that sent him to prison, has died. He was 74.
Mavroules died Thursday while recovering from gastric surgery, a funeral home said.
The Democrat became mayor of Peabody, just north of Boston, in 1967. He served in Congress from 1978 to 1992, when he lost to Republican Peter Torkildsen in 1992 after being indicted on bribery and racketeering charges in a federal investigation.
Mavroules pleaded guilty in 1993 to charges that included failing to report the use of free cars as income and accepting a gratuity in the form of a low-rent beach house. He served 11 months in prison.
In Washington, Mavroules was chairman of the House subcommittee on investigations. He helped expose major cost overruns on Navy aircraft and shed light on the deadly 1989 explosion on the battleship USS Iowa.
He led a congressional investigation into the 1983 terrorist bombing of a barracks in Beirut in which 241 Marines were killed. He was also a vocal advocate of a nuclear weapons freeze and adamantly opposed President Reagan's missile defense shield.
---
Paul Owens
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Paul Owens, general manager of the Philadelphia Phillies' 1980 World Series championship team, died Friday, the team said. He was 79.
Owens, nicknamed "The Pope" because of his resemblance to Pope Paul VI, also managed the Phillies' team that won the National League pennant in 1983. He signed and helped develop some of the team's major stars of the 1970s and 1980s, including Hall of Famer Mike Schmidt, Bob Boone and Greg Luzinski.
Owens joined the Phillies' organization as a player-manager in Olean, N.Y., in 1955, and remained with the team in various positions until his death. In 1986, the Phillies honored him by creating the Paul Owens Award for the best player and pitcher in the team's minor league system.
---
Amalia Perez Diaz
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - Amalia Perez Diaz, one of Venezuela's most beloved actresses, died Friday of a heart attack, her daughter said. She was 80.
Born in Chile in 1923, Perez Diaz arrived in Venezuela in 1952.
In her adopted country, she launched a prolific acting career that included dozens of soap operas, plays, and films. She also hosted several television shows.
In the 1980s, Perez Diaz founded an acting school that launched the careers of many Venezuelan television and theater actors. Venezuela showered her with dozens of awards and honors.
---
Robert Ross
HENDERSONVILLE, N.C. (AP) - Robert Ross, a former advertising executive who helped create the concept for the Pillsbury Doughboy, died Thursday, his family said. He was 85.
Ross, who worked for the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, was one of the people who worked on the idea for Poppin' Fresh, the character featured in Pillsbury advertisements.
He also worked at D'Arcy McManus Masius, becoming senior vice president and creative director for the company's Chicago offices in 1969. He retired in 1971. Burnett and D'Arcy later became conglomerates.
Ross also wrote mystery novels, including "The Medici Guns," "The Medici Emerald" and "The French Finish," which in 1978 won the Edgar Allan Poe Award for the best first mystery by a new writer.
In 1980, he moved to Hendersonville where he wrote a weekly column for the area's daily newspaper, The Times-News.
---
August Swanson
SEATTLE (AP) - Dr. August "Gus" Swanson, a former chief of neurology and acting dean of University of Washington medical school, died Dec. 19 of a cerebral hemorrhage, his son said. He was 78.
Swanson, the university's first resident in neurology, also spent two decades as director of academic affairs of the Association of American Medical Colleges in Washington, D.C.
He was one of the first researchers to show that drinking too much water too fast could cause death.
Swanson was a key architect of a university program credited with increasing the number of doctors in rural areas. He was known for encouraging students from non scientific backgrounds to apply to medical school. He also pushed medical students to broaden their education with liberal arts studies.
---
George Zambelli
NEW CASTLE, Pa. (AP) - George R. Zambelli Sr., whose family-owned fireworks company is one of the oldest and largest in the country, died Thursday of the flu, a funeral home said. He was 79.
Zambelli was president and general manager of Zambelli Fireworks Internationale, based in New Castle, about 45 miles northwest of Pittsburgh.
Founded in 1893 by Italian immigrant Antonio Zambelli, the company has staged thousands of shows in the United States and abroad, including July Fourth celebrations, presidential inaugurations, Super Bowls, the Kentucky Derby, concerts and parades.
---
 Load-Date: December 27, 2003

 

End of Document
