

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
February 12, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 856 words
Body




Norman Clark
LA CONNER, Wash. (AP) - Norman Clark, a leading Washington state social historian and former president of Everett Community College, died Monday, family said. He was 78.
A native of Mesa, Ariz., he was president of the college from 1975-1978, and taught English and history there from the 1960s to the 1980s.
His best-known work was "Mill Town," an account of the early rough-and-tumble years of Everett, Wash., and the first detailed research into the Everett Massacre, a waterfront battle between citizen deputies and union members in which five to 12 people died in 1916.
The book, published in 1972 by University of Washington Press, reopened wounds that had never healed in the blue-collar town about 25 miles north of Seattle.
Clark wrote three other books - "The Dry Years: Prohibition and Social Change in Washington," "Deliver Us from Evil: An Interpretation of American Prohibition," and "Washington: A Bicentennial History." He and his wife recorded an oral history of former state Supreme Court Justice James M. Dolliver.
---
Larry Krebs
WASHINGTON (AP) - Larry Krebs, the journalist who captured on film a drunken incident involving a powerful congressman and a stripper, died Wednesday after a long illness. He was 81.
Krebs worked as a cameraman for WMAL-TV, now WJLA-TV. His specialty was covering police and firefighters, and he got his biggest scoop in 1974 when authorities stopped a car driven by then-Arkansas Rep. Wilbur Mills. Inside was stripper Fanne Foxe, who leapt from the car.
Mills' office initially denied the incident, but Krebs had the pair on film. Mills, chair of the House's tax-writing Ways and Means Committee, later blamed a drinking problem for the incident.
Krebs also worked as a radio reporter. He retired in 2001, and a year later received the Washington Achievement In Radio lifetime honor award.
---
Jozef Lenart
PRAGUE, Czech Republic (AP) - Jozef Lenart, a former Czechoslovak prime minister cleared of treason charges for his alleged role in the 1968 Soviet-led invasion, died Wednesday after heart surgery, the daily Lidove Noviny reported. He was 80.
After the 1989 collapse of the communist regime in Czechoslovakia, Lenart was charged with treason for allegedly having tried to establish a legal basis for the 1968 Russian-led invasion that squelched a popular anti-communism uprising known as the Prague Spring.
He was acquitted in September 2002.
Lenart, who served as prime minister of Czechoslovakia from 1963-1968 and headed the Slovak Communist Party until 1988, was a Slovak national who acquired Czech citizenship after Czechoslovakia split into the Czech Republic and Slovakia in 1993.
---
Andres Alvarado Lozano
TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras (AP) - Andres Alvarado Lozano, the former publisher of what is now Honduras' largest newspaper, died Wednesday, his family said. He was 84.
Alvarado Lozano was the first publisher of La Prensa, founded in 1964. He also worked as a lawyer, teacher, columnist and Supreme Court judge.
He was born in Santa Rosa de Copan, in western Honduras, in 1919. He received a law degree in Nicaragua in 1947.
---
Corinthian Nutter
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) - Civil-rights pioneer Corinthian Nutter, a black teacher who helped desegregate schools in Merriam, Kan., years before the historic Brown v. Board of Education ruling, died Wednesday, family friends said. She was 97.
Nutter was the only certified teacher at Walker Elementary, Merriam's school for black children in the late 1940s. The building was old, lacked indoor plumbing, and students used books and supplies discarded by other schools.
When the school district constructed a new building for white children nearby, Merriam's black community rallied to form an NAACP chapter and sued the district in 1948. Nearly all the families with children at Walker pulled them from class, and Nutter joined the walkout and taught students in private homes.
Later, she became a key witness in the lawsuit, testifying about conditions at her school.
Along with another teacher, Nutter continued to teach her students until the Kansas Supreme Court ruled in their favor in 1949. More court challenges to desegregation followed, culminating in the landmark Brown decision in 1954.
---
Nancy Watson
RANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. (AP) - Nancy Watson, a Los Angeles County Superior Court judge who presided over the 1980 murder trial of the Alphabet Bomber, died Monday of cancer, her daughter said. She was 77.
Following the much-publicized trial, Watson sentenced Muharem Kurbegovic to life in prison with the possibility of parole.
Kurbegovic, who remains in state prison, was convicted of planting a bomb at Los Angeles International Airport in 1974 that killed three people and injured 36. He was also convicted of trying to bomb the downtown Greyhound bus terminal and firebombing the homes of several local officials.
He was dubbed the Alphabet Bomber for his claim to news agencies that he planned to detonate explosives at places spelling out the name of the group he led, Aliens of America.
In 1972, Watson was elected to the county Superior Court, becoming one of five women judges to hold the position statewide. She retired in 1984.
 Load-Date: February 13, 2004

 

End of Document
