

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
October 24, 2004, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 885 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Samuel Lee Gravely Jr.
WASHINGTON (AP) - Retired Vice Adm. Samuel Lee Gravely Jr., the first black naval officer to become an admiral and to command a warship and a fleet, died Friday at the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md., after a stroke. He was 82.
Gravely began his 38-year Navy career as a fireman apprentice in 1942. In the 1960s he made history by becoming acting commanding officer of the destroyer USS Theodore E. Chandler. During the Vietnam War he commanded the destroyer USS Taussig and the guided missile frigate USS Jouett.
Subsequent assignments included command of a cruiser destroyer group, the 11th Naval District and the Third Fleet in the Pacific. After leaving active duty in 1980 he became director of the Defense Communications Agency in Washington.
---
James Hickey
WASHINGTON (AP) - Cardinal James Hickey, former archbishop of Washington, who led the Roman Catholic Church in the nation's capital for two decades, died Sunday, his diocese said. He was 84.
One of 13 Americans in the College of Cardinals, Hickey headed the Washington Diocese from 1980 to 2000.
Born Oct. 11, 1920, in Midland, Mich., Hickey was ordained a priest 58 years ago and became a cardinal in 1988, eight years after he became archbishop of Washington.
Hickey came to Washington with a reputation as an activist priest. He became a crucial figure in dealing with the government on issues affecting the church in Central America.
Two of four nuns murdered in El Salvador in 1980, the year Hickey was brought to Washington, had been under his jurisdiction as bishop of Cleveland, and he had ridden in the van in which they were murdered.
Also in 1980, Hickey attended the tumultuous funeral of his friend, assassinated Salvadoran Archbishop Oscar Romero, whose death precipitated a 12-year civil war.
In his diocese, he established a center for the area's large Hispanic population and expanded Catholic Social Services greatly, to serve not only the poor of inner-city Washington but people in rural areas of southern Maryland, said Bishop William Lori of Bridgeport, Conn., a close aide and confidante.
Church people considered Hickey farsighted in dealing with abusive priests. He established a review board and a policy not to return abusive priests to ministry.
---
J. Richard Nokes
PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) - J. Richard Nokes, whose 46-year career with The Oregonian took him from office boy to the newspaper's chief editorship before his retirement in 1982, died Saturday following complications from a fall at his home, his family said. He was 89.
Nokes got an ensign's commission in the U.S. Navy in 1944 and served in the Pacific. After the war, he returned to The Oregonian as night city editor but remained on inactive duty in the Navy and retired as a commander in 1975.
Nokes received the Voorhies Award of the Oregon Newspaper Publishers Association in 1983 for his contributions to Oregon journalism.
After retirement, Nokes and his wife traveled to research books on North Pacific maritime history. In 1939, he had written "American Form of Government," and in his retirement he followed with "Columbia's River: The Voyages of Robert Gray 1787-1793" and "Almost a Hero: The Voyages of John Meares."
Family members said he had just finished writing a biography of Kamehameha, the first ruler of Hawaii.
---
William Reed
LEXINGTON, Ky. (AP) - Dr. William Reed, a central Kentucky farm owner and equine veterinarian who treated famous racehorses, died Saturday at Winthrop Hospital in Mineola, N.Y., colleagues said. He was 83.
Reed gained prominence after treating Stymie, a champion in the 1940s, said Edward Bowen of Versailles, who is president of the Grayson-Jockey Club Research Foundation. The foundation raises money to support research for equine health.
Reed diagnosed and treated Stymie for a right forefoot fracture after a fourth-place finish in the Monmouth Handicap.
In 1975, Reed performed surgery on American Filly Triple Crown winner Ruffian, after she broke her leg in a race at Belmont Park.
Until recently, Reed owned Mare Haven Farm, now called Casa, on Old Frankfort Pike. Horses bred by Reed include Known Fact, Goodbye Halo and Gone West, according to the New York Racing Association.
---
Dorothy Comstock Riley
DETROIT (AP) - Dorothy Comstock Riley, former chief justice of the Michigan Supreme Court, died Saturday, Michigan Republican Party officials said. She was 79.
A cause of death was not released for Riley, who retired from the court in 1997, a year after announcing she had Parkinson's disease.
Riley served from 1982-83 and 1985-97 on the Michigan Supreme Court, and was chief justice from 1987-91. In 1976, she became the first woman justice on the Michigan Court of Appeals.
Riley was the focus of a bitter partisan battle shortly after joining the high court.
Republican Gov. William Milliken appointed Riley on Dec. 9, 1982, to fill the vacancy created by the death of Justice Blair Moody Jr. Democratic Gov.-elect James Blanchard, who was taking office the following month, argued that he, not Milliken, should have chosen Moody's replacement.
Shortly after Blanchard took office, her colleagues voted 4-2 to oust Riley from the court. Blanchard replaced her with U.S. District Judge Patricia Boyle. Riley, however, won election to the Supreme Court in 1984 and was re-elected in 1992.
 Load-Date: October 25, 2004

 

End of Document
