

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
February 17, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 721 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Max Jennings
DAYTON, Ohio (AP) - Max Jennings, former editor of the Dayton Daily News, died Wednesday while skiing near his home in Taos, N.M. He was 63.
Steve Sidlo, managing editor of the Daily News, said Jennings collapsed on the slopes and could not be revived.
Jennings was editor at the Daily News from 1988 until retiring in 1998. The Cox newspaper has a daily circulation of 134,283 and a Sunday circulation of 179,800.
Jennings became a reporter for United Press International in Cheyenne, Wyo., in 1964 and later was editor of the Mesa (Ariz.) Tribune.
Jennings was one of the national founders of Kids Voting, a nonprofit, nonpartisan effort to educate students from kindergarten through high school about the voting process. More than 25 states are involved in the program.
---
Otto Plaschkes
LONDON (AP) - Otto Plaschkes, producer of films including "Georgy Girl" and "Hopscotch," died Monday, his family said Thursday. He was 75.
Plaschkes, an arts-loving socialist who belied the popular image of the brash film producer, died of a heart attack, minutes after watching a film in London's West End.
One of his teachers at school was writer William Golding, and classmates swore that Plaschkes was the model for plump, sensitive schoolboy Piggy in Golding's "The Lord of the Flies" - a claim the author neither confirmed nor denied.
After study at Oxford and Cambridge universities, Plaschkes got a job at Ealing Studios and eventually graduated to production roles, including on "Exodus" in 1960 and "Lawrence of Arabia" two years later.
His first feature as producer was "Georgy Girl," the 1966 film starring Lynn Redgrave that helped popularize the image of "swinging London" in the 1960s.
He produced a string of thoughtful movies for the American Film Theater in the 1970s, including "The Homecoming," "Butley" and "In Celebration." In 1980, he produced "Hopscotch," a thriller starring Walter Matthau and Glenda Jackson that was his most commercially successful film.
---
Enrique Omar Sivori
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Former soccer great Enrique Omar Sivori, who helped Argentina's River Plate and Juventus of Italy to numerous titles, died Thursday. He was 69.
Sivori passed away in San Nicolas, a community north of Buenos Aires where he was born in 1935. The Argentine television network TodosNoticias reported he had pancreatic cancer, but the family reported no further details.
Sivori helped win numerous championships for River Plate, the famed Buenos Aires club where he made his debut at age 17. In 1957 he was picked up by Juventus, where he helped the Italian squad capture league titles in 1958, 1960 and 1961. He also helped Juventus to two Italian Cup championships, in 1959 and 1960.
---
Marcello Viotti
BERLIN (AP) - Marcello Viotti, the music director of Venice's La Fenice Theater, died Wednesday at a German hospital. He was 50.
Viotti succumbed after being in a coma for several days at a clinic in Munich, Germany, his agent, Paul Steinhauser, said by telephone from Vienna, Austria.
Viotti, music director at La Fenice since 2002, conducted several renowned orchestras, including the Berlin Philharmonic and the English Chamber Orchestra.
He also conducted at opera houses around the world, including Milan's La Scala and the Metropolitan Opera in New York. He recently conducted a production of Giuseppe Verdi's "Aida" at the Met.
Viotti, an Italian, was born in the French-speaking part of Switzerland. He studied at the Lausanne Conservatory, and his career took off in the 1980s as chief conductor at the Turin Opera in Italy.
---
Solomon Williams
BRADENTON, Fla. (AP) - Solomon Williams, who broke the color barrier on Florida's railroads to become the state's first black locomotive engineer, died Feb. 11. He was 101.
When Williams became an engineer in 1921, the sight of a black man driving a train so surprised some people that they offered money to take his picture, he once said.
Williams' place in state history was confirmed by the Manatee County Historical Commission, which gave him an award in 2001.
Williams will be forever linked with Manatee County's locomotive icon, Old Cabbage Head, which sits in the Manatee Village Historical Park. The high-profile job earned him 10 cents an hour.
Williams retired in 1951 along with the Old Cabbage Head, he said, because no one else around could drive it.
 Load-Date: February 18, 2005

 

End of Document
