

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 13, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1180 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Harry Caicedo
MIAMI BEACH, Fla. (AP) - Harry Caicedo, a former Miami Herald bureau chief, foreign correspondent and magazine editor, died Saturday of heart failure. He was 76.
Caicedo died after suffering complications from chemotherapy treatment for leukemia.
He worked for the Herald in Key West before joining the U.S. Information Agency in 1966 and becoming the first foreign correspondent for Voice of America in Peru. He served as the agency's publishing director for literature distributed to Latin American embassies after moving to Miami.
He returned to the Herald as a liaison between the newsroom and El Nuevo Herald, Knight-Ridder's Spanish-language newspaper in Miami. He later helped co-found Vista, a weekly magazine aimed at Hispanic readers, and served as editor for seven years.
Caicedo wrote a thriller titled "Conflicting Loyalties" that was published in April.
---
Emilio Cruz
NEW YORK (AP) - Emilio Cruz, an artist known for his mixture of human figures, animal and natural history imagery, died Friday of pancreatic cancer, his wife said. He was 66.
He was linked with Abstract Expressionist painters like Lester Johnson, Bob Thompson and Jan Muller, and his paintings often illustrated the darker side of human existence.
He began his career in the early 1960s with local exhibitions which expanded around the country. During the 1970s, he lived in Chicago and taught at the Art Institute of Chicago. At the time of his death he was an assistant professor at Pratt Institute and New York University.
In 1981, two plays that Cruz wrote were produced called "Homeostasis: Once More the Scorpion" and "The Absence Held Fast to Its Presence." Both were held at the Open Eye Theater in Manhattan and went on to be part of the World Theater Festival in Europe.
---
Beverly Kees
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - Beverly Kees, a journalist and author who once was editor of the Post-Tribune in Gary, Ind., was struck and killed by a truck Friday, authorities said. She was 63.
The driver was not charged, and the investigation was continuing.
Kees spent most of her newspaper career at the Minneapolis Star and Minneapolis Tribune, starting as a reporter and ending as an assistant managing editor. She also served as executive editor of the Grand Forks (N.D.) Herald and executive editor of The Fresno Bee.
Kees was editor of the Post-Tribune from 1984 to 1988.
Along with Bill Phillips, she wrote "Nothing Sacred: Journalism, Politics and Public Trust in a Tell-All Age."
Kees was former president of the northern California chapter of the Society of Professional Journalists.
She was also a member of the American Society of Newspaper Editors, spending three years as an ASNE writing awards judge, and served as the Associated Press Managing Editors Association committee chairwoman, board member and secretary.
---
Arthur Lydiard
WELLINGTON, New Zealand (AP) - New Zealand athletics coach Arthur Lydiard, who guided Peter Snell and Murray Halberg to Olympic gold medals, died Saturday, family members said. He was 87.
Lydiard suffered a suspected heart attack at a Houston hotel while visiting the United States on a lecture tour.
His methods of preparing middle-distance runners with long regimes of distance training were initially thought to be controversial, but they gained international recognition when Snell and Halberg won gold medals at the 1960 Rome Olympics.
Snell, who now lives in the United States, won over 800 meters, and Halberg the 5,000 in Rome. Snell, who also held the world record for the mile, won the 800 and 1,500 at the 1964 Tokyo Olympics.
Lydiard was recognized internationally not only for training elite athletes but for making jogging popular for fitness.
Lydiard coached for the Mexican Athletics Federation in 1965 and in Finland from 1967. He was credited with the rise of Finnish athletes in the 1970s.
---
John O'Neil III
COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) - John O'Neil III, a painter and former head of the University of South Carolina art department, died Sunday. He was 72.
A cause of death was not given, but current department chairman Phillip Dunn said O'Neil had pneumonia.
O'Neil was described as a gifted painter as well as a mentor to young artists and professors during his nearly 25-year tenure at the helm of the art department.
O'Neil's own work appeared in more than 250 exhibitions at museums and galleries across the country, including the Southeastern Center for Contemporary Art in Winston-Salem, N.C., the Center of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles and the High Museum of Art in Atlanta.
He served on the Presidential Panel of Graphic Design, which was charged with guiding federal agencies to upgrade graphic and architectural standards.
A New York native, O'Neil earned two master's degrees and a doctorate from Columbia University.
---
Fernando Poe Jr.
MANILA, Philippines (AP) - Action film star and presidential candidate Fernando Poe Jr., who refused to concede May's election, died Tuesday after suffering a stroke, doctors said. He was 65.
Poe was a hero to millions of poor Filipinos who embraced the fast-punching, straight-shooting underdog hero he typically played in more than 200 action films. He also played true-to-life heroes, including decorated policemen, and appeared in several World War II movies as a soldier or guerrilla fighting Japanese invaders.
He was a five-time winner of the local version of the Oscars.
President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo called Poe "a worthy adversary in politics and a great Filipino."
Poe, better known as "Da King" or simply FPJ, started appearing in movies in his teens and never held public office. He had come under pressure from politicians, especially supporters of his close friend and another ex-actor, ousted President Joseph Estrada, to capitalize on his popularity and seek the presidency in the May 10 election.
Despite support from the poor, who overwhelmingly voted for Estrada in 1998, Poe couldn't deliver. He lost the election by 1.1 million votes.
---
William Rosson
SALEM, Va. (AP) - William Rosson, a retired four-star Army general and a former board member of the National D-Day Memorial Foundation, died Sunday of a heart attack, his wife said. He was 86.
Rosson's military honors spanned World War II to the Vietnam War.
He was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Army and fought in 10 campaigns in North Africa and Europe in World War II. He received the Distinguished Service Cross, the nation's second-highest decoration for valor, and rose to lieutenant colonel by the war's end.
He later served on the Army General Staff at the Pentagon, in Gen. Dwight Eisenhower's NATO headquarters in Paris and on the staff of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs.
In the Vietnam War, Rosson served a tour as Gen. William Westmoreland's chief of staff.
He retired in 1975 as commander in chief of the U.S. Southern Command in the Panama Canal Zone.
Rosson's many awards included the Bronze Star, the Legion of Merit, a Purple Heart and the Doughboy Award, the infantry's highest award.
He graduated from the University of Oregon in 1940 and later received a master's degree in international relations from Oxford University.
 Load-Date: December 14, 2004

 

End of Document
