

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
September 3, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1003 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Tom Capone
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Tom Capone, a Brazilian music producer nominated for five Latin Grammys, was killed in a motorcycle crash hours after being shut out at the awards show. He was 38.
Capone, whose real name was Luis Antonio Ferreira Goncalves, was widely known as a producer for many top names on the Brazilian music scene. He died early Thursday when his Harley Davidson collided with a car in the Van Nuys area of the city, police said Friday. Capone was thrown from the motorcycle. The driver of the car was not injured.
A toxicology test was under way, Los Angeles County coroner's spokesman David Campbell said. A preliminary report showed Capone died of multiple traumatic injuries and that investigators noted the odor of alcohol, Campbell said.
Capone had five Grammy nominations, including producer of the year; two for record of the year (Maria Rita's "A Festa" and Skank's "Dois Rios"); album of the year; and best engineered album for Rita's eponymous CD. He failed to receive any awards at the ceremony Wednesday night in Los Angeles.
Capone, who lived in Rio de Janeiro, worked with major Brazilian artists such as Paralamas do Sucesso, Legiao Urbana and the late Cassia Eller. He produced for rock acts such as Raimundos, Skank and O Rappa as well as for more traditional Brazilian artists like Milton Nascimento, Marisa Monte and Carlinhos Brown.
---
Jack Crow
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. (AP) - Jack Crow, who brought the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory to Florida State University, died Friday of cancer. He was 65.
The lab, the only one of its kind in the Western Hemisphere and one of only nine in the world, is used by scientists from various fields. It is considered critical to understanding matter and living structures and to developing modern technologies and new, improved materials.
MIT had run the nation's magnet lab for three decades when the National Science Foundation in 1990 awarded the contract to a consortium including Florida State, the University of Florida and Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico. It was located in Tallahassee, where hundreds of scientists from around the world visit the lab each year.
Crow, who was instrumental in winning the lab away from MIT, hired J. Robert Schrieffer, winner of the 1972 Nobel Prize for Physics, as the lab's chief scientist and lured a number of other top scientists to the center.
An experimental physicist whose research interests included magnetism, superconductivity and magnet-related technologies, Crow directed the laboratory until he announced in 2002 that he was stepping down to return to part-time teaching duties in the Florida State physics department.
The lab's magnets can produce fields 1 million times greater than the Earth's magnetic field and are instrumental in a variety of research areas.
---
Sir Alastair Morton
LONDON (AP) - Sir Alastair Morton, who played a key role in the building of the Channel tunnel between England and France, died Wednesday, his family said. He was 66.
Morton, who died of a heart attack, became co-chairman of Eurotunnel in 1987 and served as group chief executive from 1990 until 1994, when the undersea link opened.
He brought a sharp mind and an explosive temper to a task which many thought would be impossible: to complete the 31-mile tunnel entirely with private funding, as Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher insisted.
The construction cost of $18 billion was double the original estimate. Morton, who saw himself as representing the small shareholders in Eurotunnel, battled with the banks that financed the project and with Transmanche-Link, the consortium of construction companies that did the work.
---
William Pierson
LOS ANGELES (AP) - William Pierson, a raspy-voiced movie, television and stage actor perhaps best remembered for his role as Marko the Mailman in the Billy Wilder film classic "Stalag 17," died Aug. 27. He was 78.
Pierson died from respiratory problems at Valley View Care Center in Newton, N.J., publicist Dale Olson said in Los Angeles.
Pierson originally played Marko in the Broadway version of "Stalag 17," the dark comedy-drama set in a prisoner of war camp in World War II Germany. Wilder brought him to Hollywood in 1953 to recreate the role for the film.
He also appeared on Broadway in "High Button Shoes," "Make Mine Manhattan" and "Reuben, Reuben" and in a national touring company of "The Odd Couple."
Other film credits included "Operation Madball" and "Fun With Dick and Jane."
He had a long career in TV, dating to the medium's Golden Age when he appeared on such shows as "Studio One" and "Kraft Theatre."
He also had a recurring role on "Three's Company" as Dean Travers, and appeared on such shows as "The Facts of Life," "One Day at a Time," "All in the Family" and "Diff'rent Strokes."
---
Paul Shmyr
SURREY, British Columbia (AP) - Paul Shmyr, the former NHL and WHA defenseman who captained the Edmonton Oilers in Wayne Gretzky's first season with the team, died Thursday after a battle with throat cancer, the Oilers said. He was 58.
Shmyr played 511 games in the WHA, including 160 with the Oilers, and 343 in the NHL with Chicago, Minnesota, California and Hartford. He captained the Oilers in 1978-79 - their last season in the WHA.
---
Lou Witzeman
SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. (AP) - Lou Witzeman, the founder of one of the nation's largest private providers of medical transportation and fire protection, died Thursday. He was 79.
Rural/Metro Corp. said Witzeman suffered an extended illness before his death.
Witzeman started Rural/Metro in 1948 with a single pumper truck and four men. The company now operates in 23 states and more than 400 communities.
When Witzeman started Rural/Metro, he charged subscribing residents $12 per year for fire protection and sold the service door-to-door.
He said in a 1998 interview with the East Valley Tribune that he founded the company after watching an old house burn in his then-rural community and had no plans for a big business. He retired in 1981 but continued to serve on the company's board until his death.
 Load-Date: September 4, 2004

 

End of Document
