

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 3, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1460 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Shiing-shen Chern
SHANGHAI, China (AP) - Shiing-shen Chern, a Chinese-American mathematician famous for his breakthroughs in differential geometry, died Friday in the northeastern Chinese city of Tianjin, the Xinhua News Agency reported. He was 93.
After studying at Beijing's Tsinghua University and the University of Hamburg, as well as in Paris, Chern taught during World War II both in China and at Princeton University in the United States.
After civil war broke out between the Communists and Nationalists, Chern moved abroad again, first back to Princeton and then to the University of Chicago, later becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen. In 1960, he moved to the University of California at Berkeley, where a mathematics chair has been endowed in his name.
Chern returned to China after the death of the communist state's founder, Mao Zedong, in 1976, and in 1985 established the Institute for Mathematics at Nankai and served as its first director.
Chern's field of research led to the development of the later-named Chern characteristic classes in fiber spaces that came to play a role in a wide area of mathematics and mathematical physics.
---
Jody Jacobs
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Jody Jacobs, who chronicled the city's rich, famous and powerful as the Los Angeles Times society editor for 14 years, died Wednesday of congestive heart failure, her husband said. She was 82.
Considered among the best society reporters of her era, she joined the newspaper in 1971 as the region's social network was undergoing dramatic change.
Among her exclusive interviews was one with Reagan after he was elected president in 1980. The night before his inauguration, she jotted notes about Reagan searching for his mother's Bible for his swearing-in ceremony and his yearning for an inauguration dinner of macaroni and cheese.
Jacobs was born Josephine Caceres in Margarita, Venezuela, in 1922. She moved at age 6 with her family to New York City and later studied journalism at Hunter College. She worked at Women's Wear Daily before joining the Times.
---
Verona Johnston
WORTHINGTON, Ohio (AP) - Verona Johnston, America's oldest person, died Wednesday, her daughter said. She was 114.
She was born Aug. 6, 1890, in Indianola, Iowa. She was the eighth of nine children born to Civil War veteran Joseph Calhoun and Emma Speer Calhoun.
Johnston voted in every election since women earned the right in 1920, even casting an absentee ballot in November.
Relatives said Johnston lived a wholesome life, rarely visited doctors and never used the deductible on her health insurance policy. The secretary at her doctor's office said Johnston had the thinnest file on record.
Johnston attended Drake University in Des Moines, Iowa, where she studied Latin and graduated in 1912. At the time, tuition was $54 per year.
---
Maria Perschy
VIENNA, Austria (AP) - Maria Perschy, an Austrian movie actress who played in several Hollywood movies, has died of cancer, Austrian state radio ORF reported Friday. She was 66.
Perschy played in Hollywood movies including the 1963 slapstick "Man's Favorite Sport?" which also starred Rock Hudson, and the 1962 movie "Freud," which was based on the life of Austrian psychotherapist Sigmund Freud.
Born in the eastern Austrian city of Eisenstadt, Perschy moved to Vienna as a 17-year-old to study acting, ORF reported. After school, she moved to Germany for further training, and her career later took her to Britain, France, Italy, Spain and eventually to Hollywood.
She returned to Austria in 1985 and acted in theater plays and television series.
---
Cora Lee Price
LAWRENCE, Kan. (AP) - Cora Lee Price, a retired classics professor at the University of Kansas and a member of the university's Women's Hall of Fame, died Wednesday at a nursing home, colleagues said. She was 96.
Price joined the faculty at Kansas in 1962 and taught English and classics there until retiring in 1979.
Price got her bachelor's degree from Beloit College in Wisconsin, followed by a master's from California's Claremont College and, in 1940, a doctorate in English from Stanford University.
Her husband, retired mathematics professor G. Baley Price, gave the university $500,000 to endow a professorship bearing his wife's name in October. The Prices donated their papers to the university's Spencer Research Library in 2002.
---
Roderick Anthony Robinson
NEW AIYANSH, British Columbia (AP) - Roderick Anthony Robinson, elder statesman of the Nisga'a people and a leading force in Canada's long-running native land claims talks, died Tuesday after a long illness, relatives and tribal officials said. He was 74.
He played a pivotal role in the nation's first Indian land claims settlement involving the Nisga'a in 2000. A hereditary chief of the Eagle Clan, Robinson also held the Nisga'a name Sim'oogit Minee'eskw.
After serving as a negotiator in the Nisga'a Final Agreement, as the settlement was called, Robinson was appointed first ambassador of Nisga'a Lisims Government and elected chair of Council of Elders in 2000. He retired from that post in 2002.
Robinson also was a deacon of Holy Trinity Anglican Church in New Aiyansh and was made Canon of St. Andrews Cathedral in Prince Rupert in 2000.
In October he was presented the Order of Canada by Gov. Gen. Adrienne Clarkson for lifelong service to his people.
---
Josef Schwammberger
BERLIN (AP) - Josef Schwammberger, a former Nazi labor-camp commander who hid for 40 years in Argentina before being captured and returned to Germany for trial, died during the night in a prison hospital near Stuttgart, officials said Friday. He was 92.
Schwammberger, a native of Austria who was known for particular sadism during the war, was convicted in 1992 in Stuttgart of seven counts of murder and 32 counts of accessory to murder and sentenced to life in prison.
He was originally charged with murdering or helping murder 3,377 people, including more than 40 by his own hand.
In the final days of the 11-month trial, prosecutors reduced the number of charges, because of lack of evidence, to 34 inmates killed by Schwammberger and at least 275 who died as a result of his orders.
Schwammberger escaped in January 1948 from a train taking him to U.S. military authorities in Austria for trial.
Within months he entered Argentina, where he lived under his own name and obtained Argentine citizenship in 1965.
Argentine officials tracked him down on Nov. 13, 1987, in Huerta Grande, a village 500 miles northwest of Buenos Aires near a German-Argentine settlement. Schwammberger was eventually returned to Germany in May 1990 for trial.
---
Edwin Shanke
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - Edwin Shanke, a World War II news correspondent who reported from behind Nazi lines for two years and later opened The Associated Press bureau in Sweden as war raged in Europe, died Wednesday of a long illness, his wife said. He was 94.
He had lived in Stockholm since retiring in the early 1970s as chief of AP's Scandinavian Services.
He started with the AP in Milwaukee in the late 1930s, but was assigned to Berlin in 1937 because he spoke German.
When war broke out in 1939, Shanke followed the invading German army into Poland and France.
Shanke also reported on the Nazi annexation of Austria and the Sudetenland in then-Czechoslovakia.
After U.S. journalists were expelled from Germany in 1942, Shanke worked briefly as a night editor in the AP London bureau.
In 1942, he was posted to Stockholm to open a bureau.
After World War II ended, he returned to Berlin to participate in the coverage of war-wrecked Germany, and the Nuremberg trials.
He went back to London in 1948 and covered several major news events, including the 1956 attack by France, Britain and Israel on Egypt when it seized the Suez Canal.
---
Mona Van Duyn
UNIVERSITY CITY, Mo. (AP) - Mona Van Duyn, the nation's first female poet laureate and a Pulitzer Prize winner, died Thursday at her home from bone cancer, her husband said. She was 83.
Van Duyn published nine volumes of poetry and won a Pulitzer for "Near Changes" in 1991. The following year she became the sixth poet and the first woman named U.S. poet laureate, an eight-month position appointed by the Librarian of Congress since 1986.
Van Duyn won a National Book Award for her book of poems "To See, To Take" in 1971. The year before, she was awarded the Bollingen Prize from Yale University, one of many honors for her poetry.
Her other works include "Firefall" (1994), "Merciful Disguises" (1973) and "Bedtime Stories" (1972). Her first book of poetry, "Valentines to the Wide World," was published in 1959.
Van Duyn was a lecturer from 1950 to 1967 at St. Louis' Washington University and a visiting professor for about three years in the 1980s, the school said. Her husband, Jarvis Thurston, is a former chairman of the school's English department.
 Load-Date: December 4, 2004

 

End of Document
