

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 24, 2005, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 707 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Lajos Baroti
BUDAPEST, Hungary (AP) - Lajos Baroti, who coached Hungary to a bronze medal at the 1960 Rome Olympics, died Friday, the country's soccer federation said. He was 91.
Baroti coached Hungary a record 117 times between 1957 and 1978 and played twice on the national team.
Besides the Olympic medal, Baroti also led Hungary to a sixth-place finish at the 1966 World Cup.
Baroti also was credited with training the Hungarian team, which won the gold medal at the 1964 Tokyo Olympics, although he didn't travel with the team to the games.
Baroti coached Portugal's SL Benfica to three titles from 1980-1982 and also worked with Peru's national team in the early 1970s.
Baroti began his soccer career at the age of 14, playing for Szeged AK in southern Hungary. After retiring due to a foot injury in 1948, he began his coaching career at Hungary's Gyori ETO.
---
Argentina Brunetti
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Argentina Brunetti, a character actress who played the worried wife of Mr. Martini in the classic film "It's a Wonderful Life," has died. She was 98.
Brunette died Tuesday in her sleep, in Rome, said Ben Ohmart, whose Boalsburg, Pa.,-based publishing house, BearManor Media, released Brunetti's autobiography.
She starred in dozens of films and television shows over a career spanning more than 50 years.
She portrayed Dean Martin's mother in the 1953 comedy "The Caddy," in which Martin sings "That's Amore" to her, and performed with Desi Arnaz in the 1949 film "Holiday in Havana."
Her TV credits include "Hopalong Cassidy," "The Untouchables," "Kojak" and "Everybody Loves Raymond."
Born in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in 1907, Brunetti followed her Sicilian mother, actress Mimi Aguglia, into the theater. Beginning with a walk-on role at age 3 in the opera "Cavalleria Rusticana," Brunetti performed throughout Europe and South America.
Her Hollywood career began in 1937 with contract work dubbing the voices of Jeanette MacDonald and Norma Shearer into Italian. She earned her first credited role as an Italian immigrant in Frank Capra's 1946 holiday film "It's a Wonderful Life," in which James Stewart's character helps her large family buy a house.
Off screen, Brunetti was a founding member of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association and wrote a weekly column for foreign language publications in Canada and Italy.
---
Wang Daohan
BEIJING (AP) - Wang Daohan, the longtime head of China's agency that deals with rival Taiwan in the absence of formal diplomatic ties has died. He was 90.
He died Saturday of an unspecified disease at a Shanghai hospital, the official Xinhua News Agency said.
Wang, the former Communist Party secretary for Shanghai, served as president of the Association for Relations Across Taiwan Straits since it was founded in 1991 to oversee Beijing's relations with Taiwan.
Two years later, Wang met with his Taiwanese counterpart, Koo Chen-fu in Singapore in the first high-level talks between the two sides since they split in 1949 amid civil war.
Wang was a former economics professor at elite Peking University in the Chinese capital and Fudan and Tonji Universities in Shanghai.
Chang Chun-hsiung, who succeeded the late Koo as head of Taiwan's agency for dealing with the mainland, praised Wang for his contributions to relations between the two sides.
---
James L. Swauger
PITTSBURGH (AP) - James L. Swauger, a longtime museum researcher who led the excavation of Fort Pitt, has died. He was 92.
Swauger died of pneumonia at a nursing home in Johnston, R.I., on Dec. 18, said David Watters, curator of anthropology at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History.
When Swauger began excavating Fort Pitt in 1952, he knew roughly where he might find the remnants of the 200-year-old structure located in what is now Point State Park at the beginning of the Ohio River.
But since the field of urban archaeology was in its infancy, the techniques Swauger would use to uncover the famous fort's remains would have to be learned as he went, Watters said.
Swauger was an associate director when he formally retired from the Pittsburgh museum in 1980, but he continued to work there on projects into his mid-80s, Watters said.
He began working at the Carnegie Museum in 1935 as an assistant in archaeology and ethnology, later becoming a curator.
 Load-Date: December 25, 2005

 

End of Document
