

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
April 30, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1720 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Amado Avendano
SAN CRISTOBAL DE LAS CASAS, Mexico (AP) - Amado Avendano, a journalist and activist who became a well-known symbol of the Zapatista uprising in Chiapas, died of a brain hemorrhage Thursday, his son said. He was 65.
He was hospitalized Monday after suffering a stroke that left him in a coma.
Avendano co-founded the newspaper El Tiempo, which began publishing in San Cristobal in February 1968.
Avendano developed a reputation among friends and foes alike as an investigative journalist who was not afraid to expose government corruption and the exploitation of Chiapas' Indian population.
Under intense criticism from the state government, which leaned on advertisers to stop running ads in the paper, El Tiempo closed in 1980. Avendano became editor of a new daily, El Diario de Hoy.
In the last years of his life, he served as editor and chief reporter of "La Foja Coleta," a two-page daily that harshly criticized Chiapas' elected officials.
Avendano is best known in Mexico for his run for Chiapas governor in 1994 with the leftist Democratic Revolution Party.
---
Gaetano Badalamenti
BOSTON (AP) - Gaetano Badalamenti, once described by federal authorities as the "boss of all bosses" of the Sicilian Mafia, has died, a Justice Department spokesman said Friday.
Badalamenti, 80, a ringleader of a $1.65 billion heroin and cocaine smuggling operation that used pizzerias as fronts to distribute the drugs from 1975 to 1984, was sentenced in 1987 to 45 years in federal prison.
The Justice Department spokesman, who spoke on condition of anonymity, could not confirm when, where or how Badalamenti died, but he was most recently housed at the Federal Medical Center in Ayer, according to the federal Bureau of Prisons Web site. The facility specializes in treating inmates with serious illnesses.
The smuggling ring was charged with importing heroin from the Middle East and cocaine from South America and then laundering profits through Swiss bank accounts. Prosecutors also claimed ring members were behind scores of murders in Sicily and the United States.
Badalamenti, of Cinisi, Italy, was also sentenced to life in prison in absentia in Italy in 2002 for the 1978 murder of a disc jockey who was frequently critical of the Mafia boss.
---
Joseph Cullman
NEW YORK (AP) - Joseph Cullman, a former chairman of the International Tennis Hall of Fame, died Friday, a spokeswoman for the Hall of Fame said. He was 92.
His health had been deteriorating in recent months.
Cullman was considered a pioneer of women's tennis, helping start a women's pro tour in 1970.
Cullman became president of the Hall of Fame in 1982 and served as chairman from 1985 to 1988. He was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1990, as a contributor to the sport.
---
Bonnie Jo Halpin
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Bonnie Jo Halpin, an original Playboy bunny who worked at several of Hugh Hefner's clubs and appeared in the magazine numerous times in the 1960s, died March 31, her friend Joyce Nizzari said. She was 65.
The Los Angeles County Coroner's office said the cause of death was an accidental overdose of the prescription painkiller Vicodin. She died in her apartment after she was seriously injured in a hit-and-run car accident, Nizzari said.
Halpin wore the trademark bunny wear - a skimpy, one-piece satin outfit with a black bow tie and rabbit ears - at the opening of Hefner's first club in 1960.
She appeared on the cover of the October 1962 issue of Playboy.
After working for Playboy, Halpin had several other jobs, including working as a personal trainer.
---
Denis Hills
LONDON (AP) - Denis Hills, the writer sentenced to death by Idi Amin for describing the Ugandan dictator as a "black Nero" and "village tyrant," has died. He was 90.
Hills died on April 26 in Richmond, southern England, the death notice in The Times said.
Amin used Hills' imprisonment to make Britain "kneel at his feet." Two British envoys who brought an appeal from Queen Elizabeth II to spare Hills' life were forced to crawl on their knees through a low entrance to a hut where Amin received them.
The day before Hills was due to face a firing squad, Amin summoned him and said he was being freed.
After graduation from college, Hills traveled to Germany, where he attended the 1935 Nuremberg Rally of Adolf Hitler's Nazis.
In 1937, he went to work as the English editor of a cultural magazine in Gdynia, Poland, a country colorfully described in his book, "Return to Poland."
At the end of the war, Hills persuaded authorities to cast a blind eye so that a ship carrying 1,200 Polish Jews who had survived the Holocaust could leave Italy for Palestine, a decision celebrated in Leon Uris's novel, "Exodus."
---
Ernest Jasmin
LOUISVILLE, Ky. (AP) - Ernest Jasmin, who was elected Kentucky's first black commonwealth's attorney in 1988 and prosecuted some of Louisville's highest-profile murder cases, died Friday of lung cancer. He was 69.
Jasmin won convictions of Victor Taylor and George Wade for the 1984 slayings of two Trinity High School students, and of Kevin Stanford and David Buchanan for the 1981 murder of gas-station attendant Baerbel Poore.
Jasmin later served as a circuit judge from 1992 until he retired in 1999.
Jasmin was dubbed the "preacher for the prosecution" for his fire-and-brimstone courtroom oratory. He said that as a teen he memorized the Bible verses he later used in the courtroom.
---
John W. Kirklin
BIRMINGHAM, Ala. (AP) - Dr. John W. Kirklin, who helped perfect the heart-lung bypass machine at the Mayo Clinic in the 1950s, has died from complications from a head injury in January. He was 86.
Kirklin died April 21 according a statement released by the University of Alabama.
At the clinic in Rochester, Minn., Kirklin refined the Gibbon heart-lung machine and in 1955 performed the first series of successful heart surgeries using the improved device.
During his 45-year career, Kirklin developed surgical techniques for a variety of heart defects and co-authored the textbook, "Cardiac Surgery."
Recruited in 1966 to direct UAB's surgical program in Birmingham, he helped turn the city from a racially troubled steel center into one of the nation's prominent medical sites.
The Kirklin Clinic, an outpatient center that opened at UAB in 1992, was named in his honor. Kirklin had persuaded the famed architect I.M. Pei to design it.
Kirklin served as a neurosurgeon in the Army during World War II and in 1950 joined the Mayo Clinic, where he became its first chairman of cardiovascular surgery.
---
Johnny Mann
CATHEDRAL CITY, Calif. (AP) - Johnny Mann, an actor who appeared in dozens of soap operas and TV dramas, including "Hawaii Five-0," died of complication from cancer Monday, his wife said. He was 73.
Mann landed character roles in various TV shows, including "Remington Steele" and "The A-Team." He had a recurring role on "Highway to Heaven," where he became friends with the show's star, Michael Landon, according Mann's wife, Shirley.
He also appeared in various soaps, including "Days of Our Lives," "General Hospital" and "The Young and the Restless." His film credits include "Legal Eagles" and "Blind Date."
Mann was able to land many acting roles because of his shocking white hair and dark complexion, his wife said. He was often confused with singer Johnny Mann, she said.
---
Kioumars Saberi
TEHRAN, Iran (AP) - Kioumars Saberi, Iran's best-known satirical columnist and cartoonist, died Friday, according to a friend, Giti Safarzadeh. He was 63.
Known as "Gol Agha" in Persian, or Mr. Flower, Saberi was the first to satirize the leaders of Iran's clerical establishment after the Islamic Revolution of 1979. His humor was groundbreaking as even minor criticism of the ruling clerics was forbidden during the 1980s and 1990s.
His main outlet was the daily newspaper Ettela'at, for which he wrote a page-two column that thousands of readers chuckled over. However, about five years ago he stopped writing for Ettela'at and focused on his own magazine Gol Agha, which consisted mainly of cartoons.
Trained as a teacher of literature, Saberi worked in the central government for a few years after the 1979 revolution. He served as a cultural adviser to President Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who is now Iran's supreme leader. He left the post in the mid-1980s to devote himself to satire.
---
David S. Sheridan
ARGYLE, N.Y. (AP) - David S. Sheridan, who is credited with inventing the modern disposable catheter, died Thursday, his family said. He was 95.
Active in the catheter business until the age of 90, Sheridan was dubbed the "Catheter King" in 1988 by Forbes Magazine.
Until World War II, urethral catheters were usually made of braided cotton strings that looked like shoelaces and were repeatedly laminated. And they were used repeatedly.
Sheridan, who only had an 8th grade education, built a machine that made disposable plastic catheter tubes. He later figured out a way to produce plastic catheters with wider ends and put a line of radioactive paint down a catheter that would show up on X-rays.
Sheridan started in the catheter business in the 1930s when a friend convinced him to put up his $35,000 in savings to begin U.S. Catheter and Instrument Corp. He left that company in 1945 but later built and sold three more catheter companies. He started his fourth company, Sheridan Catheter Corp., in 1982 at the age of 73.
Sheridan, who held more than 50 patents, also pioneered a plastic endotracheal tube used routinely in surgery.
---
Sam White
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. (AP) - Dr. Sam White, a pioneer in biomedical research who helped design medical tests for the first American astronauts, has died. He was 91.
He died Monday of respiratory complications, his daughter, Meredith White, said.
White organized a team approach to examining and testing the astronauts at Lovelace Medical Center, said Dr. Don Kilgore, who worked with White for 30 years.
During his more than 30 years at Lovelace, White researched aging, memory loss, hypothermia, cosmic rays, geology and pollution of the upper atmosphere.
He also was known for making instruments to treat patients or to conduct experiments, his daughter said.
The Smithsonian Institution asked White to borrow the slide-rule-like device he designed to calculate the shock wave of the first atom bomb for an exhibit on the 50th anniversary of the bomb.
His brother was late U.S. Supreme Court Justice Byron White.
 Load-Date: May 1, 2004

 

End of Document
