

Officials from around the Americas declares war on corruption, offer support for Haiti
The Associated Press
June 9, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 594 words
Byline: By MONTE HAYES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUITO, Ecuador
Body




The Organization of American States called for elections in Haiti as soon as possible and opened the way for an investigation into the ouster of Haitian President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Over the objections of the United States and Haiti's new government, the OAS General Assembly approved a resolution Tuesday night noting Aristide's ouster was unconstitutional and allowing an assessment of what occurred.
Aristide accuses the United States of forcing him from office - a charge Washington denies. A U.S.-supplied jet flew Aristide to the Central African Republic on Feb. 29 as rebels advanced on the Haitian capital of Port-au-Prince, and he is now in asylum in South Africa after spending several weeks in Jamaica.
Foreign Ministers from around the Americas also declared war on the deeply ingrained corruption in the region at the end of a two-day meeting in this Andean capital.
The ministers committed their nations to undertaking "all the diplomatic initiatives necessary" to promote democracy in Haiti.
They invoked Article 20 of the organization's charter, which allows it to undertake a "collective assessment" of a country "in the event of unconstitutional alterations of the constitutional regime that seriously impairs the democratic order."
In a resolution, the foreign minister urged "the transitional government in Haiti to create conditions conducive to the holding of free, fair and democratic elections in Haiti as soon as possible."
Haiti's new government and U.S. officials were opposed to invoking Article 20, but CARICOM, a grouping of Caribbean nations, insisted on its inclusion and the debate dragged on for hours Tuesday, delaying the closure of the assembly.
After Aristide's ouster, multinational forces entered the country to re-establish order under the authority of the United Nations Security Council.
The 15-member Caribbean Community still refuses to recognize Haiti's new government.
In other discussions, Secretary of State Colin Powell urged nations to "advance democratic governance and economic growth in this region" by fighting corruption.
"Corruption is deeply destructive of our people's faith in democracy," he said Monday during a debate on the general assembly's final document. "Corruption scares off investors, denying countries the money they need to lift themselves out of poverty and onto the road to sustainable development."
The document, signed by 34 foreign ministers or heads of delegations, recognizes "that corruption has a serious impact on public and private institutions, weakens economic growth and impinges upon the needs and fundamental interests of a country's most vulnerable social groups."
The foreign ministers pledged to keep corrupt officials from entering their countries and agreed to cooperate in the recovery of stolen funds.
But the general assembly rejected a Peruvian proposal calling for countries to extradite officials accused of corruption. The Peruvian government had hoped the measure would help its effort to extradite former President Alberto Fujimori from Japan, where he took refuge after his government collapsed in a corruption scandal in 2000.
Mexico, which has a long history of providing refugee to officials who say they are fleeing political persecution, opposed Peru's proposal.
The United States also was unsuccessful in persuading other hemispheric nations to agree to impose sanctions on corrupt governments.
"Governments are not corrupt," Peruvian Foreign Minister Manual Rodriguez told The Associated Press during a break in the debate. "Members of a given government are corrupt."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo QTO115
 Load-Date: June 10, 2004

 

End of Document
