

Olympic flame leaves Athens on 35-day around-the-world trip
The Associated Press
June 2, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 429 words
Byline: By ROB GLOSTER, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: ATHENS, Greece
Body




The Olympic flame left the traffic-clogged Greek capital Wednesday night on a jumbo jet dubbed "Zeus," starting the first leg of an unprecedented six-continent visit to 26 countries before returning for the Summer Games.
The flame, which has burned outside Athens' century-old Panathenean Stadium for the past two months, flew first to Sydney - host of the 2000 Olympics - and will stop in Los Angeles, St. Louis, Atlanta and New York on June 16-19.
The torch, driven to the airport in an SUV, arrived at dusk. Chief 2004 organizer Gianna Angelopoulos-Daskalaki walked it down a red carpet, past the flags of the 26 nations, and then carried it up to the plane.
Each of the countries, except the United States, was represented by a diplomat at the ceremony. Olympic authorities had expected U.S. Ambassador Thomas Miller to attend.
The 35-day journey, covering more than 46,800 miles, will bring the Olympic flame to South America and Africa for the first time.
"This journey taken by our torch will make history. It will bring the world to the Athens Games," Angelopoulos-Daskalaki said. "In these times of challenge and conflict, we can draw courage from the torch run."
Rifle-toting police stood guard as Angelopoulos-Daskalaki promised, "As this torch travels around the world, the people of Greece will continue their hard work" to prepare for the Aug. 13-29 games.
The first runner to carry the torch outside Greece will be reigning 400-meter champion Cathy Freeman, an Australian who lit the Olympic flame at the Sydney opening ceremony. Other former Olympic gold medalists such as Magic Johnson and Carl Lewis, along with "Friends" star Jennifer Aniston, will help carry the torch on its world tour.
The flame was surrounded by busloads of tourists on its last day at the Panathenean Stadium, which hosted the 1896 Olympics - the first modern games. This summer's marathon will end at the stadium, in downtown Athens.
As workers hosed down the marble steps of the stadium, Greeks and non-Greeks came to bid farewell to the flame for the next five weeks. Greek sportscaster Manolis Mavrommatis said it will be strange to pass by the stadium and not see the flame.
"It's a happy day for the other continents," he said. "The world is happy to get the flame."
One Dutch couple took wedding pictures in front of the flame. Marleen and Erik Hoogendyk, who had been married hours earlier, posed in wedding attire before heading up to the Acropolis for more snapshots.
The torch was lit March 25 at ancient Olympia, birthplace of the games 3,000 years ago. It will return to Greece July 9.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XPG101-104; AP Graphic OLY RELAY ROUTE
 Load-Date: June 3, 2004

 

End of Document
