

Over the airport and through the traffic, the Thanksgiving travel rush is on
The Associated Press
November 23, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 531 words
Byline: By ROGER PETTERSON, Associated Press Writer
Body




Millions of Americans hit the road or took to the sky Wednesday in the annual dash to someone else's house for Thanksgiving turkey, despite the prospect of traffic jams, snowy highways and crowded airports and train stations.
"It's like a hurricane," said Martha Bittencourt, 54, of Sao Paulo, Brazil, describing the Miami airport as she waited for a flight to visit friends in Tennessee.
People who were accustomed to the Miami airport, however, said it wasn't bad. The holiday rush also started out more smoothly than expected at many airports, including Boston, Denver, Dallas-Fort Worth and Minneapolis-St. Paul.
Despite some high wind in the Northeast and ground delays at New York's LaGuardia Airport, "everything's going relatively smoothly," said Federal Aviation Administration spokesman Greg Martin. He said about 55,000 flights were scheduled Wednesday, 20 percent more than on a normal Wednesday.
Those smooth operations will change when people head home again, said John Wallace, a spokesman at Bradley International Airport near Hartford.
"What we're seeing is a staggered effect on the front end," he said. "And then, on the back end, everybody's got to get back for the beginning of the school week and the work week."
The Air Transport Association predicted 21.7 million people would fly globally on U.S. airlines from Nov. 19 to Nov. 29, slightly more than last year's record number.
AAA said more than 37 million people would travel at least 50 miles from home during the long holiday weekend, and that about 31 million of them would travel by car. The association, citing a telephone survey, said the number of Thanksgiving travelers would be up 0.8 percent from last year.
It helped that gasoline prices in many areas had dropped to about what motorists were paying before Hurricane Katrina hit.
Wanzetta Dan said that after staying home for a month to save on gas money, she was glad to see lower prices along Interstate 35 as she began driving from Dallas to her mother's home in Oklahoma.
"That put a smile on my face," Dan said. "It's going to be better, because now the money I was going to be spending on gas, I can spend on gifts."
Pam Grey, 52, of West Hollywood, opted for the train instead of her car to travel.
"The car is taking a little rest," Grey said. "I really don't want to drive on the highway right now."
Snowy and icy weather meant drivers in the Great Lakes area and northern New England had to be especially careful; hundreds of accidents were reported from Minnesota to Indiana to Maine. A winter storm warning in parts of Michigan forecast up to a foot of lake-effect snow and winds of more than 35 mph.
"It doesn't matter if you have a half-inch of snow, people can slide on it, the first snow of the year," said forecaster Bill Simpson in Taunton, Mass.
The snow caused no problems at Chicago's O'Hare and Midway airports, which expected nearly 2 million passengers during the holiday weekend.
Fog was the culprit in Idaho, stranding travelers in Boise.
Elsewhere in the West, "it's just beautiful traveling weather," Nancy Daniels said during a break at a truck stop in Sterling, Colo., as she and her family drove to Minnesota for "a big ol' family reunion."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BX104, CX101, DCSW102, FLJC101, MITD102, 103
 Load-Date: November 24, 2005

 

End of Document
