

People in the News
The Associated Press
October 27, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1144 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Angelina Jolie, often photographed with her two children in her arms, says she wants to adopt again.
"It's a very special thing," the 30-year-old actress told People magazine at the recent Worldwide Orphans Foundation benefit in Manhattan. "There's something about making a choice, waking up and traveling somewhere and finding your family."
Jolie has a 4-year-old son, Maddox, who was adopted from Cambodia, and a 9-month-old daughter, Zahara, adopted from Ethiopia.
"Most of the night I just thought about how quickly I want to adopt again," she said. "There are so many wonderful places. There are many parts of Asia, Africa, South America, so sooner or later I'll end up everywhere, I'm sure."
Jolie announced at the Oct. 24 benefit that she is joining with Dr. Jane Aronson, the foundation's founder, to build a pediatric AIDS center in Ethiopia.
"I know some of the kids that were next to my daughter (at the orphanage); two of them passed away, with symptoms very similar to hers," she told People. "I really do believe that if I didn't get her out at that time, that she wouldn't be here. She was days away."
Is Maddox old enough to understand what adoption means?
"We've always addressed it," said Jolie, who is a goodwill ambassador for the United Nations. "I say, 'You're from Asia, you're from Cambodia. Asia is not Mommy's continent, it's your continent.' … He knows where Zahara came from. It's pretty amazing."
Jolie credits Aronson, her children's pediatrician, with saving Zahara's life. "It was really tough. You need this wonderful, calm doctor who tells you everything is going to be OK."
---
On the Net:
http://people.aol.com/people/ 
http://www.orphandoctor.com/wwo/ 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The Metropolitan Opera has established the Beverly Sills Artist Award, a prize worth $50,000 for young opera singers.
The annual award, intended to aid career development, will be given to U.S. singers between ages 25 and 40 who have already appeared in featured solo roles with the opera company.
Sills sang for international audiences for more than three decades before retiring from the stage in 1980 at age 51. The Brooklyn-born singer later became an executive and leader of New York's performing arts community. She headed Lincoln Center for eight years beginning in 1994 and was chairman of the Metropolitan Opera for two years before resigning in January.
The award will be funded by Agnes Varis, a managing director on the Met board, and her husband, Karl Leichtman.
"I am deeply touched, but not surprised by the generosity of my two very close friends who have honored me in such a meaningful way," Sills said in a statement Wednesday. "It is not only a privilege but a treat to see our names linked in such an important endeavor as helping young singers."
Sills, 76, will chair the judging panel, which will include Nathan Leventhal, former president of Lincoln Center. The first recipient of the award will be announced in the latter part of the current opera season.
---
On the Net:
http://www.metoperafamily.org/metopera/home.aspx 
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - A former associate who is suing Michael Jackson for more than $3 million has been accused by the entertainer of concealing and misappropriating funds.
Jackson filed the cross-complaint against Marc Schaffel in Los Angeles County Superior Court on Oct. 18, his lawyer, Brent Ayscough, said Wednesday.
The original lawsuit, filed in November, claimed that Jackson owes Schaffel $800,000 for producing two 2003 television specials and $2.3 million for payments and loans made to the entertainer over the past three years.
In the latest filing, Jackson said Schaffel failed to pay costs related to the production of the Jackson song "What More Can I Give?" He also continued to represent himself as affiliated with Jackson after their business arrangement ended, according to the complaint.
Jackson also alleged Schaffel kept $250,000 in sculptures and paintings belonging to the singer.
Ayscough said Schaffel has tried to get a lien placed on Jackson's Neverland Ranch in Santa Barbara County.
Schaffel's lawyer, Howard King, dismissed the accusation, calling it "another ridiculous claim."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Catherine Zeta-Jones has some rules about what her children eat.
"I don't give them kid food," she tells Life magazine. "No candy. Almost no juice. When my kids have juice, it's like they're having their first taste of champagne."
Zeta-Jones and her husband, Michael Douglas, have two children, Dylan, 5, and Carys, 2 1/2. "We have a pact that if one of us works, the other doesn't, so the children can have some sense of normalcy," the 36-year-old actress says.
She doesn't cook - "I read about cooking" - and she's not good at watching her children scale the jungle gym.
"I'm always afraid they're going to fall off and break their legs, whereas Michael throws them in the air!" she says.
Now that she's a working mother, Zeta-Jones says she no longer worries about whether she's on the best-dressed lists. As for Douglas, "Every time I look down at his feet, he's always got the scabbiest-looking socks. And he's obsessed with this plastic $2 hairbrush. It goes everywhere with him."
Zeta-Jones won an Oscar for her role in 2002's "Chicago." Her new film, "The Legend of Zorro," also starring Antonio Banderas, opens in theaters Friday.
---
LONDON (AP) - Judi Dench, who won an Oscar for her portrayal of Queen Elizabeth in 1998's "Shakespeare in Love," is now a Companion of Honor.
She received the honor from Queen Elizabeth II during a ceremony Wednesday at Buckingham Palace. The honor recognizes service of national importance and is limited to a select group of 65 people at any one time.
Dench played 007's boss M in several James Bond movies and was Queen Victoria in "Mrs. Brown." Her screen credits also include roles in "Chocolat," "Iris," "Tea With Mussolini" and "The Shipping News."
The 70-year-old actress was made a Dame of the British Empire in 1988.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Last year, he won one. This year, Samuel L. Jackson will host the Spike TV Video Game Awards.
The 56-year-old actor, who won a VGA for voicing "Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas," will host the Nov. 18 awards show at the Gibson Amphitheater in Los Angeles. The show will air Dec. 10 on Spike TV.
"Sam Jackson is one of the coolest guys on the planet; we're thrilled to have him hosting this year's show which promises more stars, more rock and more games than ever before," said Casey Patterson, senior vice president, event production and talent development for Spike TV, in a statement this week.
The Red Hot Chili Peppers, Vin Diesel, The Rock, Missy Elliot, Snoop Dogg and Ozzy Osbourne are among those set to appear at the third annual awards event.
Jackson was nominated for an Oscar for his role in 1994's "Pulp Fiction." He has also appeared in "A Time to Kill," "Shaft" and "Changing Lanes."
---
On the Net:
http://www.spiketv.com/home 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY117 of Jolie, NY119 of Sills, NY116 of Michael Jackson,
 Load-Date: October 28, 2005

 

End of Document
