

People in the News
The Associated Press
February 21, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1278 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MINNEAPOLIS (AP) - It takes a lot of guts to tell Bob Dylan to change his song.
But, guitarist Kevin Odegard says he did during the Minneapolis sessions for Dylan's classic 1975 album "Blood on the Tracks."
Odegard is one of the uncredited musicians who played on the album in 1974 at Sound 80, a studio in south Minneapolis. He recalls the musicians going over a version of one of Dylan's songs, but the singer didn't care for it.
Dylan then asked Odegard what he thought.
"And I said, 'Well, it's passable,' " Odegard told AP Radio. "I got 'the look,' and began to sweat right through my clothes."
Odegard, 53, offered a suggestion - moving the song up a key, from G to A. The musicians played it halfway through the first verse and Dylan liked it, Odegard said.
The song, "Tangled Up in Blue," ended up kicking off "Blood on the Tracks" and is still performed by Dylan in concert.
Odegard and some of the musicians on the album are reuniting for a March 3 performance in Minneapolis. Dylan isn't on the lineup, though.
Odegard also has co-written a book on those recording sessions called "A Simple Twist Of Fate: Bob Dylan and the Making of 'Blood on the Tracks.' "
---
CASTRIES, St. Lucia (AP) - Britain's Prince Andrew is in St. Lucia for a three day visit to help celebrate the Caribbean island's 25 years of independence.
The Duke of York arrived on Friday, greeted by government officials and a police band playing "God Save the Queen" for the first time since 1979, when Princess Margaret visited for Independence Day.
During his stay, Prince Andrew was to attend a youth rally and the opening of the island's newest secondary school. He also will be the guest of honor at St. Lucia's Independence Day rally on Sunday.
From St. Lucia, Prince Andrew was to travel to Barbados and then Guyana.
---
DECATUR, Ga. (AP) - Singer Bobby Brown is back in jail for violating his probation on a prior drunken driving conviction.
Brown, 35, was being held Saturday without bond at the DeKalb County Jail, sheriff's spokeswoman Mikki Jones said. He was taken into custody after appearing before a judge Friday, but officials could not confirm exactly what Brown had done to violate his probation.
He was expected to remain jailed until a court hearing on Friday.
The judge's ruling may have been related to Brown's charge of misdemeanor battery in December, following an argument with his wife, singer Whitney Houston. A preliminary hearing in that case was set for May 5.
Brown left the R&B group New Edition in the late 1980s for a solo career. He has been on probation since January 2003, when he was convicted of a 1996 drunken driving incident. Brown had been ordered to remain on probation until Feb. 17, 2005.
Brown's hits include "My Prerogative" and "Every Little Step."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Kristin Davis of "Sex and the City" will always have the show in her heart - and in her closet.
Davis played eternal optimist Charlotte York on the HBO series, which ends Sunday after six seasons. The actress said keeping most of the clothes was part of the deal.
"I have a lot of quintessential 'Charlotte' pieces," Davis told AP Radio recently. "I have a lot of her vintage clothes. I have a lot of her shoes, except for the ones that I'm really, really sick of because they hurt."
Davis said the series, about four women living in Manhattan, dramatically changed her life.
"What it's like to walk around in the world is completely different, in a way that has taken some getting used to, but is really incredibly flattering, especially now that we're going and people are so sad and kind of adorable about it, and it just makes you so thankful to have been a part of it," she said.
"Sex and the City" also starred Sarah Jessica Parker as sex columnist Carrie Bradshaw, Kim Cattrall as promiscuous Samantha Jones and Cynthia Nixon as cynical Miranda Hobbes.
Edited versions of the HBO series will begin appearing on cable's TBS later this year.
---
On the Net:
http://www.hbo.com 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Norah Jones has done countless interviews with relative ease, but her scheduled chat with Jon Stewart of Comedy Central's "The Daily Show" has the songbird feeling a bit apprehensive.
"I'm afraid I'm going to say something stupid," the Grammy-winning singer told The Associated Press in a recent interview.
Jones is scheduled to appear Wednesday. She's on a promotional tour for her new album, "Feels Like Home."
"I know what's going on, but I'm not like current event savvy. I'm not perfect, I don't know everything. I'm a bit nervous about that," the singer said.
Jones won't be performing, but she'll chat with Stewart, of whom she raves: "He's so smart."
"I hope he doesn't say something and I'm like, 'I don't know,"' she said, laughing.
Her mother is a big fan of "The Daily Show," Jones said. The singer doesn't watch television that often, she said, and doesn't even have cable. Instead, she prefers to read.
"I've always loved to read, but sometimes I go for a year without reading a book because I forget to, or I don't have a book that I can get into easily," she said. "Recently I've been reading a lot more."
---
On the Net:
http://www.norahjones.com/ 
http://www.comedycentral.com/ 
---
LONDON (AP) - A royal spokesman came to the defense of Prince Harry in a letter published Friday after a tabloid columnist called Prince Charles' younger son a "national disgrace."
The Daily Express' Carol Sarler devoted several hundred words in her column Wednesday to roasting Prince Harry, who has been traveling and working in Australia and Africa since he finished his education at Eton in June.
She ridiculed the Australian sojourn, making comments about his behavior at rugby matches there, and said he has now "opted for eight lavish weeks in interesting parts of Africa, where he has reluctantly agreed to spend a bit of the trip staring at poor people."
"That Prince Harry is a national disgrace is scarcely news," she said.
Two years ago, Prince Harry was widely reported to have indulged in underage drinking and smoking marijuana. His father sent him to a south London rehabilitation clinic for a day so he could talk to recovering addicts and see the dangers of drug use.
Friday's Daily Express published a letter from Paddy Harverson, Prince Charles' press secretary, calling the Sarler column "grossly unfair and ill-informed." The paper simply printed the letter, without comment.
Harverson wrote that Sarler's column was a "very unfair and unfounded attack on Prince Harry's character" that showed "little or no understanding of Harry as a person."
Prince Harry has chosen a military career and is due to enter Sandhurst military academy after his time off.
---
ANDERSON, Ind.(AP) - Sandi Patty has made it big in music. Now she hopes to start small in politics.
The Grammy-winning gospel singer filed papers Thursday expressing intent to run for a seat on the Anderson Community Schools board. She will challenge Brian K. Kohles and incumbent Keith Millikan in the May 4 election.
Although the 47-year-old singer has never held public office, she's familiar with the Anderson school system - she and her husband, Don Peslis, have eight children, all of whom have attended Anderson schools.
"My passion is already in the schools, and I want to be part of something that will be good for the community," Patty said.
Millikan, a former Anderson teacher and a past president of the Anderson Federation of Teachers, is seeking a fourth term.
"It's good for the voters to have choices," Millikan said of Patty's entrance in the race. "She is probably the best known, and I know she is the best singer I have ever faced."
Patty is the winner of 39 Dove Awards and five Grammys.
---
On the Net:
http://www.sandipatty.com/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY118 of Odegard; NY119 of Prince Andrew; NY120 of Brown;
 Load-Date: February 22, 2004

 

End of Document
