

People in the News
The Associated Press
July 5, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 854 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LONDON (AP) - "Baywatch" star David Hasselhoff will appear in the London stage production of the hit musical "Chicago."
Hasselhoff will play scheming lawyer Billy Flynn in his debut on the British stage at the Adelphi Theatre. The show has run in the West End for seven years.
Hasselhoff, 51, is booked for 60 performances starting July 16.
"This is not about making money - this is about following my heart, challenging myself and having fun," Hasselhoff said.
---
STAMFORD, Conn. (AP) - Four men claim the Wayans brothers stole the idea behind the movie "White Chicks" from them.
Mario Pittore and brothers Jason, Jon and James Coppola sued last week in federal court, seeking $15 million in damages.
"We feel not only does it rip us off, but it's not even as good" as the Pittore-Coppola script, said Pittore, 30.
"White Chicks" stars the Wayans as black FBI agents who pose as young white hotel heiresses. The movie has grossed $37.3 million since it opened June 23.
The mens' script, titled "Johnny Bronx," is about a bumbling black FBI agent who impersonates a white man to infiltrate the mob.
---
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - Sweden King Carl XVI Gustaf and Queen Silvia will market their brand of perfume worldwide, their cosmetics company said Monday.
The perfume is named Solliden, after the couple's summer residence on the island of Oeland in the Baltic Sea. It has been sold in royal palace gift shops for more than 10 years.
A portion of the proceeds will go to the World Childhood Foundation, which the queen founded to help teenage mothers and sexually abused children.
---
EL PASO, Texas (AP) - Former college basketball coach Don Haskins had been approached before about doing a movie on his 1966 Texas Western team - the first to win a national title with five black starters.
But when Walt Disney Pictures came to him a few years ago, Haskins did not hesitate.
"I always liked their movies and I thought they were movies kids could watch," said Haskins, who coached 38 years at the school now known as the University of Texas at El Paso.
The movie, "Glory Road," will star Ben Affleck as Haskins. Filming is tentatively scheduled to begin this year.
Haskins, 74, said he simply picked the best players for the team that beat Kentucky's heavily favored - and all-white - basketball powerhouse 72-65.
---
COPENHAGEN, Denmark (AP) - Brazilian singer and Culture Minister Gilberto Gil will act as a goodwill ambassador for the Hans Christian Andersen bicentennial in 2005.
Gil, 62, is the third South American named to help increase awareness about the author and promote the 200th anniversary of his birth.
Brazilian soccer star Pele and Luisa Duran de Lagos, the wife of Chilean President Ricardo Lagos, have also been named.
Andersen, who died in 1875, is renowned for such children's stories as "The Ugly Duckling" and "The Red Shoes."
---
CARSON CITY, Nev. (AP) - Elizabeth Muto was abandoned as a baby at the Reno airport 24 years ago. Now she's Miss Nevada.
The Las Vegas woman beat 11 other women Saturday to become the first black Miss Nevada and to advance to the Miss America pageant in Atlantic City, N.J., in September.
"I've been Nevada's own since I was 10 days old," Muto said. "Since then, the people of Nevada have loved and supported me."
Muto was abandoned atop a counter at Reno-Tahoe airport. A Reno couple adopted her.
---
SACRAMENTO, Calif. (AP) - Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger's personal-label cigars have become coveted currency at the state Capitol.
Political insiders who have received a stogie straight from Schwarzenegger or lifted one from his open humidor save the cigars as keepsakes or pass them on to friends.
"It's not a status thing," Assemblyman Greg Aghazarian said last week. "It's more like you know when someone's been to the governor's office when they have a cigar in their hand."
Aghazarian, who has asthma and doesn't smoke, said the cigars have helped him break the ice with constituents.
---
CONCORD, Mass. (AP) - A day after becoming a U.S. citizen, three-time Boston Marathon winner Uta Pippig won her first race as an American in her hometown of Concord.
Pippig was first among women runners at the annual Fourth of July Minuteman Classic Road Race, a five-kilometer run.
"Coming from East Germany, where there was a dictator, and we were living behind the Iron Curtain, we had not the freedom of speech, or religion, or Bill of Rights," said Pippig, who escaped East Berlin as a teenager.
Pippig is the only woman to have won three consecutive Boston Marathons since the women's division was created in 1972. She last ran in the Boston Marathon in 1997, finishing fourth.
---
STRATFORD, Conn. (AP) - Romance novelist Fern Michaels has come to the aid of Stratford's police department.
Michaels, the author of "Vegas Rich" and "Vegas Heat," has given the town $10,000 to buy two police dogs to help find drugs. The German shepherds, Roscoe and Zak, will wear body armor provided by Michaels, too.
"If you give a police officer a bulletproof vest, you should give his partner one, too," she said last week.
Michaels lives in South Carolina but responded to an e-mail appeal for help from a Stratford resident.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY111 of Hasselhoff, NY112 of the Wayans brothers, NY113
 Load-Date: July 6, 2004

 

End of Document
