

People in the News
The Associated Press
May 7, 2005, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1345 words
Dateline: ISTANBUL, Turkey
Body




Shakira has arrived in Turkey to film a popular German entertainment show.
She is scheduled to appear live May 15 in "Wetten, dass … ?" from the ancient Roman amphitheater of Aspendos near the Mediterranean resort of Antalya.
The Colombian superstar will sing "La Tortura" from her new album, "Fijacion Oral 1," scheduled for release in June, the show's Web site said.
The show is also expected to include hotel heiress Paris Hilton.
Shakira arrived Saturday and was accompanied at the airport by Antonio de la Rua, son of Argentina's former President Fernando de la Rua, the Anatolia news agency said.
---
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (AP) - Hollywood star and U.N. goodwill ambassador Angelina Jolie made an emotional appeal to the international community to help millions of Afghan refugees living in Pakistan.
Jolie spent four days touring sprawling refugee amps near Pakistan's border with Afghanistan and met Friday with President Gen. Pervez Musharraf.
"I ask the international community to do more to fund and to help shoulder the burden of this part of the world," she said Saturday.
She also stressed the need to develop war-battered Afghanistan so refugees - some of whom have been in Pakistan for over 25 years - can go home and build new lives.
"I met a woman who was about to get on a truck with a small baby," she said. "I do not know how she is going to survive, and how she will be able to make a living, to find food, to find health care. So it is very, very difficult but many people are moving back."
Since the fall of the hardline Taliban regime in late 2001, an estimated 2.3 million Afghans have gone back to their country under a U.N.-supported repatriation program. More than 3 million others remain in camps and cities in Pakistan.
The flight of Afghan refugees to Pakistan and other neighboring countries began with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979, and continued into the 1990s because of a bloody civil war, the fundamentalist rule of the Taliban and years of drought.
Jolie, who won a best supporting-actress Oscar for 1999's "Girl, Interrupted," became a goodwill ambassador for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in 2001, and has visited refugee camps throughout the world.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - A man accused of punching Dr. Dre at the Vibe Awards last year must stand trial on an assault charge, a judge has ruled.
Judge James Dabney on Friday found sufficient evidence to try 26-year-old Jimmy James Johnson.
The man allegedly punched the veteran producer and rap star after asking for his autograph during a taping of the show on Nov. 15. The attack set off a chair-throwing brawl that spread through the crowd.
Johnson was allegedly stabbed by rapper Young Buck after Dre was struck. Buck, whose given name is David Darnell Brown, has pleaded not guilty and is free on bail awaiting trial.
Dre., 40, whose given name is Andre Young, was about to receive a lifetime achievement award when he was punched.
---
NEW ORLEANS (AP) - Matthew McConaughey spent his childhood fascinated by motorcycle daredevil Evel Knievel's jumps, but now he is focusing on the life "between the jumps" as host for The History Channel's show on the veteran stuntsman.
McConaughey has been wrapping up shooting for The History Channel's "Absolute Evel: The Evel Knievel Story" scheduled to air June 13.
The program is part autobiographical, with Knievel talking about his career, relationships with women and his son, his baseball-bat beating of a former press agent and time in jail.
As a child, McConaughey said he watched Knievel's stunts, then went outside and jumped mounds of dirt on his bike. "I'd jump and only get a little air, and they'd call me Little Knievel," McConaughey told The Associated Press in an interview Friday.
"I believe that when he was about to jump, that's when he felt most right with the world. In between the jumps, that's when life was tough," he said. "This is a life story I've been wanting to tell for a while, but I want to tell it right."
McConaughey said he also is planning to play Knievel in a major motion picture about the daredevil's life. The movie star has known Knievel for the past five years and said there are major misconceptions about the man he calls the "granddaddy" of action sports contests such as the X-Games.
McConaughey, a 35-year-old Texas native, starred in John Grisham's "A Time to Kill," and romantic comedies "The Wedding Planner" with and "How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days." His most recent film, action flick "Sahara," debuted last month at the top of the box office with $18.5 million.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Gregg Carey's chances at $1 million sunk on the latest episode of "Survivor: Palau."
The 28-year-old business consultant won a luxury cruise as part of a reward challenge Thursday, but his tribemates plotted against him while he was away from the island.
Carey told The Associated Press on Friday the move was "stupid."
"I wasn't thinking strategically when I was on the boat," said Carey. "It was an innocent mistake. That innocence will bite you every time on 'Survivor."'
Most of Carey's screen time on the CBS reality show was dedicated to his intricate strategies and intimate alliance with nanny Jennifer Lyon, a relationship that Carey described as a "friendship with hints of romance." Even so, Carey insists the kinship never became physical.
"When you're out there, that's the last thing on your mind," said Carey. "You don't consider hooking up. You don't consider kissing. You don't consider any of that."
Now, as a member of the seven-person jury, Carey will have to consider which remaining "Survivor" is deserving of the $1 million prize. The finale and live reunion show will air May 15 at 10 p.m. EST.
---
On the Net:
http://www.cbs.com/primetime/survivor10/ 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Chris Rock is ready to get juiced.
"I'm pretty scrawny," Rock says in the new issue of Rolling Stone magazine. "If I was playing (football), I'd definitely be on steroids. You know, most people in the world, if you told them they could take a pill and be better at their job, they'd take the pill."
Rock co-stars with Adam Sandler in the upcoming "The Longest Yard," a remake of the 1974 movie about prison inmates who challenge the prison guards to a football game.
It is Rock's first film since he hosted the Oscars in February. The 39-year-old actor-comedian continues to say he would do the show again if they asked him and the time was right.
"Doing the show got a bit of the chip off my shoulder," he says. "When you're a comedian that curses, you're always a second-class citizen to the guys who don't curse. They say, 'You're big, but so-and-so's a family comedian.' It's almost like porn - nobody admits to liking it, but it's a billion-dollar industry."
"The Longest Yard" hits theaters May 27.
---
On the Net:
http://www.rollingstone.com 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Vampires are usually her passion, but Anne Rice is getting biblical in her next book, due out in November from publisher Random House. "Christ the Lord: Out of Egypt" will tell the story of Jesus' early years in his own words.
Excerpts of a lengthy letter that will accompany advance review copies of the book this summer are published in the new issue of Entertainment Weekly magazine.
"For over 10 years I've wanted to do this book - Jesus in his own words," Rice writes. "For five years, I've been obsessed with how to do it, and for the last three years I've been consumed with nothing else."
Rice, who has moved from New Orleans to San Diego, brought the undead back to life in the 1970s with "Interview With the Vampire."
"I'm not a priest," Rice also writes in the letter. "I can't be one. I'll never be able to go to the altar of the Lord and say the words of consecration at Mass, 'This is my body. This is my blood.' No, I can't work that magnificent Eucharistic miracle. But in humility, I have attempted something transformative which we writers dare to call a miracle in the imperfect human idiom we possess. It's to bring Him here in the form a story, and that story is Christ The Lord."
---
On the Net:
http://www.annerice.com/ 
http://www.ew.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY114 of Shakira, ISL105 of Jolie, NY115 of Dre, NY116 of
 Load-Date: May 8, 2005

 

End of Document
