

People in the News
The Associated Press
December 19, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1825 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MOUNT CLEMENS, Mich. (AP) - Eminem's ex-wife, Kimberly Mathers, has pleaded guilty to a drug charge and a driving offense as part of an agreement to resolve two drug cases, the prosecutor's office said.
Mathers, who's been the subject of some of the rapper's songs, appeared Thursday before Circuit Court Judge Edward A. Servitto and entered the pleas to a charge of possessing 25 grams or less of cocaine and failing to give adequate space to an emergency vehicle. The charges came from a June traffic stop in St. Clair Shores.
A third charge of driving with a suspended license will be dropped and a charge of maintaining a drug house, from a Warren hotel party in September where police confiscated marijuana and Ecstasy, will be dismissed, said David Portuesi, chief of the drug crimes unit for the Macomb County prosecutor's office.
"Probation is an outcome that's recommended here within the state guidelines," Portuesi told The Macomb Daily for Friday's editions.
While the St. Clair Shores case was pending, the 28-year-old Mathers failed to appear in court. On Nov. 1, she broke or removed an electronic tether designed to monitor her whereabouts. Mathers turned herself in later that month.
Portuesi said the judge has removed the tether and house arrest as conditions of Mathers' bond.
Defense attorney Michael Sinutko asked for Mathers to get consideration under a legal provision where offenders convicted of their first drug crime can abide by probation or other terms and get their convictions sealed or expunged. Servitto likely will rule on the request at Mathers' Jan. 21 sentencing.
EAST ORANGE, N.J. (AP) - She knows the way to San Jose - and East Orange as well.
Dionne Warwick, an East Orange, N.J., native, dropped by her old school Thursday to give presents to every one of the 561 students and 77 staff members.
The singer said she stayed up most of the night before wrapping the gifts for those at the former Lincoln School, which since has been renamed Dionne Warwick Institute of Economics ad Entrepreneurship.
"You will never know how proud I am to be associated with you," said Warwick, 63, who now lives in Brazil. "You have done magnificently."
Her hits include "Walk on By," "Do You Know the Way to San Jose" and "That's What Friends Are For."
WOODLAND HILLS, Calif. (AP) - Polished fashionistas like Jennifer Aniston - who plays a Ralph Lauren staffer on "Friends" - and the makeover crew on "Queer Eye for the Straight Guy" were singled out for having top tresses in a recent celebrity hair survey.
To determine the year's best and worst in hair, Wella conducted unscientific surveys after the MTV Video Music Awards, the Emmys and the American Music Awards.
Aniston won best overall hair and best highlights, while other TV stars won some other categories: "Miss Match" star Alicia Silverstone's golden locks earned top honors, Jennifer Garner of "Alias" was named best brilliant brunette and "Will & Grace's" Debra Messing was called the most ravishing redhead.
The only pop star to rate a "best" rating was Britney Spears, who was named best blond bombshell along with Pamela Anderson. Christina Aguilera and Pink made Wella's list, but in a "worst" category. Aguilera's "Dirrty" black mane and Pink's streaks were named worst female hair color. Rounding out the "worst" category was red carpet interviewer and E! host Melissa Rivers, who was singled out for the worst red carpet hair.
When it came to the men, the Wella results were mixed. Besides the "Queer Eye" cast, "best" hair honors went to stringy-haired rocker Kid Rock and actor Rob Lowe. For worst male hair, respondents singled out Justin Timberlake as the star they'd like to see with longer hair and Tim McGraw and Adam Sandler as the celebrities who should stop hiding their hair under hats.
NEW YORK (AP) - This year's special guest for the Times Square countdown to 2004 will be Shoshana Johnson, who spent 22 days as a prisoner of war in Iraq after being shot during an ambush.
Johnson was in a war "that was started right across the street from where we are today, on 9-11," Mayor Michael Bloomberg told a news conference Thursday at a hotel facing the World Trade Center site.
He called the 30-year-old former U.S. Army specialist from El Paso, Texas - who has relatives in New York City - "the perfect choice to be our New Year's guest." He said she'll push the globe triggering the drop of a 1,070-pound Waterford crystal ball and lead a 60-second countdown to 2004.
Johnson, who was discharged from the Army last week, told New Yorkers: "Thank you for your support of my Army, my armed forces, my fellow soldiers, who were willing to do what is necessary for our freedom, for us to sit back and enjoy such a wonderful New Year's Eve."
She was a cook for the 507th Maintenance Company when it was ambushed in March. She was shot in both ankles and captured with five other soldiers, including Jessica Lynch. Nine soldiers died in the attack.
Johnson was awarded the Bronze Star, the Purple Heart and the Prisoner of War Medal for her service in Iraq.
SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - Nicole Kidman says she was so humiliated after her split with actor-husband Tom Cruise that she had to be coaxed out of bed to go back to work.
"I sort of thought at that time that I was going to curl up in a ball and just never get out of bed," the 36-year-old actress told Australian television's Nine network Thursday. "But I have two kids and I had to get out of bed."
Cruise and Kidman divorced in 2001 after about 10 years of marriage.
She was in her hometown for the Australian premiere of her latest movie, "Cold Mountain," directed by Anthony Minghella and also starring Jude Law and Renee Zellweger.
The Civil War epic received eight Golden Globe nominations Thursday, including a lead dramatic actress nomination for Kidman, who plays a prim Southerner, and a best director nomination for Minghella.
"She has got a great appetite for work," said Minghella, who also attended the Sydney premiere. "She has got a laugh like a hyena."
Kidman won the best-actress Oscar this year for her portrayal of troubled author Virginia Woolf in "The Hours."
"Cold Mountain" opens in the United States on Christmas Day.
NEW YORK (AP) - A court ruling has stopped hip-hop magazine The Source from distributing a disc of a previously unreleased recording by Eminem that includes phrases such as "black girls are dumb."
Manhattan federal Judge Gerald Lynch granted the rapper's lawyers an injunction preventing the magazine from enclosing the CD in its February issue, which goes on sale in mid-January. The magazine had planned extensive coverage of the recording.
The Source said it exposed the Eminem track while investigating the forces corrupting hip-hop, including racism.
"The fact that our opinion regarding the prevalence of racism in the music industry is being censored is just another step in the effort to cover up the racial bias destroying hip-hop culture," The Source said in a statement Thursday.
Eminem's record company, Interscope Records, declined comment on the ruling.
The rapper's lawyers had argued that distributing the CD violates copyright laws.
Last month, The Source held a news conference to accuse Eminem, who is white, of racism, citing lyrics on the recording such as "black girls are dumb, and white girls are good chicks."
The tape was provided to the magazine by "three white hip-hop fans from Detroit who were peers of Eminem, whose real name is Marshall Mathers, in the early '90s, at the time of the recording," the Source said last month.
The 31-year-old rapper has said the recording was "foolishness" that he'd made as a teen "out of anger, stupidity and frustration" after breaking up with a black girlfriend.
Besides winning several Grammys, Eminem won an Oscar this year for his song "Lose Yourself" from the film "8 Mile."
ROCHESTER, Minn. (AP) - The family of Pauline Phillips, better known as advice columnist Abigail Van Buren, has teamed up with an anonymous donor to contribute $10 million to the Mayo Clinic for research into Alzheimer's disease.
Phillips, who began writing Dear Abby in 1956, formally retired last year after she was found to have Alzheimer's. She hadn't been actively writing the column for several years.
Alzheimer's, which afflicts more than 4 million Americans, is a progressive degenerative disease that results in impaired memory, judgment and behavior. There's no cure, although some drugs appear to slow its progress in some patients.
The gift, announced Wednesday, is the largest donation to fight the disease ever given to the Mayo Clinic, which said it will rename its research center the Mayo Clinic Abigail Van Buren Alzheimer's Disease Research Clinic.
Phillips, 85, lives in Minnetonka with her husband, Morton.
Her twin sister, Esther "Eppie" Lederer, also doled out advice to thousands of readers under the name Ann Landers. Lederer died last year.
"This is a very important gift," said Dr. Ronald Petersen, who heads the Alzheimer's research center at the Mayo Clinic. "We're moving toward prediction and prevention for this disease, and the research this finances can take us pretty far down that road."
The gift includes $5 million from Phillips' family and $5 million given by an anonymous donor from the Washington, D.C., area who isn't related to the Phillips family, Mayo officials said.
On the Net:
http://www.mayo.edu 
NEW YORK (AP) - Twin teen actresses Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen can stop checking their mailbox for college acceptances.
New York University has invited them to join the class of 2008, People magazine reports in its Dec. 29 issue.
"Like every other senior, they had been sweating out their acceptance and they are absolutely thrilled," their representative, Michael Pagnotta, is quoted as saying. "They have always taken academics very seriously. This is a major achievement for them."
The magazine says the twins will be enrolled next fall at the Gallatin School of Individualized Study, a college within NYU that lets students tailor their own curriculums.
Their new movie, "New York Minute," will be released next year.
Mary-Kate and Ashley, now 17, alternated the role of Michelle Tanner on the ABC sitcom "Full House," which ran from 1987-95.
On the Net:
http://www.marykateandashley.com/ 
NEW YORK (AP) - Paris Hilton and Nicole Richie, stars of Fox network's "The Simple Life," will help count down the final moments of 2003 on "America's Party," airing live on New Year's Eve from Las Vegas.
Ashanti, Metallica, Puddle of Mudd, Hootie and the Blowfish and keith urban will be among the performers, Fox announced Thursday. The show will be broadcast from the Venetian Resort Hotel & Casino (11 p.m.-12:30 a.m. EST).
"Paris and Nicole turned Altus, Ark., upside-down on 'The Simple Life' and were the talk of the 2003 Billboard Music Awards, so imagine what celebratory antics the beautiful duo will get into as they help ring in the New Year on 'America's Party,"' Fox said.
On the Net:
http://www.fox.com/home.htm 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYET101 Mathers; NYET102 Warwick; NYET103 Aniston;
 Load-Date: December 20, 2003

 

End of Document
