

People in the News; NY117 Banderas; NY107 Allen; NYR101 Klein and Kennedy; NY108 Bradbury; LA102-4 Slick
October 24, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1401 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MEMPHIS, Tenn. (AP) - NAACP chairman Julian Bond and Nobel Peace Prize winner Rigoberta Menchu were honored with Freedom Awards from the National Civil Rights Museum.
Bond, 62, a civil rights leader, and Menchu, 43, a peace activist in her native Guatemala, told about 2,500 at a local church Wednesday why they became involved in their causes.
Bond said news reports in 1957 about the Little Rock Nine integrating a school changed his life, especially the images of a frightened, 15-year-old Elizabeth Eckford walking to school followed by a menacing crowd of white adults.
"I wondered what I would do if I was ever tested by the Elizabeth Eckford test," said Bond, who was named chairman of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People in 1998. "What she did was come back the next day and the next day and the next day."
At 33, Menchu was the youngest person to receive the Nobel Prize when she was named a laureate in 1992. She drew worldwide attention when she told her story for an autobiography, "I, Rigoberta Menchu: An Indian Woman in Guatemala."
Menchu said she drew inspiration in her struggle for justice and peace in her country from human rights icons such as Martin Luther King Jr., Mahatma Gandhi and Nelson Mandela.
"Our struggle for peace and justice is the same," she said. "So, we need to make one agenda for the future."
MEXICO CITY (AP) - HBO Films narrowly avoided a strike that could have shut down the set where Antonio Banderas is filming "And Starring Pancho Villa as Himself" after signing a contract with Mexican technicians.
The Mexican Union of Film Technicians complained that "Pancho Villa" was being made without a contract, and that 18 workers had been fired without cause. It named Banderas as a defendant in his role as associate producer and sought to bar him from leaving the country.
The head of the union denied that the labor complaint would affect Mexico's already-battered reputation as a location for foreign films.
"These foreign companies have to talk to us before they come down here and make these mistakes," union leader David Negrete said Wednesday. He confirmed that the strike set for Thursday had been called off.
HBO's spokeswoman for the project, Patricia Zavala, said she could not comment on the settlement but said the filming had not been interrupted at the set in the north-central city of San Miguel Allende.
Banderas also had trouble in Mexico in 1997 while filming "The Mask of Zorro." Customs officials temporarily impounded the sword he was to use in the movie.
GREENWICH, Conn. (AP) - The estate of Victor Borge has received approval to subdivide his waterfront property.
The renowned pianist and satirist lived in the Belle Haven section of Greenwich for more than 40 years before his death in 2000 at 91.
The Planning and Zoning Commission approved a plan Tuesday to split the 4.16-acre lot into two 2-acre parcels.
Because the proposed property line runs through Borge's former home, the 19-room house would be demolished.
Borge's estate was put on the market in April for $30 million, a price that would have set a record for residential real estate in Greenwich.
Sotheby's International Realty is handling the sale for Borge's heirs, and the estate was listed on the firm's Web site Wednesday at $21.5 million.
Francine Ehrlich, the listing broker, said someone has signed a contract to buy the estate, though the sale is not final. She wouldn't divulge the potential buyer's identity or the agreed-upon price.
Borge's three-story, 11,000-square-foot house was built in 1905. Any historic value the building might have had was lost when the musician remodeled it in the 1960s, giving it a more modern look, historians said.
In April, then-chairman of the Historic District Commission Peter Alexander said Borge had at one time painted "giant piano keys" on the eastern-facing side of the house, visible to boaters in Greenwich Harbor and passengers aboard the town ferry heading to Island Beach. While the paint job was "hilarious" - befitting Borge's sense of humor and the era of Liberace in which it was done - Alexander said it may have destroyed the house's "historic and architectural significance."
LOS ANGELES (AP) - So what's Santa Claus' favorite Christmas movie?
Tim Allen, who reprises his role as head elf of the North Pole in "The Santa Clause 2," puts Bing Crosby and Rosemary Clooney's "White Christmas" and the quirky comedy "A Christmas Story" at the top of his list.
"'White Christmas,' that's possibly my favorite, because I love how the set opens up at the end and it's snowing," Allen said in an interview with The Associated Press. "It's sweet, it still holds up."
His other pick, the 1983 dysfunctional-family tale "A Christmas Story," stars Darren McGavin as a gruff but lovable dad and Peter Billingsley as a wide-eyed kid yearning for a Red Ryder air rifle come Christmas morning.
"'Christmas Story' is such a little sweetheart," Allen said. "Terrific details about a specific time of life. The rifle, the snow falling outside, and Christmas Day and the turkey. It's got the details, everything right."
"The Santa Clause 2" is scheduled for release Nov. 1.
NEW YORK (AP) - Schools Chancellor Joel Klein brought his chief fund-raiser, Caroline Kennedy, to a breakfast meeting of high-powered New Yorkers and told them how her father, President John F. Kennedy, had inspired him.
Klein, the former U.S. Justice Department lawyer chosen by Mayor Michael Bloomberg to run the city's public schools, quoted the famous line from Kennedy's inaugural address: "Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country."
"I sometimes wonder whether that spirit is as alive today as it was in John F. Kennedy's day," he told an audience Wednesday that included business leaders, elected officials and former Mayors Edward Koch and David Dinkins.
"But we need it every bit as much today, so to all of the public servants here in this audience, you have my congratulations and my highest praise."
Caroline Kennedy, who began her new job as head of the school system's Office of Strategic Partnerships this week, was introduced to the Association for a Better New York audience of 600 at a midtown hotel but didn't speak.
On the Net:
NYC Department of Education Web site: http://www.nycenet.edu/ 
SANTA BARBARA, Calif. (AP) - Ray Bradbury, author of "Fahrenheit 451" and "The Martian Chronicles," has received the first Ross Macdonald Literary Award.
Bradbury accepted an engraved plaque from the Santa Barbara Book Council. The 82-year-old author said he had deep affection for the Santa Barbara detective novelist and his body of work.
Macdonald's books include "The Galton Case" and "The Goodbye Look."
"The selection of the first recipient was challenging, yet simplified by Ray Bradbury's distinguished, multifaceted career that spans generations," Debra Park, a member of the award selection committee, said Tuesday.
Ross Macdonald was the pseudonym of Ken Millar.
PAULSBORO, N.J. (AP) - A street has been renamed in honor of director Kevin Smith, a New Jersey native who's filming "Jersey Girl" in this southern New Jersey community.
Tyler Street became Kevin Smith Way during a ceremony organized by borough officials, who wanted to thank Smith for staging the production in the Gloucester County town.
"Hopefully nothing nefarious will happen on Kevin Smith Way but, if it does, call my lawyers," the 32-year-old director quipped Tuesday as he received a key to the city.
Smith said "Jersey Girl," tentatively scheduled for release next October, would premiere in Paulsboro.
The small-town love story stars off-screen couple Ben Affleck and Jennifer Lopez. Filming began in August.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Grace Slick, lead singer of Jefferson Airplane, Jefferson Starship and Starship through the 1960s, '70s and '80s, has been inducted into Hollywood's RockWalk on Sunset Boulevard.
Slick, who will be 63 on Oct. 30, is retired from music and has turned to painting. Her work includes portraits of old friends such as Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin and Jerry Garcia.
Her hand prints and signature were placed in cement Tuesday for installation outside the Guitar Center music store.
Other rock musicians and celebrities on the sidewalk include B.B. King, Brian Wilson, Johnny Cash, Carlos Santana, James Brown, Carl Perkins, Bonnie Raitt, John Lee Hooker and George Martin.
On the Net:
RockWalk Web site: http://www.rockwalk.com 
 Load-Date: October 25, 2002

 

End of Document
