

People in the News
The Associated Press
October 11, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1545 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




ROME (AP) - Luciano Pavarotti will stage his annual benefit concert in Brazil this year instead of his Italian hometown of Modena, a news report said.
The Pavarotti and Friends concert will take place in Sao Paolo in December, the ANSA news agency said Monday, quoting the famed opera singer.
"We're still defining the cast and the exact date, and we will announce them soon," Pavarotti said. The report didn't explain the change of location, and concert organizers said they had no information on the venue.
For 10 years, the charity concert has been staged in Modena in northern Italian.
---
On the Net:
http://www.lucianopavarotti.com/ 
---
ADDIS ABABA, Ethiopia (AP) - Irish rock star Bob Geldof has acknowledged that solutions to Africa's poverty, disease and conflict elude a commission set up by British Prime Minister Tony Blair to craft ways of helping the continent.
Speaking on the final day of a meeting of the Africa Commission, Geldof said Friday that increased aid, debt relief and fairer trade weren't enough to end the woes of the world's poorest continent.
"There is something else, something else that all of us are missing and I keep wanting to hear the new idea," the singer said.
Geldof is a member of the commission working to spell out what Africa needs to develop and explain what has held it back. Its findings are expected in time for Britain's presidency of the Group of Eight industrialized countries and the leadership of the European Union next year.
"Of course we are going to apply more aid - that is an absolute given," Geldof said. "Debt relief isn't even an argument anymore. The argument is won, get on with it. Trade is not an argument - it is completely biased against the poor world."
Western countries spend about $1 billion a day supporting their farmers, subsidies that African countries argue undercut the competitive advantage of one of their main revenue sources and effectively cut them out of markets they could dominate.
African officials said the subsidies are threatening the livelihood of millions of African producers and their elimination could change the lives of millions of poor African farmers.
---
On the Net:
http://www.bobgeldof.info/ 
---
RENO, Nev. (AP) - The president of the University of Nevada, Reno says "Fahrenheit 9/11" filmmaker Michael Moore "must be allowed to speak" when he visits the campus this week.
Moore's scheduled appearance Wednesday has prompted criticism from Republican student groups and some alumni. In response, UNR President John Lilley has written a letter underscoring the university's commitment to free speech.
"I encourage the students, faculty and community to respect Mr. Moore's right to express his views and to remind others of his right to express them," Lilley wrote last week. "Whatever you think of his views, he is now a guest of the university, and he must be allowed to speak."
Several donors and alumni are upset that the school's student government has rejected their offer of $100,000 to have Moore debate a conservative spokesman during his appearance.
Rick Reviglio, a Republican whose family has given about $1 million to the university, said his donations could cease if Moore, whose "Fahrenheit 9/11" blasts President Bush, doesn't debate a conservative during his visit.
"We have given generously to the university and to see that money being spent frivolously on the likes of people like Michael Moore is upsetting," said Reviglio, general manager of Western Nevada Supply in Reno.
Moore has been encouraging students to vote. His college tour, which ends Nov. 2 in Tallahassee, Fla., has drawn sellout crowds, as well as heated criticism at almost every stop.
Lilley said Moore's speech is expected to attract an audience of about 9,000 to the Lawlor Events Center.
The university's student government voted last month to contribute $6,300 in student-fee funds to Democracy for Nevada, a student political action committee and recognized campus club, which is sponsoring the appearance. The balance of Moore's $33,000 speaking fee will come from fund-raising projects and ticket sales.
Lilley said the student government also has made funds available to the College Republicans and interested parties so they can invite a speaker of a different point of view. He said those plans are pending.
---
On the Net:
http://www.unr.edu/content/ 
http://www.michaelmoore.com 
---
JACKSONVILLE, Fla. (AP) - Tiger Woods always said he had to win a major golf tournament for it to be considered a great year, but he might have found an exception last week when he got married in Barbados.
"As far as off the course, it is a great year," he said Sunday from his yacht, where Woods and his bride, Elin Nordegren, have been diving on their honeymoon since their marriage in the Caribbean.
Sounding relaxed, Woods is in no hurry to resurface.
His next scheduled tournament is the Funai Classic at Disney (about 10 minutes away from his home in Florida), which starts Oct. 21. But Woods didn't say whether he was going to play.
"I'm having so much fun on my honeymoon, I don't know if I'll be back or not," he said during a 30-minute conference call. "It depends on how much fun I'm having out here and whether I need to get back."
Woods doesn't expect to be any different on the course now that he's married.
"It's not going to change the way I play golf," he said. "I've been living with Elin. … We've been happy together the last two years. Nothing has changed in that regard. Just because you're married doesn't change the way a relationship is, it just changes the way it's viewed from the outside.
"I just hope I can get the ball in the hole a little faster."
---
On the Net:
http://www.tigerwoods.com/splash/splash.sps 
---
FORT SCOTT, Kan. (AP) - Gordon Parks, the poet and composer, filmmaker and photographer, wasn't able to sit with whites when he was growing up here. The town has made it up to him with a four-day celebration of his life.
In the downtown theater where, as a boy, Parks had to sit in the balcony with other blacks, he ate dinner Saturday next to the governor of Kansas. Down front.
"Gordon, welcome to the front row," Gov. Kathleen Sebelius told Parks to the applause of about 350 people at the Liberty Theater.
The banquet was the culmination of the town's first Gordon Parks Celebration of Culture and Diversity.
More than 200 people attended four days of lectures, panel discussions, movie screenings and reminiscing. The crowd included about a dozen members of Parks' family who had come from several states and presented a bronze bust of him to the town's Mercy Health Center.
"I have a strange feeling back here," Parks said at the presentation. "I can't explain it. It's a strange mixture of the tragedies and the good things that happened here."
It was Parks' first visit to his hometown in more than 20 years.
The 91-year-old Parks, still recovering from a hernia operation less than a month ago, defied doctors' orders to attend the celebration. When he was told what the town was planning, he told family and friends: "I want to go home. They're waiting for me there."
Parks directed the films "The Learning Tree" and 1971's "Shaft."
---
BOSTON (AP) - Don't hold your breath for a guest appearance by Michelle Pfeiffer on David E. Kelley's latest TV show.
Kelley, the creator of hits such as "Ally McBeal" and "Boston Public," said his wife could have a role on his new ABC drama, "Boston Legal," only if certain conditions are met.
"She would be great. The trick would be convincing her to ever work with me. Even though I might be able to persuade her that other people are running the show, she might not quite believe that I would completely stay out of the process," he said.
"We made one rule that we would try not to work together if possible. For example, I wrote a feature a year ago that I thought she would happen to be right for. She read it, she liked it, and the next day I was fired off the project," he said.
"Boston Legal" stars James Spader and William Shatner as two eccentric lawyers.
---
On the Net:
http://abc.go.com/primetime/bostonlegal/index.html 
---
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - The on-screen romance in "Stage Beauty" could be upstaged by the real romance that ignited on the set between Claire Danes and Billy Crudup.
The film's co-stars were hounded by questions about their relationship at the movie's premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival. The couple offered the standard "no comment" to all questions about their personal lives, the San Francisco Chronicle reported Sunday.
"All I will say is that we work very well together," Danes told the newspaper.
But "Stage Beauty" director Richard Eyre stirred the pot by acknowledging their relationship to Entertainment Weekly magazine. He commented that it was apparent during filming that "these two very intelligent actors, who are witty and attractive, got on very well."
"Stage Beauty," which also stars Ben Chaplin, is set in 17th-century England at a time when men assumed the female roles in plays. Crudup spends much of the movie in full drag as a stage star considered the most beautiful leading lady of his day.
Danes plays an ambitious wannabe actress who falls in love with him, but is jealous of his success. She finally gets a chance to perform when King Charles II decides to allow women to take the stage.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYET193 of Pavarotti, NYET194 of Geldof, MNJH102 of
 Load-Date: October 12, 2004

 

End of Document
