

People in the News
The Associated Press
January 24, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1546 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LOS ANGELES (AP) - An ex-boyfriend of Anna Nicole Smith was sentenced to nearly seven years in prison for making criminal threats against the former Playboy Playmate and attacking her neighbor, officials said.
Superior Court Judge Kathryne Stoltz rejected Mark Hatten's motion for a new trial on Friday.
"I'm not a bad person. I basically walked away from this fight," Hatten said. "You'll never hear about me bothering Anna Nicole again."
Hatten was convicted last November of making criminal threats against Smith, who testified she had a brief sexual relationship with him in 2000 that ended when he approached her with a knife in her home. Hatten claimed they had an on-again, off-again relationship.
Hatten was also convicted of assault for a fight involving a neighbor who went to Smith's house to persuade Hatten to leave.
Jurors acquitted Hatten of two other counts involving stalking and threats against Smith, 36, who became a reality TV star when "The Anna Nicole Show" began airing on E! Entertainment Television.
NEW YORK (AP) - From good ol' boy to slick Chicago lawyer.
Tom Wopat, the star of television's "The Dukes of Hazzard," is joining the national tour of "Chicago," the Kander and Ebb musical now in its eighth year on Broadway. Wopat takes over the role of shady mouthpiece Billy Flynn from Patrick Swayze. He starts Jan. 27 at the Paramount Theatre in Seattle. The tour then continues to Salt Lake City, Dallas, Phoenix and Miami, with other cities to follow.
Wopat, who starred as Luke Duke on "Hazzard" from 1979-1985, appeared as Frank Butler in the Bernadette Peters revival of "Annie Get Your Gun" and later joined the cast of the current Broadway revival of "42nd Street." The tour of "Chicago" stars Bianca Marroquin as Roxie Hart and Reva Rice as Velma Kelly.
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Topping the year's worst dressed list hasn't made Paris Hilton any less of a fashion plate.
The socialite and reality TV star became a model - and the main attraction of Rio's fashion week - as she strolled the catwalk for local designer Colcci.
She also delayed the show for an hour to cope with hair problems.
"This is my first time in Brazil, in Rio for the fashion show. I'm so exited, the show is amazing," Hilton, who opened and closed the designer's show, told AP Television News.
With most top models staying away from this season's Fashion Rio - the weeklong fashion event ending Saturday - Hilton was the closest thing the event had to a star.
Hilton's visit was talked up in the local press all week and she was mobbed after the show by reporters and fans.
After the show, Hilton headed straight for the airport, but told fans not to fear: "I plan to come back for Carnival."
NEW ORLEANS (AP) - Loyola University has blocked a campus production of Eve Ensler's "The Vagina Monologues," apparently after the Jesuit school's president voiced concerns about the play's language.
Erica Ciccarone, an English major who had planned to stage the play as a fund-raiser for women's groups, said the school president, the Rev. William Byron, made it clear in a meeting last week that the production was off.
Loyola spokeswoman Kristine Lelong confirmed that the play will not be produced on campus. However, Byron said in an interview that he had not decided to quash the play.
"We'll see what happens," he said.
"The Vagina Monologues," written by Ensler, was an off-Broadway hit in New York after opening in October 1999. The play explores issues and perceptions related to women's sexual anatomy.
Ensler has allowed her play to be staged on college campuses for fund-raising purposes, and scores of college groups have responded.
Loyola's production had been planned for Valentine's Day as part of a national "V-Day" campaign to stop violence against women. Proceeds would have gone to the Loyola's Women's Issues Organization.
PHOENIX (AP) - Michael Jackson's customized 2001 Bentley sedan has been pulled off the auction block.
The vehicle was scheduled for sale at the Barrett-Jackson Classic Car Auction in Scottsdale, which concludes Sunday.
But auction officials said they were notified through the pop star's management team Thursday that Jackson wanted the sale postponed.
The Bentley Arnage Red Label Turbo was featured in Jackson's video for the song "What More Can I Give."
The metallic blue car is signed on its interior roof by Jackson and a host of other celebrities.
NEW YORK (AP) - The upcoming Broadway revival of Lorraine Hansberry's "A Raisin in the Sun" starring hip-hop impresario Sean Combs has found his two co-stars: Audra McDonald and Phylicia Rashad.
McDonald, a three-time Tony Award winner, will portray Ruth Younger, the wife of Combs' character, Walter Younger. Rashad will play the matriarch in this family drama about the hopes and dreams of a black family on Chicago's South Side trying to move into a white neighborhood.
"A Raisin in the Sun," first seen in New York in 1959 with Sidney Poitier, Claudia MacNeil and Ruby Dee in the leading roles, will be Combs' theatrical debut. Dates and theater are to be announced. Kenny Leon will direct.
McDonald won Tonys for her performances in "Ragtime," "Master Class" and the Lincoln Center Theater revival of "Carousel." Rashad is best known for her television appearances on "The Cosby Show" and "Cosby."
NEW YORK (AP) - "Sex and the City" fans often approach Kim Cattrall during shooting on the streets of New York to chat about her character's highly active sex life.
Now that Samantha has been diagnosed with breast cancer during the show's final episodes, they have much more serious topics on their minds.
"People always used to come up to me and they say, 'Oh, my God, that thing that happened with that guy' … and now they're coming up and saying, 'Just tell me you're gonna be OK. I don't want anything to happen to you,"' Cattrall says during an interview on "The Ellen DeGeneres Show" airing Monday. "So it's a different kind of feeling on the streets."
But even she doesn't know how what happens to Samantha - or Carrie, Miranda or Charlotte - when the HBO series ends next month.
"We've shot four different endings. Nobody knows. None of the actors, the crew, the extras," Cattrall says. "Nobody knows how it's going to end so I couldn't tell you even if you tortured me."
On the Net:
http://ellen.warnerbros.com/ 
http://www.hbo.com/city/ 
NEW YORK (AP) - Yolanda Adams is two months pregnant with her second child, but the gospel singer isn't slowing down.
Already the mother of a 3-year-old daughter, Adams is still on tour, she recently co-hosted gospel music's 19th Annual Stellar Awards and she'll participate in the Super Bowl Gospel Celebration, which takes place two days before the Feb. 1 Super Bowl.
The 41-year-old says she's used to keeping up a heavy pace: "I toured up until the eight and a half months (last time)."
Adams is a big football fan, and the game is being held in Houston, where she lives. But while she's gearing up for the pomp and circumstance surrounding the big event, she's not as excited about the actual game this time around, with the New England Patriots-Carolina Panthers matchup: "None of the teams that I thought would be in it are in it. I was hoping that the (Tennessee) Titans would have been in it."
She was more enthusiastic about the Stellar Awards, which also took place in Houston earlier this month. Among those present for the awards, beginning broadcast in syndication starting Saturday, included gospel stars Shirley Caesar, Kirk Franklin and Donnie McClurkin, as well as R&B stars such as Musiq, Ruben Studdard and Patti LaBelle.
Adams says the participation of secular stars shows how widespread an influence gospel music has.
"It is extremely important for the general public to realize that these people came from the church, came from choirs, came from a diverse background that includes gospel music," she says.
NEW YORK (AP) - At a time when the Dixie Chicks and other performers have been criticized for speaking against the Iraq war and Bush administration, actor and singer Harry Belafonte says he believes it's his duty to continue protesting as he has since the early days of the civil rights movement.
"Today it's almost a disease, there's some social flaw if an artist at any level dares to participate in political or social action, somehow you are out of your league, why don't you just shut up and entertain. It's somehow that we are not citizens," Belafonte said Thursday at a panel hosted by Paxton Baker of the BET Jazz cable channel at the International Association for Jazz Education's annual conference.
"I find protest very entertaining and very instructive," he added, recalling that during the civil rights movement Miles Davis, Dizzy Gillespie and other jazz musicians didn't hesitate to support the cause. "I think there is a need for artists to jump in here, to be heard. We've got to stop distancing ourselves."
Last year, Belafonte, 76, spoke at anti-Iraq war protests in the United States, and in interviews for European newspapers criticized President Bush for displaying an "extremely dangerous" combination "of arrogance and limited intellect."
In October 2002, he came under fire from the right for comments likening Secretary of State Colin Powell to a plantation slave who moves into the master's house and does his bidding.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY117 of Smith, NY118 of Wopat, NY119 of Ensler, RIOX108
 Load-Date: January 25, 2004

 

End of Document
