

People in the News
July 5, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1322 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LONDON (AP) - Jimi Hendrix's family won an injunction at the High Court on Friday barring a New York-based music production company from releasing recordings on which the singer and guitarist performed.
Experience Hendrix, the family firm that controls the rights to all Hendrix's work except some early recordings, sued PPX Enterprises over recordings the then little-known guitar virtuoso made with the group Curtis Knight and The Squires in PPX's New York studios.
Experience Hendrix said PPX failed to pay royalties on the works and had authorized the release of records without licenses, in contravention of a 1973 agreement with the English administrator of Hendrix's estate.
Judge Justice Roger Buckley granted an injunction restraining the future release or licensing of recordings on which Hendrix performed, apart from 33 master tapes to which Experience Hendrix agreed PPX was entitled.
Buckley ruled that PPX must account for royalties due on those 33 tapes in the future, but not in the past. He rejected demands that PPX hand over the master tapes and pay an unspecified amount in damages.
He said PPX must pay 70 percent of Experience Hendrix's legal bill, starting with an interim payment of $112,500.
PPX argued it had an oral agreement with Experience Hendrix entitling it to every master tape it had previously released or licensed. It was granted permission to appeal.
Hendrix rose to prominence in the late 1960s with hits including "Purple Haze," "Hey Joe" and "Voodoo Chile." In 1970, he died of a drug overdose in London at 27.
Lawyer Nick Valner, who represented Experience Hendrix, said of the ruling: "This is a great day for the Hendrix family and represents the culmination of years of heavily fought litigation."
No one was immediately available for comment at PPX.
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Lawyers for a popular children's television hostess stopped a bookstore from auctioning photo negatives of her posing nude.
The Universal bookstore canceled Thursday's auction of 12 slides showing Xuxa naked after her lawyers warned the images belonged to her and the negatives belonged to the photographer, store manager Roberto Menezes said.
Menezes said he stopped the auction to avoid further problems.
The photos were shot by the late photographer Indalecio Wanderley for the now-defunct men's magazine Status-Plus in 1981.
At the beginning of her career, the 39-year-old Xuxa, whose real name is Maria da Graca Meneghel, posed for several magazines including Brazilian Playboy.
Xuxa's lawyers also succeeded in banning further exhibitions of an erotic film in which she appeared in the early 1980s.
MEMPHIS, Tenn. (AP) - A hip-hop artist convicted on federal weapons charges is seeking a new trial, claiming that the judge and jury were improperly influenced by his lyrics.
Patrick Houston, who has sold more than a million records as Project Pat, was convicted last month in federal court in Jackson of being a felon in possession of a gun.
In a filing to the U.S. 6th Circuit Court of Appeals, defense attorneys argue that Judge Robert H. Cleland, a visiting federal jurist from Detroit, allowed images of guns and gangsters in Houston's music to be used unfairly.
During the trial, Houston's lawyers tried to limit questions about rap music or his lyrics on a claim of "protected speech." The defense also objected to using the term "gangsta rap," which prosecutors argued referred specifically to Houston's style of music.
The judge sentenced Houston to four years and three months in prison.
"We contend … (Cleland) increased the sentence as a result of the lyrics of some of Mr. Houston's songs," defense attorney John E. Herbison of Nashville said this week. "I have some concerns … as to whether that violates the First Amendment."
Houston, a state felon convicted of aggravated robbery, was arrested in January 2001 when Memphis police looking for stolen sport utility vehicles pulled him over and found two loaded revolvers under a front floor mat in his Cadillac Escalade.
Officer Michael McCord testified that Houston admitted the guns were his and said he needed them because he was a rapper.
LONDON (AP) - A fire broke out at Royal Albert Hall, forcing Tony Bennett to stop his concert and the sellout crowd to evacuate the building, officials said. No injuries were reported.
The 75-year-old singer was halfway through his signature tune, "I Left My Heart in San Francisco," when smoke began to fill the auditorium Thursday night. As the evacuation began, Bennett tried to calm the crowd, joking, "I knew I was hot, but not that hot."
A spokesman for the hall later said the smoke had come from a burned-out motor. "As it turned out the public were never at risk but we cannot take chances," he said on condition of anonymity.
Bennett's spokeswoman, Helen Solomon, said smoke started coming from a sound and lighting area at about 8:30 p.m.
"Tony was halfway through his song when people started moving away from their seats. He then told the audience: 'I've just been informed that there is a fire, but please don't panic,"' Solomon said. "Then a lady came on stage and said that everyone would have to be evacuated."
A London Fire Brigade spokeswoman said the fire was put out just after 9 p.m.
OTTAWA (AP) - Singer-songwriters Joni Mitchell and Bruce Cockburn were among 99 appointees to the Order of Canada announced by Governor General Adrienne Clarkson.
Mitchell, a Saskatchewan native who wrote and performed songs including "Big Yellow Taxi," "The Circle Game" and "Both Sides Now," was made a companion of the order, the highest designation.
Also appointed companions were former Supreme Court Justice Peter Cory, Toronto social activist and feminist author Doris Anderson and Roger Blais, a renowned engineer, scientist, teacher and entrepreneur from Montreal.
Cockburn, known as much for his outspoken social activism as his folksy music, was promoted to an officer of the order after previously being made a member.
Lorne Michaels, founder of TV comedies Saturday Night Live and a nine-time Emmy Award winner, was appointed a member of the order.
The Order of Canada was established in 1967 to recognize Canadians for outstanding lifetime achievement and service.
FAIRMOUNT, Ind. (AP) - Time may be running out to save the historic Indiana high school that James Dean attended.
Residents have discussed converting Fairmount High School into a community center, a new library or apartments for senior citizens.
The town of Fairmount, about 45 miles northeast of Indianapolis, is applying for a $30,000 to $50,000 state grant to fund a feasibility study.
The "Rebel Without A Cause" star, who died in 1955, began his acting career on the auditorium stage in the 1940s. The 100-year-old building also is on the Historic Landmark Foundation's list of the top 10 most endangered buildings in Indiana.
The school has been vacant since 1986, when it was closed after districts were consolidated.
"That feeling you are in Fairmount is so strong you can almost touch it," Judy Cowling, president of Historic Fairmount Inc., said at a Tuesday meeting to support preservation. "That feeling is echoed in our buildings."
LONDON (AP) - Paul McCartney and new wife, Heather, made their first public appearance since their recent marriage to attend an awards ceremony honoring outstanding young artists and athletes.
They helped present the awards with other celebrities Thursday at ITV1's Britain's Brilliant Prodigies show, in association with the charity Children In Crisis, which was founded by Sarah Ferguson, the Duchess of York.
The duchess presented an award to 14-year-old violinist Nicola Benedetti. Other prizes were for best young actor, best young ballet dancer and best gymnast.
McCartney gave the award for the best young pop singer, and his wife gave the award for "young person who made a difference."
"Isn't it great that (the children) are actually doing the show and that is an inspiration for all kids?" she said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY107 Hendrix; NY108 Xuxa; NY107 Bennett; NY108 Mitchell;
 Load-Date: July 6, 2002

 

End of Document
