

People in the News
June 13, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1538 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




NORTHAM, Australia (AP) - Blustery conditions in Australia and storms brewing over South America on Thursday forced American adventurer Steve Fossett to postpone his latest bid to become the first person to fly solo around the world in a balloon.
The 58-year-old Chicago millionaire had hoped to set off from the small farming town of Northam, 60 miles east of Western Australian state capital, Perth, on Saturday.
Now, he's not expected to take off before next Tuesday on his sixth attempt to fly alone around the world.
Fossett needs virtually wind-free conditions to inflate his towering 140 foot balloon as only a slight gust can blow it over and damage the envelope.
Cruising at up to 6 miles above sea level in freezing temperatures, Fossett will breathe from an oxygen mask and average four hours of sleep a day in 45-minute naps when he finally takes off.
His balloon, the Bud Light Spirit of Freedom, will fly eastward around the world.
Fossett holds world records connected to balloons, sailboats and airplanes. He placed fourth in the Iditarod dogsled race in 1992, swam the English Channel in 1985 and participated in the 24 Hours of Le Mans car race in 1996.
NEW YORK (AP) - Over the years, Brandy's fans have watched her grow up on camera. Now, they'll be able to watch her baby before it's even born.
Starting Tuesday, MTV will broadcast "Diary Presents: Brandy-Special Delivery." The reality miniseries, which is expected to run four or five episodes, will follow the R&B singer as she goes to the doctor, attends her baby shower, and prepares for the birth of her first child.
One thing that you won't see, however, is Brandy giving birth. MTV says cameras will not follow Brandy into the delivery room, but fans will get a chance to see the baby after the birth.
Brandy, whose latest album is "Full Moon," is eight months pregnant. The former teen star, now 23, is expecting a girl.
MTV already has had success following celebrities - "The Osbournes," which invades the home of Ozzy Osbourne and his wacky family, is the biggest hit in the channel's history.
On the Net: http://www.mtv.com 
NEW YORK (AP) - How do you pick up women when you're the mayor of New York City?
That's what Jon Stewart wanted to know from Mayor Michael Bloomberg, his guest on Comedy Central's "The Daily Show" Wednesday night.
Stewart asked Bloomberg, who's a bachelor, which lines he uses: '"Good evening, I am the mayor of one of the greatest cities in the world,' or 'My name is Mike and I run a 24-hour information network?"'
"Whatever works," Bloomberg replied, grinning.
Stewart also asked the mayor, a reported billionaire, about opting not to live in the official residence, Gracie Mansion.
"You must have a nice house to be able to say, 'That mansion? Ehhh,"' Stewart said, to which Bloomberg laughed and said, "Suffice it to say, I'm comfortable."
Bloomberg later reiterated his recent mantra that New York is the "safest big city in the country" and mentioned that the most that ever happens to him during his daily commute to City Hall on subway trains is being asked for his autograph.
ROME (AP) - British singer Peter Gabriel has married his companion at the hotel he owns near Sardinia's Emerald Coast, his publicist said.
Gabriel and Meah Flynn were wed Sunday at Li Capanni hotel in northern Sardinia, Caroline Turner said by phone Wednesday from London.
"It was quite a low-key, private ceremony, with friends and family, a low-key, Peter-type wedding," Turner said.
The two have been together for five years, said Turner, declining to give details about the wedding. "They're both quite private."
SEATTLE (AP) - The nation's sixth-largest wireless carrier has cut service to America's scream queen and called up Catherine Zeta-Jones instead.
Zeta-Jones, 32, is replacing "Halloween" star Jamie Lee Curtis as the advertising spokeswoman for Bellevue, Wash.-based VoiceStream Wireless as the company kicks off a re-branding campaign and becomes T-Mobile International.
T-Mobile is the wireless unit of Deutsche Telekom, the Bonn, Germany-based telecommunications giant that acquired VoiceStream last year. In February, Deutsche Telekom announced that it was re-branding operations with the T-Mobile International name, and the changes grew Tuesday to include Zeta-Jones' image.
"Catherine was born in Wales; she has a strong following in London, she's really well-known there," said Kim Thompson, spokeswoman for VoiceStream. "When you're talking about the power a global spokesperson can bring, they need to have that strong recognition over there. This is it."
VoiceStream turned to Curtis in 1998 to launch its "Get More" ad campaign. The 43-year-old actress helped build the VoiceStream brand, and it quickly became synonymous with her smart-talking sass.
Thompson said the decision to choose a younger, cosmopolitan "It Girl" was made jointly by the U.S. and German management teams.
Zeta-Jones, whose films include "America's Sweethearts," "Traffic" and "The Mask of Zorro," has signed a two-year contract.
MENDENHALL, Miss. (AP) - Former syndicated television talk-show host Gary Collins was found innocent of drunken driving and reckless driving by Simpson County Justice Court Judge Eugene Knight.
Collins, who gave his address as Beverly Hills, Calif., and his age as 64, did not testify during Wednesday's 90-minute hearing. He had no comment after leaving the courtroom.
Sheriff J.C. Dillon said Collins was arrested March 24 after a deputy stopped his vehicle on U.S. 49 north of Mendenhall. Dillon said officers had been alerted that a motorist was driving erratically on the busy north-south highway that connects Jackson with the Gulf Coast.
Collins' attorney, William B. Kirksey of Jackson, told the judge that Collins had been up all night driving from Gulf Shores, Ala., into Mendenhall, about a four-hour drive.
Deputies said Collins admitted drinking alcohol earlier in the day. He refused to take a breath test, and deputies testified they did not administer a field sobriety test. Deputies testified that Collins' eyes were red and there was an odor of alcohol.
The actor, who was the host of "Hour Magazine" in the 1980s and appeared in 2000's beauty pageant comedy "Beautiful," is married to 1959's Miss America, Mary Ann Mobley of Brandon.
BANFF, Alberta (AP) - Actors Raymond Burr, Jim Carrey and Michael J. Fox head a new list of the top Canadians in U.S. television compiled for this year's Banff Television Festival.
The list of "Top 10 Canadians in U.S. Television" also includes actors Lorne Greene and William Shatner; comedian Rich Little; journalists Peter Jennings, Robert MacNeil and Morley Safer; and game-show host Alex Trebek.
A panel of Canadian television industry figures chose the celebrity exports for the Top 10, announced earlier this week, from a list compiled by the Banff Television Foundation.
Included on the list of "The Famous 50 Faces of 50 Years of Canadian Television" are singers Celine Dion and Anne Murray, and comedy shows "Kids in the Hall" and "SCTV."
BERLIN (AP) - Prince Charles rounded off a visit to Germany with a trip to an organic farm and an appeal to business leaders gathered in Berlin to get more involved in community projects.
Charles, a keen organic farmer, was greeted Wednesday by a children's choir at the Dalwitz estate in the eastern state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania.
Accompanied by owner Count Heinrich von Bassewitz as well as Germany's environment and agriculture ministers, he nodded his approval as he chatted with staff and inspected cattle at the 2,500-acre estate, which also rears pigs for export to Britain.
The visit cast a kinder light on Germany's organic farming business, shaken by an investigation into how feed supplied to organic farms was tainted with a banned pesticide.
Later, about 250 people waved British flags and cheered as Charles arrived at the British Embassy in Berlin. He shook hands with several in the crowd, receiving a small bear - the capital's emblem - and bouquets before disappearing inside.
Charles, who received an award from a European environmental organization Tuesday and spent the night on a remote island nature reserve off Germany's Baltic Coast, completed his visit by opening a seminar on corporate citizenship.
NEW YORK (AP) - Filmmaker Woody Allen was back in court - but only to thank jurors for sitting through a nine-day trial that ended in a settlement with the two producers he'd accused of cheating him out of $12 million.
"I'm sorry for all this," a sheepish-looking Allen told jurors Wednesday. "I know it was not fun to sit there and listen to all this. It sure was dull."
Terms of Tuesday's settlement with producer Jean Doumanian and her business partner and boyfriend Jacqui Safra were not released.
Allen, 66, had accused the pair unfairly cut him out of profits on eight movies they had made together.
Doumanian was in court Wednesday but did not comment on the case. Safra was not in court and could not immediately be reached for comment.
Juror Paul Meinel, 36, said Wednesday he found Allen "entertaining" but not very concerned about money.
Juror Ian Lawrence, a retired telephone technician, said he would not have given Allen much if the case had gone to the jury.
"I would have awarded Woody $1," Lawrence said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY124 Brandy; NY126 Fossett; NY127 Bloomberg and Stewart;
 Load-Date: June 14, 2002

 

End of Document
