

People in the News
August 30, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1427 words
Dateline: MENANDS, N.Y.
Body




Former President Bill Clinton is having a fine time adjusting to life after the White House, his wife said.
"He's doing great," said Hillary Rodham Clinton, the former first lady and New York's junior senator, in an interview with The Associated Press on Wednesday.
"He's not anywhere near retired," she added. "I don't think he knows the meaning of the word."
The senator said her husband was "actively involved in a lot of causes and he's traveling widely on both his speaking tour and his not-for-profit activities."
"He's having a really good time. He gets to play golf a lot, which he loves, and he gets to go to beautiful places," she said as she prepared to leave a diner just north of Albany for a meeting with local officials in nearby Troy. "He's down in Brazil right now."
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - A lawyer for Louisiana evangelist Jimmy Swaggart said a federal lawsuit accusing the preacher of plagiarism should be dismissed.
The children of Christian writer Finis Jennings Dake claim Swaggart lifted their father's work and used it in his 1987 book.
They filed the lawsuit in Tennessee because Swaggart's book, "Straight Answers to Tough Questions," was published by the now defunct Wolgemuth & Hyatt Publishers of Brentwood, a Nashville suburb. 
"It's a question of whether federal court in Nashville is an appropriate place for citizens of Georgia to be suing citizens of Louisiana," lawyer Jeffrey L. Squires said in Wednesday's editions of The Tennessean.
The lawsuit, filed in May, includes excerpts from Swaggart's 1987 book and claims they are similar to "Dake's Annotated Reference Bible" published in 1963. Dake's children are seeking unspecified damages.
Dake died in 1987.
Swaggart's Louisiana-based ministry once pulled in nearly $150 million a year and preached to millions worldwide. It disintegrated after he was photographed leaving a motel room with a prostitute in 1988. Afterward, his Pentecostal denomination dismissed him and stripped him of his preaching credentials, but he since has returned to the pulpit.
BANGOR, Maine (AP) - Stephen King's insurance company settled a lawsuit with the horror writer by donating $750,000 to the hospital that cared for him after a car hit him two years ago.
King sued OneBeacon Insurance for $10 million in February, claiming it failed to provide full coverage for injuries he suffered in the accident.
He was insured personally and by his business policy, both through Commercial Union, which OneBeacon bought. But his lawsuit claimed an umbrella policy should entitle him to additional payments.
The settlement was executed on July 27, the Portland Press Herald reported Thursday.
King was injured in June 1999 when a van driven by Bryan Smith of Fryeburg struck him as he walked along the shoulder of Route 5 near his vacation home in Lovell.
The 53-year-old suffered a broken leg and hip, a punctured lung, broken ribs and other injuries. He has undergone five surgeries since the accident.
Tony Payne, vice president of marketing for OneBeacon, said the donation to the regional hospital was a compromise.
"(The lawsuit) wasn't likely to be easily resolved without long and expensive litigation," Payne said. "So we collaborated and said, 'How can some good come out of this that can impart community good?"'
The Kings spend summers in Lovell, and live the rest of the year in Bangor.
DENVER (AP) - Bill Cosby had words of encouragement and advice for Colorado educators.
"You happen to be that which makes the world go around," Cosby told more than 900 teachers, principals and superintendents who gathered at the Adam's Mark hotel on Wednesday.
Cosby, 64, honored his sixth-grade teacher, Mary Forchic, at the inaugural fund-raiser for the Thank-a-Teacher education scholarships.
The University of Colorado-Denver School of Education sponsored the banquet, which kicked off a new university program that allows people to post tributes to teachers on its Web site in exchange for a $100 donation. Proceeds will be used for teacher-education scholarships at the university and, later, at other schools.
Cosby saluted Forchic, who taught him at Philadelphia's Wister Elementary School, for steering him to the stage. The comedian said he and Forchic, who later married and became Mary Forchic Nagle, kept in touch until she died several years ago.
"I didn't realize until much later what an enormous impact she had in my life," he said. "I just loved her so much."
On the Net:
http://www.thank-a-teacher.com 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Despite the light sabers and other props, Mark Hamill says he isn't taking specific aim at his "Star Wars" character in Kevin Smith's new film, "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back."
Hamill, 49, played Luke Skywalker in George Lucas' "Star Wars" in 1977. He also appeared in two sequels, 1980's "The Empire Strikes Back" and 1983's "Return of the Jedi."
"I don't think I'm really going to get in trouble with all the Lucas-film fundamentalists," Hamill says. "He's not that character, he's a pompous actor who's on like a Batman-like TV show, and that's the way I approached it."
"Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back," co-starring Ben Affleck, Shannon Elizabeth, Jason Lee and Will Ferrell, grossed $11 million in its first weekend. Hamill's co-star in the "Star Wars" trilogy, Carrie Fisher, makes a cameo as a nun.
WASHINGTON (AP) - When Patricia Velasquez filmed 1999's "The Mummy," she says there weren't many Hispanics working in Hollywood.
"I think we're doing a lot better, I think, in terms of like even three years ago when I was just arriving to the business," she told AP Radio. "There was a lot less work than there is now."
Velasquez, who returned for this year's sequel, "The Mummy Returns," says there now are more Hispanics working as actors, writers and directors - and more opportunities all the way around.
"They're eager to say who we really are as a community," she says.
She was a co-host at the recent Hispanic Heritage Awards, which will air Sept. 22 on NBC.
On the Net:
http://www.hispanicawards.org/2001/Default.asp 
LONDON (AP) - Jerry Hall is going back to school - and she has an edge over her classmates.
The Texas-born model and former partner of Mick Jagger said Wednesday that she is studying for an arts degree, with modules in fine art and music, at Britain's Open University.
"I will be studying Andy Warhol and I think we will also be learning about the Rolling Stones, which is something I think I've got a good head start at," said Hall, whose 20-year relationship with the Stones' frontman produced four children.
The 45-year-old said she waited until her youngest child had started nursery school to pursue the degree at the university, which offers part-time and correspondence courses.
"It's something I've always wanted to do, it's just for me," said Hall, who last year starred in London's West End as seductress Mrs. Robinson in "The Graduate."
HONOLULU (AP) - Hawaii's governor says romance on the beach probably isn't as glamorous as it appears in "From Here to Eternity," which has one of Hollywood's most famous love scenes.
Gov. Ben Cayetano broke from prepared remarks to the annual meeting of the Environmental Council of States on Tuesday to offer his take on Burt Lancaster and Deborah Kerr's memorable embrace in the surf in the 1953 Academy Award-winning film.
While talking about the rugged beauty of the Ka Iwi shoreline 15 miles east of Honolulu, the governor noted for the mostly out-of-town crowd that a cove along the shoreline was the site of the famous kissing scene.
Cayetano told the audience he doubted his wife, Vicky, would find lying on the sand in a full body embrace and being swept over by waves very romantic.
"It'd be like a cold shower," he said, drawing a laugh from the crowd.
BIRMINGHAM, Ala. (AP) - Janet Jackson canceled Thursday night's concert in Birmingham and Friday's rescheduled concert in Philadelphia because of a nagging respiratory infection.
"I greatly regret having to inconvenience my fans, but I think the time has come to follow the advice of my doctors and not my heart - to take the time to rest so that I can return 100 percent on September 3rd," Jackson said in a statement.
Her next performance is scheduled for Monday in Cleveland.
The concert at the Birmingham-Jefferson Convention Complex will not be rescheduled, said Rachel Gary of Clear Channel Entertainment, which promoted the show.
Jackson's "All for You" tour has been plagued by postponements since it began in July. The 35-year-old singer postponed a sold-out show in Philadelphia on Tuesday, rescheduled it for Friday, then postponed that show until Oct. 23.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos DXZ104 Cosby; NY138 King; NY107 Hamill; NY108 Hall; NY109
 Load-Date: August 31, 2001

 

End of Document
