

People in the News
The Associated Press
August 23, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1555 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




NEW ORLEANS (AP) - Grammy-nominated rapper Mystikal did not break copyright laws when he used two Cajun sayings in one of his songs, a federal appeals court has ruled.
Emanation Inc. sued Mystikal's record label, Zomba Recording Inc., in 2001 claiming it owned the copyright to the phrases.
Emanation makes a hand-held toy called "Cajun in Your Pocket" that plays several Cajun phrases, and got a copyright for the word arrangements on Dec. 13, 2000.
The 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled Wednesday that Mystikal, whose real name is Michael Tyler, did not infringe on the company's copyright in his 2000 song "Shake Ya Ass."
The appeals court agreed with a district judge, ruling that the sayings - "We gon pass a good time, yeah, cher," and "You gotta suck da head on dem der crawfish" - are not original and therefore are not protected under copyright laws.
Mystikal's record "Tarantula" was nominated for a best rap album Grammy in January.
SANTA MONICA, Calif. (AP) - Trustees of actor Burt Lancaster's estate have sued MGM, claiming the studio owes at least $2 million in profits for his films, including "Judgment at Nuremberg," "The Birdman of Alcatraz" and "Elmer Gantry."
The suit, filed Tuesday in Los Angeles Superior Court, alleges that from 1996 to 2001, MGM failed to pay the estate its proper share of revenues from the distribution of Lancaster's films.
The suit also alleges the studio charged excessive distribution fees and deducted excessive amounts of interest on production costs.
The studio declined to comment on the pending litigation, MGM spokesman Joseph Fitzgerald said.
Lancaster died in October 1994 at the age of 80. His lengthy career included more than 70 films. He won an Oscar for his role preaching hellfire and damnation in 1960's "Elmer Gantry." He received several Oscar nominations, including one in 1962 for his role in "The Birdman of Alcatraz," and one for the 1954 film "From Here to Eternity."
ST. LOUIS (AP) - The pair who made the inspirational sports films "Hoosiers" and "Rudy" are at it again.
Director David Anspaugh and writer-producer Angelo Pizzo are making "The Game of Their Lives," about the 1950 U.S. World Cup team, which upset England 1-0.
That tournament in Brazil was the last World Cup appearance for the Americans until 1990, and still is considered by many to be the greatest in the history of U.S. soccer.
The movie, slated for release next year, focuses on five players in the starting lineup from St. Louis, among them Harry Keough and Frank Borghi.
Actor Zachery Ty Bryan - who plays Keough in the film - said the movie has given him a greater appreciation for what athletes had to do in 1950 to reach World Cup play.
"The game wasn't (at the time) part of our culture like it was in other countries," Bryan said.
The original players and their families hope the movie will help others realize just what it was like for the U.S. World Cup players.
"These guys came home to no fanfare 50 years ago," said Borghi's daughter, Bette. "And who would have thought this would happen 50 years later? It's kind of like divine justice."
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Fans of National Public Radio talk-show host Tavis Smiley soon will be able to see as well as hear him.
Smiley will host a new PBS late-night talk show beginning in January 2004, according to KCET/Hollywood, the Los Angeles public television station that will produce the program.
"The Tavis Smiley Show" will offer a mix of news and pop culture coverage, KCET said. It will air weeknights as part of the PBS lineup that includes "The Charlie Rose Show."
"Our series will cover everything, politics, money, relationships, race, class, culture and more," Smiley said in a statement. "If it's being discussed - or better yet, if it's not - we'll be talking about it and we'll be breaking news."
On his NPR show, Smiley's guests have ranged from President George W. Bush to actress Halle Berry. Before joining NPR, he was the host of "BET Tonight with Tavis Smiley" on Black Entertainment Network.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The second annual Daniel Pearl Music Day will take place in October to encourage worldwide harmony in memory of the slain Wall Street Journal reporter.
The international series of concerts will be organized around what would have been Pearl's 40th birthday on Oct. 10, according to the Daniel Pearl Foundation.
The inaugural music day last year included more than 100 concerts in 18 countries.
"We have a unique opportunity to promote a message of tolerance and the spirit of peace on Daniel Pearl Music Day," said jazz musician and composer Herbie Hancock. "I encourage other musicians around the world to join me in this message of harmony and understanding through music."
Pearl, who was raised in suburban Encino, was a violinist, fiddler and mandolin player.
An honorary committee formed on behalf of the event includes Hancock, Elton John, Yo-Yo Ma, Itzhak Perlman, Ravi Shankar, Barbra Streisand, John Williams and others.
Pearl, 38, was chief of the Journal's South Asia bureau when he was kidnapped Jan. 23, 2002, while researching a story on Islamic extremists. Four Islamic militants were convicted last year for their involvement in his kidnapping and slaying.
On the Net:
http://www.danielpearl.org 
NEW YORK (AP) - Diane Lane said she wasn't nervous about meeting her future mother-in-law, Barbra Streisand.
"I'd met her before on 'Yentl,"' said the actress, who's marrying Streisand's stepson, Josh Brolin. "I've been around and I've met Barbra on different occasions for different reasons at different times. She'd forgotten that she'd read me for 'Yentl' and I was like, 'Good! Please lose the tape!"'
Lane, 38, said Brolin, 35, got down on one knee and popped the question on the Fourth of July.
"It was early, early, early, early in the morning. Like dawn," Lane told AP Radio. "I had no idea what was coming."
She said they haven't set a wedding date yet because they're both so busy with work. Lane co-stars in the film "Under the Tuscan Sun," opening Sept. 26.
LONDON (AP) - For his latest trick, magician David Blaine will try to last more than six weeks without food in a box suspended high over central London.
Starting Sept. 5, Blaine will live in a plastic box 7 feet long, 7 feet deep and 3 feet wide for 44 days without food or contact with the outside world, a representative said Thursday.
The street magician-turned-endurance performer previously spent 35 hours standing atop a 100-foot-tall pole and three days encased in ice. Both of those stunts took place in New York City.
Unlike the feats performed by his hero, Harry Houdini, this latest challenge for Blaine won't be to escape, but to survive. All he'll have in the box is a tube for water and a tube for urine.
But he'll also have a good view of London. The box will be suspended 40 feet high from a crane next to the River Thames and near the historic Tower Bridge.
The 30-year-old said performing the stunt will give him a chance to search for his "truths."
On the Net:
http://www.davidblaine.com 
DETROIT (AP) - Ted Nugent has filed a lawsuit in federal court, claiming organizers who canceled a June performance wrongly accused him of making racist comments.
Nugent claims that accusations by city officials and others, and the cancellation of the June 30 concert, damaged his reputation and career, according to a statement issued by his attorney.
The lawsuit filed Thursday names the City of Muskegon; Mayor Stephen Warmington; City Manager Bryon Mazade; Meridian Entertainment, the concert's promoter; and others as defendants.
"In a world of political correctness, there is no more reputation-destroying term than racist," Nugent, 54, said in the statement. "And the alleged statements falsely attributed to me could not have been more inaccurate or misleading, completely counter to what I stand for."
Officials of the Muskegon Summer Celebration canceled Nugent's appearance after the rock star did an interview with two Denver disc jockeys in which the DJs say he used slurs when referring to Asians and blacks.
Following discussions with community leaders, Summer Celebration's board decided it was in the community's best interest to drop Nugent from the festival lineup, city officials said at the time.
Festival and city officials couldn't be reached for comment.
On the Net:
Muskegon Summer Celebration: http://www.summercelebration.com 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The family of the late Buddy Ebsen wants fans to join in this week's tribute to the actor known to generations as Jed Clampett on TV's old series "The Beverly Hillbillies."
Ebsen's widow, Dorothy, will host the Aug. 30 "Life Celebration" for Ebsen, who died July 6 at 95.
Dick Van Dyke will host the event and actors Fess Parker, Lee Meriwether and Max Baer Jr. will share memories about Ebsen. The never-released, one-hour retrospective "The Buddy Ebsen Story" will be shown.
"I know Buddy is up there somewhere tap dancing with Gregory Hines, and he will be here with us for the celebration," Dorothy Ebsen said. "Over the years, so many people have approached us to tell Buddy how much he has meant to them."
Hines died Aug. 9.
Ebsen began his television career and nine-year run as mountaineer Jed Clampett in 1962, when "The Beverly Hillbillies" premiered. He later starred in the CBS detective series "Barnaby Jones," which ran from 1973 until 1980.
On The Net:
http://www.buddyebsen.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY111 of Smiley, NY12 of Lancaster, NY113 of Bryan, NY114
 Load-Date: August 24, 2003

 

End of Document
