

People in the News
July 8, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 628 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Candace Bushnell is no longer a single girl in the city. The author of "Sex and the City" has gotten hitched.
Bushnell, whose best-selling book was adapted into the HBO television program starring Sarah Jessica Parker, married Charles Askegard July 4 on a wind-swept Nantucket beach in Massachusetts.
"One has to be open-minded when the right man comes along," Bushnell told The New York Times on Sunday. "And I know it's freaky, but this just seems like the natural thing to do."
"We're both independent, so we complement each other in a good way," said the groom, a 33-year-old ballet dancer she met eight weeks earlier. "It's fun to be out on the town with her, but when we're alone, that's when it's really great."
After the couple were declared man and wife, Bushnell ran across the sand and leapt at Askegard, who caught her and held her above his head.
It is her first marriage and his second.
"Life is constantly evolving," said Darren Star, the creator of the hit HBO show. "Everyone has to have a new chapter."
Bushnell's "Sex and the City" was a collection of columns she had written for the New York Observer newspaper. She also is the author of "Four Blondes."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The difference between athletes and movie stars is easy to identify for Samuel L. Jackson.
The actor of such recent fare as "Changing Lanes," the latest "Star Wars" episodes and the upcoming thriller "XXX," has had a lot of time to think about the issue while preparing to host the ESPY Awards on ESPN this week.
"Athletes take things more seriously. We have a lot of drama around here with the show because certain athletes won't come on because ESPN said something bad about them," he told the July 15 edition of Newsweek magazine, on newsstands Monday.
"As an actor, you get criticized and rejected all day. We don't take it personally."
---
MIAMI (AP) - Swinging chads and a confusing presidential election helped inspire John Sayles to film his next movie in Florida.
A native of Schenectady, N.Y., Sayles has used other locations for his films, including Texas ("Lone Star"), Alaska ("Limbo"), Ireland ("The Secret of Roan Inish") and Latin America ("Men With Guns").
Then came the 2000 election.
"The election helped me focus ideas that I had been thinking about for a long time," Sayles told the Miami Herald on Sunday. The product is the film "Sunshine State."
"It reminded me how much Florida is a place of parallel communities that don't always intersect and have totally different ways of looking at the world. They might do certain things together, but they don't necessarily mix."
The sprawl of development and the segregation of communities within a supposed melting pot are both examined in the film. But he stops short of calling his movie a cautionary tale against overdevelopment.
"It's more of a cautionary tale to simply pay attention," he said. "When you just sit back and everything becomes a theme park, you can really lose your soul and your connection to a place."
---
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Bow Wow, the singer-turned-movie star in "Like Mike," wasn't too worried about making the transition to the hard court.
A fan of basketball, the 14-year-old rapper needed less preparation than most when he tackled the role of Calvin Cambridge, a down-on-his-luck basketball fan who stumbles across a pair of old-school high-tops and becomes a basketball star.
"I just had to get adjusted to it, but it's good I could play a little; I'm happy about my balling. Probably saved Fox a lot of money" by not paying for expensive basketball lessons.
"This was my first movie, and the experience was wonderful," Bow Wow, who has dropped the Lil' from his name, told the Philadelphia Inquirer last week. "I had a lot of fun doing it, having the opportunity to work with many actors and NBA stars."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY117 of Bushnell, NY118 of Jackson, NY119 of Sayles
 Load-Date: July 9, 2002

 

End of Document
