

People in the News
March 28, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1566 words
Dateline: PEORIA, Ill.
Body




Richard Pryor won't get a street named after him after all.
The city council in Pryor's hometown voted 6-5 on Tuesday against a study of renaming a street for the comedian and actor. Several council members said there was little public support for the idea, and plenty of public opinion against it.
Councilwoman Gale Thetford said several callers told her they objected to honoring Pryor - whose past drug use is well known - regardless of his contributions to the entertainment world.
As depicted in his semi-autobiographical 1986 film, "Jo Jo Dancer, Your Life is Calling," Pryor spent much of his early years in a brothel run by his grandmother. He dropped out of Peoria Central High School at age 16 and began showcasing his talents at local clubs after his father kicked him out.
After a stint in the Army, Pryor began working at New York clubs, where he formed a comedy style that mixed anger and humor - and lots of foul language.
Pryor suffered near-fatal burns in a 1980 fire linked to cocaine free-basing. He announced in 1991 that he has the degenerative nerve disease multiple sclerosis and now spends most of his time at home in California.
SAN LUCAS TOLIMAN, Guatemala (AP) - Italian tenor Luciano Pavarotti inaugurated one of his personal charity projects, a school for Mayan Indian children on the shores of Lake Atitlan, in central Guatemala.
"This is a donation for our youth, and a symbol of Italy's commitment to Guatemala," Pavarotti said at the ceremony on Tuesday.
Despite his good intentions - he raised money for the school at the 1999 "Pavarotti and Friends" charity concert in his hometown of Modena, Italy - Guatemala's political tensions marred his visit.
Nobel peace prize laureate Rigoberta Menchu originally was scheduled to accompany Pavarotti at the inauguration 100 miles west of the capital. But she refused to attend because President Alfonso Portillo also was planning to be there.
Portillo's main political ally is former dictator Efrain Rios Montt, whose 1980-82 military regime was blamed for some of the worst atrocities against Guatemalan Indians during the country's 36-year civil war.
Menchu has filed a genocide complaint in international courts against Rios Montt and other former officers.
In the end, Portillo did not attend the ceremony because "he had things to do at the office," his private secretary, Rodrigo Carrillo, told The Associated Press.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Fifty years after his hit "I've Got a Lovely Bunch of Coconuts," Merv Griffin is still haunted by the tune that made him a household word to generations.
"It's become a lifetime joke. I'm always asked to sing it. Tony Bennett gets to sing 'I Left My Heart in San Francisco' and I always get asked to do 'Coconuts.' I hate that damn thing," the 75-year-old singer said Tuesday.
Griffin's first album in about 25 years arrives in stores this week, but don't look for 21st century rappin' Griffin. "It's Like a Dream," released this week by Pat Boone's Gold Label, includes standards like "My Funny Valentine," "The More I See You" and "You Stepped Out of a Dream."
"What was I going to be - Merv 'Puffy' Griffin?" he laughed, noting the album producer is Steve Lindsey. "He produces me and Eminem."
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Holly Hunter never played sports growing up, so portraying tennis star Billie Jean King showed her how it felt to be an athlete.
"We haven't seen too many women athletes portrayed on film," she said. "I thought, what a great opportunity to use my whole body."
Hunter said she was exhausted a month into her four months of training for "When Billie Beat Bobby," airing April 16 on ABC.
"Then I kind of broke through that and started feeling I was in the best shape of my life," she said. "That was intoxicating, to feel capable."
Hunter learned to play tennis and drilled five days a week with 1974 Wimbledon doubles champion Peggy Michel.
"When I did 'The Piano,' people asked me if I learned to play the piano for the movie," she said. "Tennis is like a musical instrument. It's not something you can pick up and be proficient in four months. You can only reach a certain level through an investment of some serious time."
NEW YORK (AP) - Alice Munro, a Canadian author long acclaimed as one of the world's greatest short story writers, has won the Rea Award for lifetime achievement. The $30,000 prize is given annually for contributions to the short story form.
"In her art of the story, Alice Munro encourages us to reflect, to see our own time and place and perhaps to redeem, if not ourselves, at least our own stories in the larger setting of the world," award jurors said in a statement Tuesday.
Munro is the author of several short story collections, including "The Love of a Good Woman," "The Beggar Maid" and "Friend of My Youth." She has received many awards, including the National Book Critics Circle prize for "The Love of a Good Woman."
Previous winners of the Rea Award, established in 1986, include Eudora Welty, Richard Ford and Cynthia Ozick.
ST. PAUL, Minn. (AP) - Will the XFL get its cancellation notice?
"If they choose to cancel it, that's their call," Gov. Jesse Ventura said during an interview Tuesday on Minnesota Public Radio. "The players gave their hearts. I gave mine and all the broadcasters, we're doing the best job we can do and that's all you can do."
Ventura is the lead analyst for the broadcasts.
Dick Ebersol, NBC Sports president, said Sunday the network is considering pulling the plug on the XFL if ratings don't improve during the new football league's playoffs games next month.
Ebersol said a decision would be made no later than the end of April as to whether the league would make it into a second year.
The XFL, an offshoot of the World Wrestling Federation, has a two-year agreement with NBC that also included the broadcast company spending $100 million during the first two seasons.
WOODSIDE, Calif. (AP) - Oracle chief Larry Ellison is building quite the dream home in rustic Woodside.
Taking shape on Ellison's 23 acres is a Japanese-styled villa with man-made ponds, waterfalls and teahouse and a moon pavilion.
The cost for Ellison's not-so-humble abode? More than $80 million.
"It's the biggest development in Woodside," said David Rizk, the town's planning director. "It's unique in magnitude, materials and architectural design."
One goes about building a home like Ellison's by moving 81,000 cubic yards of earth, importing more than 500 mature trees and 3,750 tons of hand-chiseled Chinese granite.
The project is expected to continue for another two years, although it was originally scheduled for completion in 1999.
Ellison's home is still no match for that of Microsoft's Bill Gates. Gates' house in Medina, Wash., is more than 48,000 square feet and is being expanded.
NEW YORK (AP) - David Copperfield lives in a four-floor penthouse, 55 stories above Manhattan, complete with a swimming pool and a screening room. He earned $60 million last year, placing him fifth on the Forbes magazine list of richest celebrities.
Now, he wants a wife and kids to share it all with.
"I'm trying to balance my life a little bit," the illusionist says in the April 9 issue of People magazine. "I need a form of escape even when I'm working really hard."
Part of that balance comes from his girlfriend, 22-year-old Belgian model Ambre Frisque. It's the first serious relationship for Copperfield, 44, since his 1999 breakup with supermodel Claudia Schiffer, whom he was engaged to for six years.
He and Frisque have been together for five months, and they're not planning to rush into marriage.
His next feat, "Copperfield! Tornado of Fire," airs April 3 on CBS. He'll walk through heavy gusts and withstand flames as hot as 2,000 degrees.
LONDON (AP) - Baby, you can drive my car.
Bidders hesitated to take up the invitation Tuesday, as a limousine once owned by John Lennon failed to reach its reserve price at auction.
The 1970 Mercedes Benz 600 Pullman attracted a telephone bid of $270,000 - $14,000 short of its reserve price - during a sale at London's Hard Rock Cafe.
A Steinway piano that once sat in Lennon's New York home drew a top bid of $1.1 million - $360,000 short of the anticipated price.
The owners of the items must now decide whether to sell them at the bid prices, said auctioneers Fleetwood Owen.
The Mercedes limo, complete with black velvet upholstery and a built-in record player, was made to order for Lennon in 1970. Lennon sold it to fellow Beatle George Harrison when he moved from Britain to the United States in 1973. It was subsequently owned by Mary Wilson of the Supremes.
Last year, singer George Michael paid $2.1 million for the piano on which Lennon composed "Imagine." He has said he plans to give it to Liverpool's Beatles museum.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The Eagles have soared to "record" status.
The Recording Industry Association of America announced Tuesday that the "Hotel California" rockers now rank as the third highest-selling band in the United States.
A recent audit by the Eagles' label, Elektra Records, boosted its album sales by more than 17 million, for a total of 83.5 million.
The Eagles, known for such hits as "Desperado" and "Take it Easy," now follow only The Beatles, with 163.5 million sales, and Led Zeppelin, with 103.5 million.
Pink Floyd has fallen to fourth place with 68.5 million sales.
The band's "Their Greatest Hits: 1971-75" remains the best-selling album in history for sales of 27 million copies.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY120 Pavarotti; NY121 Hunter; NY128 Ventura; NY129
 Load-Date: March 29, 2001

 

End of Document
