

People in the News
September 20, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1181 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




David Bowie is returning to the venue where he killed off his most famous creation, Ziggy Stardust, nearly 30 years ago.
The 55-year-old star said Friday he'll perform Oct. 2 at London's Carling Apollo, which was known in the 1970s as the Hammersmith Odeon.
"This has got to be one of the great venues in London. It should be a thrill to play it again," Bowie said.
The performer stunned his fans in 1973 when he rounded off a Ziggy tour at the Odeon by telling them: "This show will stay the longest in our memories, not just because it is the end of the tour but because it is the last show we'll ever do."
The announcement was his way of burying Ziggy Stardust, the outrageous stage persona his fans had come to love.
At the Oct. 2 concert, he'll play many of his classic tracks as well as songs from his recent "Heathen" album. But he gave no indication that he has any plans to resurrect Ziggy.
The concert is part of a 10-date tour across Britain and Ireland. Supporting acts include the Manic Street Preachers and Ian Brown.
On the Net:
David Bowie Web site: http://www.davidbowie.com/ 
Concert Web site: http://www.carlinglive.com. 
SAN SEBASTIAN, Spain (AP) - Actor John Malkovich tackled a dense political drama inspired by the capture of former Peruvian guerrilla leader Abimael Guzman for his directorial debut, "The Dancer Upstairs."
Based on the novel by Nicholas Shakespeare, the film was shown Thursday at the San Sebastian International Film Festival.
The movie, set in an unidentified Latin American country, describes a social climate where political corruption is universal and public indifference so ingrained that a brutal revolution is almost unnoticed.
Javier Bardem plays an idealistic lawyer-turned-politician who faces the challenge of capturing a mysterious guerrilla leader.
When asked if he would have liked to play a role in the film, Malkovich replied, "The thought of watching me in the editing room for one year and a half just makes me nauseous."
The 48-year-old added, with a big smile: "Even if I had one line, I would have had to be taken to a hospital, a mental one."
He starred in 1999's "Being John Malkovich" and other films.
On the Net:
San Sebastian International Film Festival Web site: http://sansebastianfestival.ya.com/2002/in/index.htm 
NEW YORK (AP) - A new album isn't all that Toni Braxton's expecting to deliver soon - the songbird is pregnant with her second child, due early next year, her record label said.
Braxton, who is married to 31-year-old producer Keri Lewis, gave birth to a son, Denim Cole Braxton Lewis, last December.
The 33-year-old R&B singer, the winner of six Grammys, is working on a new album, expected to be released by the end of the year.
Arista Records confirmed her pregnancy on Thursday.
CINCINNATI (AP) - Leonard Slatkin, music director of the National Symphony Orchestra, has been inducted into the American Classical Music Hall of Fame.
Slatkin, 58, has served seven years as conductor of the Washington-based orchestra. He previously was music director of the St. Louis Symphony.
His induction was in recognition of his advocacy of American music, his international reputation and his support for arts education in public schools. The hall of fame is in Cincinnati.
"Such a distinction would not be possible without the many American composers who have entrusted me with their music and the many orchestras that have embraced the new and different, especially my own National Symphony Orchestra," he said.
The induction took place Wednesday night.
Ceremonies marking the occasion are planned later this year at New York's Lincoln Center, the Music Hall in Cincinnati and Boston's Symphony Hall.
SAN SEBASTIAN, Spain (AP) - The San Sebastian International Film Festival kicked off its 50th edition with the screening of Neil Jordan's "The Good Thief," starring Nick Nolte and Ralph Fiennes.
The film, a loose remake of the 1955 French crime classic "Bob Le Flambeur," tells the story of a drug addict and die-hard gambler who decides to rob a casino.
"Characters in films, especially in American films, become so bland. They never have personal problems. I fell in love with this intelligent thief, with his obsessions with gambling and mathematics," Jordan said Thursday.
Jordan, director of "Mona Lisa" and "The Crying Game," said he made the film to honor the European filmmaking style of the 1940s and '50s.
The festival continues until Sept. 28.
On the Net:
San Sebastian International Film Festival: http://sansebastianfestival.ya.com/2002/in/index.htm 
NEW YORK (AP) - David Halberstam, author of acclaimed best sellers such as "The Best and the Brightest" and "War in a Time of Peace," has signed a three-book deal with Hyperion.
His first project, due for publication next summer, is "The Teammates," a look at the 60-year friendship among four Boston Red Sox stars: Ted Williams, Bobby Doerr, Dom DiMaggio and Johnny Pesky.
Halberstam will follow with a book about the Korean War, tentatively titled, "The Coldest Winter," and then will work on a book about the classic 1958 championship showdown between the New York Giants and the Baltimore Colts.
Financial terms weren't disclosed.
PITTSBURGH (AP) - A man who racked up nearly $33,000 in credit card bills in the name of actor-rapper Will Smith has pleaded guilty to one count of the use of an unauthorized access device.
Carlos Lomax, 41, entered the plea Wednesday before Senior U.S. District Judge Alan N. Bloch. Lomax faces a maximum sentence of 20 years in prison and a $250,000 fine.
Federal prosecutors say Lomax used Smith's Social Security number and other information to obtain 14 credit accounts at various department and specialty stores in the Pittsburgh region. They say Lomax placed fraudulent charges on 12 of those accounts.
The total amount placed in the name of Willard C. Smith - the film star's given name - was $32,897.34.
A telephone message left for Lomax's federal public defender, Jay Finkelstein, was not returned Wednesday.
Smith's business manager alerted federal authorities after noticing $5,447 worth of items had been charged on a Sears account in Pittsburgh.
U.S. Attorney Mary Beth Buchanan has said Lomax was on probation for running up $81,000 in credit card bills in the name of Steve Smith, the Atlanta Hawks basketball player, when the Will Smith identity theft occurred.
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - Air travelers flying over the northern city of Umeaa can catch a glimpse of Swedish film star Greta Garbo's mysterious gaze.
A group of students from the local university have honored Garbo, who died in 1990 at 84, with a giant portrait made with an art form known as "land art."
The six students used different shades of sand and dirt from a nearby sandpit to replicate a digital picture of a young Garbo. The portrait measures 17-by-21 meters (yards), said Fredrik Jonsson, 33, one of the artists.
The portrait took a week to complete, Jonsson said, and the weather will determine how long it lasts.
"It has already rained," he said. "But she still looks to be in good spirits."
Garbo's films include 1930s film classics "Mata Hari" and "Anna Karenina."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY115, Bowie; NY116, Braxton; NY107, Slatkin; STO201,
 Load-Date: September 21, 2002

 

End of Document
