

Peru's leading presidential contender a hero to the country's Indians
May 26, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 841 words
Byline: By RICK VECCHIO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHANCAY, Peru
Body




In the center of this poor fishing town, Alfonso Zapata eagerly awaits the arrival of presidential candidate Alejandro Toledo - a man of Indian descent he feels is destined to lead like an Inca emperor.
"If he governs the nation, he will do so with the authority of Pachacutec," Zapata, 62, said, referring to the 15th century ruler who extended the Indian empire to its greatest expanse before Spanish colonization. "I believe the time has come for a man born of poverty to occupy the presidency."
Toledo, a U.S.-trained economist, has played on Peru's deep racial divisions to become the favorite in Peru's June 3 runoff against former President Alan Garcia, a left-leaning populist. The men were the top vote-getters in a first round of voting in April.
Toledo's strongest backing comes from the "cholos"- dark-skinned people like him, whose Indian ancestors migrated to Peru's coastal cities and towns over the past 40 years and gradually gave up their Andean customs. Most of them remain at the bottom of this Andean nation's social order.
Toledo's emergence as front-runner - he has a 10-to-13 percentage point lead over Garcia in the polls - has rekindled the rarely discussed issue of racism in Peruvian politics. No Indian or mestizo has ever been democratically elected president here, although several have come to power through military coups.
Peru's history has largely been one of criollos - the locally born European elite - dominating an Indian and mestizo, or mixed-race, majority. Of Peru's 26 million people, about 80 percent are Indian or mestizo, 15 percent are white, and the rest are of African or Asian descent.
Historian Juan Jose Vega notes that racism is deeply rooted in Peru's past, to the point that Jose de San Martin, a dark-skinned mestizo who in 1821 proclaimed Peru's independence from Spain, is depicted in a congressional portrait as light-complexioned with clearly Caucasian features.
In stump speeches, Toledo, 55, tells his supporters of how he overcame poverty to earn a doctorate from Stanford University and work for the World Bank.
His aides prod crowds to chant "Pachacutec! Pachacutec!" while he promises to create 2.5 million new jobs, raise wages, and provide Internet access to Peru's poorest school children.
As Toledo pulled into Chancay, 30 miles north of Lima, aboard his "cholo bus," as he calls it, Andean-style folk music blared over a loudspeaker.
Toledo is married to Eliane Karp, a red-haired Belgian anthropologist who speaks Quechua, the Indian language. She has been by his side through much of the campaign, invoking mountain spirits "to break the curse of 500 years" of oppression and herald the inevitable coming of her husband's "cholo government."
The racial overtones of this presidential race are evident even in the music of the candidates' campaigns.
In comparison to the melancholy tone of Andean pan pipes in Toledo's music, Garcia's radio and television ads feature him singing an upbeat Peruvian criollo vals, a coastal waltz with Afro-Peruvian rhythms and Latin harmonic touches.
Toledo is widely credited with galvanizing Peru's political opposition against the corruption-ridden regime of former President Alberto Fujimori, whose decade in power ended last November after he fled to Japan, the homeland of his parents. Toledo led large anti-Fujimori street marches.
In 1990, Fujimori capitalized heavily on his Asian ancestry to beat novelist Mario Vargas Llosa, who was clearly identified with Peru's privileged European-descended elite.
Toledo toned down his racially charged rhetoric after Garcia, 52, suggested during their recent debate that his opponent was practicing the same brand of demagoguery that helped earn Fujimori the nickname "The Emperor" for his autocratic style of government.
"There was no one more powerful than Pachacutec," Garcia said. "Hopefully we won't switch from a Japanese emperor to a Pachacutec-type emperor."
Anthropologist Juan Ossio said Toledo's campaign had already succeeded in capturing the imagination of an Andean society where Messianic symbolism plays a central role.
"Without a doubt, this identification with Pachacutec, the restorer of order, has been very well received in the Andean world," he said.
Until land reform was implemented by a left-wing military government in the late 1960s, most descendants of the Incas lived in near feudal conditions in the Andean highlands. They worked on large estates owned by a white elite based in Lima, the capital.
Alberto Flores, an office clerk, said he remembers the racism he encountered in the capital as a 10-year-old boy after his family left the central Andean region of Huanuco in 1966.
He said he was treated like a "strange animal" by police who denied Andean migrants entrance to the city's then-regal historic center, where flower-filled plazas and immaculately waxed sidewalks were the exclusive domain of white high society.
A Toledo victory would represent "vindication for the oppressed, vindication for the marginalized, for the forgotten, for the great majority of Peruvians," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY192
 Load-Date: May 27, 2001

 

End of Document
