

Peru begins the task of bringing charges against ex-spymaster Vladimiro Montesinos
June 26, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 785 words
Byline: By RICK VECCHIO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




Peru began Tuesday sorting out the avalanche of charges against Vladimiro Montesinos, the ex-spy chief accused of everything from smuggling arms to Colombian guerrillas, to bribing judges and lawmakers and directing a notorious death squad.
Montesinos, who was extradited to Lima Monday after his weekend capture in Venezuela, faces 52 judicial cases against him in Peru and has been the subject of 140 investigations.
"It is a wide range of crimes that practically covers the majority of the penal code," said Jose Ugaz, the anti-corruption investigator leading the Montesinos case.
Both U.S. and Peruvian officials have credited the FBI with providing key information on Montesinos whereabouts in Venezuela. But Venezuela on Tuesday downplayed any U.S. role.
"The FBI could never say that it collaborated in the detention of Vladimiro Montesinos," Venezuelan Interior Minister Luis Miquilena said. "This was an operation strictly and effectively done by Venezuelan agencies."
U.S. officials have said a money laundering investigation led to the arrest in Miami of a Montesinos associate, who told authorities where the spymaster was hiding. They said the FBI, in turn, gave that information to Venezuela and Montesinos was captured.
"At no moment and under no circumstance did I get the least participation from any foreign agency," Miquilena said, challenging the FBI and Peru's government to prove their participation in the capture.
Moments before Miquilena spoke, Interim Peruvian President Valentin Paniagua said in Lima that Montesinos' capture involved intelligent agents from "Peru, the FBI and, I imagine, from the Venezuelan government."
Montesinos for a decade was the power broker behind ousted President Alberto Fujimori. He fled the country last year amid a corruption scandal that also topped Fujimori, making a failed asylum bid in Panama before becoming a fugitive and launching an eight-month international manhunt.
Ugaz said Peru's courts will likely group the cases against Montesinos into categories, such as drug trafficking, illegal arms dealing and human rights violations. He said a reorganization is needed to keep the legal process manageable, adding, "It's not going to be an easy task."
On Tuesday, six anti-corruption judges started what was expected to be a several days of closed-door arraignments, in which Montesinos would be advised of the charges against him.
One allegation against Montesinos is that he and his cronies in Peru's military smuggled weapons purchased in Jordan to Colombia's largest guerrilla group, the Revolutionary Armed Force of Colombia, or FARC.
But the most serious was a charge he and his allies in the military collected hundreds of millions of dollars in kickbacks from purchases of used, defective Soviet-made MIGs and Sukhoi-25 jet fighters during Peru's brief 1995 border war with Ecuador.
Some lawmakers have suggested Montesinos should face the death penalty for "betrayal of the fatherland" for his actions during the war, the only crime meriting capital punishment under Peru's Constitution.
But legal experts said the death penalty was unlikely, because the handling of those cases is not spelled out clearly in Peru's penal code.
"It is true the Constitution recognizes a sanction of that nature, but there is no corresponding penalty included in the penal code," said Luis Lamas Puccio, a constitutional expert. He said a life sentence was the likely outcome.
In compiling their case, investigators say Montesinos formed the Colina paramilitary death squad, which carried out two massacres in the early 1990s. He is believed to have directed the group in the early 1990s to combat rising attacks by Maoist Shining Path guerrillas.
He faces charges of homicide and crimes against humanity in connection with the group's 1991 murders of 15 people in a tenement building in Lima's Barrios Altos district and the 1992 assassinations of nine students and a professor at La Cantuta University. Both massacres were allegedly meant as strikes at Shining Path sympathizers.
For years, Montesinos, 55, was the shadow at Fujimori's ear, operating out of the public eye.
But the release in recent months of videos secretly recorded by the ex-spymaster brought to light his role as the power broker behind Fujimori, controlling the military, the police, the judiciary and other institutions.
Congress declared Fujimori morally unfit for office in November after he fled to Japan, his ancestral homeland, as corruption scandals mounted against his top aide, Montesinos.
The videos have shown Montesinos paying bribes to election officials and conspiring with lawmakers, military authorities, business leaders and media heads to assure Fujimori's third-term victory last year.
 Graphic



 
AP photos LIM102,106,111
 Load-Date: June 27, 2001

 

End of Document
