

Police say sniper may have tried to contact them, but the call was garbled
October 21, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 789 words
Byline: By STEPHEN MANNING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROCKVILLE, Md.
Body




In a tantalizing turn in the hunt for the Washington-area sniper, investigators said Monday the killer apparently tried to contact them in a phone call, but it was too garbled to understand. They pleaded with the person to call back.
The announcement came hours after Virginia authorities surrounded a white van at a pay phone outside a Richmond gas station and seized two men. However, sources said the two men were not involved in the attacks and would be deported to Latin America for immigration violations.
"They were in the wrong place at the wrong time," a senior law enforcement source in Washington said on condition of anonymity.
Montgomery County Police Chief Charles Moose, who is in charge of the investigation, disclosed for the first time that a call had been received from someone of high interest to investigators.
"The person you called could not hear everything you said. The audio was unclear and we want to get it right. Call us back so that we can clearly understand," Moose said.
Investigators believe that the call may have came from the sniper and that the caller was the same person who left a message and phone number at the scene of the latest shooting, a law enforcement source told The Associated Press on condition of anonymity.
Authorities did not disclose who received the call, when it was made or any other details.
For the second consecutive day, Moose seemed intent on establishing a dialogue with the killer. On Sunday, he publicly pleaded with the note writer to call authorities.
On Monday, he said: "The message that needs to be delivered is that we are going to respond to a message that we have received. We are preparing our response at this time."
Moose said he could not discuss the message further.
The flurry of activity raised hope there had been a break in the search for the sniper who has killed nine people and critically wounded three others in Virginia, Maryland and Washington since Oct. 2.
Schools in Richmond and nearby counties were shut down Monday because of fears raised by the sniper's southward march.
"We want to assure you we continue to press forward with all of our resources and truly understand the fears, anxieties and the concerns of all of our citizens," Hanover County Sheriff Stuart Cook said after the two men were taken into custody in suburban Richmond.
The van, which had 30-day Virginia tags and a small Marine Corps sticker on the back window, had been idling beside the pay phone at least 45 minutes, said David Dunham, a mechanic at a nearby car dealership.
Witnesses said officers in bulletproof vests converged on the van and dragged out a man before slapping him in handcuffs. Authorities did not say how the second man was arrested.
Hours later, the lead fell apart. A Justice Department official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said deportation proceedings had begun against the 24-year-old Mexican and 34-year-old Guatemalan.
Meanwhile, the latest victim was in stable condition at a Richmond hospital after having his spleen and parts of his pancreas and stomach removed.
The man and his wife had stopped in Ashland for gas and food. His wife told authorities the shot sounded like a car backfiring and said her husband took about three steps before collapsing.
Through the hospital, the wife issued a statement saying the caring and prayers she and her husband have received "have been a bright ray of hope and comfort."
"Please pray also for the attacker and that no one else is hurt," she added.
Amid the mayhem, the sniper's latest fatal victim was laid to rest.
FBI analyst Linda Franklin, 47, was killed by the sniper Oct. 14 outside a Home Depot in Falls Church while loading packages with her husband. Franklin had survived breast cancer and was awaiting the birth of her first grandson.
"Whoever this perpetrator is has surrendered himself to darkness and evil," minister Larry Tingle told about 200 mourners at Mount Olivet United Methodist Church in Arlington.
In other developments Monday:
- France alerted Interpol about a French army deserter who is known as a marksman and is missing in North America. A Defense Ministry spokesman said there was speculation of a link to the sniper.
- Bail was denied for Matthew M. Dowdy, who was accused of lying to police by describing a cream-colored van with a burned-out taillight at the scene of last week's shooting in Falls Church.
-The Richmond Times-Dispatch reported that police have found more than one tarot card during the investigation. A tarot death card was reported found Oct. 7 outside a Bowie, Md., middle school where the sniper wounded a 13-year-old boy. It had the words "Dear Policeman, I am God" written on it.
On the Net:
Montgomery County police: http://www.co.mo.md.us 
FBI: http://www.fbi.gov 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos; AP Graphic SHOOTINGS ROUNDUP
 Load-Date: October 22, 2002

 

End of Document
