

Police arrest six people ahead of Summit of the Americas
April 18, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 477 words
Byline: By PHIL COUVRETTE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUEBEC
Body




Police arrested six Canadians they said were planning violence at this weekend's Summit of the Americas, officials said Wednesday, displaying seized weapons that included small explosives and smoke grenades.
Inspector Robert Poeti of the Quebec Provincial Police said increased security for the Friday-Sunday summit, where 34 leaders of the Western Hemisphere will gather, led to the arrests of two 21-year-old men driving into Quebec City and four men in the Montreal area.
The arrests occurred Tuesday and Wednesday. Police recovered the explosives and grenades along with flammable liquid, baseball bats, gas masks and pointed sticks, Poeti said.
Poeti said a Canadian military reservist and a former member of the military were among the six arrested, and that some of the explosive materials seized were military-issue. The arrest of the two men in Quebec City on Tuesday led to the arrests Wednesday of the four in Montreal, he said.
Police would not identify the arrested men, who face charges including possession of explosives, stealing military supplies and conspiring to endanger public safety.
"We'll have no tolerance for people coming here to cause problems and criminal acts," Poeti said.
In a separate case, a 17-year-old youth from New York state was arrested for possessing knives and pepper spray in Quebec City. City police Inspector Gaetan Labbe said the youth was freed on $130 bail and ordered to stay away from the security area around the summit. The youth's name and hometown were not released.
Huge protests are planned around the summit by activists who are traveling from around the world. Shopkeepers have boarded up many stores, and Canadian authorities have erected a 2 1/2-mile concrete-and-wire fence to prevent the activists from getting near the summit site.
On Wednesday, a Quebec judge ruled that although the fence infringes on civil liberties, it is justified given the fears of unrest. The groups that filed the lawsuit said they would appeal, but the appeal will not be heard until after the summit.
Probably the most high-profile of the activists, French farmer Jose Bove, said Wednesday that he would participate in the demonstrations but didn't want to make trouble.
Bove, 47, is appealing a three-month prison sentence for the 1999 ransacking of a McDonald's restaurant in France.
"I have not come here to impose any mode of action, but will participate in whatever actions are being prepared by local groups," Bove said.
The Canadian government intervened to allow Bove to attend the Summit of the Americas, where the leaders will discuss expanding the North America Free Trade Agreement to include Central and South America and the Caribbean.
Immigration laws allow border officials to turn back anyone with a criminal record. Activists heading to Quebec City say they have been harassed and refused entrance at the Canadian border.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos QBC104
 Load-Date: April 19, 2001

 

End of Document
