

Police fend off rebels in Colombia - and nervously wait the next assault
April 5, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 555 words
Byline: By MARGARITA MARTINEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN ANTONIO, Colombia
Body




Thousands of residents have fled this village in Colombia's western mountains after a failed rebel attack, leaving behind rumors the guerrillas will come back and two dozen edgy police officers.
On Wednesday, about the only activity in San Antonio, which normally has 7,000 residents, was at a two-story building serving as the temporary police station. Officers there were piling sandbags and sorting through their dwindling ammunition. On Monday, they had fought off a more than six-hour attack by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC.
The rebels appear determined to take San Antonio, a coffee-growing town in a strategic corridor leading to the sea from a rebel stronghold south of Bogota, the capital. They had also attacked San Antonio on Feb. 23, destroying the police station, the mayor's office and the village priest's home.
The government ceded a Switzerland-sized demilitarized zone to the FARC in 1998 to start peace talks. But discussions with the guerrilla army have achieved little in the 37-year armed conflict that kills some 3,000 people a year.
When rebels attack a town, they are capable of showing police absolutely no mercy.
Last July, FARC rebels attacked the nearby town of Roncesvalles and executed 13 police officers who had surrendered after their ammunition ran out. The rebels often reduce whole blocks to rubble with bombs in their attacks.
The officers in San Antonio were clearly under stress, fearing another attack at any moment and not having slept since Monday's assault. When a car carrying journalists pulled up, the officers pointed their weapons at them and shouted for them to get out of the vehicle.
Once they realized the newcomers were journalists, the officers relaxed, but only slightly.
"We're waiting to see what happens," said Lt. Angel Garcia, the 26-year-old commander of the 25-member police contingent, as he fidgeted with his rifle.
On a dirt road leading into San Antonio, a stream of people, mostly women and children, were seen fleeing the town, carrying sacks bulging with food and clothing.
The few people remaining listened attentively to rumors that the rebels would return within hours and destroy San Antonio, located 105 miles southwest of Bogota.
"I can't eat or sleep," said Luz Helena Ocampo, who owns a restaurant in town that was devoid of customers.
When a military helicopter flew over San Antonio on Wednesday, one man shouted: "Land, land!" But it flew away.
"These villages are abandoned to their own fate," muttered a man who stood on a street corner with his companions.
During Monday's attack, which began in the afternoon and lasted past midnight, the rebels engaged the police in a firefight and robbed the Agrarian Bank of $39,000. Mayor Belisario Tao said the rebels wounded one person, and no one was killed.
The police think they wounded or killed some of the rebels in the exchange of gunfire.
Late Wednesday, there was relief: dozens of army troops finally arrived in San Antonio.
"We're calmer with them here," Garcia said.
But the army says it cannot maintain troops in all the villages in Colombia that are threatened by rebels and rival right-wing paramilitary groups. They are not expected to remain long in San Antonio.
Once the army leaves, the residents and police of San Antonio will be left wondering not if the rebels will be back, but when.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BOG101-104
 Load-Date: April 6, 2001

 

End of Document
