

Powell says Israel is setting back progress toward peace with the Palestinians
The Associated Press
June 10, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 703 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Israel's attack on a Hamas leader sets back progress in peacemaking with the Palestinians, Secretary of State Colin Powell said Tuesday.
Israel defended the targeting of Abdel Aziz Rantisi in Gaza as self-defense designed to prevent more Hamas attacks on Israel, but Powell said the helicopter assault "does not contribute to the security of Israel."
Rantisi, a high-profile political leader of the Islamic militant group that claimed it participated in the killing of four Israeli soldiers on Sunday, was wounded and hospitalized. His bodyguard and a bystander were killed.
"We are deeply troubled by what happened in Gaza earlier today and we are concerned that this kind of activity will delay the kind of progress we are hoping for as we move down the road map," Powell said during a visit to Argentina.
"My colleagues back in Washington are in touch with the Israeli government and have expressed our concern to the Israeli government," he said.
Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian prime minister who pledged at a summit meeting last week with President Bush and Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to try to stop attacks on Israelis, accused Israel of a terrorist attack.
Hamas, meanwhile, threatened revenge "that will be like an earthquake" after the Israeli helicopter assault Tuesday.
At the White House, spokesman Ari Fleischer said, "The president is concerned that the strike will undermine efforts by Palestinian authorities and others to bring an end to terrorist attacks, and does not contribute to the security of Israel."
Shortly after Fleischer spoke, Israeli tanks and helicopters fired toward a Palestinian residential area in the northern Gaza Strip, killing three Palestinians and wounding 30, doctors said. At about the same time, Palestinians fired six homemade rockets from northern Gaza, four of which landed in Israel.
Meantime, Israel's ambassador to the United States, Daniel Ayalon, defended the assassination attempt. He called the Hamas leader a "master terrorist" and said that Israel would present the administration with detailed information about his planned activities.
"He is one of the most extreme members of Hamas," Ayalon told the Israel Policy Forum, an American-Jewish group that advocates conciliation in the Middle East.
"He is attacking Israelis, he is attacking the peace process," and Abbas, as well, Ayalon said. "Terrorism will undermine Abbas," he said of the prime minister backed by the Bush administration in preference to Yasser Arafat, who is recognized by the Palestinians and most of the world as their leader.
Since the summit with Bush and Abbas in Aqaba, Jordan, Israel has dismantled 12 settlement outposts on the West Bank, released many Palestinian prisoners including some "with blood on their hands,' turned funds over to Abbas and eased entry of Palestinian workers to Israel, Ayalon said.
"But nothing has been done" to end Palestinian terror, the ambassador said. Referring to Abbas and his associates, Ayalon said "they claim incapability, but they could start."
Hamas participated Sunday in a rare joint operation with Islamic Jihad and the Al Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades, which Ayalon said is controlled by Arafat, to kill four Israeli soldiers at an army outpost in Gaza. On Monday, Bush offered measured criticism of that attack.
"I recognize there're going to be extremists, particularly in the Palestinian territories, that want to blow up peace. I think people are sick of it," Bush said.
The burst of violence this week prompted a flurry of calls Tuesday to Palestinian and Israeli officials from national security adviser Condoleezza Rice; U.S. Assistant Secretary of State William Burns; Elliott Abrams, who heads the Middle East desk at the National Security Council; acting U.S. Consul-General Jeffrey Feltman; and U.S. ambassador to Israel Daniel Kertzer.
Bush did not make calls himself, Fleischer said.
"There's a moment when the president will decide when it's appropriate for this to be a presidential contact," Fleischer said. "You want the parties to be able to work together to solve these problems with the help of the president of the United States, without the president of the United States being the only crutch that they have to get anything done."

 

End of Document
