

Project seeks to digitize the collections of 1893 World's Fair
The Associated Press
October 14, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 851 words
Byline: By TARA BURGHART, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




Visitors to the 1893 World's Fair were awed by delicate feather armbands worn for decoration in Paraguay, complex necklaces beaded by the Zulu people of South Africa and fantastical masks used in exorcism ceremonies in Sri Lanka.
Tens of thousands of cultural objects were collected for the fair, formally called the World's Columbian Exposition. But due to space constraints, it's been nearly a century since the public has seen most of them.
Instead, the objects reside in storage rooms at Chicago's Field Museum of Natural History.
Now a project getting underway at the museum aims to photograph up to 30,000 of these artifacts for the development of a Web site that will allow the public virtual access to the amazing collection.
"This is arguably a national treasure for us, but it is scattered around the building," said Steve Nash, head of collections in the museum's anthropology department.
"We don't have the World's Columbian Exposition room, but with the Web and the database we're proposing to make, we could have the World's Columbian Exposition Web site, so it's virtually reuniting the collection."
The acclaimed Field Museum actually owes its existence to the 1893 World's Fair, which marked - a year late - the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus' arrival in the New World. The museum originally was incorporated as the Columbian Museum of Chicago to house the biological and anthropological collections assembled for the fair.
In 1890, fair organizers hired Harvard University's Frederick Ward Putnam to oversee the development of anthropology exhibits for the event.
The exhibits were designed to introduce fair visitors to other cultures - Putnam said he sought "a perfect exhibition of the past and present peoples of America." But they also helped establish anthropology as a professional scientific endeavor, distinct from older, more established social sciences.
One-hundred anthropologists, military officers, missionaries and government officials were enlisted to collect objects in North and South America. Some of the highlights from those expeditions include Incan pottery from Peru, objects from the Eskimo culture of Greenland and 8,000 pieces from the prehistoric Hopewell civilization in the Ohio River Valley.
Dozens of countries from around the world also sent items - such as silk tapestries from Japan, jewelry from the Zulu and 85 masks from Sri Lanka, including one red demon with ferocious teeth and eyes popping out of the sockets.
Some countries sent groups of people - such as a theatrical ensemble from Java, an island in Indonesia, complete with musical instruments, elaborately dressed puppets and character masks worn by the ensemble's dancers.
The fair, which opened on May 1, 1893, featured objects and people - from a serious-minded, 160,000 square-foot exhibit called "Anthropology: Man and His Work" to the flashy Midway Plaisance, where other attractions included the first Ferris Wheel and belly dancers.
By the time it closed on Oct. 30 of that year, the fair was a massive success, drawing more than 25 million visitors.
Less than a year later, with $1 million in startup funds from retailer Marshall Field, the Columbian Museum of Chicago opened, with approximately 50,000 artifacts from the fair forming the core of its collection.
Its name was changed in 1905 to the Field Museum of Natural History to honor the museum's first major benefactor, and in 1921 it moved from one of the last remaining fair structures - formerly the Palace of the Fine Arts building - a few miles north to its current Grant Park location.
Over the years, the Field Museum's collection of anthropological items has grown to 1.5 million objects. Less than 1 percent are on display, Nash said.
The Field Museum previously has created online databases for other collections, including 37,000 archaeological specimens from the American Southwest.
With renewed interest in the 1893 World's Fair - Erik Larson's 2003 book about the event, "The Devil in the White City," was a best seller - now seemed like a good time to tackle the Columbian Exposition collection, Nash said.
The photography and creation of a Web site is expected to take about two years. About a dozen people will be involved in the project, which is expected to cost at least $200,000, including a $150,000 grant from the Gaylord and Dorothy Donnelley Foundation.
Nancy Parezo, a professor of American Indian Studies at the University of Arizona, has used the Field Museum's collection for her work and looks forward to being able to search the World's Fair artifacts without traveling to Chicago.
Parezo said she also believes having the artifacts cataloged on a Web site will help Indians who are researching their culture's history or seeking to borrow items for exhibit in smaller museums.
"I think (the objects) are so beautiful. We need other types of venues to get the collection out so it has value and use," Parezo said. "When you have something like that sitting in the back of a museum for 100 years and nobody has seen it, you partly say, 'Why are we keeping it?"'
---
 
On the Net:
Field Museum: www.fieldmuseum.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos CX303-306
 Load-Date: October 18, 2005

 

End of Document
