

Protesters planning how to get noticed at Summit of the Americas
April 17, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 642 words
Byline: By PHIL COUVRETTE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUEBEC
Body




Two lines of people square off, shoving and grunting in a human tug-of-war that turns faces red and sweaty. Expletives fill the hall, attracting a security guard holding a walkie-talkie up to his mouth.
This time, it's only a rehearsal. Activist Philippe Duhamel is showing about 40 people of all ages and backgrounds what to expect when they come to protest at the Summit of the Americas.
"If you can't deal with the possibility of getting arrested and the idea of a criminal record, don't join the movement," Duhamel told the workshop on protest methods, held by groups organizing demonstrations at the weekend gathering of 34 heads of state from Canada to Brazil.
Through e-mails, public pronouncements and the workshops held in Quebec City, Montreal and Toronto, the protest movement makes clear that it considers the summit a showdown over the momentum of globalization.
Leaders at the summit will be discussing the proposed Free Trade Area of the Americas agreement, which would expand the North American Free Trade Agreement to Central and South America.
Angered by what they call a lack of openness and public participation in the negotiations, the diverse groups opposing the process plan a range of demonstrations - some peaceful, some confrontational.
The most radical elements hope to repeat the chaos that undermined World Trade Organization talks in Seattle in 1999, considered a defining moment for the anti-globalization community.
Police are anticipating mayhem. Quebec's minister of public security has increased the police force comprising federal, provincial and local officers to 6,000.
"We have to prepare for a situation even more serious than the previous ones. We're getting set for the worst," said the minister, Serge Menard. "That doesn't mean we hope for the worst."
Mayor Jean-Paul L'Allier noted that President Bush's attendance at his first major international meeting gives demonstrators a rare opportunity to capture world attention. He fears that a 10-foot-tall fence being built around several acres of Old Quebec City as a security perimeter will become a flashpoint of confrontation.
"I'm worried a city like Quebec, which figures on UNESCO's world heritage list, could witness the kind of violent events like those seen in Seattle," he said. "At the same time, extreme (security) measures should not be used to deprive people of the right to demonstrate."
Groups organizing the protests plan three "levels" of demonstrations - festive ones with giant puppets, songs and chants; civil disobedience such as blockades; and direct attempts to disrupt the summit itself.
The idea is to help the 10,000 or more protesters feel comfortable with whatever level of activism they choose to join, said Tania Halle of the Anti-Capitalist Convergence, known by its French-language acronym, CLAC.
At his workshop at the University of Quebec campus in Montreal, Duhamel divided the participants in two groups that took turns playing police trying to remove protesters from a mock barricade.
As a veteran of the Seattle protests, he knows that lessons learned by both sides since then have hardened attitudes and strategies. Shutting down the summit is "not a realistic goal," Duhamel conceded, so his group provides training for defending against police batons, tear gas and police dogs, as well as gives information such as legal guidance on arrests.
Protest organizers include local groups like the CLAC and Duhamel's salAMI, and others from outside Canada such as the Black Bloc, considered the most violent.
At a workshop sponsored by Concordia University students in Montreal, former Black Panther Lorenzo Komboa Ervin summed up the attitude of the radical side.
"If we don't constitute a threat to the system, if we don't make them think that their precious lives or profits are in danger, they will not take us seriously at all," he said.
 Load-Date: April 18, 2001

 

End of Document
