

Q&A: What is the WTO and why should we care what it does?
The Associated Press
September 9, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 739 words
Byline: By NAOMI KOPPEL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CANCUN, Mexico
Body




The 146 governments that belong to the World Trade Organization will hold a five-day meeting starting Wednesday in Cancun to thrash out many problems surrounding the latest "round" of trade liberalization talks.
Here, in question-and-answer form, is a look at the WTO and how it affects businesses and individuals worldwide.
Q: When and how did the WTO come into being?
A: The WTO was created as part of the treaty on the Uruguay Round of trade liberalization negotiations. The organization came into existence on Jan. 1, 1995, to replace the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. It employs 550 people at its headquarters, on the shores of Lake Geneva.
Unlike its predecessor, the WTO has legal force and its agreements and rules are binding on all its members.
Q: What does it do?
A: It sets out the legal rules surrounding international commerce, through a series of treaties and agreements negotiated by its members. These treaties are built upon the principle that trade should be as uninhibited as possible and that a country should treat all its trading partners equally and avoid discriminating between domestic and foreign products, services or people.
To ensure this, the WTO has a legal system for settling disputes between members and a surveillance mechanism to look at trade policies in each country. It also is responsible for the occasional "rounds" of negotiations that lead to treaties to open up trade. The current round was launched in November 2001 and is supposed to finish by the end of next year, though the last round overran by several years.
Q: The phrase "free trade" is widely used and often criticized. What does it actually mean?
A: In economics, it is the principle that the global economy benefits if trade is dictated only by market forces. Countries specialize in the products that they can produce most cheaply and import those that can be produced more efficiently elsewhere.
Barriers to free trade, like import tariffs, quotas, government subsidies and complicated customs procedures adversely affect economic growth. A recent study by the University of Michigan found that cutting global trade barriers by a third would boost the world economy by $613 billion - the equivalent of adding a country the size of Canada to the world.
Q: That sounds good. Why not just do it?
A: Because free trade creates losers as well as winners and can widen the gaps between rich and poor.
"For some parts of the world, trade has been proved to have very positive effects in the reduction of income inequality, but in other areas, like Latin America, we have seen just the opposite," said WTO Director-General Supachai Panitchpakdi.
Many industries only survive in certain countries because of subsidies or because foreign products are kept out. Governments can't afford politically to agree to a move that could destroy one of their industries, like steel in the United States or sugar in the European Union. In addition, free trade may conflict with governments' social or environmental policies.
For this reason, the WTO recognizes that countries will need time to adapt and restructure as barriers fall, so cuts are made gradually and with the agreement of all members. Because decisions made at the WTO can have a massive effect on individual countries, all decisions are taken by consensus.
Q: Why are so many groups and individuals opposed to the WTO?
A: Many WTO opponents see the organization as putting the interests of business - especially big multinationals - above those of workers, the environment and poor nations. Some groups, especially in the United States, are concerned that the binding rules of the WTO take away a country's national sovereignty.
Even those who accept the principle of the WTO are concerned that the current system means that power lies with the big traders, especially the United States and the European Union, who can easily put pressure on smaller nations to go along with things that may not be in their interest. They also see the WTO - which always meets in private - as lacking transparency.
Small and poor countries also complain that they cannot keep up with the goings-on of the organization, even though it is vitally important to them. Meetings have proliferated in recent years, and sometimes several take place simultaneously. More than 30 WTO members cannot afford to maintain any staff at all in Geneva and many others have only one or two officials to cover all the issues.
 Load-Date: September 10, 2003

 

End of Document
