

Quake survivors spend long days and nights waiting for the dead
January 17, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 631 words
Byline: By NIKO PRICE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANTA TECLA, El Salvador
Body




The clothing designer doesn't sleep anymore. Day and night, she stands outside the municipal cemetery, waiting for the trucks that bring the rotting corpses and mangled body parts for burial in a mass grave.
When they come, she braces herself, jockeys for position among dozens of other survivors, and peers into the black garbage bags to scour their gruesome content.
Ana Alicia Martinez is looking for her son.
"I'll wait for him," she says. "I won't give up until I find him."
Both the cemetery and a makeshift morgue near the site of an earthquake-driven landslide that killed hundreds are teeming with people like Martinez, desperate to find the bodies of their loved ones.
Most don't sleep, and they hardly eat. Some say it would be an insult to the dead to rest before they are found.
For many, that mission has become an obsession as they funnel their grief into the task of finding the bodies. Many say they will never heal until they do.
"I need the satisfaction of seeing him one last time. Of talking to him. Of saying goodbye," Martinez says of her son, 10-year-old Jose Rodolfo. "At least of giving him a Christian burial, having a place to visit him."
On Saturday morning, Martinez went to the bank and asked Jose Rodolfo to come along. But he preferred to go to a neighbor's house to play Nintendo. Minutes later, a magnitude-7.6 earthquake struck El Salvador, triggering a landslide that buried their neighborhood.
Martinez rushed back to search for her son. One by one, rescuers uncovered the bodies of his friends, but his was nowhere to be found. He wasn't in the hospitals, and the makeshift morgue didn't have his body.
So she came to the cemetery where city workers dump the unidentified bodies in a single pit, to make sure it isn't her son's final resting place.
When a truck filled with corpses pulls up, Martinez joins the others waiting to swarm around it.
"Do you have any children's bodies?" one man asks the workers.
"No, just pieces," a worker responds through a surgical mask. "A few are almost half complete. No children."
The worker hoists one of the bags up, and women hold handkerchiefs to their noses as a stench of rotting flesh fills the cemetery.
The workers carry the bags, one by one, over to the pit on stretchers and dump them inside. A gravedigger shovels a bit of dirt into the pit to cover the bags, which are already piled several deep.
"It's horrible, the body parts they bring: hands, legs, feet," Martinez says. "One woman found her daughter, but only the head."
At the makeshift morgue, where workers gather the remains dug from the dirt, several dozen others wait to look for their loved ones. Although few knew each other before the quake, they have now become friends.
Suddenly, a burly police officer assigned to the morgue whirls and walks away, onto the street. Tears stream down his face, which contorts into a hopeless grimace.
He has found his father.
A woman looking for her parents and two daughters rushes over and hugs him, crying. Several officers break into quiet sobs at their posts.
Hugo Orellana, another police officer at the morgue, says 304 bodies have come through, as well as countless pieces of others.
He says many survivors go through the parts, slowly assembling the bodies of their loved ones.
"Sometimes they find a hand that has a ring, a foot with a certain color of toenail polish," he says. "Sometimes a piece of clothing indicates it's them. The faces are almost all unrecognizable."
At the cemetery, Martinez continues to wait. She says her life can't resume until she recovers the body of her son. She hasn't even gone to her workshop, where seamstresses have just completed an order of uniforms for an elementary school.
"The uniforms will stay there. Nobody will come for them," she says. "Because the children are all dead."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos SAL105-106
 Load-Date: January 18, 2001

 

End of Document
