

Rebel attacks across Colombia shatter notions the insurgents are a subdued force
The Associated Press
February 21, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 532 words
Byline: By ANDREW SELSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




Colombia faces a hard road in its fight against leftist rebels, President Alvaro Uribe said Monday after deadly attacks blacked out towns, shut down a highway, blew up a hotel and shattered notions that the nation's main insurgent group was on its knees.
The weekend violence left nine people dead, and a rebel commander in this Andean nation warned: "This is only the beginning."
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, has not been this aggressive since Uribe took office two years ago, pledging to impose order on a nation plagued by drug trafficking and a leftist insurgency, now in its 40th year.
Uribe acknowledged Monday that the rebels "will not be easily defeated" but vowed to prevail.
"The world should know that the Colombian people will never retreat from the decision to defeat terrorism," Uribe said. "We do have the strength to defeat it."
The bloodiest of the weekend attacks was in the village of Puerto Toledo, 105 miles southeast of Bogota, where FARC rebels detonated a bomb in a hotel Sunday, killing three government soldiers and two civilians, including a boy, said Gen. Reinaldo Castellanos, commander of the Colombian Army.
Rebels also detonated a car bomb Sunday night outside the offices of RCN television and radio in Cali, Colombia's third-largest city, Castellanos said. A watchman and sound engineer were wounded in the blast, which heavily damaged the RCN facilities.
"We will keep working amid the ruins," vowed Antonio Jose Caballero, an RCN radio reporter.
The rebels also blew up a gas pipeline in central Colombia's Huila state and an electrical substation in Putumayo state in the south, knocking out power to la Hormiga and other towns, local media reported. At a FARC roadblock in Tolima state in western Colombia, rebels torched a passenger bus, blocking a highway to the capital.
On Saturday, four soldiers were killed and five wounded in a FARC minefield near the town of Dabeiba, 20 miles northwest of Bogota, the army's 17th Brigade reported.
The FARC, which along with the smaller National Liberation Army, or ELN, has been battling a succession of elected government for four decades, threatened more bloodshed.
"This is only the beginning of what is coming in the country against the Alvaro Uribe regime," FARC commander Raul Reyes said in a written statement broadcast on Noticias Uno television.
Reyes said Uribe's plans to wipe out the rebels or force them to negotiate a peace deal will fail.
"More than ever, our expert war combatants, located in every nook and cranny throughout the country … will put an end to this policy," Reyes said in the statement, broadcast Saturday night.
Uribe, backed by billions of dollars in U.S. military aid, has waged an unprecedented crackdown on the FARC, centering on a year-old offensive against the rebels' jungle strongholds in sparsely populated southeastern Colombia.
But the weekend attacks underscore that the FARC, said to number from 12,000 to 17,000 combatants, is also present in the Andes mountains that slice across the center of the country, along the Pacific coast in the west, in the oil-rich northeast, in the south along Ecuador's border and even have "militia" operating in the cities.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo BOG101
 Load-Date: February 22, 2005

 

End of Document
