

Religion News in Brief; Large Kansas congregation leaves the Episcopal Church
The Associated Press
April 20, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1076 words
Dateline: OVERLAND PARK, Kan.
Body




The 2,200-member Christ Episcopal Church in Overland Park has decided to leave the Episcopal Church and its Kansas Diocese and join another body in the Anglican Communion.
The congregation, which voted 873-211 on Sunday, had long-standing differences with its denomination over theology and interpretation of the Bible. Matters culminated with the 2003 consecration of the first openly gay bishop, after which Christ Church withheld most financial support from the diocese.
Bishop Dean E. Wolfe said "this is a sad and difficult time for the Diocese of Kansas because we are losing an important part of the body," The Kansas City Star reported.
The Rev. Ron McCrary, the congregation's rector, said "we welcome whoever wants to remain with Christ Church" but he and the bishop would help anyone seeking to join another Episcopal parish.
Under a deal not yet finalized, the renamed Christ Church Anglican would assume the current parish's debt of $1.7 million and pay the diocese $1 million over the next 10 years.
--- Thousands attend funeral for longtime leader of America's Greek Orthodox
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Thousands of worshippers packed the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity on Manhattan's Upper East Side for the funeral of Archbishop Iakovos, who for nearly four decades led the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America.
Mayor Michael Bloomberg called Iakovos, a native of Turkey who came to the United States in 1939, "an immigrant in a city of immigrants." He said the archbishop "challenged us to honor what Abraham Lincoln called the better angels of our nature. … He truly walked the walk, talked the talk."
The service was led by Archbishop Demetrios, current head of the New York-based archdiocese. Also attending were Archbishop Christodoulou of Athens, Greece; Archbishop Gregory of Great Britain; and former New York City Mayors David Dinkins, Rudolph Giuliani and Ed Koch.
Iakovos' initiatives included being the first Greek Orthodox archbishop in 350 years to meet with a Roman Catholic pope, John XXIII. Some compared Iakovos with Pope John Paul II as a Christian leader.
"In terms of the Orthodox church, he was a man of the people, he loved being with youth, he was an ecumenical leader, starting dialogues with everyone," said Nikki Stephanopoulos, archdiocesan spokeswoman.
Iakovos, who died at 93 in Stamford, Conn., of a pulmonary ailment, was buried at Holy Cross Greek Orthodox School of Theology in Brookline, Mass.
---
http://www.goarch.org 
--- Myanmar Buddhists usher in the New Year with ceremonies
 
YANGON, Myanmar (AP) - After four days of unrestrained merrymaking, Myanmar ushered in the traditional New Year Sunday with hundreds of thousands of devout Buddhists across the country thronging pagodas to pray for a better future.
The mid-April New Year is celebrated in Myanmar, Thailand, Laos and Cambodia. To achieve merit and attain happiness in future rebirths, people donated food to monks in monasteries and invited the monks to recite prayers.
Many observed the old customs, paying respect to their elders and visiting homes for the aged to wash the hair and cut nails of the residents. Others released captive fish, birds and other animals as part of the merit-making.
As in recent years, however, the traditionally gentle religious event also was marked by wild parties, water-throwing and commercialism.
Despite severe penalties from Myanmar's military government for unruly behavior, including up to five years in jail, thousands took to the streets to flout warnings in the four-day run-up to the New Year.
In Thailand, Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra said next year the government would have to clamp down on the celebrations. Many of the 481 persons who died during the first nine days of the 10-day holiday period in Thailand were drunken motorcyclists. Another 14,339 Thais were reported injured.
--- Proposed Texas law on age of marriage consent targets polygamous sect
 
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) - Responding to a polygamous sect's move to West Texas, a state lawmaker has filed a bill that would raise the age of consent of marriage from 14 to 16, outlaw stepparents from marrying stepchildren and strengthen requirements to run for office.
Republican Rep. Harvey Hilderbran's bill is aimed at the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, which has built a new complex just north of Eldorado. Members are forbidden access to outside media and cannot speak to nonmembers.
The bill is modeled on a Utah law that many believe caused polygamous groups to move to other states, Hilderbran said.
"We don't want them here unless they are going to comply with Texas law and comply with Texas values of protecting women and especially children," he said.
Rod Parker, a Utah attorney who has represented the group's reclusive prophet, Warren Jeffs, said "it's inappropriate to pass laws or use your position as a lawmaker to essentially try to drive someone out of town."
The Fundamentalist Church is among those that split from the Salt Lake City-based Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints after it renounced founder Joseph Smith's polygamy practice in 1890.
The sect's polygamy is an open secret in Utah. Civil lawsuits by former members have accused Jeffs of sexual misconduct and of assigning young girls as wives to older men. Authorities said they lacked sufficient evidence to file criminal charges against Jeffs.
--- Radio host fired after talk about whether pope would go to heaven
 
PITTSBURGH (AP) - Evangelical Christian talk show host Marty Minto, who questioned Roman Catholic beliefs and entertained a caller's question about whether the late Pope John Paul II would go to heaven, has been fired.
Minto, 39, pastor of Turning Point Community Church, had been a host for three years on Pittsburgh's WORD-FM.
Minto fielded a question from a caller who asked whether the pope would go to heaven. Minto said he told the caller that whether someone was "born-again" was personal and "between an individual and the Creator," the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported.
He said he was told he was dismissed for alienating listeners: "As far as I'm concerned, I was doing what I've always done on the radio - look at events around the world from a biblical perspective. I've always been willing to talk about controversial subjects."
Chuck Gratner, general manager of WORD-FM, said the station "needs to function in this city in support of the entire church - that means everybody - and not focus on denominational issues."
 Load-Date: April 23, 2005

 

End of Document
