

Religion news in brief; Pro-gay bishop reported as top choice to lead the world's 77 million Anglicans
June 26, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1325 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




A nominating commission has picked Archbishop Rowan Williams of Wales as its first choice to be the new leader of the worldwide Anglican Communion and the Church of England, The London Times has reported.
Among candidates for archbishop of Canterbury, Williams, 52, stands out for his liberal view on homosexual priests, the most divisive issue among the world's 77 million Anglicans - including U.S. Episcopalians.
In 1998, 82 percent of the world's Anglican bishops opposed same-sex activity, but Williams declined to endorse that decision. Before the 1998 vote Williams had ordained a gay priest living with a partner, the London Telegraph said last month.
Following that report, Williams told an interviewer in Australia, "I am not convinced that a homosexual has to be celibate in every imaginable circumstance."
Two choices for Canterbury are sent by the nominating commission to Prime Minister Tony Blair, in order of preference. The Times did not identify the panel's second choice. Blair could select either one or request further names, but the Times predicted Blair would choose Williams within weeks. Queen Elizabeth will then make the official appointment.
In a related development, conservatives in Africa, Asia, Latin America, England, the United States and Canada are protesting approval of blessing ceremonies for same-sex couples by the Anglican Church of Canada's diocese for southwest British Columbia.
Outgoing Archbishop of Canterbury George Carey said the decision threatened Anglican unity, and he will raise the issue with an international council in September.
---
Anglican Communion: http://www.anglicancommunion.org 
--- Southern Baptist missionary who admitted abuse is working at Raleigh church
 
RALEIGH, N.C. (AP) - A Southern Baptist missionary who was fired for abusing children in Indonesia is working at a Raleigh church where the minister knew of his past.
William McElrath's abuse case is the first in the Southern Baptist Convention this year, following months of Roman Catholic scandals.
McElrath, 70, teaches English to new immigrants and students, mostly from North Carolina State University, in a program of the Forest Hills Baptist Church.
Last week, he wrote the 1,800 church members that during a time of "stress and culture shock" in Indonesia he was guilty of "touching, tickling, cuddling and fondling that went too far." Relatives of McElrath's victims want him kept away from children, The News & Observer reported.
The mission board resolved an earlier complaint against McElrath, then fired him in 1995 after further charges surfaced. Forest Hills said there were no incidents of abuse after 1973. It's unclear how many children McElrath molested - no charges were ever filed in the United States.
McElrath said he told the Rev. Larry Harper, Forest Hills' pastor, about the accusations, and they agreed McElrath would take no position of authority with children. But McElrath acknowledged he and his wife "occasionally accepted one-time requests to share with children or youth."
Harper said his agreement with McElrath has now been formalized and he won't be allowed to work with youths.
--- Maine city tells Salvation Army to provide homosexual benefits or lose contracts
 
PORTLAND, Maine (AP) - The Salvation Army must comply with Portland's domestic partners ordinance, or lose contracts for the only activity center and meals-on-wheels program serving the city's elderly.
City councilors voted 6-3 against exempting religious groups from a 2001 ordinance that requires recipients of federal funding to provide health and employment benefits to workers' domestic partners.
The Salvation Army says it cannot comply because the Bible forbids sexual relations between persons of the same gender.
The Salvation Army receives $60,000 a year from the city to operate its $400,000 meals program and the center for seniors, so it expects to reduce or cancel programs.
--- Community theater changes play after Missouri abbey shootings
 
MARYVILLE, Mo. (AP) - Next year, perhaps, a musical comedy about death in a Roman Catholic community will be funny again - but not now.
The Nodaway Community Theater Co. canceled summer performances of "Nunsense" after a June 10 attack at nearby Conception Abbey in which a man shot dead two monks and wounded two others before killing himself.
"It's not the time to be making fun of the faith," said Jody Strauch, theater president.
The musical comedy focuses on five nuns' efforts to raise money to bury four sisters who died of food poisoning.
The replacement production is the mystery "Murder in the Wings." The troupe plans to produce "Nunsense" next year.
--- Imprisoned minister Lyons looking for a new pastorate
 
TAMPA, Fla. (AP) - The Rev. Henry Lyons will serve another 19 months in prison for racketeering and theft, but he's already looking for a new calling.
The former president of the National Baptist Convention U.S.A. Inc. - the largest black organization in the United States - Lyons expressed interest in an opening at Tampa's Victory Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church. But the congregation said it wouldn't consider him because the application deadline had passed.
Lyons was convicted of swindling $4 million from companies doing business with his denomination to fund a lavish lifestyle that included a mistress, jewelry and a waterfront home.
Supporters are confident that Lyons will find a church willing to take him.
"Doors are going to be opened for him," said Marva Dennard, a member of Bethel Metropolitan Baptist Church in St. Petersburg, Lyons' previous congregation. "We all do well if we learn from the mistakes we've made, and I'm sure he has."
--- Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod orders big budget cuts
 
ST. LOUIS (AP) - The 2.5 million-member Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod has ordered big cuts in its national budget for the fiscal year that began June 1. The $89.6 million is $10 million below the budget adopted a year ago and drops $9.1 million from budget requests by agencies.
The conservative denomination said elimination of some programs and staff is likely but details are undecided. Especially hard-hit is higher education, which had its request cut by $4 million.
Administrative officer Brad Hewitt said unrestricted income pledged for national programs, mostly from congregational offerings, is $25.6 million for the new fiscal year, compared with more than $50 million 20 years ago, adjusted for inflation.
---
Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod: http://www.lcms.org 
--- Presbyterian Church defines limits on late abortions
 
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) - The Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) assembly reaffirmed a woman's right to an abortion if the fetus is too young to survive outside the womb. After that, it said, abortion is acceptable only to save a woman's life, avoid fetal suffering or in cases of rape or incest.
At a meeting in Columbus, the assembly approved a measure that also says the mother must receive counseling from pastors and doctors.
Supporters called the vote a reasonable compromise in line with the church's pro-choice stand. But Terry Schlossberg, of Presbyterians Pro-Life protested: "This allows for so many exceptions; there's no way for the church to counsel that any late-term abortion would be objectionable."
---
Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.): http://www.pcusa.org 
--- Ex-Congressman is interim president of African Methodist university
 
WILBERFORCE, Ohio (AP) - The Rev. Floyd Flake, a New York City pastor and former congressman, has been named interim president of Wilberforce University, affiliated with the African Methodist Episcopal Church.
Flake, a Wilberforce graduate, will keep his pastorate and serve for a year while the school searches for a permanent president.
Wilberforce, dating from 1856, is the oldest college founded by American blacks. It is named in honor of William Wilberforce (1759-1833), the devout evangelical who led the abolitionist cause in the British Parliament.
---
Wilberforce University: http://www.wilberforce.edu 
 Load-Date: June 27, 2002

 

End of Document
