

Rightist government inaugurated in the Netherlands, tough on immigration and labor
July 22, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 711 words
Byline: By ARTHUR MAX, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMSTERDAM, Netherlands
Body




Jan Peter Balkenende was sworn in Monday as prime minister of a new center-right Dutch government, with a program tightening restrictions on immigration and scaling back workers' benefits to such an extent that unions warned of strikes.
The 14 ministers and 14 junior ministers of the three-party coalition took the oath of office before Queen Beatrix at her Huis ten Bosch palace in The Hague. The senior ministers emerged for the traditional photograph with the queen on the red-carpeted palace steps.
The ceremony capped a hasty rise in national politics for Balkenende, a 46-year-old professor of economics and Christian philosophy who entered parliament in 1998 and became leader of his party, the Christian Democratic Alliance, 10 months ago.
"It's been an invigorating day," Balkenende told at a news conference. "Everyone is eager to get started."
But trouble arose early, when the new junior minister for social affairs and employment resigned just hours after the swearing in. Philomena Bijlhout admitted she had misrepresented her membership in a militia supporting the military dictatorship in her home country of Suriname 20 years ago.
Bijlhout stepped down after a private Dutch television station, RTL4, reported that she was part of the militia backing the government of Desi Bouterse at a time when the regime was accused of killing 15 opposition journalists, lawyers and politicians in 1982.
Bijlhout had previously admitted joining the militia, but said she had left before the December 1982 killings.
Before the resignation, Balkenende brushed aside concerns that his inexperienced Cabinet would fail to serve out a full four-year term. He said motivation was high and the disparate parties were pulling together into an effective team.
The right-leaning parties were vaulted into power by a backlash against immigration and a perception of rising crime, ousting the reigning alliance of center-left parties led by former Prime Minister Wim Kok in the May 15 election after eight years in office.
It is the first center-right government in 25 years, and follows a period of progressive social policies such as regulating euthanasia, permitting gay marriages and showing tolerance toward soft drugs - all policies opposed by Balkenende's CDA.
The new Cabinet allocated four ministries to the party of Pim Fortuyn, the anti-immigration politician who was murdered nine days before the May election. Among them was the newly created position of Ministry for Foreigner Policy and Integration, headed by a tough-minded former chief of the naturalization and immigration service, Hilbrand Nawijn.
The third party in the coalition is the free-market Liberals, formally called the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy and known by its Dutch acronym VVD, which deserted the Kok-led alliance to join Balkenende.
The program hammered out in nine weeks of negotiations stiffens the standards for granting political asylum and raises the bar for allowing immigrants to bring their families to join them in the Netherlands.
The 45-page policy document guiding the new government calls for tightening social benefits. It would make it more difficult for workers to go on disability, in a labor market where one worker in five collects disability payments. It also would cancel an employees' tax-free saving scheme, and would scrap some government-subsidized jobs.
Lodewijk de Waal, chairman of the country's largest labor union, was quoted as saying Monday he was prepared to discuss these policies with the new government, but his organization already was setting up action committees to prepare strikes if necessary.
"Chills ran down our spines when we looked at the new government's plans," de Waal told Het Financieele Dagblad, a financial daily. "If you want peace, you must be prepared for war."
The new Cabinet brings an air of uncertainty to government, with about half the ministers lacking any experience in parliament. Only three have served in previous cabinets.
Kok, who has announced his retirement from politics, was among those predicting the new government would collapse before completing a full term. Fortuyn's new party lacked internal stability, Kok said on Dutch television Sunday, and the Liberals were reluctant participants who may seek an early exit.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos AMS801
 Load-Date: July 23, 2002

 

End of Document
