

Rivalry between Peru and Chile spills into the liquor cabinet
The Associated Press
September 28, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 888 words
Byline: By DREW BENSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PISCO, Peru
Body




When ships sailed out of this port some 150 years ago, it wasn't the guano fertilizer in the holds that high-flying California miners were waiting for - it was the Peruvian firewater also stowed on board.
The bird-dropping boom has been over for more than a century, but Peru now is hoping to rekindle foreign interest in pisco, a clear grape brandy bearing the name of this rundown town 130 miles down the Pacific coast from Lima.
It's a campaign that has led to recriminations with Peru's southern neighbor, Chile, the victor in a war 120 years ago that still has Peruvians bitter. The long-running grudge, generally shrugged off by Chileans, also recently flared up over Peru's desire to reset the two nations' maritime border. Chile said no way.
Resentment toward Chile runs even stronger in landlocked Bolivia, which lost its Pacific coastline in the same war. But Bolivia, home to a grape brandy called "singani," doesn't have an ax to grind when it comes to booze.
The fighting word is "pisco."
With a port, a valley and a river named Pisco, Peruvians say the hard liquor is to Peru as scotch is to Scotland and port is to Portugal - and they want exclusive rights to use the name overseas.
Chile argues it has as much right to the name, noting it has a town named Pisco Elqui in its pisco-producing Elqui valley. But Peruvians say that town, the birthplace of Nobel laureate poet Gabriela Mistral, was called Union until the Chilean government renamed it in the 1930s during a previous campaign to promote pisco.
In an effort to beef up Peru's claim, and standardize an industry dominated for centuries by a few hundred hacienda home brewers, government regulators revamped the "denomination of origin" law in 2002. Under those rules, liquor can be labeled "pisco" in Peru only if it is produced in five arid regions extending south from Lima to the Chilean border and made from eight approved types of grapes.
Served straight, Peruvian pisco delivers subtle flavors and scents ranging from jasmine to mango, although it is more often mixed into pisco sours - powerful foamy-topped lime aperitifs that taste something like an unsalted Tex-Mex margarita.
But even cocktail recipes using pisco spark debate. Peruvians froth them up with a dash of egg whites - an ingredient Chileans usually leave out.
What would normally be a business dispute is freighted with more intensity because of Peruvians' ill will toward their richer neighbor.
The rancor stems from the 1879-84 War of the Pacific, which raged as "pisco punch" fueled revelers at San Francisco's long-gone Bank Exchange bar, a popular haunt with the likes of Rudyard Kipling and Mark Twain.
Chile seized a chunk of Peru's mineral-rich southern coast and sent some 5,000 soldiers to occupy Lima for nearly two years.
When the Chileans left, Peruvians say, they took the name pisco with them and slapped it on a liquor that Peruvians deride as second-rate swill.
"They took the name, but they didn't take the recipe," says Johnny Schuler, a professional wine and spirits taster and government pitchman.
That recipe has been used by Luis Gonzales' family to turn Quebranta grapes into 92 proof pisco for three generations at its vineyard along a sandy road lined with other vineyards and adobe homes.
The Peruvian technique requires 15 pounds of fresh grapes to make just one bottle of Peruvian pisco, Gonzales notes at the Tres Esquinas vineyard in Ica, about 40 miles inland from Pisco.
"We distill it just one time," Gonzales says. "We don't add anything and we don't have to dilute it with water like the Chileans."
Chilean pisco is distilled on an industrial scale to a higher alcohol content and later cut with water like many liquors, including cognac.
Chile's three dominant pisco producers make 13 million gallons each year. Of that, Chile exports about 130,000 gallons, an amount about equal to Peru's entire production.
Peru sells only around 18,200 gallons abroad. That includes 2,340 gallons shipped to Chile - where the law requires that it be labeled "grape firewater" instead of pisco.
The 15 million Chileans consume nearly 20 times as much pisco as the 27 million people in Peru, where those with money prefer imported whiskey and beer and where the half of the population living in poverty turns to cheap rum or cane liquor. In Chile, decades of high tariffs on imported liquor have helped boost domestic pisco consumption.
Besides pisco sours, Chileans often mix the liquor with Coke and limes to make "piscolas" - tasty drinks most Peruvians reject as a Chilean concoction invented to mask their low-quality pisco.
Some Peruvians say their country's sales campaign is having an effect.
Manuel Guerrero, a shopkeeper in Pisco, says he now sells just about as much of the city's namesake brandy as he does rum. And instead of two brands of pisco five years ago, he now has nearly two dozen amid a wall of liquor bottles behind the counter.
"Sales picked up after the Chileans started saying that pisco is Chilean," he says.
Many Chileans dismiss Peru's pisco complaints as a ploy by politicians to distract their constituents from more pressing issues.
Besides, says Elio Elorza, general manager of Chile's second largest pisco producer, Pisco Control, the export market has yet to be seriously attacked by either nation.
"Pisco is still unknown on a worldwide level," he says.
 Graphic



 
APN SUNDAY ILLUSTRATIONS: Subscribers get 4 photos, NY366-369 of
 Load-Date: October 4, 2004

 

End of Document
