

Scenic and dismal, Vladivostok hopes the worst is over
September 2, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 757 words
Byline: By JIM HEINTZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VLADIVOSTOK, Russia
Body




Felled by drink, a fat man in a bathing suit lies in a filthy puddle on a seaside embankment under some steam pipes shedding their insulation.
A young man remonstrates with him to get up, then smirks and calls up an ironic Soviet-era turn of phrase: "The citizen wants to rest for a while."
When the Soviet Union collapsed and Vladivostok opened up to the world, many thought the city of steep hills and ocean vistas was on the verge of living up to its wistful self-image of being Russia's San Francisco.
But a decade later, despite the appearance of a few pleasure boats and windsurfers and new restaurants for its 700,000 people, Vladivostok mostly remains mired in a Soviet hangover. Battered, rusting trams crawl through the streets, and some of the city buses, imported secondhand, still show route signs for Pusan, South Korea.
Now, a pair of events are boosting faint hopes of revival: President Vladimir Putin's recent visit, lasting nearly a week, and the Pacific Rim investment conference that begins in Vladivostok on Wednesday.
Putin's visit was short on tangible results, but symbolically significant. It was the first time in more than 2 1/2 years as president that he had come to the city, even though it is home to the Pacific Fleet and potentially the economic driving wheel for the Russian Far East, a region two-thirds the size of Canada.
Regional leaders who met with Putin here were clearly irritated by their perceived treatment as a distant relative, seven time zones away from the Kremlin. They complained that their region gets less return on its taxes than western Russia, and that such shortchanging could weaken the country.
Putin acknowledged the neglect, blaming it largely on Boris Yeltsin's presidency, when federal authority was weak and many local officials appeared more interested in grabbing power and assets than in luring investors.
The region's image is one of endemic corruption, unreliable police and ineffectual courts. Alexander Hamilton, the acting U.S. consul-general in Vladivostok, said American businessmen have suffered an array of abuses.
"One was chased out literally at gunpoint," he said. Another company, the U.S.-based Euro Asia Investment, has been fighting court battles for years to recover assets it claims were siphoned off from its investment in a flour company that dominated the regional market.
"There's no real rule of law out here," Hamilton said. "Our official position is that we cannot encourage companies to invest here."
Such assessments cast a pall over the meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation group, the forum whose 21 member-governments range from the United States and Canada through China, Japan and Australia to Pacific Latin America.
But even though Japan is increasingly moving production overseas, Japanese companies aren't coming to the conference and just nine U.S. companies have registered, but only to seek customers for their goods and services, not to look at investing in the region, Hamilton said.
Nonetheless, Vladivostok is trying to look up-and-coming, with workers slathering pastel paint on buildings near the conference venue.
In the late 1800s, after Russia founded the city it swaggeringly named "Lord of the East," the Swiss built a department store and Asian and European entrepreneurs and adventurers moved in. They were attracted by the spectacular natural harbor and by the access to vast swaths of fertile land, rich fishing and the timber in thick forests through which Amur tigers prowled.
But that ended in Soviet times. Today, however dismal Vladivostok looks, the outlying regions are worse: villages where the only structures in good repair are the war memorials, where old women line the road selling a few home-grown onions to supplement bare-bones pensions.
"You don't even want to think of getting old out there," said a Vladivostok mechanic who gave his name as Yevgeny.
The region has suffered severe wintertime power and water shortages, although last winter saw notable improvement, much of the credit going to Sergei Darkin, who was elected governor after the Kremlin forced out his widely criticized predecessor.
Darkin is also trying to curb the illegal fish exports that were so extensive that fresh seafood was often unavailable in restaurants. A gauge of his success, Darkin says, is a 40 percent rise in the price of contraband Russian seafood in Japan.
But Hamilton doubts these improvements indicate the Far East has turned the corner.
"I think the only lasting effect is going to be the new paint on the buildings," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY183, Graphic FRN VLADIVOSTOK
 Load-Date: September 3, 2002

 

End of Document
