

Sept. 11 attack victims among those remembered during Mexico's Day of the Dead
November 1, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 571 words
Byline: By TRACI CARL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEXICO CITY
Body




Day of the Dead festivities, which began Thursday, are largely a solemn opportunity to remember dead loved ones. This year, some Mexicans are using traditional altar-like offerings to remember those killed in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in the United States.
There are bagels and Mexican rice and photos of the World Trade Center in offerings in front of the U.S. Embassy and across Mexico for the country's annual "Dia de los Muertos," or Day of the Dead, festival.
At Latin America's largest university, the National Autonomous University, high school students built an altar with a replica of the World Trade Center and offerings in memory of the 17 Mexicans missing in the attacks, as well as the firefighters and police officers who were killed.
Cecilia Cortina's family came up with the idea of building a giant altar in front of the U.S. Embassy, complete with one of New York's most famous foods, bagels. Her daughter and grandchildren live in New York City, near a fire station at 66th Street and Amsterdam that lost several firefighters in the attacks.
Cortina's 3-year-old grandson, Cristobal Flores, celebrated his birthday with several of the firefighters on Aug. 24. They gave him a plastic firefighter's hat, which now hangs above their names on the altar.
"This is a very emotional event for us here in the embassy, and for the American community in Mexico," U.S. Ambassador Jeffrey Davidow said at the altar's dedication. "The expression of solidarity on the part of my Mexican friends is very welcome and impressive."
Cristobal and his family were in Mexico and helped dedicate the altar. Cortina's other daughter, who remained in New York, told the station's surviving firefighters about what her family planned to do.
"They cried," said Cortina's sister, Marcela Cortina, as she arranged flowers and candles left by passers-by. "They were so touched. They couldn't believe we were doing this.
"It's been a wonderful work of love. We had no idea it would have this impact."
The festival features skeletons and candy skulls often decorated with the names of both the living and the dead. But the solemn festival also has a light side.
Preschools line up tiny wooden coffins alongside shrunken, sugar skulls with the names of their young students, while offices set up altars for recently fired employees, victims of an economic slowdown that has claimed thousands of jobs.
Mexico has always accepted death with a quiet resilience.
Many families set up altars in their homes with the favorite foods and liquor of the deceased. Some camp out all night at cemeteries "conversing" with deceased loved ones, eating and drinking and lighting fires believed to help lead spirits back to earth. The night of Nov. 1 is when the spirits of deceased children are believed to return; Nov. 2 is when the rest of the dead come back.
On Wednesday, Linda Messier, a Spanish teacher from State College, Pa., snapped photos of the embassy altar for her students. As Cortina described the Americans who have come by, often crying, Messier told her: "I'm one of them."
"I think it's a beautiful tradition," Messier said of the Day of the Dead activities.
The U.S. terrorist attacks have affected more than just Day of the Dead altars, however.
Juarez police chief Ramon Dominguez warned parents in northern Mexico who often take their children to the United States to go trick-or-treating to stay home because "the neighboring country is at war."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos MO101-103
 Load-Date: November 2, 2001

 

End of Document
