

Smithsonian preserves the world's ticks in little-known Georgia collection
The Associated Press
March 20, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 609 words
Byline: By DANIEL YEE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: STATESBORO, Ga.
Body




Like a tiny gilded menagerie, 3,000 gold-covered ticks stand upright in active positions on dime-sized platforms. Nearby is one of the most complete repositories of written knowledge on the tick, dating back to Homer, 800 B.C.
Hundreds of thousands more of the bloodsucking creatures are tucked away in government-issue metal filing cabinets.
The Smithsonian's little-known U.S. National Tick Collection is stored in a former home-economics demonstration house at Georgia Southern University. The collection's curators, the world's foremost authorities of tick identification, are in charge of more than 1 million dead ticks that represent more than 700 of the 850 known species.
"It's an important historical document; you never know when a new outbreak of disease will occur," curator James Keirans said. "Ticks transmit more disease to man and animals than any other arthropod and are second only to mosquitoes in pathogenic agents to humans."
Finding Earth's remaining ticks is an increasingly difficult challenge.
"There's not many more to be found," Keirans said. "We ID ticks for practically everybody; this is the only place where you can get ticks identified from anywhere in the world."
The collection, touted as the world's largest, spans nearly a century to America's first encounters with tick-borne Rocky Mountain spotted fever in the Bitterroot Valley of western Montana. First created by Montana state researchers, the tick collection and research lab in Hamilton, Mont., was taken over in 1932 by the government's National Institutes of Health.
By 1983, the collection had to make way for a new NIH priority: AIDS research. Because the collection was government-owned, it was offered to the Smithsonian.
But even the Smithsonian's diverse curators weren't sure what to do with the world's tick compendium, which remained at an off-Mall location for seven years. Keirans and James Oliver Jr., director of the university's Institute of Arthropodology and Parasitology since 1983, proposed moving the collection to Georgia Southern. Smithsonian officials readily agreed.
The collection remains at the university as a long-term loan. The Smithsonian provides materials such as glass jars to maintain the collection. The university provides the building and the curator's salary.
Collection officials identify ticks for doctors, graduate students and museums - often on memory alone.
"With a group of 850 (species), you can keep most of the information in your head," Keirans said.
But describing a new species for the scientific world requires exquisite detail. Some ticks they coat in gold to scan with an electron microscope. Without the coating, the electron field around ticks can blur the image.
The Field Museum in Chicago recently sent Keirans 90 vials of ticks from expeditions exploring animals and insects of Peru's Manu National Park.
"It's an extraordinary resource," said Bruce Patterson, the museum's curator of mammals. "We can be assured that not only can these things be compared to the most complete reference collection on the planet but it can be evaluated by one of the best eyes and most trained" tick experts.
"There's no single specialist like Jim Keirans," Patterson added. "If only we had a National Chigger Collection."
Despite Keirans' reputation, there are worries about the future of tick identification, as there are few taxonomists who can do what he does.
"Unfortunately, a lot of people good with ticks or tick identification are getting very old," Oliver said. "Most of the young people are not getting trained in it; they're getting trained in molecular biology, that's where the fellowships are. It is a serious problem."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos GASTA423-425 of March 20

 

End of Document
