

Some of the victims of the terrorist attacks
November 1, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 456 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Some of those confirmed dead, reported dead or missing in the terrorist attacks Sept. 11:
 
BRUCE BOEHM, 49, of West Hempstead, N.Y., a broker at Cantor Fitzgerald had his 19th wedding anniversary on Sept. 11. "I really thought if anyone could get out of that building, he could," said his wife, Irene Boehm. Her husband had participated in several triathlons, including one the weekend before the terrorist attacks. He had run more than 10 marathons. Bruce Boehm also went to the beach almost every weekend during the summer and ran on its boardwalk in the cooler months. His mantra was: "The beach is my church."
DOROTHY ALMA DEARAUJO, 80, of Long Beach, Calif., was known in her seaside neighborhood as "our artist" because she captured the area's canals, boats, home and shops in detailed, bright watercolors. DeAraujo was a passenger on United Flight 175 that hit the south tower of the World Trade Center. DeAraujo was a frequent traveler to countries famous for their scenery and museums such as France, Australia, Italy and Brazil. She was 69 years old when she earned a bachelor's degree in art at California State University.
 
MICHEL ADRIAN PELLETIER, 36, of Greenwich, Conn., was a commodities broker for Cantor Fitzgerald. A friend called Pelletier after seeing the World Trade Center attacks on television. "I was telling him things I was seeing on TV which he was relaying to other people in the room," Randy Christ said. "Even at that point it seemed like he was in charge." Pelletier called his wife, Sophie Pelletier, to tell her he was trying to get fellow employees out of the building and that he loved her. "I feel like my heart and soul have been ripped away," she said.
 
JOSHUA A. ROSENTHAL, 44, of New York, N.Y., was a senior vice president of Fiduciary Trust International at the World Trade Center. Tom Rollins, a family friend, said Rosenthal worked for several investment bankers in New York and Boston in the past nine years and traveled the world to keep in touch with clients. "Josh is a wonderful, caring individual. When we were in New York, he took us to the top of the World Trade Center to show us the spectacular view," Rollins said. "He loved New York."
 
CMDR. ROBERT SCHLEGEL, 38, of Alexandria, Va., was in the Pentagon helping coordinate defense efforts when American Flight 93 crashed into the building. He recently was promoted to commander, achieving the highest naval rank earned in his family. His family had a combined 72 years of military experience. His brother, David Schlegel, remembers him as a prankster and a fierce competitor who always had a humorous excuse when he lost a competition. "He always had smile on his face - one of those smirks that said something was up," David Schlegel said.
 Load-Date: November 2, 2001

 

End of Document
