

State Department says dozens of potential terrorists detained around the world
October 10, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 735 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Dozens of potential terrorists in 23 countries have been arrested or detained as part of the U.S.-led anti-terrorist crackdown, the State Department said Wednesday.
Ten were in Europe, one in East Asia, four in Africa, seven in the Near East-Middle East area and one in Latin America, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said.
In addition, Boucher said, the administration is aware of 111 countries that have modified banking regulations and taken other steps to curb financial flows to terrorists.
He said the actions were taken in the wake of a U.N. Security Council resolution approved late last month that targeted terrorist funding.
Meanwhile, Secretary of State Colin Powell said that despite anti-American protests in some countries, Arab nations have been very supportive, citing positive statements from Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
Still, solid evidence of unqualified support from the countries is scant.
"They all have internal domestic situations that they have to keep very much in mind and we're very satisfied with the level of support we've received from our friends, not only in the Persian Gulf area but throughout that part of the world," Powell said on CBS' "The Early Show."
He added on CNN that the recognition that terrorism is a worldwide problem has been "useful in pulling the whole world together."
Powell said he was not concerned about the anti-American protests that have erupted because "the overwhelming response has been positive."
"Those demonstrations don't reflect the entire populations," he said on NBC's "Today" show.
Powell said he received numerous expressions of support during telephone conversations with Arab and Muslim leaders Sunday as the attacks began against the terrorist infrastructure and key installations of Afghanistan's ruling Taliban militia.
Powell was scheduled to meet later Wednesday with NATO secretary-general Lord Robertson. During an early morning speech at the National Press Club, Robertson said the United States has set a strong example for the world with its measured response to the Sept. 11 attacks.
"Those who expected U.S. unilateralism have witnessed instead the masterpiece of multi-lateralness rallying the world behind a common purpose in a way only the United States of America can do," he said. "This has been coalition building at its very best."
Robertson added that NATO will be "one of the key pillars of that coalition."
He also warned against turning "enemies into giants," stressing that bin Laden and his associates aren't 10 feet tall, "but we are."
"Bin Laden has had his Pearl Harbor, but we will have our Tokyo Bay," he said.
President Bush ordered the campaign largely to retaliate for the Sept. 11 attacks against the United States, which the Bush administration blames on bin Laden and his Afghanistan-based al-Qaida terror network.
In a videotape released Tuesday through Qatar's al-Jazeera television station, al-Qaida promised more to come unless the United States abandons Israel, takes its soldiers out of Saudi Arabia and ends international sanctions against Iraq.
Powell responded on NBC: "Those are chilling words from a terrorist. … It is a chilling challenge but I assure you we will meet that challenge."
For its part, the United States has pledged to root out terrorism wherever it may exist through a variety of means, including the military. For the time being, the administration is focusing on Afghanistan, home to bin Laden and his organization.
Afghanistan is a non-Arab Muslim country, and Arab leaders are warning that the United States will court trouble if it uses force against Arabs.
The secretary-general of the 22-member Arab League, Amr Moussa, warned this week that "any military strike on any Arab country will lead to serious consequences and will be considered an aggression against Arab states." Moussa is a former Egyptian foreign minister.
Powell plans visits to Pakistan and India, leaving Washington this weekend. He has welcomed the support both countries have offered.
A State Department statement issued Tuesday night said Powell will discuss with the two countries their "overall efforts in support of the coalition against terrorism and to further that cooperation in order to continue in order to continue this process over the long haul as well."
On the Net:
State on Afghanistan: http://www.state.gov/p/sa/ci/af/ 
State on building coalition: http://www.state.gov/s/ct/index.cfm?id=4291 
 Load-Date: October 11, 2001

 

End of Document
