

The real Mexico was hiding in there all the time, author says
March 26, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1164 words
Byline: By RICHARD BENKE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M.
Body




Something was stirring in Mexico.
Low-income Indians were earning a steady living by farming in Baja with Israeli drip irrigation and guaranteed markets. Mexico's television shows fared better in many countries than Hollywood's. A homegrown ice cream industry transformed a small town in Michoacan. A refugee from Sinaloa sold his music at swap meets and became a star in Los Angeles.
But there also were suspects killed by angry mobs throughout Mexico, and scores of young women were raped, murdered and dumped in the desert near Ciudad Juarez, along the border with New Mexico.
What was going on?
In a new book, "True Tales From Another Mexico," Mexico City-based author Sam Quinones tells how Mexico survived 71 years of one controlling political party, the PRI. Some citizens found ways around the politics and corruption with "incredible ingenuity and creativity," he says. Some found violence. "True Tales," published by the University of New Mexico Press, includeS a balanced diet of horror stories and success stories.
In March 1998 at Huejutla, a town of 40,000 in northern Hidalgo state, Quinones describes a "collective psychosis" that overwhelmed the citizens before they killed two traveling salesmen marketing children's trading stickers. Rumors whipped through the town that the men meant to kidnap children for transplant organs, a rustic myth circulating in Mexico and Guatemala.
The salesmen had a pickup truck full of toys, and children crowded around. A girl alleged one man grabbed her and said something like, "What a pretty girl. When you're older, we'll come back and kidnap you." The man said that he was just trying to shoo kids from the truck.
Both salesmen were arrested. Townspeople were furious when a judge granted bail. The citizens, believing bail smacked of "bought justice," massed in the plaza.
With police watching and not interfering, the crowd broke down the courthouse door and beat up the judge. The salesmen were taken to the plaza bandstand. One was attacked with a machete and blinded in one eye. Despite an appearance on the plaza by the state governor urging calm, both men were eventually lynched. Six people were arrested for the killings.
Quinones, who spent three weeks doing interviews in Huejutla, concludes that the murders represented citizens' rage over an untrustworthy justice system - the idea that kidnappers could buy their freedom.
"They have this sense of injustice that has been perpetrated against them their entire lives," says Quinones, who maintains a file on lynchings, many of them in Morelos state.
Self-administered retribution, a theme throughout the book, might even have played a twisted role in the deaths of several dozen women and girls, mostly unsophisticated maquiladora (assembly plant) workers near Juarez, he suggests.
Maquiladora workers flock to nightclubs after hours.
"It's obvious that many of these girls went willingly with their murderers," worker adviser Graciela de la Rosa told Quinones.
They go along because they don't understand what's really happening and don't know how to say no, says de la Rosa, representing a nonprofit group that educates maquiladora workers on health and social issues.
More than 200 women have been killed in Juarez since 1993. Drugs, gangs or domestic violence are blamed. But at least 64 were raped, and many of those shared a similar profile: young, slender maquiladora workers. Some estimates range up to 86 such victims.
The deaths, says Quinones, reflect the anonymity and rapid growth of Juarez to accommodate the border boom involving maquiladoras.
Perhaps, he says, "growth does not necessarily equal development or sanity."
"Perhaps, too," he says, "it's that Mexico's rural young women have changed Juarez, responded to what it asked of them and now are resented for it."
Quinones worked as a journalist in California and Washington state before moving to Mexico in 1994. His book represents six years of reporting, revised and updated.
He says that he went to Mexico to tap the country's complexity, not to skim the surface.
"As a result, I found things that are wonderful and inspiring about Mexico and things that are just odious and depressing," he says.
Ambivalence incarnate was Chalino Sanchez, a singer who became a star by adapting old-fashioned Mexican rural "corrido" songs to the bullet-punctuated drug trade.
Sanchez, assassinated during a 1992 homecoming in Culiacan, was no stranger to firearms. He often wore guns onstage - and used one once when a fan shot and wounded him at a club in Coachella, Calif.
As a teen, Sanchez also had shot a man near Culiacan because the man had raped his sister, Quinones says. That shooting forced Sanchez's move to California. He became part of the Los Angeles music scene.
His career started slowly. He sold his tapes at swap meets. Word of mouth made him a star before his songs hit the radio. He died before getting radio play, Quinones says in an interview from Claremont, Calif.
"He was an important figure before he died, but after he died, his fame just took off. … He just became a mythical figure," Quinones says.
Who killed Chalino Sanchez, and why, is a mystery fit for a "telenovela" - a TV genre that once was Mexico's answer to American soap operas.
In "True Tales," the telenovela is liberated from lowly soap status to Mexico's prime cultural export, creating a sensation in Russia and the former Yugoslavia while showing in nearly 150 countries.
Under President Ernesto Zedillo, strict rules of censorship governing telenovelas were lifted, and producers began to test their limits.
In 1996, the telenovela "Nada Personal" premiered and broke the mold, showing society more realistically, Quinones says. For the first time, TV shows could mention homosexuality, drugs and use slang.
"Telenovelas had always been this lie - wealthy people, no poverty, no family violence - a kind of fairy tale set in modern times," he says.
The shift to realism was all the more dramatic in Mexico, where visual imagery seems to have greater impact than words. "The soap opera came to reflect Mexico's evolution toward a more open and democratic society," Quinones says.
Like characters in all these stories, Quinones says, Mexico has rejected the status quo. This is underscored by the election of a can-do president, Vicente Fox.
"It's a new day for Mexico. This is the Mexico that has always been kind of marginalized, ignored, deprived, yet it has survived," he says. "This other Mexico is very creative, dynamic, very entrepreneurial, self-reliant."
Francisco Lomeli, head of Chicano studies at the University of California-Santa Barbara, is enthusiastic about what's happening in Mexico - and about Quinones' book.
Quinones, says Lomeli, "unearths dimensions of Mexico - experiences, points of view, incidents people might not know about or might wish to ignore.
"It unearths these things, points a finger and says these do mean something."
---
On The Net:
Quinones: http://www.samquinones.com 
End Adv for March 29-April 1 and Thereafter
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY304 of March 26
 Load-Date: March 27, 2001

 

End of Document
