

THE OTHER CARIBBEAN: Venezuela's Offshore Islands
The Associated Press
May 24, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel News
Length: 1119 words
Byline: By STEPHANIE J. MARTIN, For The Associated Press
Dateline: LOS TESTIGOS, Venezuela
Body




Off the coast of Venezuela are some of the most beautiful and remote islands in all the Caribbean. Beginning with Los Testigos' tiny fishing village and sand dunes in the east and stretching 300 miles to Los Aves' reef-strewn mangroves in the west, the offshore islands of Venezuela offer a Caribbean paradise far away from cruise ships, crowds and casinos.
Puerto La Cruz on the mainland and Porlamar on Isla Margarita, about 60 miles north, are the jumping-off places for both tourists and cruising sailboats. Both have large airports and offer a wide variety of hotel and tour packages. Cruising boats will find excellent anchorages on all sides of Margarita with duty-free shopping and other services in Porlamar.
A selection of marinas and boatyards awaits the cruiser in Puerto La Cruz. Both Puerto La Cruz and Porlamar are veritable United Nations of cruising sailboats. Flags from all over the world fly on boats in these two harbors as they stop off for provisions and adventures.
The best way to see the outlying islands is by boat chartered either in Puerto La Cruz or Porlamar, although Isla La Tortuga and Los Roques both have airstrips. Los Roques, an archipelago of small coral islands, offers deserted white, sandy beaches, snorkeling and scuba diving along numerous coral reefs, bird-watching and excellent fishing, including some of the world's finest bonefishing.
Gran Roque is the only island with a village on it and has a selection of small, brightly colored posadas on its sandy streets, many of which offer both lodging and dining. La Tortuga is a deserted island but for a few small fishing camps, and offers no overnight accommodation. You can camp out on any of its miles of pristine beach. Small planes land at Playa Caldera, a huge crescent-shaped sand beach with just a hint of pink against the swimming-pool blue water reflecting brightly colored sailboats at anchor - one of the most beautiful in the world. La Tortuga is surrounded by scattered reefs teeming with fish and varieties of coral.
Just five miles off Venezuela's coast near Puerto La Cruz is a group of about 25 barrier islands, all within a short pirogue boat ride from either Puerto La Cruz or one of the many small fishing villages on the coast west of Puerto La Cruz. The islands, although close in distance, are a world away. Stark cliffs rise out of the deep blue sea into a rarefied blue sky. Cool waters offer beautiful snorkeling and a bounty for fishermen. You can visit one of the many beaches or anchor a boat in an isolated cove and see no one but the frigates, pelicans and boobies swooping overhead.
A little to the east is Mochima National Park, a long inlet of deep anchorages and beaches off a remote part of the mainland. The park is considered one of the jewels of Venezuela. Much of this area is accessible by car.
Moving farther east into the Gulf of Cariaco are many inlets with small colorful villages and outstanding anchorages. Most significant is Laguna Grande, a large lagoon with many fingers of inlets offering snorkeling. Oysters and scallops can be scooped up by hand. The red and green surrounding hills offer challenging hikes to about 1,000 feet. They reflect downward into the mirror-like lagoon, creating an image of unending depth and a kaleidoscope of color. At the easternmost end of the gulf, Colobus monkeys play in the mangroves and scarlet ibis can often be seen flying overhead.
Los Testigos, La Banquilla and Los Aves are the groups of islands farthest away from the coast. They are not easy to get to unless you have your own boat, but they are very much worth the visit. Boat trips can be arranged to all three from Los Roques and Margarita. These islands offer world-class snorkeling and challenging deep-sea fishing en route with plenty of dolphins to lead the way.
Los Testigos, 50 miles east of Margarita, is a group of three islands with hikes through sand dunes and over rocks to spectacular views from the lighthouse. The narrow strip of beach at the northernmost anchorage allows the surf from the windward side to blast through to the flat calm of the leeward anchorage.
La Blanquilla is about 60 miles north of Margarita and has a tiny village and coast guard station on its south side. All around the island are long beaches with colorful live reefs you can swim out to. Every fish imaginable resides in these waters. Since La Blanquilla is very remote, the coral is particularly healthy. The island itself is low and full of cactus with many footpaths. Bird life abounds and it is one of the few places in the world where you might spot a burrowing owl.
Los Aves is only for the most adventurous. Lying about 30 miles west of Los Roques, there is no coast guard station and no village, but the snorkeling is some of the best in the world and the range of water colors will dazzle you.
Unfortunately the pirates of the Caribbean are alive and well, with infrequent incidents along Venezuela's Paria peninsula and some of its outlying islands. The economy is weak due to the unstable political situation and instead of plundering gold and silver, these pirates look for inflatable dinghies, outboard motors, cash and electronics to steal. Travel in small groups is generally wise. Leave jewelry and other valuables at home.
Whether you fly into Margarita and stay for its shopping, beaches and mountains or travel by boat to some of the more remote islands for spectacular diving and fishing, Venezuela's offshore islands have something for everyone. Many of these islands remain the unspoiled paradise that they were 100 years ago. They are the best of the Caribbean.
---
If You Go...@ 
GETTING THERE: You can fly from Caracas and other cities to Porlamar on Isla de Margarita, Puerto La Cruz on the mainland, and some of the other islands like La Tortuga and Los Roques.
GETTING AROUND: From Porlamar, Puerto La Cruz and other jumping-off ports, you can charter boats for diving, fishing or sightseeing excursions to outlying islands.
VISA AND TRAVEL INFORMATION: U.S. State Department Consular Information Sheet: www.travel.state.gov/venezuela.html - or call the Venezuelan Embassy in Washington, D.C.: (202) 342-2214.
TOURS: Prices vary depending on itinerary and season. High season for the Venezuelan Caribbean is midsummer, Christmas and Easter; prices are lower at other times. Here are some contacts for information on arranging trips to Venezuela's Caribbean coast and islands:
-Natoura Adventure Tours: Telephone in Venezuela, (58-274) 252-4075, or visit www.natoura.com 
-Venezuela Tuya: Telephone in Venezuela, (58-212) 959-0884 or visit www.venezuelatuya.com. 
-Isla Margarita: Background, sample itineraries and contacts for lodging and excursions at www.islamargarita.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY413-420 of May 24
 Load-Date: May 25, 2004

 

End of Document
