

The unenviable task in Argentina: heading up the economy minister
March 6, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 618 words
Byline: By KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




Argentina's previous economy minister lasted just 15 months before quitting.
Now it is up to Ricardo Lopez Murphy to balance the needs of demanding foreign investors and weary citizens all while engineering a turnaround for South America's second-largest economy, which has been in a recession for 32 months.
It's not a job for the faint of heart: Argentina's currency peg - fixing the peso one-to-one with the dollar - has come under attack. Unemployment hovers at 15 percent. And consumer confidence has plummeted.
But Lopez Murphy, a U.S.-educated economist, is a hard-charging, fiscal conservative believed to be capable of managing the financial concerns of Wall Street and Main Street with equal skill.
The job invariably invites second-guessing from Argentines tired of economic instability, not to mention promises from politicians that a recovery is just around the corner.
"It's a bit like being the coach of the national soccer team," said Felipe Noguera, a political analyst based in Buenos Aires. "Everybody has an opinion on what you're doing wrong."
So far, however, there seems to be confidence that Murphy Lopez is someone who could get things right.
Argentine stocks soared on Monday, with the benchmark Merval Index jumping 8.1 percent, as investors reacted favorably to his appointment by President Fernando De la Rua.
Comparatively, shares took a beating last week on rumors that Jose Luis Machinea, the former minister, would soon quit - which was exactly what he did on Friday.
Under constant attack from the public, investors, and even from within his own government, Machinea lasted just 15 months.
In December, Machinea helped craft a $39.7 billion emergency aid package from international lenders including the International Monetary Fund. But the bailout provided only temporary relief and financial markets soon sagged once a recovery didn't appear forthcoming.
"That's why the appointment of Lopez Murphy is important," said Rosendo Fraga, an Argentine analyst. "His background and his penchant to trim government will put investors at ease."
Stern in manner and committed throughout his career as an economist to cutting taxes and trimming government spending, Lopez Murphy moved over from the post of defense minister. He's expected to move quickly to regain investor confidence in Argentina.
Argentina is an enormous borrower of foreign money - the largest in Latin America. The country's total foreign debt is $120 billion, close to 50 percent of the country's gross domestic product.
In October, investors' concerns that the country would have trouble making its debt payments sparked a financial crisis that lasted for months.
Argentina is now three years into a slump that shows no signs of easing. So far this year industrial production, construction activity, supermarket sales, government spending and tax collections have failed to meet the expectations of the government and analysts.
And while there are no guarantees Lopez Murphy's fate will be any different that Machinea's, market watchers are optimistic about what he'll be able to accomplish.
As soon as this week, he's expected to press de la Rua and the Congress to slash a host of government spending programs, including workers' salaries, their pensions and outlays to the nation's 23 provinces.
He's also expected to press for cuts in the nation's sales and income taxes as an incentive for Argentina's largest corporations and its small- and medium-sized companies to begin new investments and job creation.
Carlos Janada, a New-York based economist with Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, summed up Wall Street's impression of Lopez Murphy this way: "He's seen as an orthodox economist that will try to put the fiscal house in order."
 Load-Date: March 7, 2001

 

End of Document
