

The trial of Peruvian rebel leader collapses after a second judge in the case quits
The Associated Press
November 15, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 315 words
Byline: By TEOFILO CASO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CALLAO, Peru
Body




The first public trial of Shining Path rebel leader Abimael Guzman fell apart on Monday as the second of the three judges presiding over the case stepped down citing a conflict of interest.
The development means three new judges must be named and a new trial set for Guzman, 69, who masterminded a fanatical struggle to impose his vision of a Maoist, peasant workers state, on Peru until his 1992 capture.
In the case being tried Monday, Guzman and 17 other defendants, including two still at large, were charged with using a preparatory school for aspiring college students to help finance the insurgency. Guzman faces numerous trials for planning peasant massacres and political assassinations.
The case was annulled after Judge Jose de Vinatea recused himself, saying he had represented accused terrorists in court previously. Another judge, Carlos Manrique, stepped down on Friday, after saying he had participated in other rebel trials and his partiality might be questioned.
Last week, prosecutors had insisted the lead judge, Dante Terrel, step down since he had also represented terrorism suspects in the past, but he refused.
"This demonstrates that the judicial system is not prepared to handle terrorism trials," said Luz Villanueva, an attorney representing two of the defendants in the case.
Guzman, a former philosophy professor, launched his insurgency in 1980. He was captured in 1992 and sentenced by a secret military tribunal to life in prison without parole.
Last year, Peru's Constitutional Tribunal ruled the secret military courts created by former President Alberto Fujimori in the 1990s were unconstitutional, and prosecutors brought new charges against Guzman and other convicted rebels in civilian court.
A truth commission last year blamed the Shining Path for 54 percent of the nearly 70,000 deaths and disappearances caused by rebel violence and a brutal state backlash.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo LIM103
 Load-Date: November 16, 2004

 

End of Document
