

The Christmas lights will go on despite energy rationing in Brazil
The Associated Press
March 5, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 701 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




Six months into nationwide electricity rationing, Brazilian energy officials are upping the wattage during the holidays so Christmas lights can shine.
"That should help improve people's humor," said Euclides Scalco, head of the company that runs huge Itaipu hydroelectric dam on Brazil's southwestern border with Paraguay.
Top energy officials said cities are getting an extra 14 megawatts for holiday lights, which still must be shut off by midnight except on Christmas Eve and Christmas Day.
Years of drought have shrunk reservoirs and shackled the world's ninth-largest economy, which depends almost exclusively on hydroelectric power. Economists say the rationing could cut what had been projected as 4 percent-4.5 percent growth in the eoconomy this year by almost half.
The country's mood could stand some improvement. After a half year of rationing, fines and punitive energy cutoffs, Brazilians are fed up.
Each month, consumers save less energy than before. In the parched northeast, the government decreed mandatory business holidays to reduce energy use. Many shopowners ignored the order and stayed open.
Electric utilities took a beating. One company ran newspaper ads saying: "We're asking you not to buy the only thing we sell."
The government said rationing had cost 80 energy generating and distribution companies about $3.1 billion and granted them a rate increase to cover the loss. Company estimates put losses at more than double what the government granted.
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso faces a tough choice. There isn't enough electricity to go around and without rationing he could be blamed for outages. But if the cuts continue long into next year, disgruntled voters could hurt the government in October's national elections.
"There definitely was a heavy political cost," said Luciano Dias, a political analyst with Goes e Associados consultants in Brasilia, the capital. "The government is still in the dark about how to solve it and just hopes to muddle through to the elections."
Although December rains allowed the government to relax rationing a bit, the long-term problem persists. Reservoirs are so low they could take three to four years to recover.
The government had plenty of warning the problem was coming.
A 1996 government-commissioned study recommended 16 emergency measures to avert an impending energy collapse. But leaders seemed more interested in selling off state energy facilities to help pay the government's debt than in increasing supply.
As the economy emerged from recession, industries needed more power just as hydroelectric reservoirs started running dry.
In June, to avoid blackouts, the government said most Brazilians would have to cut energy consumption by 20 percent, with violators subject to fines or even temporary shutoffs.
Brazilians responded gamely. They turned off toasters and microwaves, took cold showers and bought up energy-saving light bulbs. The government did its part - even the lights on Rio's famed Christ the Redeemer statue were dimmed.
But as the months passed, Brazilians got tired of saving. With the approach of the Southern Hemisphere summer, they turned on fans, air conditioners and freezers.
"In the summer there's no way you can't turn on the air conditioning," said Patricia Amarante, a housewife expecting her second child. "When we get the bill at the end of the month, we'll cry, but we'll still turn it on."
Meanwhile, the government scrambled to find other energy sources. It bought energy from industrial and private suppliers. It launched an emergency program to build 49 natural gas-burning power plants. State oil giant Petrobras will join Italy's Eni SpA in studying construction of a 3,300-mile, $5 billion gas pipeline from Bolivia to Brazil, Paraguay and Argentina.
There are tentative signs of economic recovery. Makers of electronic appliances, who saw production plunge 18 percent in the third quarter from a year earlier, are raising prices as sales and exports slowly rebound.
With December's rainfall, the government lowered quotas. Rationing will be suspended in January for northern Brazil, which includes the Amazon rain forest, and for the rest of the country won't exceed 5 percent in 2002, Parente said.

 

End of Document
