

The ripple effects of war in Iraq fan out to Russia, Horn of Africa and back
The Associated Press
March 30, 2003, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 691 words
Byline: By SONYA ROSS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The bombs are dropping on Baghdad, but reverberations of war in Iraq are being felt in capitals elsewhere.
Moscow and Washington are bickering about Russian technology transfers to Iraq. Talk is stirring in an irked Russian lower house of parliament that perhaps new U.S.-Russian arms control treaty should be postponed.
Britain, in lockstep with the United States on the battlefield, is showing signs of peeling away from President Bush to favor a U.N.-oriented approach to rebuilding once the war is ended.
On the Horn of Africa, the fight against terrorism stands to lose the stabilizing influence of American soldiers as they are called to Iraq from the U.S. facilities in Djibouti.
Even in the United States, antiwar protests have proved stubborn. The stock market remains rocky, suggesting an economy unable to sustain the war over the long haul. Congress, nervous that Bush did not factor the cost of war into his budget plan, has begun scaling back his proposed tax cut.
Demonstrators have filled plazas and boulevards in cities of Africa, Asia, Europe and South America.
"It's hard to see a place where it doesn't have an impact," said former Democratic Rep. Lee Hamilton of Indiana, chairman of the House International Relations Committee during the first Persian Gulf War.
"In a diplomatic sense, the ripples spread from the center out. The economic ripples are uncertain at this point, but they may be profound. … The ripples of this war will continue for a good many years to come," said Hamilton, now director of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.
Negative perceptions of the United States have not helped. A Pew poll released this month showed overwhelming antiwar sentiment in countries where favorable views of America have slipped, even though many respondents also said they felt Iraqi President Saddam Hussein needs to be removed.
The most palpable ripple effect has played out between Washington and Moscow. The United States learned that a Russian company sold military technology to Iraq, and Bush called Russian President Vladimir Putin to complain.
Since then, Russia has been lodging its own complaints, accusing the United States of violating the Start I treaty by moving B-52s and other aircraft.
Putin has said the U.S.-led war against Iraq poses a serious threat to global stability and urged that political negotiations at the United Nations be resumed.
That issue, along with Russia's siding with Germany and France in opposing the U.S. position on Iraq, could set back whatever progress Bush and Putin have made, said Celeste Wallander, a Russia expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
"Russia joining with France, that was annoying but it was manageable. It could be forgiven," Wallander said.
"The U.S. complaint about arms sales would have emerged at some point. It would have reached the top at some time anyway. Someone put it on the agenda at this time because of the war. … Politically speaking it could be bad, and that is certainly because we're in a war."
Another ripple is coursing through U.S. relations with Turkey, a NATO ally that lobbied for a $15 billion aid package in exchange for letting the U.S. military use Turkish bases to further the Iraq war. With an eye toward fervent opposition among its citizens, the Turkish government said no, and the United States took its 62,000 ground troops to bases elsewhere.
"There are hopes … that this would not have been a matter of money, but a matter of right and wrong," said Peter Brookes, senior fellow for national security affairs at the Heritage Foundation. "There's going to have to be a lot of fences mended following the conflict."
The war also could dash Bush administration hopes that it might stir momentum toward establishing a Palestinian state by 2005. A protracted war could exacerbate an already strong backlash among Arabs and Muslims, Hamilton said.
"I don't think the issues in that conflict will be easily resolved even if we come out of Iraq under very favorable circumstances," Hamilton said. "The issues will continue, and they're going to be just as hard to solve after the war as they were before the war."

 

End of Document
