

The unenviable task in Argentina: heading the economy ministry
March 6, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 491 words
Byline: By KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




Argentina's previous economy minister lasted just 15 months before quitting.
Now it is up to Ricardo Lopez Murphy to balance the needs of insistent foreign investors and weary citizens while engineering a turnaround for South America's second-largest economy, which has been in a recession for 32 months.
It's not a job for the faint of heart: Argentina's currency peg - fixing the peso one-to-one with the dollar - has come under attack. Unemployment hovers at 15 percent, and consumer confidence has plummeted.
"It's a bit like being the coach of the national soccer team," said Felipe Noguera, a political analyst based in Buenos Aires. "Everybody has an opinion on what you're doing wrong."
So far, however, there seems to be confidence that Murphy Lopez, a stern, U.S.-trained economist who was previously defense minister, is someone who could get things right.
Argentine stocks soared on Monday, with the benchmark Merval Index jumping 8.1 percent, as investors reacted favorably to his appointment by President Fernando De la Rua.
Shares took a beating last week on rumors that Jose Luis Machinea, the former minister, would soon quit - which was exactly what he did on Friday.
During his 15 months in office, Machinea was under constant attack from the public, investors, and members of his own government.
In December, he helped craft a $39.7 billion emergency aid package from international lenders including the International Monetary Fund. But the bailout provided only temporary relief, and financial markets soon sagged when a recovery failed to appear.
"That's why the appointment of Lopez Murphy is important," said Rosendo Fraga, an Argentine analyst. "His background and his penchant to trim government will put investors at ease."
Argentina is an enormous borrower of foreign money - the largest in Latin America. The country's total foreign debt is $120 billion, close to 50 percent of the country's gross domestic product.
In October, investors' concerns that the country would have trouble making its debt payments sparked a financial crisis that lasted for months.
Argentina is now three years into a slump that shows no signs of easing. So far this year, industrial production, construction activity, supermarket sales, government spending and tax collections have failed to meet projections.
As soon as this week, Lopez Murphy is expected to press de la Rua and the Congress to slash a host of government expenses, including workers' salaries, their pensions and outlays to the nation's 23 provinces.
He's also expected to press for cuts in the nation's sales and income taxes as an incentive for Argentina's largest corporations and its small- and medium-sized companies to begin new investments and job creation.
Carlos Janada, a New-York based economist with Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, summed up Wall Street's impression of Lopez Murphy this way: "He's seen as an orthodox economist that will try to put the fiscal house in order."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BAI104-105 of March 5
 Load-Date: March 7, 2001

 

End of Document
