

The U.S. supports reopening the sale of African ivory under strict regulation
November 11, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 525 words
Byline: By GRAHAM GORI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANTIAGO, Chile
Body




The United States said Monday it would endorse a one-time sale of African ivory if strict international regulations of enforcement were set in place.
An American delegation at the U.N. Convention of International Trade in Endangered Species offered a proposal to allow Botswana's government to sell nearly 45 tons of elephant ivory worth millions of dollars.
International trade in elephant ivory has been illegal since 1989 when the U.N. banned it worldwide.
Botswana, along with four other southern African nations, has sought permission to sell a total of 188 tons of ivory in a one-time sale. They also seek a yearly sale of ivory from stockpiles collected by their government from elephants culled in governmental management plans.
Elephants in most parts of Africa continue to recover from a decade-long scourge of poaching that reduced the continent's herds from 1.3 million to 600,000 during the 1980s. At the height of the killing, 2,000 elephants were killed every week across Africa.
But some nations, like Botswana, say their elephant management plans have been so successful that they have more elephants than their nation's parks can accommodate.
Although many nations argue that any legal sale of ivory would tempt another outbreak of poaching, Craig Manson, head of the U.S. delegation disagrees.
The U.S. proposal calls for strict monitoring of elephant populations across Africa and in Asia, along with tighter customs controls. If approved, ivory sales would begin in four years.
"If the conditions we've set are met, we believe (the ivory trade) would be consistent with sustainable management of the species," Manson said.
The ivory issue has been one of the most divisive at this convention where 160 nations have convened to discuss how best to regulate the international trade of threatened and endangered species.
At the heart of the debate is whether rekindling an ivory trade will set off another round of poaching that terrorized much of Africa and left many nations unable to battle the heavily armed bands of poachers.
Opponents to the plan say a decade-long effort to stabilize elephant populations across Africa will be threatened if international demand for ivory begins once again.
Kenya, which lost nearly 80 percent of its elephants during the decade-long scourge of elephant poaching, has been the loudest and strongest opponent of once again legalizing the legal sale of ivory that was banned worldwide in 1986.
"I'm very surprised. I had no idea the U.S. had this up their sleeve," said Paula Kahumbu, a delegate from Kenya. "The U.S. proposal throws everything askew, but in principle they have some very good ideas."
In a country that earns $1.3 billion from ecotourism, Kenya's delegation often points out that live elephants are worth much more than dead elephants.
Some delegates from other African nations fear that their governments do not have the controls in place to fight poachers who are often better-armed and better-organized than the state forces meant to control them.
The convention is set to vote on the U.S. proposal tomorrow, but it remains unclear whether there will be the support necessary for it to pass.
 Load-Date: November 12, 2002

 

End of Document
