

The Week's Business: U.S. motorists pay high price for creeping dependence on gasoline imports
The Associated Press
May 21, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 968 words
Byline: By BRAD FOSS, AP Business Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Everyone knows the United States relies heavily on foreign oil. But most people don't realize the nation also increasingly needs imported gasoline - a trend that's contributing to the recent spike in prices at the pump.
The creeping dependence on imports leaves the country more vulnerable to international supply disruptions and exposes the growing inability of domestic refiners to provide relief when markets get tight.
This growing market constraint, amplified lately by the trouble foreign refiners have had meeting new Environmental Protection Agency standards for cleaner-burning gasoline, did not develop overnight.
More than half the nation's refineries have shut down since 1981, no new ones have been built and none are planned. Moreover, the industry has kept capacity growth at remaining facilities to a minimum, despite rising demand.
"Refiners are spending all of their money just meeting all the new (environmental) regulations," Bill Greehey, the chairman and chief executive of refiner Valero Energy Corp., said in an interview Friday. "They don't have the money for strategic projects to add to their capacity, so it's not surprising that we're short capacity."
At the same time, Greehey acknowledged that this dearth has allowed the industry to enjoy phenomenal profits these days.
"The thing that's been more surprising than anything else is the strong demand for gasoline," even with pump prices averaging more than $2 a gallon nationwide, Greehey said.
L. Bruce Lanni, a senior oil analyst at A.G. Edwards in San Francisco, estimates that refining margins are more than double what they were a year ago. That has sent the stock prices of independent refiners Sunoco Inc., Tesoro Petroleum Corp. and Valero, among others, soaring.
U.S. refiners don't hide from the fact that profits are at near-record levels these days. Instead, they use this fact to dispute claims that they are withholding product from the market, arguing that there is every incentive to produce as much gasoline as possible.
Often left unsaid, however, is the fact that domestic refiners no longer have the wherewithal to produce enough gasoline to meet peak summer demand. With just over a week until Memorial Day, the traditional start of the summer driving season, U.S. gasoline inventories are nearly 8 million barrels below the 5-year average at this time.
The U.S. refining industry is "producing record supplies, but it's still not enough to meet the current demand," said Aaron Brady, an associate director at Cambridge Energy Research Associates in Cambridge, Mass. "That puts the spotlight on imports."
Make that a floodlight. The United States now imports upwards of 1 million barrels a day of gasoline during the peak summer driving season, more than twice as much as it did 20 years ago, according to government statistics. Imports arrive from South America, Europe and the Carribbean, and mostly serve the refinery-poor East Coast.
Lately, though, gasoline imports have been "lower-than-expected" given the sharp increase in demand, according to the Energy Department, whose statistics show that foreign shipments were more than 100,000 barrels a day below year ago levels in April.
This has exacerbated the supply crunch. Other factors underpinning today's lofty gasoline prices include: geopolitical instability, speculative buying on futures markets and the high cost of oil, which accounts for roughly $1 out of every $2 motorists spend at the pump.
But when asked what steps Washington plans to take to address the high prices, Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham, speaking in London on Thursday, said: "We are looking at how we can increase our refinery capabilities in the U.S."
In the meantime, analysts are concerned that European refiners are having difficulty meeting EPA guidelines for low-sulfur gasoline that went into effect in January.
"It limits their ability to send supply to us," said Bryan Caviness, a Chicago-based analyst for Fitch Ratings.
To be sure, the country's vulnerability to gasoline import disruptions has been on display before. In 2002, a labor strike at Venezuela's state-run oil company resulted in several months of lower imports. The impact on pump prices was less pronounced though, partly because the economy was much weaker.
While gasoline imports have risen from one week to the next since late April, so has consumption, to say nothing of the price wholesalers must pay for each gallon. On the New York Mercantile Exchange, unleaded gasoline for June delivery is trading at nearly $1.42 per gallon - more than 60 percent higher than a year ago.
Whether temporary or not, the current import shortfall places a bigger burden on domestic refiners, whose plants are already running at 95 percent, on average. The harder refiners run their plants, the greater the risk of operational problems that could force them to temporarily shut down.
Yet, according to some, domestic refiners aren't necessarily producing as much gasoline as they can.
"They don't want to take the risk of overproducing" and thereby cause prices to drop, said Ken Miller, a refined products analyst at the Houston oil consultancy Purvin & Gertz.
That rationale also might help explain why domestic refiners have allowed the domestic appetite for gasoline outpace their own capacity growth, thereby making the country more dependent on gasoline imports.
Another factor making the U.S. gasoline market tighter and more volatile is the industry's systematic reduction in the amount of fuel kept in storage.
Advances in information technology and logistics have enabled the industry to operate efficiently with less of a cushion. Further, when prices are high, refiners prefer to sell existing inventories as quickly as possible.
Of course, this leaves less margin for error and contributes to the anxiety in the marketplace.
 Graphic



 
With AP Photo; With AP GRAPHIC GAS IMPORTS
 Load-Date: May 24, 2004

 

End of Document
