

This time around, it's the rich, not emerging markets, hit hardest by Argentina
January 7, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 770 words
Byline: By TONY SMITH, AP Business Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




After months of bracing for fallout from a default and devaluation in Argentina, Latin nations breathed easier Monday after apparently escaping the brunt of Argentina's "Tango effect."
In the throes of an agonizing slump for nearly four years and on its fifth president in two weeks, Argentina on Sunday announced it was cutting the value of the peso by 29 percent. After a decade of one-to-one parity, the dollar now buys 1.4 pesos.
Just days earlier, South America's No. 2 economy formally defaulted on its massive $141 billion public debt, missing a $28 million payment on a eurobond for the first time.
Just as Mexico's 1994 meltdown toppled the emerging markets of smaller nations like dominos and was labeled the "Tequila crisis," analysts for months now had been predicting similar fallout from Argentina's collapse and dubbed it the "Tango effect."
"Normally it's emerging markets that bear the brunt," said Raquel Fleury, analyst at Tendencias, a consultancy in Sao Paulo, Brazil. "This time, it's the opposite - it's the banks and corporates of the rich world that are the first to be hit."
Latin American markets from Brazil to Mexico shrugged off the news from Argentina, with stocks and currencies remaining stable. In Peru, the Sol strengthened, as did South Africa's rand.
"The effect is very, very limited. We have a different situation," said Peru's finance minister, Pedro Pablo Kuczynski.
In the boardrooms in rich, industrial markets, there was more concern after some banks and utilities operating in Argentina found themselves staring at balance sheets that lost millions of dollars overnight from the devaluation.
Outlining the devaluation Sunday, Economy Minister Jorge Remes Lenicov announced telephone, electricity, water and gas bills would be switched from dollars to pesos at the old, one-to-one rate.
The first $100,000 of dollar-denominated bank loans - an estimated 25 percent of bank debt - would also be converted to pesos at parity, he said.
That spells trouble for phone companies such as France Telecom, Telecom Italia and Spain's Telefonica, and other utilities such as Ontario-based Azurix, British Gas and Italy's Camuzzi.
Merrill Lynch cut medium-term recommendations Monday on Perez Companc, an Argentine energy group, MetroGas, owned by British Gas, and Enron's Transportadora de Gas del Sur on the "greater uncertainty and the negative effects" produced by Remes Lenicov's plan.
Banks including U.S. giants Citigroup Inc. and FleetBoston Financial Corp., Spain's Santander Centro Hispano and Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria and Britain's HSBC are also on the frontline.
Dutch banking and insurance group ING announced Monday it was taking a provision of $60 million in the fourth quarter to cover its Argentine exposure, following similar recent steps by Spanish banks.
Spain, which accounts for about a quarter of all foreign investment in Argentina - second only to United States' one-third share - is likely to be hardest hit.
Spanish-controlled assets equal 20 percent of Argentina's $260 billion gross domestic product and 3 percent of Spain's.
Up to 12 percent of Telefonica's global operations are Argentine-based and it makes 11.5 percent of its earnings here.
Madrid's stock market index fell another 3.4 percent Monday morning to 8.177 points after dropping 1.1 percent Friday ahead of the devaluation.
As the dust settled Monday, there were signs U.S. companies, whose interests are spread more evenly throughout the Argentine economy than Spanish firms', were offloading Argentine assets.
Mexico's Banamex bank, a unit of Citigroup Inc., said Monday it sold its majority stake in Argentina's Banco Bansud to local bank, Macro, for $65 million.
Banamex spokesman Jose Ortiz Izquierdo said the sale would "reduce the risk exposure" in Argentina.
Foreign banks here have complained the new measures would cost them as much as $12 billion, while the government claims their losses would be more like $5 billion. It is planning to compensate them with bonds financed by a 20 percent levy on oil exports over the next five years. But Argentina's oil giant, YPF, is itself owned by Spain's Repsol.
The recovery of Argentina's banking system will be crucial to the country's revival, said John Welch, chief Latin American economist at Barclays Capital in New York.
He predicts Argentina's economy will shrink 6 percent this year and about half the dollar loans and a quarter of peso loans will go bad.
"We could be talking $16 billion losses all told" for banks, Welch said. "The government will have to create some sort of recapitalization scheme. The recovery of the banking system is crucial."
 Load-Date: January 8, 2002

 

End of Document
