

TV Lookout: highlights (and lowlights) for the week ahead, Feb. 22-28
The Associated Press
February 18, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 682 words
Byline: By FRAZIER MOORE, AP Television Writer
Body




It's a shocking story, all the more so for those who haven't followed it, or have simply forgotten.
"The Kidnapping of Ingrid Betancourt" tells of the abduction of a Colombian presidential candidate who dared to wage a campaign for reform. Cinemax is airing it at 6:30 p.m. EST Monday - two years to the day after Betancourt disappeared.
Originally meant to be a profile of a woman on the campaign trail, the film chronicles Betancourt's career as a crusader, supplementing original video with home movies and archival footage, as well as radio interviews she gave shortly before her abduction.
Perhaps more poignantly, the film shows her as a woman of grace and courage, a wife and mother who stepped from her life of privilege to fight the corruption gripping her land.
A senator from 1998 to 2002 and a candidate in the May 2002 presidential elections, Betancourt was kidnapped on Feb. 23, 2002, as she drove into one of Colombia's most active war zones. She had ignored military advice to stay out, saying she wanted to show solidarity with the people there in her quest for the presidency.
Still held hostage by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia guerillas, Betancourt is also seen in two proof-of-life videos released in July 2002 and August 2003 - her last appearances.
Meanwhile, her family and supporters continue their campaign to have her freed.
In this U.S. election year, "The Kidnapping of Ingrid Betancourt" is more than a gripping film. It's a timely reminder of a candidate willing to face the ultimate odds.
Other shows to look out for:
- The Oscars are coming, and "Biography" rolls out the red carpet for the little gold man. In a special two-hour edition, this A&E series profiles Oscar and the legacy behind it. The program features movie clips from Oscar-winning films and Oscar ceremony footage, as well as interviews with stars including Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Michael Caine, Anjelica Huston and Ron Howard. It premieres a week before this year's Oscarcast, Sunday at 8 p.m.
- In its latest effort to educate its audience and serve humanity, Comedy Central will help a gay man achieve his dream of becoming a blue-collar meatpacker on the first of three editions of "Straight Plan for the Gay Man." This sly twist on "Queer Eye for the Straight Guy" deploys the Flab 4 (a quartet of foolishly stereotypical regular guys) to help a gay man pull the wool over the straight world's eyes for a day. Future episodes transform the subject into a competitive basketball player and a bar-hopping Romeo. (What's the straight plan? Uglier clothes, a bare kitchen and macho braggadocio. As if you didn't know.) It airs 10 p.m. Monday.
- Imagine "L.A. Law" set in London, written in the witty style of "The West Wing," with the breathless pace of "ER." You've got "Trust," a delicious dramatic series set in the unlikely world of corporate law. Robson Green ("Reckless," "Touching Evil") leads the ensemble cast as a senior partner who works around the clock while his marriage comes apart - but he's never too busy for a wry remark. The rest of the cast is similarly excellent, the high-powered setting is a feast for the eye, and the stories are a roller-coaster ride. Just when you think the law-show genre is exhausted, "Trust" will restore your trust. It premieres 10 p.m. Saturday on BBC America.
- Viewers of a certain age (boomers, you know who you are) should look out for "The Sixties Pop Rock Reunion," airing on PBS stations across the country starting Saturday (check local listings). Taped last summer in Cleveland, it's a lush, memory-sparking bash with Tommy James and the Shondells, the Grass Roots, the Buckinghams, Gary Lewis and the Playboys, Mark Lindsay (formerly with Paul Revere and the Raiders), Herman's Hermits starring Peter Noone, and, in a rare get-together, Chad and Jeremy. Some of these stars have aged better than others. Some sound better than others. But all in all, it's an entertaining time trip. And if you're not quite sure who these performers are - all the more reason to watch!
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Frazier Moore can be reached at fmoore(at)ap.org
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NYET432-433
 Load-Date: February 19, 2004

 

End of Document
