

U.N. and scientific organizations launch first Internet atlas of the world's oceans
June 5, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 399 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The murky depths are getting an online road map, thanks to the United Nations and a host of scientific institutions that are launching an Internet atlas of the world's oceans.
After a decade of planning and more than 2 1/2 years of development, the U.N. Oceans Atlas goes online Wednesday, World Environment Day, with 14 global maps, links to hundreds of other sites, and more than 2,000 documents on 900 subjects ranging from climate change to poisonous algae.
"This is a very ambitious and important partnership for monitoring, diagnosing and we hope helping to heal the great oceans of the world," said former U.S. Sen. Timothy Wirth, who heads the United Nations Foundation. The foundation provided the main $500,000 grant that funded the project.
The need for an atlas was identified during the 1992 U.N. earth summit in Rio de Janeiro in response to a call to address the world's greatest environmental challenges.
Project manager John Everett said the atlas will better spotlight acute marine issues, from overfishing and destruction of coastal areas to pollution and the effects of climate change on the Earth's ice caps.
Ocean-related issues are expected to dominate international efforts later this century if, as predicted, the Earth's continued warming melts more ice and causes the oceans to rise by up to 3.3 feet.
That kind of rise could affect millions of people worldwide and drown coastal areas, including 6,630 square miles in the United States - an area the size of Connecticut and New Jersey combined.
The National Geographic Society made its map-producing technology and marine information available for the atlas. The Census of Marine Life contributed its assessments of the diversity of marine life, said Serge Garcia, who heads the fisheries resources division of the Food and Agriculture Organization. The FAO led development of the atlas.
"Now we have the ability to see information on all the areas of the ocean, coming from all the reliable sources, through the United Nations, so there will always be a reliable control," Garcia said.
He said the online atlas has the capacity to hold 100,000 documents and thousands of maps, and will be constantly updated.
"If we're going to solve or prevent the world's biggest problems, the public and the private sector have to come together and we've done so on the atlas of the oceans," said Wirth.
On the Net: http://www.oceansatlas.org 
 Load-Date: June 6, 2002

 

End of Document
