

U.S. citizens cruise to Grenada to commemorate invasion as beginning of the end for communism
The Associated Press
March 6, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 738 words
Byline: By STEVENSON JACOBS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada
Body




As the United States gathers its military might against Iraq, scores of Americans commemorated another show of U.S. power - the invasion of Grenada 20 years ago.
Leaders of the 135 Americans, including former government officials, who joined the "Freedom Cruise" to the Caribbean island on Wednesday called the Oct. 25, 1983 invasion the beginning of the end of communism.
"We're here to celebrate the end of the Cold War," said Tom Kilgannon of the Virginia-based Freedom Alliance public policy group. "Grenada is an important event in the rolling back of communism."
The ship dropped anchor Wednesday in Grenada's main harbor, not far from where a U.S. aircraft carrier launched the invasion.
"It really was a turning point," said former Republican Congressman Bob Barr. "It was an end to (Fidel) Castro's efforts to get a foothold in the region."
Though most Grenadians supported the invasion, many have mixed feelings about celebrating an event that killed nearly 100 people - 45 Grenadians, 29 Cubans and 19 Americans. Others say hundreds died in the turmoil.
"They should have let the political thing solve itself instead of just coming in and invading," said Samuel Harris, a dreadlocked vegetable vendor injured by shrapnel from U.S. bombs.
Grenada became a flashpoint in the Cold War after Marxist lawyer Maurice Bishop led a bloodless coup in 1979 and installed a socialist government that turned to Cuba for aid.
The Cuban government began building a large airport in Grenada, and the United States feared that it would become a Cuban military outpost capable of sending jets deep into South America.
In October 1983, a radical faction of the government staged a palace coup. Bishop was killed by a firing squad on Oct. 19.
Six days later, thousands of U.S. soldiers, Marines and paratroopers stormed the island in a nighttime insertion dubbed "Operation Urgent Fury."
President Ronald Reagan said he ordered the invasion to protect 650 U.S. medical students - even though the students radioed that they felt safe - and stem growing communist influence in America's back yard.
"It was all political," said a tour guide who refused to have his name published. "They fooled the Americans into thinking their lives were at stake. Now they're going to make the same mistake in Iraq."
"Grenada … was a shot heard round the world by usurpers and despots of every ideology," George P. Shultz wrote in his memoir "Turmoil and Triumph: My Years As Secretary of State," published 10 years after the invasion. "The report was sharp and clear: some Western democracies were again ready to use their military strength … in defense of their principles and interests."
Wednesday's tour was to be led by Oliver North, the retired lieutenant colonel at the center of the 1980s Iran-Contra scandal who said he played "a small role" in the invasion as an aide to Reagan's National Security Council. But North canceled to travel to Kuwait as a TV commentator.
This year also is a landmark for 17 Grenadians sentenced to death for their role in Bishop's execution. Their sentences were commuted to life imprisonment, though many have raised doubts about their guilt and the fairness of the trial under U.S.-paid judges who refused to allow defense lawyers.
A motion to release three prisoners is being considered by London's Privy Council, the court of appeal for many former British Caribbean colonies.
Ironically, Cuban influence has returned to Grenada. The countries renewed diplomatic ties in 1992 and Cuba has funded scholarships for Grenadians and helped with construction projects including a 270-bed hospital opened this year. Cuban doctors, nurses and teachers are permanent fixtures on the island of 100,000 people.
"The Cubans do good work. Why doesn't the United States help us more?" asked 45-year-old Mary Parke. She works at a mental ward that was accidentally bombed by U.S. forces in the invasion, sending bleeding and naked patients spilling out onto the street.
The American visitors, including former Attorney General Edwin Meese and National Rifle Association vice president Wayne LaPierre, spent the day touring historical sites from the invasion and listening to firsthand accounts.
Denis Radix, a doctor, said he's forever grateful: "Some people call it different things, but I call it a rescue mission," he said. "The Americans did what we couldn't, and the Grenadians were rescued."
On the Net:
http://www.freedomalliance.org/events.htm 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos GRD102-103

 

End of Document
