

U.S. soldiers swoop down to feed the unreachable in El Salvador
January 16, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 594 words
Byline: By WILL WEISSERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: COMASAGUA, El Salvador
Body




It was Rodney Swanson's ninth trip to Comasagua in two days, but that didn't make landing any easier. Once his chopper dropped below 30 feet, Swanson was essentially blinded by dust.
"We can't see anything until we're three feet from landing the helicopter," said the U.S. Army pilot from Corpus Christi, Texas. "We might as well close our eyes to land."
The 45 U.S. soldiers who made the trip here from Palmerola base in neighboring Honduras were expecting to see death and destruction, suffering and survival in the wake of Saturday's magnitude-7.6 earthquake. What they weren't ready for was the dust that has engulfed much of the Salvadoran countryside.
In the back of the Chinook transport helicopter, Sgt. Bill Cagle leaned out an open ramp to give the pilots a better idea where to touch down.
"I warn everyone, but all the warnings are never enough," said Cagle, from Carson, Calif. "It's like moon dust and there's more of it than you will believe."
As the chopper came to a stop Tuesday on what had been the soccer field in this town of 30,000, the area looked a bit like someone had erected goalposts on the surface of the moon - scorched brown terrain with huge cracks and craters where the quake ripped the ground to shreds.
In a valley below lies a graveyard of mangled homes and businesses. Nearly every structure was leveled and mangled by the force of the convulsing earth. Authorities say 140 people died here, though local soldiers say they have seen only six bodies.
The field is now home to more than 100 coffee workers and their families whose hillside metal-roofed adobe houses were leveled by the quake. With strong aftershocks continually rocking the region, locals are afraid to venture back down the hill.
"All we have is God and the helicopter that brings us food," said Fidelia Guardao, who sat, waiting for lunch, on the remains of a shattered concrete pipe. "Where else can we go? What else can we do?"
Sgt. Brad Smith of Bradford, Ark., helped hand the supplies to aid workers and volunteers in Nike T-shirts and Dallas Cowboy hats.
Beat-up pickup trucks rushed bags of corn from the United States, sardines from Norway and bottled water from Honduras to the center of town, where they are cooked in makeshift kitchens.
Prepared food and medicine was then carted back up the hill to the locals who thought they might not see aid for weeks.
Maria de los Angeles, who is more than eight months pregnant with her second child, said Tuesday she was terrified after the quake that her baby would have to be born without medical care.
"The roads were blocked and we were alone without power or food and with dirt coming out of the water pipes," she said. "I have never been so scared, but a few hours later the helicopters started arriving."
U.S. forces are helping to distribute food to six isolated towns, as well as coordinating the recovery of victims of an earthquake-triggered mudslide in the San Salvador suburb of Santa Tecla.
The process does not always go smoothly. On Tuesday, when the crew flew into a supply area run by the Salvadoran army, it took two translators and a lot of screaming over roaring helicopter rotors just to determine how many local soldiers would ride with the Americans.
But most of the U.S. soldiers here are old hands at disaster relief, having flown into devastated areas from Venezuela to Bosnia.
"We are doing things to help people out. I love this stuff," Cagle said as the chopper touched back down in the capital to pick up more food. "But my favorite part is still at the end when I get to take this helmet off."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos SAL114,123,125
 Load-Date: January 17, 2001

 

End of Document
