

Utah's Tongans are the other Mormon pioneers
February 13, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 794 words
Byline: By HANNAH WOLFSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SALT LAKE CITY
Body




There's nothing left of the town of Iosepa but a few tilted headstones, their Hawaiian inscriptions left unread in a Utah desert.
That tiny cemetery means more to Bill Afeaki than any of the larger-than-life statues in downtown Salt Lake City. For him, the people of Iosepa paved the way for his own family's journey to Utah from Tonga.
The Polynesian pioneers left their lush tropical islands more than a century ago for a new church and new life.
"It's a little corner of Utah that we can quietly claim as our own," said Afeaki, the state's director of Pacific Islander Affairs.
Mormon pioneers have become one of the symbols of the Winter Olympics ever since dancers dressed as calico-clad settlers do-si-doed their way through the opening ceremony.
But there's another wave of pioneers in Salt Lake City. Some, like Afeaki, have given up their islands for Utah's snowy valleys. Others came from Asia and Latin America. They're changing the face of the city, and, more slowly, the Mormon church.
"This place is very different than some of the erroneous stereotypes that people have about Utah," Salt Lake City Mayor Rocky Anderson said. "We have an immensely diverse population, and a very rich culture."
The state's Hispanic population, for example, has more than doubled in 10 years to make up 9 percent of Utah. Its Asian community is now Utah's second-largest minority at about 1.7 percent.
But the Tongans might be the most striking example, if only because men such as Afeaki - with his curly black hair, broad features and linebacker's build - are so easy to spot in this still mostly white city.
The 2000 Census found more than 15,000 Pacific Islanders or Hawaiians living in Utah, seven-tenths of a percent of the state's population. About half are thought to be members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which sent its first two missionaries to Tonga in 1891 as part of the same Pacific outreach that brought those Hawaiian settlers to Iosepa.
Today, there are more than 44,000 converts there, more than a third of the population, and it is expected to be the first country to become predominantly Mormon.
"It's like Utah there!" said Molitika Va'Ivaka, who oversees several Salt Lake City Tongan congregations.
Many are introduced to Mormonism by the church-run high school; they stay in part because of their attitude toward family. There is no Tongan word for cousin, so they call each other brother or sister, the same greeting used by Mormons.
And, like Utahns, the Tongans have large families. On a recent Sunday at a Tongan congregation in the Salt Lake suburbs, each of bishop Iki Tonga's nine children came to the podium to say a prayer. The last was 21-year-old Iki Jr., who just spent two years on a mission for the church.
It's not exactly the vision Brigham Young had when he first came across the plains in 1847. Under his leadership, the church banned blacks from holding offices, and leaders as late as the 1940s quoted Young's statement that those "cursed with a skin of blackness" were descended from men who rejected God.
That changed in 1978, when the church expanded the privilege of priesthood to all "worthy" males. Since then, the church has baptized more than 110,000 people in Africa, and today, more than half of its 11 million members live outside the United States.
"During the new century, church communities around the world increasingly will reflect the diversity of the nation in which they are located," church elder Alexander B. Morrison wrote recently in the church magazine Ensign. "Taken as a whole, the church worldwide will become more diverse in terms of the national, racial, cultural, and linguistic characteristics of its members."
But true progress in this country has been slow in coming, said Don Harwell, a Mormon since 1985 and a leader of the Genesis Group, the church's official support group for black members.
"My brother asks me, 'How can you join that racist church?"' said Harwell, who insists the accusation isn't true and that there are plenty of Mormon minorities - just not in church administration.
Indeed, there are no nonwhite faces among the top 15 Mormon leaders, and only four were born outside Utah (two in Idaho, one in New York and one in New Jersey). But Harwell and the Tongans believe that things will probably change in their children's lifetimes.
"The day will come that we will have a Tongan general authority," Va'Ivaka said. "A lot of the doors are opening up."
Meanwhile, Afeaki said, he plans to keep making the trip out to Iosepa for inspiration as he tries to help his Tongan compatriots adjust to life in Utah.
"We must not ignore the Mormon pioneer story, but we must expand it to include the personal pioneer story," Afeaki said. "We are not going back. We are here to stay."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos OLY104-105
 Load-Date: February 14, 2002

 

End of Document
