

Venezuelan government fights on two fronts: the opposition, its radical supporters
November 9, 2002, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 817 words
Byline: By ANDREW SELSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




Mayor Alfredo Pena's building looks more like a besieged fortress than a city hall, with bullet-pocked windows and doors barricaded against radicals loyal to President Hugo Chavez.
"If the world wants proof that Chavez doesn't want dialogue, here it is," Pena said in his office, daylight peeking through a bullet hole in a red curtain.
Seven months after a coup briefly toppled the leftist president, Venezuela is descending into political chaos again. Chavez must not only contend with opposition forces, but also admits he is losing control of his radical street fighters.
On Monday, a pro-Chavez mob led by Lina Ron, a former activist for the homeless, ignored pleas by Chavez officials and attacked an opposition march demanding an early referendum on Chavez's presidency. Dozens of people were hurt by gunfire, rocks and tear gas. The crowd dispersed only under a cloud of tear gas fired by the National Guard.
"Lina Ron is uncontrollable," Chavez was quoted as saying by El Mundo newspaper after Monday's violence.
Radicals have also attacked Pena's offices, smashing windows and throwing a small explosive device that left a blast mark on a wall inside. Pena used to be Chavez's chief of staff before the two had a falling out, and is now one of Chavez's most vocal critics.
The drawn-out upheaval has focused international attention on Venezuela, the world's fifth largest oil exporter and a major supplier to the United States.
During the April coup, thousands of Chavez supporters poured out of Caracas' poor neighborhoods and led huge demonstrations demanding his return. Loyalist troops restored Chavez, who called for national reconciliation.
The latest round of violence has proven difficult to overcome as well. The Organization of American States is sponsoring peace talks between the government and the opposition that began Friday.
Pena said Chavez's government would only pay lip service to the talks. The opposition is adamant about its demand for an early, nonbinding referendum on Chavez, while the government says a vote would go against the constitution.
"Here, instead of dialogue, they throw bombs and rocks," Pena said, his shoes crunching through broken glass near the foyer of city hall.
Just around the corner, and three blocks from the presidential palace, Ron holds court near an underground passage she and her followers occupy as squatters. The cave-like passage is plastered with posters of Chavez and revolutionary Che Guevara.
Ron represents the radical element of the Bolivarian Circles, neighborhood groups created to carry out social projects and other actions backed by the Chavez government throughout Venezuela.
Some Venezuelan analysts say the armed forces won't allow the Bolivarian Circles to remain if Chavez goes. Ron predicted mass arrests of leftist activists if Chavez is ousted.
"There were battles between the forces of the revolution and the counterrevolution, and there will continue to be," she said of Monday's violence.
In an interview, Ron warned that violence will escalate unless the 80 percent of Venezuelans who live in poverty gain access to education, housing, health care and jobs. She said Venezuela's elite always have been selfish.
"So we are saying to them, if that's the way things are, I am preparing for war," Ron said in a machine-gun staccato, her bleached-blonde hair covered by a baseball cap. "We will wage a scorched-earth campaign."
Several months ago, Chavez hailed Ron as "a female soldier who deserves the respect of all Venezuelans." But now the president says she is going too far.
Vice President Jose Vicente Rangel also tried to distance the government from Ron.
"Lina Ron has her political rights, which she exercises. But we are not in agreement with her behavior," Rangel said in an interview. "We don't support violence."
Many of Chavez's opponents believe Ron is a useful tool for the government. They say she and other radicals intimidate the opposition, while Chavez avoids the blame.
"They wash their hands of it and say they have nothing to do with it," Pena said.
On Friday, an opposition-aligned attorney asked the attorney general's office to investigate Ron, arguing that Chavez's contention that he can't control her will stimulate more violence.
Anti-Chavez forces also have their agitators, creating a volatile mixture in a country deeply split along class lines. Since Oct. 22, more than 100 military officers have occupied a plaza in Caracas' upscale Altamira neighborhood, calling for Chavez to step down.
The officers insist they don't want bloodshed.
"We are not coup plotters," Gen. Pedro Pereira shouted to the cheers of hundreds of civilian supporters recently. "If we were, we would have used weapons, and there would have been bloodshed in Venezuela."
But Pereira then told the crowd something more ominous.
"Be attentive for our call," Pereira said, as the cheers grew even louder. "You are the soldiers of freedom."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XCAR101-103
 Load-Date: November 10, 2002

 

End of Document
