

Venezuelan president predicts "inevitable" victory in recall referendum; lashes out at alleged U.S. support for the opposition
The Associated Press
August 12, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 798 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER TOOTHAKER
Body



Associated Press Writer
 
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - Tens of thousands of opponents of President Hugo Chavez marched through Venezuela's capital on Thursday, their biggest display of strength in campaigning ahead of a weekend referendum on his rule.
Chanting, "he's leaving, leaving, leaving," marchers wove through a city blanketed in posters urging citizens to vote on Sunday: "yes!" - to recall Chavez - or "no!" - to leave him in office.
"The 'yes' is going to triumph," said Luis Aparicio, 26, waving a Venezuelan flag as he marched. "I want a much better country for my children. That man has done too much harm."
At stake is whether Chavez will serve out the remainder of a six-year term marked by huge public spending for the impoverished majority, a failed 2002 coup, and a general strike that failed to topple the 50-year-old former army paratrooper but crippled the economy.
Thursday marked the last day of campaigning for the referendum, and a final chance for a strong show of force against a leader whose resurgent popularity among the poor has made unseating him a tough battle. Security officials estimated the crowd of opponents at more than 100,000.
Before the march, Chavez supporters set of powerful fireworks throughout the city, and the president predicted his "inevitable" victory in the referendum.
Addressing a news conference, Chavez lashed out as his opponents, calling them lackeys of the United States. He accused President Bush of funding the recall campaign; he said he wouldn't be surprised if the CIA was backing efforts to destabilize his government - though he acknowledged he had "no proof."
"At this stage, our victory is inevitable," Chavez said. "The advantage that we have over the opposition is such that any surprises are impossible. Absolutely impossible."
The South American country, which sits atop the Western Hemisphere's largest oil reserves and is the world's No. 5 exporter, is bitterly polarized between those who consider Chavez the champion of the poor and those who say he is a leftist dictator-in-the-making.
The United States has repeatedly denied supporting efforts to overthrow Chavez, who irritated Washington by forging close ties with Cuban President Fidel Castro and criticizing U.S.-led efforts to create a free trade zone encompassing North America, South America and the Caribbean.
Venezuela's opposition fought for months for the referendum, convinced Chavez's defeat was a sure thing. But his skillful campaigning and spending on programs for impoverished Venezuelans has led to a resurgence of support among the poor majority. Chavez spent millions of dollars to teach adults to read, brought Cuban doctors to the slums and granted loans to small farm and business owners.
Neither side commands a convincing lead in opinion polls ahead of the referendum, which is taking place amid a crippling economic recession and 15 percent unemployment.
The splintered opposition has announced no clear plan for Venezuela - or even a candidate to succeed Chavez if he loses Sunday and early elections are called.
But Chavez's opponents insist his ouster is the only way to revive private investment, patch relations with Washington and restore the democratic checks and balances they say Chavez - who led a failed coup in 1992 before being elected president in 1998 - has undermined. Many among the middle class suspect he intends to impose a Cuba-style dictatorship.
His supporters fear losing a leader they believe is the first to care about the poor after four decades of rule by two political parties.
The deep political divisions culminated in a brief 2002 coup against Chavez by the military and last year's two-month general strike. Rioting in March and February also killed at least 14 people as opponents protested what they said were government attempts to thwart the referendum.
Seeking to back his claims of Washington's interference, Chavez has protested a U.S. National Endowment for Democracy grant for Sumate, a Venezuelan nonprofit organization that helped organize the petition drive to force the referendum. Prosecutors have charged two Sumate directors with conspiracy, which can carry a 25-year prison term.
"The confrontation in Venezuela is not really with this opposition. The opposition has a master, whose name is George W. Bush," Chavez said. "What's being debated is not whether Chavez goes or Chavez stays. What's being debated is whether Venezuela continues as sovereign nation … or if Venezuela once again become an American colony."
To win Sunday, the opposition must get more than the almost 3.8 million votes Chavez won when he was re-elected to a six-year term in 2000 after pushing though a new constitution. If Chavez loses, Vice President Jose Vicente Rangel would take power for 30 days until new elections are held.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos LCAR101,103,105
 Load-Date: August 13, 2004

 

End of Document
