

WASHINGTON YESTERDAY: Presidents still preach from the bully pulpit
August 26, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Commentary; Washington Dateline
Length: 703 words
Byline: By LAWRENCE L. KNUTSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




For Theodore Roosevelt the presidency was "the bully pulpit," the ultimate high ground in a constant campaign for the public's ear and eye.
President Bush stepped into bully pulpit territory this month when he stood before Mount Rushmore's stone-carved presidential images and assailed the Senate for binding his hands in red tape with its version of a new Department of Homeland Security.
The granite face of Theodore Roosevelt rose on the mountainside above him as Bush let the cameras drink in the presidential images and told the country: "I need the flexibility to be able to protect the homeland against an enemy that hates us."
Senate Democratic Leader Tom Daschle, an invited guest as South Dakota's senior senator, seized the moment to mount his own pulpit. Congress, he told reporters nearby, "should not give this president or any president the dictatorial powers that I think compromise the checks and balances that our Founding Fathers recognized."
Nonetheless, the focus of the moment was on the president and his message, not on the majority leader and his.
Skillful use of the bully pulpit is one reason Theodore Roosevelt, TR to the headline writers, got his place on the mountain next to Washington, Jefferson and Lincoln. And at Mount Rushmore it was clear the 43rd president was playing from the book written by the 26th.
Many other presidents have used Roosevelt's pulpit and used it well.
-Franklin Delano Roosevelt, TR's distant cousin, adopted it in his 1933 inaugural address when he injected a fear-not burst of optimism into a nation beset by the Great Depression. FDR, who called the presidency "pre-eminently a place of moral leadership," perfected its use in his nationally broadcast "fireside chats."
-John F. Kennedy showed his skill in Berlin as he told a cheering crowd that he stood with them in their Cold War struggle because "Ich bin ein Berliner!"
-Ronald Reagan, dubbed "the great communicator," proved he had mastered the form when he returned to Berlin, stood before the concrete and steel barrier separating East Berlin from the West and exclaimed, "Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall!"
Not all attempts are as successful.
Woodrow Wilson stumbled on the bully pulpit as he sought after World War I to rally support for American membership in the League of Nations but failed to crack the Senate's stony opposition.
Theodore Roosevelt not only named the bully pulpit, he used it as often and as effectively as any of them.
TR used it symbolically when he sent the American fleet around the world as signal that the United States had joined the family of great powers. He used it with similar effect when he was photographed operating the controls of a steam shovel helping dig the Panama Canal.
Roosevelt was in the bully pulpit when he inveighed against "malefactors of great wealth" and when he advised his country to "speak softly and carry a big stick."
Widely considered the first truly modern president, Roosevelt galloped into office after William McKinley's assassination in 1901 and never stopped running. He used his office to express his strong opinions on literature, art, morals, marriage, divorce and his vision of "the strenuous life." He used it to promote the program of reforms he called "the Square Deal." And he used it to shape public opinion and push legislation through Congress.
A leader of flashing teeth and sparkling personality, TR retained so much of his youthful exuberance that a friend once cautioned friends to remember that the president is "about 6" years old.
"Bully" was a muscular word he used all his life, referring to a "bully" time or a "bully" trip.
But while everyone knew that TR had coined the phrase "bully pulpit," few were able to pin down exactly when he first used the phrase. New York Times columnist and word sleuth William Safire found one such use.
In 1982, with the aid of his readers, Safire discovered an account of a conversation between the president and friend George Haven Putnam, who accused Roosevelt of a tendency to preach.
"Yes," Roosevelt agreed. "Most of us enjoy preaching, and I've got such a bully pulpit."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Lawrence L. Knutson has reported on Congress, the White House and Washington's history for 35 years.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX1, WX102
 Load-Date: August 27, 2002

 

End of Document
