

WASHINGTON TODAY: Dissent from inside and outside the hall
April 21, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 821 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUEBEC
Body




The voices of caution and concern about global trade are hard to hear amid the noisy and sometimes violent demonstrations here. Yet they have struck a nerve at the Summit of the Americas.
Some of the most pointed criticism is coming not from the streets, but from Latin American trading partners reluctant to rush into a headlong embrace of President Bush's vision of a two-continent duty-free trade zone.
Despite Bush's evocation on Saturday of "a fully democratic hemisphere bound together by goodwill and free trade," many nations see the Bush formulation as benefiting mostly North America - and primarily the United States.
"We will insist that the benefits of free trade are shared equally," says Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, one of the skeptics. Brazil, with Latin America's largest economy, is in the forefront of those concerned about U.S. economic domination.
No one disputes that the United States is the big gorilla at this meeting of the hemisphere's 34 democracies.
The United States accounts for 76 percent of the hempisphere's economic output. That's up from 73 percent when the first Americas' summit was held in December 1994 in Miami.
Then, President Clinton, fresh from a congressional victory on the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), exuberantly proclaimed a campaign to create the world's biggest free-trade zone, stretching from the Arctic to Tierra del Fuego.
Bush, like Clinton before him, talks about a potential $13 trillion market with 800 million consumers.
But most of that market size reflects trade among the United States, Canada and Mexico - already linked in free-trade matrimony by NAFTA.
The United States last year exported $187 billion to Canada, $117 billion to Mexico - and just $59 billion to all other western hemispheric countries combined. By contrast, U.S. exports to Asia were $203 billion.
"Until all the peoples of the Americas are free from hunger and fear of unemployment, we cannot celebrate the benefits of trade liberalization," said Kenny Anthony, prime minister of St. Lucia.
The third Summit of the Americas was Bush's debut at an international forum. But street demonstrations and confrontations with riot police - becoming a fixture at trade conferences - detracted from his ability to use the summit to spotlight his campaign promise to elevate the importance of Latin America in U.S. policy.
The thousands of protesters who descended on this picturesque, French-speaking city voiced a bewildering array of grievances, ranging from AIDS treatment in poorer countries to the alleged evils of globalization.
Many portrayed the trade proposal as leading to a weakening of environmental and labor protections, a form of U.S. imperialism and another way of making the rich richer and the poor poorer.
Bush promised to "listen to voices" from both those "inside this hall … and outside the hall."
The voices had different tones, but some carried similar messages.
While all 34 countries attending the summit have voiced support for a free-trade zone, much debate remains over its terms. Participants were to release a 500-plus page working draft on Sunday liberally laced with brackets to reflect continuing disagreements.
"Trade is about change, and change breeds anxiety and fears in people" said U.S. Trade Representative Robert Zoellick.
The summit brought together leaders from some of the poorest and smallest nations as well as some of the most populous and richest.
And while the Bush administration talks of open and free trade, there are many so-called "non tariff" barriers that concern U.S. trading partners, both large and small.
Brazil, for instance, does not want to sign any agreement unless it dismantles a quiltwork of U.S. farm subsidies for U.S. products like sugar and frozen orange juice and anti-dumping duties on items like Brazilian steel.
Small Caribbean nations worry about U.S. challenges to European Union policies that give them preferential markets for bananas.
Then there are social issues. A host of pledges made in previous summits remain unmet - on improving education, health care and women's rights and combating drug trafficking. And there was that vow to eradicate measles from the hemisphere by 2000.
"We have advanced very little - almost not at all - in the social objectives," said Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez.
"Trade has helped people in Latin America, but has failed to root out poverty. There is much to celebrate, but also much to lament," said Mexican President Vicente Fox.
Still, Chavez, Fox and most other participants seemed ready to accent the positive.
"Quebec should serve to reaffirm democracy and social justice and seal a pact of solidarity to promote the development and prosperity for all the region's inhabitants," said Peruvian Prime Minister Javier Perez de Cuellar.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Tom Raum has covered national and international affairs for The Associated Press since 1973, including five presidencies.
 Load-Date: April 22, 2001

 

End of Document
