

WASHINGTON TODAY: Does the CIA-leak case snowball or sputter?
The Associated Press
October 2, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 753 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Some allegations of government misconduct blossom into major scandals, while others wither and die. Strategists in both parties are now trying to gauge where the investigation into the CIA leak will lead.
The short answer appears to be that it could go either way.
Political scandals can take a huge toll on presidencies.
President Nixon was forced to resign over Watergate. President Clinton's affair with an intern and his lies about it to a grand jury resulted in an impeachment trial in the Senate. The secret sale of arms to Iran and use of the proceeds to illegally fund a guerrilla war in Central America rocked Ronald Reagan's presidency.
But little political damage resulted from once-sizzling controversies over the first President Bush's possible role in that Iran-contra affair, the Clintons' money-losing investments in Whitewater vacation lots in Arkansas, the Clinton-era transfer of nuclear technology to China and the current White House's ties to those involved in corporate mischief.
Why do some affairs become full-fledged scandals and others not?
"I always use the outrage test. Will the average person be outraged when he or she hears about it?" said Larry Sabato, a University of Virginia political scientist who has written several books about political scandals.
Thus far, the CIA-leak matter does not quite pass that test, Sabato suggests. "But it will become much more significant to average voters if one or more top-level White House aides are fingered. Otherwise, it could die out as 10,000 other mini-scandals have."
The more complicated and convoluted the details of the alleged misdeed, the less likely it is to become a major scandal. One example is the complex, hard to fathom Whitewater affair.
On the other hand, a clear-cut instance of misconduct - the Watergate break-in and cover-up - can quickly become a firestorm engulfing a presidency.
The fact that an intelligence officer's life and contacts may have been endangered elevates the CIA-leak episode above run-of-the-mill potential scandals, Democrats are charging. White House officials say they are taking the revelations seriously.
Prodded by the CIA, the Justice Department last week opened a criminal investigation to determine who leaked the identity of the CIA officer to news organizations after the officer's husband, former career diplomat Joseph Wilson, criticized Bush's Iraq war rationale.
Bush ordered his staff to cooperate fully. But at the same time, Republican allies of the administration turned up the heat on Wilson and suggested he was a partisan accuser. The White House encouraged reporters to examine what he has said.
The ultimate impact on Bush's re-election hopes clearly depends on yet-to-be-known details surrounding the improper - and possibly illegal - disclosure of the officer's name and occupation.
Were senior aides to Bush or Vice President Dick Cheney involved? If so, what was the motive? Was the leak revenge or an innocent slip of the tongue? Has there been an attempt at a cover-up?
Will the leaker be caught or step forward - or never identified?
Pollster Andy Kohut, director of the Pew Research Center, says that for now, the public seems more concerned over rising casualties and costs in Iraq than whether the administration manipulated intelligence or leaked information to reporters.
For a scandal to find staying power, "People have to think that there is clear wrongdoing," he said. "And the question becomes: has the president disappointed the American public?"
On this score, Bush may be particularly vulnerable since he won office pledging to restore "honor and integrity" to the Oval Office, and he railed against leaks.
Recent polls show that as many as seven in 10 Americans believe that a special prosecutor, rather than the Justice Department, should be named to investigate the allegations. Thus far, the White House has said the Justice Department probe is sufficient.
Republican consultant Lyn Nofziger, a former top aide to Reagan, said the CIA leak matter is perplexing to him. If the leak came from one or more high-level administration officials, "What were they leaking? It's hard for me to figure out what the purpose of this was."
"Those people who are anti-Bush think they have found something that can embarrass him. So in doing so, I think they're making a mountain out of a molehill," Nofziger said.
Still, he added, "sometimes these molehills remain mountains."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Tom Raum has covered Washington for The Associated Press since 1973, including five presidencies.
 Load-Date: October 3, 2003

 

End of Document
