

Washington may for the first time lose out in vote for new OAS chief
The Associated Press
April 4, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 785 words
Byline: By WILL WEISSERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEXICO CITY
Body




The Organization of American States, founded 57 years ago to bring the Western Hemisphere closer together, has broken into three rival camps in a leadership race from which the United States is likely for the first time to emerge the loser.
The choice of a new secretary general comes at a time when Latin American countries are increasingly moving toward governments less dependent on Washington and less enamored of U.S. foreign policy. Six South American presidents now identify with the left, although they have maintained free-market policies and many have avoided the anti-U.S. rhetoric of the past.
But whoever leads the 34-member group, which promotes inter-American cooperation and democracy, the United States will remain its biggest influence, and it's unlikely the OAS would become hostile to U.S. interests.
The decision, to be made by OAS ambassadors at the group's Washington headquarters on Thursday, has divided the Americas into Mexican, Central American and South American camps. Vying for the post are Mexico's conservative foreign secretary, Chile's socialist interior minister and a pro-business former Salvadoran president with close ties to Washington.
The focus, however, isn't on the candidates themselves as much as on whom they represent. The winner must get at least 18 members to support him, and votes are mustered through diplomatic negotiations.
"It's rare the candidate himself is taken into account," said Mexico City analyst Lorenzo Meyer. "Diplomatic pressure and negotiations that don't come through public channels - that's what counts."
The U.S.-backed candidate is 45-year-old Francisco Flores, El Salvador's president from 1999 until last year. Before he emerged as a candidate, the United States had said it would support a Central American, and Flores also won favor in Washington because his country is the only one in the hemisphere outside the United States that still has troops in Iraq.
Mexico has been lobbying for its 58-year-old foreign secretary, Luis Ernesto Derbez, a U.S.-educated economist who spent 14 years in Washington as a World Bank technocrat.
And Chile has been pressing for Interior Minister Jose Miguel Insulza, a 61-year-old lawyer. Insulza was once an adviser to Marxist President Salvador Allende, who was deposed by dictator Augusto Pinochet in 1973. He lived in exile in Italy and Mexico until the Pinochet regime ended in 1990.
Canada and Belize are among Derbez's endorsers. Mexico donated $3.1 million for OAS scholarships in Bolivia, Ecuador and the Caribbean, and denied opponents' claim that it was buying votes.
Chilean President Ricardo Lagos has sought support for Insulza with a February tour of the Caribbean, which will cast 13 of the 34 ballots and doesn't have a candidate itself.
The United States has also courted the Caribbean on Flores' behalf and has begun describing the Salvadoran as a "small-country" candidate in an apparent effort to win support on the islands.
Arturo Valenzuela, a former senior adviser on Latin America to President Clinton, said the United States often pressures small countries to support its candidate: "There's a lot of ways to send the message that 'you're really in trouble if you don't do what we want."'
The United States provides most of the funding for the OAS and dominates it politically. "The OAS is nothing without the United States," said Valenzuela.
U.S. officials indicate that while they would like to see Flores win, both Derbez and Insulza come from countries that have good relations with Washington and neither would be seen as a threat.
A Flores loss might even have unintended benefits for the United States, said Mexico City researcher Jorge Chabat.
"The winner likely won't be Flores, and therefore won't be seen as a candidate imposed by the United States, and that will help him a lot," he said. "Will he still do what the United States wants? Yes. But there will be a perception of independence."
All three candidates declined to be interviewed until after the election, but Derbez is promising to make eradicating poverty the top OAS priority, while Flores is talking up economic growth. Insulza wants to make the OAS more dynamic and restore confidence in it.
The previous secretary general, Miguel Angel Rodriguez, resigned after less than a month in office and returned to Costa Rica to face charges that he accepted kickbacks during his 1998-2002 presidency.
No one is likely to get a majority in Thursday's secret ballot, and if American-backed Flores loses in a first-round vote, Mexico's Derbez could get the U.S. vote plus those of Central American countries with strong relations with Mexico.
"I think Derbez's made that gamble from the beginning," Chabat said. "It should work."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY123-125
 Load-Date: April 5, 2005

 

End of Document
