

With one pope elected, the quiet question inevitably arises: Who's next?
The Associated Press
April 20, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 737 words
Byline: By RICHARD N. OSTLING, AP Religion Writer
Body




With the election of a 78-year-old pope, some Roman Catholics already are wondering about the 266th pontiff. The next conclave will have to tackle such questions as whether the election of Benedict XVI means the papacy has permanently swung to the right and whether Latin Americans or Africans will ever exert enough leverage to put one of their own on the throne of St. Peter.
Benedict is the oldest man elected to his office in 275 years, and though it might seem ghoulish to raise the prospect of a successor just after the white smoke has cleared, it's realistic for cardinals to contemplate the future.
After winning, Benedict himself spoke of a "short reign." And though apparently in stable health now, he suffered a hemorrhagic stroke in 1991: One German priest says he has a "delicate constitution."
Thirty-eight of this week's electors are under age 70, and would be eligible to vote even if the next conclave occurs a decade from now.
Members of the College of Cardinals will be paying close attention to colleagues who were too young to be realistic papabili in this round, including Norberto Rivera Carrera of Mexico, Oscar Andres Rodriguez Maradiaga of Honduras, Christoph Schoenborn of Austria and Angelo Scola of Venice.
Some of the cardinals who sized up each other these past weeks will continue the process when they gather with Benedict at the August World Youth Day in Germany and the international Synod of Bishops in October.
The German's snap victory, following a Pole's 1978 triumph, seems to have smashed for good any assumption that Italians are the automatic front-runners going into papal elections. It's the first time two consecutive non-Italians have won since a series of 14th century Frenchmen ruled from Avignon.
That inevitably raises expectations the next election will finally be time for a pope from Latin America, 21st century Catholicism's population center, the fast-growing church in sub-Saharan Africa or another surprise venue. From St. Peter through Benedict, popes have hailed only from the Mideast, North Africa or Europe.
Africa's current voting strength is a mere 11 and the Latin Americans constitute no unified bloc, though that could shift under Benedict, who alone has the power to appoint new cardinals and most of the bishops who will become cardinals.
The first signs of Benedict's personnel policy will come shortly, when he appoints the men who will run key agencies in the Vatican Curia, or bureaucracy. He obviously will be inclined to name people who share his doctrinal orthodoxy.
Another lesson from conclave 2005: There's no such thing as being too conservative.
In terms of church doctrine and discipline - as opposed to social and economic issues in the wider world - John Paul thinned the ranks of moderately progressive cardinals. By the end of Benedict's tenure, there are likely to be even fewer progressive leaders like Godfried Danneels (71) of Belgium and Carlo Maria Martini (78), Milan's retired archbishop.
One more clue to the next conclave will dribble out in the days and weeks to come, as more clerics leak details of Benedict's election.
That information may show whether John Paul II assured Benedict's win by abolishing the required two-thirds majority to elect a pope, a tradition that had lasted since the year 1179. John Paul allowed for election by a simple majority after 30 ballots.
True, it took only four ballots for the former Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger to get more than two-thirds of the cardinals on his side. But if a majority bloc was quickly drawn to him, that could have coaxed supporters of other candidates to accept that Ratzinger would eventually win.
The lesson, in such a scenario, is that the long tradition of finding compromise papal candidates acceptable to various voting blocs could be at an end. Even narrow majorities will be able to enforce their will on the rest of the cardinals; a situation that favors well-known candidates like Ratzinger.
Ironically, John Paul II was an underdog who probably would have lost under the new rule - a change which Benedict seems likely to maintain.
According to the conventional scenario, the cardinals looked toward Poland in 1978 only after Italy's Cardinal Giovanni Benelli couldn't quite hit the two-thirds mark because he had made too many enemies during his Vatican years.
In the next conclave, with that 31st ballot looming ahead, backers of future Benellis will be able to wait - and win.
 Graphic



 
AP Graphic POPE AGES
 Load-Date: April 21, 2005

 

End of Document
