

Working at the South Pole: incalculable risks, tremendous reward
April 29, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 786 words
Byline: By KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PUNTA ARENAS, Chile
Body




Two daring rescue missions to Antarctica last week to evacuate ailing Americans were a stark reminder that, despite advances in technology and medicine, life at the bottom of the world is still rife with danger.
During the nine-month winter when flights in and to the continent are halted, the research stations scattered across the frozen wasteland are isolated, their staffs pared down, with outside help nearly inaccessible if anything goes wrong.
Those who undertake the adventure of working in Antarctica know there's little that can be done to change that situation, say veterans of the United States' three Antarctic research stations.
"The screening and orientation you go through are very clear about the risk," said Mahlon Kennicutt, an Antarctic specialist at Texas A&M University. "Any hardships that may go along with it are well worth the time you're going to be there."
During the polar winter, Antarctica is shrouded in constant night and temperatures plunge to 115 degrees below zero or even colder. Flights are halted from late February to November, and the worst-case scenario is that a medical emergency will require an airlift.
This year, that happened twice.
On Wednesday, a team made the most dangerous rescue flight ever attempted to the South Pole and successfully evacuated Dr. Ronald Shemenski, the lone physician among 50 staffers at the Amundsmen-Scott South Pole Station. He had suffered a gall bladder attack and was diagnosed with a potentially life-threatening inflammation of the pancreas.
His evacuation came only days after a New Zealand Air Force crew made a grueling 15-hour round-trip journey from Christchurch to McMurdo Antarctic Base on the edge of the continent to airlift four other sick Americans, including one man suffering from a serious heart condition.
Shemenski was the third doctor in a row to have a wintertime emergency at the Pole. In October 1999, Jerri Nielsen was airlifted out after she diagnosed herself with breast cancer. Her successor, Robert Thompson slipped on the ice and suffered a serious back injury, but chose to remain at the base through the winter.
The evacuations have raised the question whether medical facilities at the pole are sufficient during winter.
Shemenski and others say there's not much that can be done to make the isolated posts more self-sufficient. "You can't have a trauma hospital at the Pole," he said.
At the South Pole station, medical supplies are good, but there is no surgeon or anesthesiologist. Setting up surgery facilities would be too costly, according to Colorado-based Raytheon Polar Services, which maintains the three U.S. stations.
Both Raytheon and Shemenski say there isn't enough of a workload at Amundsen-Scott to justify having two doctors. And even if a surgeon was brought in, he or she wouldn't be able to do every kind of surgery that might be necessary. Shemenski, for example, will be treated by pancreas specialists in the United States.
There was, however, one improvement that helped Shemenski: For the first time, a registered nurse was added to the staff during the winter season, and ultrasound equipment was flown in. After Shemenski complained of pains, the new equipment was used to send images back to doctors in the United States.
The other safeguard against emergencies is the extensive medical and psychological tests that the National Science Foundation in Washington requires for everyone bound for Antarctica.
But Thompson said even the most rigorous medical examinations aren't foolproof. "You just can't do everything," he said. "The South Pole is such a weird, harsh environment. But I think the screening they have in place is valid and good. When we go down there, we know we're going to accept a certain amount of risk."
The foundation reviews safety measures every year, said Peter West, an NSF spokesman. But it's not decided if they'll consider changed in light of the evacuations.
Nielsen said Antarctic workers just have to realize that if they're hurt or injured, they may have to stick it out until help can come.
"If they talk about doing something special for you like this (an evacuation), all you feel is extreme gratitude, because they don't promise you that, nor should they," said Nielsen, who waited three months for her airlift.
For many Antarctic scientists, the risk involved is part of the allure of living in such a harsh environment, especially for the small elite bunch who choose to remain through the winter.
"It was the greatest time of my life," said Nielsen. "People like to know that they can do it, that they are strong. That's why they went. They went to test themselves."
---
Editor's note: AP correspondent Celeste Tarricone in Buenos Aires contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: April 30, 2001

 

End of Document
