

World oil summit long on pledges to better protect the environment
September 2, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 594 words
Byline: By BILL CORMIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




The world's top oil producers tried to clean up their image as enemies of the environment Monday with delegates to an industry summit calling for companies to look for cleaner ways to do business.
The possibility of war in Iraq and the impact on world oil prices shadowed the World Petroleum Congress, which drew more than 3,000 delegates from 59 oil producing or consuming nations, and top oil executives.
For the first time, environmental defenders such as Greenpeace, Conservation International and the World Wildlife Fund were invited to the meetings and delegates pledged to seek cleaner-burning fuels and reduce the gases blamed for global warming.
"Oil companies have to continuously seek out new, alternative ways of doing business which will have the least impact on the environment," India's oil minister, Ram Naik, told the convention.
Naik said India, with a market of nearly 1 billion people, has followed Brazil's lead in mixing gasoline with ethanol to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.
A recycling center for the tons of garbage produced by the congress was even set up at the site.
But for some groups, the environment-friendly spin was simply for show.
"I think it's greenwash," said Frank Guggenheim, executive director of Greenpeace in Brazil. "We are participating so they can't say we're against dialogue, but I don't think the people at the conference are serious about protecting the environment … They talk about environment, but from the point of view of accidents, you have to be a little skeptical."
Oil officials urged governments and oil companies to share "clean" technologies and redouble efforts to protect the environment.
"It is no longer possible for any of us to carry out our oil or gas exploitation activities without proper regard to the broader issues of environmental protection," said Lew Watts, group managing director of Shell Sustainable Development and Latin America.
He told delegates that the energy industry is at least "partially responsible" for the damage inflicted on the environment this past century.
Norwegian oil minister Einar Steensnaes said not enough has been done to implement the promises to protect the environment issued at the Earth Summit in Rio in 1992. A followup summit, in Johannesburg, South Africa, ends Wednesday.
"Fossil fuels, at least for the next 20 or 30 years, will constitute the main source of energy in meeting increased global demand," Steensnaes said. "Coal, oil and natural gas all contribute in varying to degrees to … increasing the level of greenhouse gases."
"Ten years after the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, we once again need to address the links between energy and the environment," he said.
Oil officials fear a conflict in the Middle East could disrupt supplies from the oil-rich region. Last week, oil prices rose to around $30 a barrel amid fears of a U.S. attack on Iraq.
Other oil producers could raise output to cover the shortfall.
Ali Rodriguez, the president of Petroleos de Venezuela, said Monday that Venezuela has the capacity to greatly increase its current oil output. But he said any additional pumping would depend on the decisions of OPEC, which opposes an increase in the quota system and is likely to maintain that standing at their next meeting.
An OPEC meeting on Sept. 19 in Osaka, Japan, is to decide future production levels for the oil cartel.
Among the delegates were energy ministers from Great Britain, Algeria, Canada, Cuba and Venezuela. Also present were top executives from oil giants such as ChevronTexaco Corp., ExxonMobil Corp. and Royal Dutch Shell.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo RIO104
 Load-Date: September 3, 2002

 

End of Document
