

Yosemite killer going on trial in state court, only issue is the death penalty
July 13, 2002, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 734 words
Byline: By BRIAN BERGSTEIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN JOSE, Calif.
Body




It was one of the most infamous crimes in California history: Three women were kidnapped while visiting Yosemite National Park and savagely killed. Months later, the handyman at their hotel was caught after beheading a female nature guide and gave the FBI a detailed confession to all four murders.
Now, three years later, Cary Stayner is finally going on trial for killing the tourists.
Stayner already is serving life without parole in federal prison after pleading guilty to killing the park guide, Joie Armstrong.
But state prosecutors want to execute him.
Stayner, 40, who once said he would prefer the death penalty to life in prison, has pleaded innocent by reason of insanity. Executing him will require a trial, scheduled to start Monday, that is expected to last almost three months and cost taxpayers $3 million. Then there are the appeals.
"You have to imagine there are better ways of spending the money, even though I support the death penalty," said Ken Hawkins, the auditor for Mariposa County (population 16,000), where the killings occurred.
The county has an annual budget of $31 million, but already has spent $940,000 on the case and expects to shell out at least $2 million more for the prosecution's costs and Stayner's defense. Most of the costs are being reimbursed by the state.
"Even if you are successful in getting the death penalty, that's still setting up 15 years of appeals," Hawkins said. "If you're just looking at dollars and cents, you think about what could be spent on children in schools, roads. You think about what you're trading just to drive home a point that the guy should be executed."
Mariposa County District Attorney Christine Johnson did not return calls. Prosecutors handling the case refused to comment.
Stayner is charged with murder, kidnapping and special circumstances that could bring the death penalty - including sexual assault and attempted rape - in the killings of Carole Sund, 42, her daughter Juliana, 15, of Eureka, and Silvina Pelosso, a 16-year-old friend from Cordoba, Argentina.
They disappeared in February 1999. A month later, their burned-out rental car was found with Carole Sund's and Silvina's bodies in the trunk. Both had been strangled.
Juliana's body was discovered a week later near a remote lake, after Stayner mailed the FBI a map directing them to the site. Her throat had been slashed.
After his arrest, Stayner told the FBI that killing the tourists made him feel "like I was in control for the first time in my life." He said he sexually assaulted Juliana after killing the others, and that she had begged him to end her misery.
Silvina's parents, Pepe and Raquel Pelosso, are split on whether Stayner should be executed. He supports it, she does not, according to lawyer Horacio Martinez Baca, who is representing the family in a $20 million lawsuit against Stayner and the Cedar Lodge, the motel where the victims stayed.
Despite their disagreement, the Pelossos support the prosecution and will attend the trial. So will Carole Sund's father, Francis Carrington, who has no qualms about sending Stayner to Death Row.
Carrington said his daughter was a giving woman who adopted three inner-city children and cared for abused kids. His granddaughter Juli, he added, "was just getting to where she could experience life."
So yes, he said, "the death penalty is appropriate."
Prosecutors have more than 130 potential witnesses. The defense plans to call a handful of psychiatric experts who will say Stayner suffers from an obsessive-compulsive disorder and mental illnesses.
If he were found guilty, the jury would have to consider whether he knew right from wrong at the time of the killings. If it determined he was insane, that would mean life in a mental institution - though it's unclear if the federal government would transfer him.
Stayner certainly has thought about how his story will end.
In a jail interview on July 26, 1999, two days after his arrest, he told KNTV-TV he wanted major movie producers to bid for his story, with profits to go to his victims' families and maybe his nieces and nephews, according to a transcript in court documents.
He said he expected to be executed.
"At times, I know I'm going to die. The state's going to take my own life, one way or another," Stayner said. "I think that would be better than spending the rest of my life in prison."
On the Net:
Santa Clara Court: http://www.sccsuperiorcourt.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos FX801, CAFRE501, CAMOD501,801
 Load-Date: July 14, 2002

 

End of Document
