

204 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Monday
The Associated Press
April 14, 2008 Monday 9:58 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1003 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama says Clinton criticism from Republican playbook, calls GOP 'out of touch' ... Obama questions Clinton's opposition to free trade agreements ... Clinton says she would correct husband's NAFTA mistakes ... Union members urge Democrats to seat Michigan and Florida delegates
Obama: Clinton using GOP playbook
WASHINGTON (AP) After days on the campaign defensive, Democrat Barack Obama accused rival Hillary Rodham Clinton on Monday of leveling criticism straight from the Republican playbook and said even so, he will win the White House over John McCain and an "out of touch" GOP.
"I may have made a mistake last week in the words that I chose, but the other party has made a much more damaging mistake in the failed policies they've chosen and the bankrupt philosophy that they've embraced for the last three decades ..." Obama said.
"This philosophy isn't just out of touch, it's put our economy out of whack."
Obama spoke at The Associated Press annual meeting, a few hours after McCain had made a less combative appearance of his own.
The Arizona senator announced support for legislation to protect the confidentiality of news sources, although he also challenged the news media to acknowledge its errors "beyond the small print on a corrections page."
He also displayed his penchant for occasionally differing with the Bush administration, saying that he believes the country has already entered a recession.
Obama questions Clinton on trade
PITTSBURGH (AP) Democrat Barack Obama on Monday questioned rival Hillary Rodham Clinton's opposition to free trade agreements that some voters contend have eliminated thousands of U.S. jobs and mocked her weekend visit to an Indiana bar as pandering to the working class.
"Around election time, the candidates can't do enough for you," Obama told a meeting of the Alliance for American Manufacturing on Monday. "They'll promise you anything, give you a long list of proposals and even come around, with TV crews in tow, to throw back a shot and a beer."
Clinton did just that at a stop at Bronko's restaurant in Crown Point, Ind., on Saturday.
The two presidential candidates continued to hammer each other Monday after a weekend of criticism stemming from Obama's comment that some small-town voters are bitter over their economic circumstances and "cling to guns and religion" as a result. Obama uttered the words at a private fundraiser in San Francisco last week and Clinton has seized on them in seeking the edge in Pennsylvania, which holds its primary April 22.
Obama also chided Clinton about NAFTA and the Colombian trade deal. Despite her opposition, he noted that the North American Free Trade Agreement was passed under her husband's watch. She opposes the Colombian trade deal even though former President Clinton supports it and her top campaign strategist, Mark Penn, met with Colombian officials to help push for its passage. Penn has since been demoted.
Clinton promises to reform NAFTA
PITTSBURGH (AP) Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton told manufacturers and union workers on Monday that her husband made mistakes related to the North American Free Trade Agreement that she plans to fix.
Her comment came in response to a question by a union worker at a summit sponsored by the Alliance for American Manufacturing. The worker said President Clinton had tricked them when he championed NAFTA during his presidency.
"As smart as my husband is, he does make mistakes," Clinton said. She said she would fix problems that have led to job losses, or would tell Canada and Mexico the United States is pulling out of the agreement.
Clinton also emphasized her work as a New York senator helping manufacturers in her state. She promised to step up enforcement of trade laws and stand up to China.
"We're going to start making things like steel and other important commodities in America again," Clinton said.
Union members picket DNC headquarters
WASHINGTON (AP) Union workers picketed outside Democratic National Committee headquarters on Monday to pressure party leaders to seat delegates from Michigan and Florida at the party's summer convention.
About 40 members of the Michigan and Florida Building and Construction Trade Councils and other unions wore signs and handed out leaflets. The union members, a core constituent of Democrats, did not prevent anyone from entering the party's offices.
The DNC stripped Florida and Michigan of their convention delegates, a total of 366, for holding primaries too early in the process in violation of party rules.
"To ignore just about 1 million votes I don't believe is something in our best interest," said Patrick "Shorty" Gleason, president of the Michigan construction union.
The picketers later met with DNC officials.
THE NUMBERS
Barack Obama has a 10-point lead nationally over Hillary Rodham Clinton in the Democratic presidential race, 50 percent to 40 percent, in the latest Gallup Poll. The survey had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points. The poll was conducted April 11-13 and involved interviews with 1,271 Democratic and Democratic-leaning voters. The survey was a tracking poll, in which Gallup interviews voters every night and uses the results from the three most recent evenings.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama attended a forum on manufacturing in Pittsburgh. Obama later addressed The Associated Press' annual meeting in Washington.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain spoke at AP's annual meeting.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I know that I've kept a lot of you guys busy this weekend with the comments I made last week. Some of you might even be a little bitter about that." Democrat Barack Obama, addressing The Associated Press' annual meeting.
STAT OF THE DAY:
According to a recent Associated Press-Ipsos national poll, about a quarter of Barack Obama supporters say they'll vote for Republican John McCain if Hillary Rodham Clinton is the Democratic presidential nominee. About a third of Clinton supporters say they would vote for McCain if it's Obama.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: April 15, 2008

 

End of Document
