

211 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Monday
The Associated Press
April 7, 2008 Monday 9:17 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1371 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
McCain has best fundraising in March, still lags Obama and Clinton ... Clinton campaign senior strategist Mark Penn steps down ... McCain says Democratic rivals' call for troop withdrawal from Iraq a 'failure of leadership' ... Clinton says Bush should boycott Olympics opening ceremony in China ... Kerry expects Clinton to win Pennsylvania, argues close race would be moral victory for Obama ... Bill Clinton, on island campaign swing, touts wife's experience representing Puerto Ricans
McCain raises $15 million in March
WASHINGTON (AP) Sen. John McCain raised more than $15 million in March for his presidential campaign, a top performance for the likely Republican nominee that still falls far short of the cash gathered by rival Democratic Sens. Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
The amount was confirmed to The Associated Press by two campaign officials speaking on condition of anonymity because the numbers haven't been made public.
One official said McCain intends to accept public financing in the general election a sum of about $84 million.
Obama raised $40 million in March, bringing his total so far in the campaign to about $234 million. Clinton raised $20 million for a total of more than $175 million during the entirety of the contest. McCain has raised about $75 million since he began running last year.
Penn out as Clinton senior strategist
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton is turning to her communications chief and pollster to plan her presidential election strategy after giving the boot to a polarizing top aide because of his work on behalf of a trade agreement Clinton opposes.
Mark Penn, a lightning rod for controversy throughout Clinton's presidential campaign, left the campaign Sunday after it was disclosed he had met with representatives of the Colombian government to help promote the trade agreement.
Communications director Howard Wolfson and pollster Geoff Garin will direct the campaign's message and strategic efforts for the campaign going forward, said campaign manager Maggie Williams. She said Penn will continue "to provide polling and advice to the campaign."
Penn's departure comes as Clinton, considered the front-runner for the Democratic nomination last year, trails Barack Obama in delegates and the popular vote with a must-win primary in Pennsylvania April 22 and nine other contests remaining. Clinton almost certainly will end the primary season narrowly behind Obama in the popular vote and pledged delegates unless the nullified primaries in Florida and Michigan are counted a scenario that seems remote. Her challenge will be to persuade some 800 superdelegates to back her despite the numbers.
McCain: Democrats' stance on Iraq flawed
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) Republican presidential candidate John McCain said Monday that calls from his Democratic rivals to withdraw U.S. forces from Iraq stand as a "failure of leadership" as they are making promises they cannot keep.
Democrat Barack Obama said the failure rests with McCain's support for an open-ended occupation of Iraq.
Addressing the Veterans of Foreign Wars, McCain criticized Obama and Democratic Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton and insisted that last year's U.S. troop buildup in Iraq brought a glimmer of "something approaching normal" there, despite a recent outbreak of heavy fighting and a U.S. death toll that has surpassed 4,000.
"I do not believe that anyone should make promises as a candidate for president that they cannot keep if elected," McCain told the crowd.
"To promise a withdrawal of our forces from Iraq, regardless of the calamitous consequences to the Iraqi people, our most vital interests, and the future of the Middle East, is the height of irresponsibility," he said. "It is a failure of leadership."
McCain, the presidential nominee-in-waiting, is closely tied to the unpopular, 5-year-old war. McCain was a vocal advocate of the troop increase strategy eventually adopted by President Bush, and is seeking to convince people the strategy is working. He also argued that Iraq will need more money and aid for reconstruction.
Clinton: Bush should not open Olympics
WASHINGTON (AP) Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton on Monday called on President Bush to stay away from the Olympics opening ceremonies in Beijing, a fresh sign that politics, not sports, may take center stage at the summer games.
The Democratic presidential candidate said a boycott of the opening ceremonies by Bush would underscore U.S. concerns about the recent unrest in Tibet and questions about China's relationship with Sudan.
"The violent clashes in Tibet and the failure of the Chinese government to use its full leverage with Sudan to stop the genocide in Darfur are opportunities for presidential leadership," she said, charging the Bush administration "has been wrong to downplay human rights in its policy towards China."
She said Bush should not plan on attending the ceremonies "absent major changes by the Chinese government."
Her rival for the Democratic presidential nomination, Barack Obama, said recently that he was conflicted about whether the U.S. should fully participate.
President Bush has said he will attend the Olympics because it is a sporting event, not a political event.
Kerry expects Clinton to win Pa.
BOSTON (AP) Democratic Sen. John Kerry, one of Barack Obama's backers, said Monday he doesn't expect the presidential candidate to win Pennsylvania, but he argued that a close loss to rival Hillary Rodham Clinton would be a moral victory.
"You've got to wait and let Pennsylvania happen," Kerry told reporters after testifying at the Statehouse in Boston. "You know, she had a 20-point lead a number of weeks ago. It's obviously closing to some degree. I think you've got to see what the result is and then what happens maybe in North Carolina. I think if he wins, you know which I don't expect; I think everybody knows it's an uphill battle in Pennsylvania but if he keeps it very close there, that's a victory in itself."
Kerry, the 2004 Democratic presidential nominee, spent the weekend in Pennsylvania campaigning for Obama. The state holds its primary April 22, with 158 pledged delegates at stake.
Kerry said Clinton deserves the right to continue her campaign even though the New York senator faces "a very uphill climb" to become the nominee.
Bill Clinton campaigns in Puerto Rico
BARCELONETA, Puerto Rico (AP) Former President Clinton said Monday his wife's service as a New York senator has given her more experience representing Puerto Ricans than any other presidential candidate.
"On the mainland, she represents more Puerto Ricans than anyone who has run for president in a very long time," Clinton told a crowd of several hundred people in the north-coast city of Barceloneta. "She cares about you and your children's future."
Clinton was traveling across the U.S. Caribbean territory to campaign for Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton ahead of its Democratic primary on June 1, when 55 delegates are at stake.
Puerto Ricans cannot vote in the general presidential election.
THE NUMBERS
Barack Obama has a 9-point lead nationally over Hillary Rodham Clinton in the Democratic presidential race, 52 percent to her 43 percent, in the latest Gallup Poll. The survey had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points. The poll was conducted April 4-6 and involved interviews with 1,240 Democratic and Democratic-leaning voters. The survey was a tracking poll, in which Gallup interviews voters every night and uses the results from the three most recent evenings.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama had no public events planned.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain spoke to the Veterans of Foreign Wars in Kansas City, Mo.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"The dramatic reduction in violence has opened the way for a return to something approaching normal political and economic life for the average Iraqi." Republican John McCain, in a speech on Iraq.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Seventy percent of women backing Hillary Rodham Clinton are white while 49 percent of women supporting Barack Obama are white, according to figures from exit polls of voters in 27 Democratic primaries where both candidates competed. The figures exclude Florida, Michigan and all caucuses.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: April 8, 2008

 

End of Document
