

212 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Sunday
The Associated Press
April 6, 2008 Sunday 2:03 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1138 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
McCain says presidential campaign should be like a respectful argument, not bitter clash ... Clinton ramps up call to recognize Michigan and Florida votes ... Obama emphasizes Western issues in pitch to Montana voters ...
McCain calls for respectful campaign
PRESCOTT, Ariz. (AP) Sen. John McCain called for a presidential campaign that is more like a respectful argument among friends than a bitter clash of enemies, and said he is better able than either of his Democratic rivals to govern across party lines.
"We have nothing to fear from each other," the Arizona senator said Saturday as he wrapped up a weeklong trip designed to broaden his appeal beyond the voters who cast ballots in last winter's Republican primaries.
After a series of stops earlier in the week that emphasized his military service, McCain spoke on the steps of the Yavapai County Courthouse. The late Sen. Barry Goldwater of Arizona, the father of the modern conservative Republican party, launched his Senate campaigns as well as his 1964 bid for the White House from the same spot.
McCain looked out at his largest crowd of the week as he recalled his early lessons in political bipartisanship. He described Goldwater and the late Arizona Rep. Mo Udall, a liberal Democrat, as close friends despite many political disagreements.
McCain recalled also that shortly after his own election to Congress in 1982, Udall took him under his wing. "I intend to wage this campaign and to govern this country in a way that they would be proud of me," he said of Goldwater and Udall.
And yet, he said, there are important differences to be settled in the fall on issues such as energy, the housing crisis, health care, the struggle with terrorists, and Medicare and other federal spending programs.
"It is more than appropriate, it is necessary that even in times of crisis, we fight among ourselves for the things we believe in," McCain said. "It is not just our right, but our civic and moral obligation."
"Let us exercise our responsibilities as free people. But let us remember we are not enemies," he added.
McCain wrapped up the Republican nomination a month ago, and his weeklong trip down a sort of personal memory lane marked a new phase in his campaign.
Clinton renews call to count Fla., Mich.
HILLSBORO, Ore. (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton strengthened her pitch to allow the results of disputed primaries in Michigan and Florida to be counted in the nominating contest, noting the vote totals had been officially recognized in each state.
"Some say their votes should be ignored and the popular vote in Michigan and Florida should be discounted. Well, I have a different view," Clinton said Saturday at a rally here.
Both the Michigan and Florida primaries were essentially nullified after they were moved into January in violation of national Democratic party rules. The party voted to strip both states of their delegates and all the candidates, including Clinton and rival Barack Obama, signed a pledge not to campaign in either state.
Obama and several other Democratic candidates also removed their names from the Michigan primary ballot.
Both states saw record turnout in their primaries and the former first lady won both contests. Her campaign has pressed hard for the results to be recognized, even as the Obama campaign has argued Clinton is trying to circumvent rules she agreed to long ago.
Clinton's latest comments came a day after Michigan Democrats announced there would be no do-over of that state's Jan. 15 primary, vastly dimming the New York senator's chances of catching Obama in the popular vote and in pledged delegates. Democrats in Florida had already announced there would be no revote there.
Democratic National Committee Chairman Howard Dean has been conferring with party leaders in both states, hoping to find a way to seat their delegations.
Obama tailors message to Western voters
BUTTE, Mont. (AP) Hunting for votes out West, Democrat Barack Obama rejected the idea that the region's sparsely populated states aren't important in the presidential race and renewed his promise to appoint a high-level adviser on Indian issues if elected.
Obama also cast his usual message in more Western-friendly terms, talking about clean-coal technology as a way of protecting Montana's beautiful mountains and civil liberties as part of the state's tradition of independence.
An Obama supporter had scolded all the presidential candidates earlier for not addressing Western issues.
Montana and neighboring states have only a handful of delegates, but every one of them is valuable as Obama seeks to keep Hillary Rodham Clinton from narrowing his lead heading toward the nomination convention.
Obama, speaking Saturday at the Montana Democrats' annual Mansfield-Metcalf Dinner, mocked the suggestion from Clinton's campaign earlier this year that his lead is suspect because he won lightly contested small states that hold caucuses while losing some big states with primary elections.
"There are people saying Obama wins all these little states, all these caucus states, these small little Western states. I don't know about you, but I think they're pretty important," Obama told the crowd of 4,000.
And in a state where more than 6 percent of the population is American Indian, Obama talked about improving health and education for Indians. He promised to appoint a senior White House adviser on the subject and host an annual meeting of tribal leaders.
He acknowledged his support of clean-energy technology might worry voters in a region that produces lots of coal.
"I know Montana's a coal state. My home state, Illinois, is a coal state, but we've got to make sure that we are investing in technologies that capture carbon because we can't sustain the planet the way that we're doing it right now," Obama said, speaking to 8,000 people at a college arena in Missoula. "Look at this incredible landscape around you. We've got to pass that on."
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton holds a town hall in Missoula, Mont.; Barack Obama has no public events.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain had no public events scheduled.
QUOTE OF THE DAY: "America today faces a grave moral and leadership crisis, and those of us who care about our country's future can no longer sit on the sidelines and remain neutral." Bob Barr, the former Republican congressman from Georgia who may run for president as a Libertarian.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Of the 794 superdelegates slated to attend the Democratic National Convention this summer in Denver: 410 are members of the Democratic National Committee, 260 are Democratic members of Congress, 26 are Democratic governors, 22 are distinguished party leaders and 76 are unpledged add-ons. Some qualify in multiple ways, but they have only one vote and are listed in only one category.
Compiled by Ann Sanner and Ronald Powers.
 Load-Date: April 7, 2008

 

End of Document
