

214 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Friday
The Associated Press
April 4, 2008 Friday 10:06 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1314 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Candidates mark the 40th anniversary of Martin Luther King Jr.'s death ... Clintons had income of $109 million since 2000 ... As economy worsens, Obama says rivals are behind the curve ... Michigan Democrats decide not to hold do-over primary ... McCain to meet with Secret Service about setting up protection ... Former Republican Lowell Weicker backs Obama
Candidates mark King anniversary
MEMPHIS (AP) Republican and Democrat, black and white, the three remaining presidential candidates summoned memories of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., 40 years after his death on Friday and gently sought to advance their own strivings as they found greatness in his.
"The quality of his character is only more apparent," said Sen. John McCain, a Republican who readily told a black audience that he had been wrong to vote against legislation making King's birthday a holiday.
Like McCain, Democratic Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton traveled to Memphis to observe the day. But unlike him, she chose not to speak at ceremonies at the Lorraine Motel where King was shot.
Instead, she was in the church where he had delivered his final sermon on the day before his death. A college student 40 years ago, Clinton recalled, "I walked into my dorm room and took my book bag and hurled it across the room." Her voice breaking, she added, "It felt like everything had been shattered and we'd never be able to put the pieces together again."
Democratic Sen. Barack Obama, the strongest black candidate in history, chose to campaign in Indiana, where he said King's pleas have yet to be answered fully.
At a town hall meeting in Fort Wayne, Ind., Obama linked King's work to the present, saying the dream of economic justice is "still out of reach for too many Americans."
Clintons report $20.4 million in 2007
WASHINGTON (AP) Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton and former President Clinton reported $20.4 million in income for 2007 and more than $109 million since 2000 as they gave the public the most detailed look at their finances in eight years.
The campaign released tax returns from 2000 through 2006 and gave highlights from their 2007 return. The Clintons have asked for an extension for filing their 2007 tax returns, citing the dissolution of a blind trust last year.
The Democratic presidential candidate and her husband paid $33.8 million in taxes from 2000 through 2007. They listed $10.25 million in charitable contributions during that period.
Clinton has been under pressure to release her tax returns, especially from rival Sen. Barack Obama, who posted his 2000 to 2006 returns on his campaign Web site last week. Neither Obama nor Republican Sen. John McCain have made their 2007 tax returns public, though both say they will this month.
Obama: Economy sliding into recession
FORT WAYNE, Ind. (AP) The latest unemployment figures show the nation is "sliding into recession," Democrat Barack Obama said Friday, as he argued he has been the most aggressive presidential candidate in seeking remedies.
His rival Hillary Rodham Clinton said in a written statement: "Perhaps this jobs report will also help John McCain recognize that doing nothing is not an economic strategy in times of urgent need."
The unemployment rate jumped to 5.1 percent in March, the Labor Department reported Friday.
At a town hall meeting in Fort Wayne, Ind., Obama joined Clinton in deriding the response from McCain. He said the Republican presidential nominee-in-waiting simply wants to stand on the sidelines and watch the housing crisis unfold.
McCain, in turn, said in a written statement that "it is essential to reduce the burdens on businesses and workers by lowering taxes, streamlining regulation, tackling health care costs, opening markets to American goods and helping those workers in need."
He said Democratic proposal would hamper economic growth.
Michigan Dems say no do-over primary
LANSING, Mich. (AP) Michigan Democrats are not going to hold a do-over presidential primary.
The state party's executive committee made it official Friday, saying "it is not practical" to conduct a party-run primary or caucus as a way to get the state's delegates seated at the Democratic National Convention this August in Denver.
Michigan and Florida were stripped of their convention delegates for moving up their primaries before Feb. 5 in defiance of party rules. Florida Democrats already had decided against holding a second primary election.
Hillary Rodham Clinton won the Jan. 15 Michigan primary. Rival Barack Obama had pulled his name from the ballot.
Michigan Democrats hope the campaigns can agree on a way to split Michigan's delegates so they can be seated at the Aug. 25-28 convention.
McCain to meet with Secret Service
MEMPHIS (AP) Sen. John McCain intends to meet with Secret Service officials in the next several days in preparation for accepting security protection for the final several months of his White House bid.
McCain plans to meet with the Secret Service next week, he said in an interview for broadcast Sunday on Fox News.
"I think that it's important as we get more and more visibility, that we recognize the inevitable," McCain said. "And so we will be talking with them early to arrange for, very soon, some Secret Service protection."
McCain made the disclosure after the head of the Secret Service, Mark Sullivan, took the unusual step of discussing McCain's lack of government security at an open meeting Thursday with members of the House Appropriations Committee.
Weicker endorses Obama
HARTFORD, Conn. (AP) Former Republican senator and Connecticut independent Gov. Lowell P. Weicker Jr. endorsed Barack Obama's presidential bid Friday.
Weicker said Obama's positive outlook, vision for the country's future and common-sense made him the obvious candidate to endorse.
"Even though I'm almost 77 years old, I want a fresh start and a young start for this country," Weicker said. "I think we've had enough of the old-timers in both parties."
Weicker, a former U.S. congressman and senator, was elected Connecticut's governor in 1990 as an independent under his "A Connecticut Party" label. He served one term.
Reached by telephone Friday while traveling in Virginia, Weicker called Democratic contender Hillary Rodham Clinton "a very capable individual," but said he did not endorse her because "it's time to get on with some new thinking in this country."
THE NUMBERS
Barack Obama has a slight lead nationally over Hillary Rodham Clinton in the Democratic presidential race, 49 percent to her 44 percent, in the latest Gallup Poll. The survey had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points. The poll was conducted April 1-3 and involved interviews with 1,219 Democratic and Democratic-leaning voters. The survey was a tracking poll, in which Gallup interviews voters every night and uses the results from the three most recent evenings.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton stops in Memphis, Tenn., before addressing the state convention of the North Dakota Democratic Party in Grand Forks, N.D. Barack Obama holds a town hall meeting in Fort Wayne, Ind., before speaking at the same gathering in Grand Forks.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain participates in events commemorating Martin Luther King Jr.'s death in Memphis, Tenn.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"You know, Dr. King once said that the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice. It bends toward justice. But here's the thing it does not bend on its own. It bends because each of us in our own ways put our hand on that arc and we bend it in the direction of justice." Barack Obama, speaking at a town hall meeting in Fort Wayne, Ind., on the anniversary of Martin Luther King Jr.'s death.
STAT OF THE DAY:
The last time North Dakota voted Democratic in a presidential election was in 1964. Democrat Lyndon Johnson garnered 58 percent of the vote while Republican Barry Goldwater got about 42 percent.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: April 5, 2008

 

End of Document
