

215 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Thursday
The Associated Press
April 3, 2008 Thursday 10:14 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1105 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama outraises Clinton 2-1, flush with money for ads in Pennsylvania ... Clinton hopes to take pledged delegates from Obama ... Former President Carter hints he'd support Obama over Clinton ... McCain reminisces about Vietnam War ... Bill Clinton says wife's White House schedules show opponents her range of work
Obama outraises Clinton 2-to-1 in March
WASHINGTON (AP) Barack Obama raked in $40 million in March, leaving Hillary Rodham Clinton and her $20 million in the fundraising dust and stuffing his campaign treasury so he can outspend her in the crucial Pennsylvania primary.
His haul in new donations also buttressed his argument to Democratic superdelegates that he has built a vast network of donors and volunteers that they wouldn't want to lose by denying him the nomination.
Obama has attracted nearly 1.3 million donors, largely through the Internet.
He has raised $131 million in the first three months of the year to $70 million for Clinton. Republican John McCain's campaign has not revealed his March fundraising, but he has been far behind the Democrats, raising less than $23 million in January and February combined.
Clinton, speaking to reporters in Burbank, Calif., in the midst of her own fundraising sweep through the state, said: "We're both raising huge amounts of money, and I am thrilled at how effective Democrats have been in raising money the last 15 or so months.
"I will have money to compete. Obviously Senator Obama has more than enough money to compete. But this is a good news story because it means we are raising it from people committed to our candidacies."
Clinton hints at taking Obama delegates
BURBANK, Calif. (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton, who is unlikely to catch rival Barack Obama in pledged delegates, hinted Thursday that she hoped to persuade a few to back her instead of him.
"There is no such thing as a pledged delegate," Clinton said in California, where she has been fundraising.
Both Clinton and Obama planned to address the state convention of the North Dakota Democratic Party on Friday, where delegates to this summer's national convention will be allocated. Obama crushed Clinton in the state's Feb. 5 presidential caucuses, 61 percent to 36 percent.
The former first lady said she was traveling to North Dakota to thank her supporters and delegates and wooing Obama supporters was fair game.
While the DNC has no rules requiring pledged delegates won in primaries and caucuses to vote for the candidate, the people who serve as pledged delegates are selected by the campaigns who won them and loyalty is a key qualification.
Obama currently leads in the delegate count, 1,634-1,500, according to The Associated Press.
Carter hints at support for Obama
WASHINGTON (AP) Former President Carter wouldn't quite say it, but he left little doubt this week about who he'd like to see in the White House next year.
Speaking to local reporters Wednesday on a trip to Nigeria, the former Democratic president noted that Barack Obama had won his home state of Georgia and his hometown of Plains.
"My children and their spouses are pro-Obama. My grandchildren are also pro-Obama," he said at a news conference, according to the Nigerian newspaper This Day. "As a superdelegate, I would not disclose who I am rooting for, but I leave you to make that guess."
Carter's spokeswoman confirmed the comments.
Asked to comment, Hillary Rodham Clinton's communications director, Howard Wolfson, said Carter "is free to make whatever decision he thinks is appropriate."
McCain discusses Fla. ties during tour
JACKSONVILLE, Fla. (AP) Sen. John McCain on Thursday recalled the Vietnam War and the five and a half years he spent as a prisoner of the North Vietnamese as he continued a tour designed to introduce himself to a general election audience.
"We had met a power that wanted to obliterate our identities, and the cause to which we rallied was our response: We are free men, bound inseparably together, and by the grace of God and not your sufferance we will have our freedom restored to us," he said.
"I have never felt more powerfully free, more my own man, than when I was a small part of an organized resistance to the power that imprisoned us," the former Navy pilot said.
McCain's family lived in Jacksonville for several years while he was a prisoner of war. Upon his release, the Republican nominee-in-waiting lived in the city, where he was a commanding officer of his squadron at Cecil Field.
Clinton: Papers show wife's hard work
ALTOONA, Pa. (AP) Former President Clinton said his wife's White House schedules showed their opponents the range of issues she worked on as first lady.
"We just released Hillary's schedules, and all our adversaries thought 'We'll feast on this,'" Clinton said while campaigning for Hillary Rodham Clinton at Penn State-Altoona. "But they said, 'That woman sure did work hard across a world of areas.'"
The National Archives released the papers in Washington and at the Clinton presidential library in Arkansas last month. Critics had pressed for months for their release, saying the Clintons were delaying the disclosure.
The words of the schedules are dry, but the papers shed light on her struggle for health care reform early in the Clinton administration, her scaling back when that effort failed, her travels abroad and the legal woes that dogged the Clintons in the White House.
THE NUMBERS
Hillary Rodham Clinton is running about even nationally with Barack Obama in the Democratic presidential race, 46 percent to his 49 percent, in the latest Gallup Poll. The survey had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points. The poll was conducted March 31-April 2 and involved interviews with 1,238 Democratic and Democratic-leaning voters. The survey was a tracking poll, in which Gallup interviews voters every night and uses the results from the three most recent evenings.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton attends a fundraiser in Beverly Hills, Calif. Barack Obama has no scheduled campaign events.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain gave a speech in Jacksonville, Fla.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I am continuing to sound the alarm. You know, I feel like, you know, Paulette Revere the recession is coming, the recession is coming!" Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton, when asked about the economy at a news conference.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Sixty-eight percent of men backing Hillary Rodham Clinton are white, compared with 56 percent of men backing rival Barack Obama, according to figures from exit polls of voters in 27 Democratic primaries where both candidates competed. The figures exclude Florida, Michigan and all caucuses.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: April 4, 2008

 

End of Document
