

216 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Wednesday
The Associated Press
April 2, 2008 Wednesday 10:16 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1299 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama, Clinton woo labor vote in Pennsylvania ... McCain compiles list of possible running mates ... Poll: Obama cuts Clinton lead in Pennsylvania ... Dean: Dems committed to seating Florida delegates if Obama and Clinton campaigns can agree ... Judge blocks Clinton deposition over FBI files controversy ... Obama picks up endorsements from Lee Hamilton and Wyoming governor
Obama, Clinton woo unions in Pa.
PHILADELPHIA (AP) Barack Obama told Pennsylvania unions Wednesday that he will fight the type of trade deals struck by the Clinton and Bush administrations, while rival Hillary Rodham Clinton proposed $7 billion in tax breaks for corporations to persuade them to keep jobs in this country.
Both Democrats portrayed themselves as labor's best friend as they campaigned in Pennsylvania, where 830,000 union voters are expected to have a strong say in the state's April 22 primary. At stake are 158 delegates.
At the meeting of the Pennsylvania AFL-CIO, Obama said, "What I oppose and what I will always oppose are trade deals that put the interests of Wall Street ahead of the interests of American workers. That's why I opposed NAFTA."
Obama and Clinton have spent weeks arguing over which one of them did or didn't oppose the North American Free Trade Agreement, a deal with Mexico and Canada that was struck during Bill Clinton's presidency.
In Pittsburgh, Clinton proposed eliminating tax breaks for companies that move jobs to other countries and using the savings to persuade companies to keep jobs in the U.S. Her plan also would offer new tax benefits for research and job development.
Meanwhile, Obama received the backing of a local labor affiliate of one of Clinton's biggest supporters, the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees. The Philadelphia-based local of the National Union of Hospital and Health Care Employees has about 16,000 members.
McCain compiles list of possible veeps
PENSACOLA, Fla. (AP) Sen. John McCain disclosed Wednesday he is in the "embryonic stages" of selecting a vice presidential running mate and hopes to unveil his choice before the Republican National Convention.
"It's every name imaginable" he said of his list-in-the-making, about 20 in all.
He disclosed none of them and declined even to identify the individuals he has approached to supervise the vetting that will inevitably winnow the field.
In expressing his hope to announce his choice before the convention opens in September, McCain added, "I'm aware of enhanced importance of this issue because of my age." He is 71, and if he wins, would be the oldest president elected.
McCain's comments seemed to startle his top aides, who have scripted an elaborate weeklong series of events designed to introduce the Republican to a wider audience of voters and emphasize his military service.
The day's itinerary included stops at the Naval Academy in Annapolis, Md., where McCain graduated in 1958, and Pensacola, Fla., where the one-time Navy aviator he took his flight training.
Poll: Clinton ahead in Pennsylvania
WASHINGTON (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton's lead over Barack Obama has shrunk slightly in the Democratic presidential race in Pennsylvania, according to a Quinnipiac University poll.
Clinton holds a 9-percentage-point edge, down from 12 percentage points in a mid-March poll. With less than three weeks until Pennsylvania's primary, she has 50 percent compared with Obama's 41 percent.
The New York senator is well ahead of Obama among the state's white voters, 59 percent to 34 percent, while Obama gets nearly three of four black votes. She leads among women, while the two are even with men. As usual, the Illinois senator does best with younger voters while Clinton leads among older ones.
Dean: Dems will seat Fla. delegates
WASHINGTON (AP) Democratic National Committee Chairman Howard Dean said Wednesday the party was committed to seating Florida's delegates at this summer's convention as long as any agreement is supported by the party's two presidential contenders.
Dean met with Florida lawmakers to discuss ways of allocating delegates between Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton and prepare for the fall campaign in the battleground state.
The party stripped Florida and Michigan of their delegates to the national convention in Denver in August because they ignored party rules and moved their primaries to January.
"We are committed to making sure that we do everything in our power to seat a delegation from Florida," Dean said. "We believe we will seat a delegation from Florida."
Clinton testimony on FBI files blocked
WASHINGTON (AP) A federal judge has rejected an effort to force Hillary Rodham Clinton to testify in a decade-old lawsuit over White House acquisition of FBI background files.
The court ruling spares Clinton a politically sensitive deposition at a time when she is fighting to overtake Barack Obama in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination.
The lawsuit is over the Clinton White House's acquisition of hundreds of FBI files on Republican appointees to White House jobs in previous administrations. The conservative group Judicial Watch accused the former first lady of masterminding a conspiracy and has been trying to question her for years.
Had Clinton been forced to testify, it would have rekindled the controversy. An independent counsel report in 2000 found no evidence of wrongdoing.
Hamilton endorses Obama
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) Former Indiana Rep. Lee Hamilton backed Sen. Barack Obama on Wednesday, an endorsement that could boost the presidential hopeful's national security standing and his prospects in the state's May 6 primary.
Obama won the support of Wyoming Gov. Dave Freudenthal and former Montana Sen. John Melcher.
As superdelegates to the national convention, they two are among the Democratic Party leaders who will decide the nomination because neither Obama or Hillary Rodham Clinton can win solely with the pledged delegates they've won through primaries and caucuses. Obama handily won Wyoming's March 8 caucus; Montana holds a Democratic primary June 3.
Since last Friday, Obama has cut Clinton's lead among superdelegates by four; she has 250 to his 220.
Hamilton, who is not a superdelegate, was vice chairman of the Sept. 11 commission. During a three-decade House career, he rose to be chairman of the Foreign Affairs and Intelligence committees.
In an interview Hamilton said he viewed Obama as a champion of "the politics of consensus and not of partisan division."
THE NUMBERS
Hillary Rodham Clinton is running about even nationally with Barack Obama in the Democratic presidential race, 49 percent to 46 percent, in the latest Gallup Poll. The survey had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points. The poll was conducted March 30-April 1 and involved interviews with 1,262 Democratic and Democratic-leaning voters. The survey was a tracking poll, in which Gallup interviews voters every night and uses the results from the three most recent evenings.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama campaign in Pennsylvania.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain gives a speech in Maryland before campaigning in Florida.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"You know, I am always game for a little competition. Now, I have to say that I think she has to be heavily favored given my track record in bowling." Democrat Barack Obama, speaking on CBS' "The Early Show" in response to rival Hillary Rodham Clinton's jokingly challenging him to a bowl-off.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Twelve percent of Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton's female supporters are under age 30, as are 18 percent of those supporting rival Barack Obama, according to figures from exit polls of voters in 27 Democratic primaries where both candidates competed. The figures exclude Florida, Michigan and all caucuses.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: April 3, 2008

 

End of Document
