

217 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Tuesday
The Associated Press
April 1, 2008 Tuesday 9:11 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1221 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Pelosi says superdelegates have right to vote their conscience, Democratic race should go on ... Clinton likens herself to legendary film boxer Rocky, says she won't quit ... Obama focuses on McCain, largely ignores Clinton ... Clinton backer says white voters attracted to 'articulate' Obama ... McCain reminisces on campaign trip to high school alma mater
Pelosi says Democratic race should go on
WASHINGTON (AP) House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said the superdelegates who may ultimately determine the Democratic party's presidential nominee have a right to vote as they wish, and that the contest between candidates Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama should be allowed to reach its conclusion.
"These superdelegates have the right to vote their conscience and who they think would be the better president, or who can win, but they also then should get involved in the campaigns and make their power known there," Pelosi said in an interview aired Tuesday on ABC's "Good Morning America."
Pelosi recently drew objections from Clinton backers for saying she shared Obama's view that superdelegates nearly 800 elected officials and party leaders should be guided by the vote for pledged delegates. Obama leads Clinton in pledged delegates earned in primaries and caucuses, but Clinton leads Obama in endorsements from superdelegates. Overall, Obama has 1,632 delegates to Clinton's 1,500, according to the latest Associated Press tally. It takes 2,024 delegates to win the nomination.
Pelosi repeated her view that it would it be harmful to the party if superdelegates were perceived to overturn the will of voters, but made clear she was not suggesting Clinton withdraw from the race.
Clinton likens herself to 'Rocky'
PHILADELPHIA (AP) Perhaps the analogy was inevitable: Hillary Rodham Clinton as Rocky Balboa, the scrappy underdog boxer from Philadelphia memorably depicted in the 1976 Oscar-winning film. Even if Rocky did lose his first big fight.
Addressing a meeting of the Pennsylvania AFL-CIO Tuesday, the former first lady and New York senator said that she, like Rocky, wasn't a quitter.
Recalling a famous scene on the steps of the Philadelphia Museum of Art, Clinton said to end her presidential campaign now would be as if "Rocky Balboa had gotten halfway up those art museum steps and said, 'Well, I guess that's about far enough.'"
"Let me tell you something, when it comes to finishing a fight, Rocky and I have a lot in common. I never quit. I never give up. And neither do the American people," Clinton said.
She promised the labor group that as president, she would create 3 million new jobs through investments in public infrastructure like roads and bridges.
Clinton also warned that Democrats won't have an easy time against Republican nominee-in-waiting John McCain in the general election, and implied that her rival for the nomination, Sen. Barack Obama of Illinois, may not be up to the task.
Obama casts race between him, McCain
WILKES-BARRE, Pa. (AP) Sen. Barack Obama is talking about the elephant in the room Republican rival John McCain and all but ignoring the Democrat who stands between him and his party's presidential nomination.
Even though Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton was campaigning just down the Northeast Extension in Philadelphia, Obama criticized the likely Republican nominee's policies on the U.S. troop presence in Iraq, trade and tax cuts. In his town-hall session Tuesday, and in other campaign appearances in recent days, Obama has sought to frame the race as a general election matchup between him and McCain.
Of course, there's the little matter of a Pennsylvania primary on April 22, and Clinton's double-digit lead in recent state polls.
The extended presidential nomination contest has resulted in an odd political triangle, with each candidate taking alternate turns criticizing one or both of their competitors.
"He's on a biography tour right now," Obama said of McCain. "Most of us know his biography, and it's worthy of our admiration. My argument with John McCain is not with his biography, it's with his policies."
Lawmaker dismisses Obama's attraction
WASHINGTON (AP) A congressman backing Hillary Rodham Clinton says white voters are supporting Barack Obama based on the view that he is articulate and his election would allow the nation "to get this boogeyman called race behind us."
Missouri Rep. Emanuel Cleaver, who is black, told the Canadian Broadcasting Corp. that Obama "is articulate. In the black tradition, he would probably be mediocre."
"For white Americans, it's like, this guy can speak," Cleaver said in the radio interview first aired Sunday. "If you put him on a level with a lot of other African-American public speakers, he may not even measure up."
But Cleaver also conceded in the interview that he thinks Obama will win the White House. "I will be stunned if he's not the next president of the United States."
Cleaver has remained a strong supporter of Clinton despite pressure from other black leaders and many of his constituents to switch allegiance to Obama. He was not immediately available Tuesday to discuss his comments.
McCain focuses on teacher performance
ALEXANDRIA, Va. (AP) Sen. John McCain returned to his high school alma mater on Tuesday to reminisce about a teacher who inspired him and stress his support for weeding out the good from the bad in today's classroom instructors.
"We should reward the best of them with merit pay, and encourage teachers who have lost their focus on the children they teach to find another line of work," he said at Episcopal High School.
"Schools should compete to be innovative, flexible and student-centered institutions, not safe havens for the uninspired and unaccountable."
The stop was the second on McCain's weeklong campaign trip down memory lane, a series of speeches at locations that played an important role in his life. Speaking before an audience comprised largely of students, he fondly recalled William B. Ravenel, head of the English department and coach of the junior varsity football team in the 1950s.
"His influence in my life was more important and more benevolent than that of any person outside my family," the Republican presidential hopeful said.
THE NUMBERS
Barack Obama is slightly ahead of Hillary Rodham Clinton nationally in the Democratic presidential race by 4 points just outside the margin of error 49 percent to 45 percent, in the latest Gallup Poll. The poll was conducted March 29-31 and involved interviews with 1,288 Democratic and Democratic-leaning voters. It had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points. The survey was a tracking poll, in which Gallup interviews voters every night and uses the results from the three most recent evenings.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama campaign in Pennsylvania.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain holds a town-hall style meeting in Virginia.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"It is time for his campaign to get out of the gutter and allow all the pins to be counted. I'm prepared to play this game all the way to the 10th frame." Hillary Rodham Clinton, in challenging her Democratic rival Barack Obama to a bowl-off in an April Fools' Day joke on reporters.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Only 10 percent of Pennsylvanians are age 18-24, a group that Democrat Barack Obama has captured in other states.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: April 2, 2008

 

End of Document
