

218 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Monday
The Associated Press
March 31, 2008 Monday 9:31 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1296 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
McCain highlights military heritage at start of the biographical tour ... Obama wins support of another female senator as jockeying for Pennsylvania intensifies ... Clinton says proposed Fed overhaul "falls short," offers steps to ease market crisis ... Obama wins more Texas delegates than Clinton in county conventions ... Pennsylvania's Democratic Party sees membership rise after updated state figures ... Mich. congressman proposes alternate plan for seating state's delegates
McCain touts military heritage
MERIDIAN, Miss. (AP) Republican Sen. John McCain embarked on a carefully crafted tour to introduce himself to a wider election audience on Monday, but quickly veered off script to express surprise at the Iraqi government's crackdown on Shiite militias.
"It's still a very fluid situation," he told reporters even before his campaign bus had delivered him to his first speech of the day.
He said it could be 48 hours or so before the outcome of several days of fighting in Basra was known.
McCain said Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki had acted without consultations with the United States, adding, "I was surprised because I didn't think he'd do it yet." He added that he had thought the military focus would remain on Mosul before shifting to the port city in the southern part of the country.
McCain's support for the Iraq war is a central tenet of his presidential campaign, but his formal speech mentioned neither the conflict nor even his own candidacy.
Instead, he cast himself as an "imperfect servant of my country," descended from a family of U.S. warriors devoted to honor, courage and duty.
Second female senator endorses Obama
LANCASTER, Pa. (AP) Democrat Barack Obama secured the backing of a second female senator on Monday as a top supporter of rival Hillary Rodham Clinton raised expectations for Obama in the upcoming Pennsylvania primary.
"He's able to dissolve the hard, cynical edge that has dominated our politics under the Bush administration," Klobuchar said Monday on a conference call with reporters.
Klobuchar joins Missouri Sen. Claire McCaskill in backing Obama, who hasn't fared as well with white female voters as Clinton has in the primaries. The two presidential candidates each have the backing of 13 senators, who are superdelegates to the convention.
Klobuchar's decision follows last Friday's endorsement from Pennsylvania Sen. Bob Casey Jr., who has campaigned with Obama on his six-day bus tour of the Keystone State.
Clinton holds a double-digit lead in state polls and Obama is trying to erase or at least cut into her advantage in the April 22 primary. Gov. Ed Rendell, who backs Clinton, said Monday that Obama was probably making up ground.
"We have a very strong lead, but I think that lead is going to shrink," Rendell said on ABC's "Good Morning America."
Clinton criticizes proposed Fed overhaul
HARRISBURG, Pa. (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton said Monday the Bush administration's plan to overhaul regulation of U.S. financial institutions "comes late and falls short."
Clinton said the government must move more assertively to contain the mortgage and credit crisis rattling financial markets, especially by finding ways to ease soaring rates of home foreclosures.
"No amount of rearranging the deck chairs can hide the fact that our housing and credit markets are in crisis, and they're sinking deeper every day," she said at a campaign appearance.
Clinton has focused on the nation's economic woes in appearances in Pennsylvania and other states holding primaries in coming weeks, trying to persuade voters that she is better prepared to tackle economic challenges than rival Barack Obama and Republican nominee-in-waiting John McCain.
Obama wins most Texas delegates
WASHINGTON (AP) Sen. Barack Obama has won the overall delegate race in Texas thanks to a strong showing in Democratic county conventions this past weekend.
Obama picked up seven of nine outstanding delegates, giving him a total of 99 Texas delegates to the party's national convention this summer. Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton won the other two, giving her a total of 94 Texas delegates, according to an analysis of returns by The Associated Press.
Texas Democrats held both a presidential primary and caucus. Clinton narrowly won the popular vote in the state's primary March 4, earning her 65 national convention delegates to Obama's 61.
Precinct caucuses began immediately after polls closed primary night and quickly devolved into chaos in many parts of the state because of an unprecedented turnout of more than 1 million Democrats. The state party was never able to provide complete results from the caucuses, which is why the AP withheld nine delegates.
The AP awarded the remaining delegates from the precinct caucuses based on results from about 280 county and state senate district conventions on Saturday.
Number of Democrats in Pa. expands
HARRISBURG, Pa. (AP) Pennsylvania's Democratic Party continues to build on enrollment gains that have expanded its membership to more than 4 million a record for either party according to updated figures released Monday by state elections officials.
The number of Democrats surged to at least 4,119,213, an increase of more than 235,000 about 6 percent since last fall's election. Republican Party enrollment shrank by 1.5 percent to 3,197,586, while the number of independents slipped by 3 percent to 953,562,
The changes largely reflect efforts by the presidential campaigns of Sens. Barack Obama of Illinois and Hillary Rodham Clinton to enlist voters in the Democratic Party. Only Democrats can vote in the Democratic primary on April 22.
The latest totals reflect ongoing work by county officials to process registration applications that were filed or mailed in by the March 24 deadline. State officials said it is likely to take another week or two to finish the job.
Michigan delegate compromise offered
WASHINGTON (AP) A Michigan congressman proposed an alternate plan Monday for seating the state's delegates at the Democratic National Convention award delegates based partly on Michigan's Jan. 15 primary results and partly on the popular vote in all the nation's presidential primaries.
Rep. Bart Stupak, D-Mich., in a letter to DNC Chairman Howard Dean, proposed that Michigan's 83 pledged delegates be chosen at congressional district conventions according to the results of the state's primary.
The party stripped both Michigan and Florida of their national convention delegates because they moved their primaries to January dates that were earlier than party rules allowed.
Under Stupak's formula, Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, who received 55 percent of the primary vote, would receive 47 delegates. Sen. Barack Obama, who pulled his name from Michigan's ballot, would receive 36 delegates. Many Obama supporters in Michigan voted for "uncommitted," which received 40 percent in the primary.
The remaining 73 delegates would be awarded based on the percentage of the popular vote garnered nationwide by Clinton and Obama after the last Democratic presidential primary is completed.
Stupak endorsed former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards in the primary and has remained neutral since Edwards dropped out of the race in January.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama campaign in Pennsylvania.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain gave a speech in Mississippi.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I think the world will breathe a sigh of relief when this president is gone." Chelsea Clinton, speaking about President Bush while campaigning for her mother Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton in North Carolina.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Pennsylvania has an estimated 3.8 million Catholics, or just over 30 percent of the state's population, and the percentage among Democrats is estimated to be slightly higher.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: April 1, 2008

 

End of Document
