

219 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Sunday
The Associated Press
March 30, 2008 Sunday 7:32 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1106 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Clinton, Obama press for more delegates in complicated Texas process .... Obama bowls for voters badly as his Pennsylvania bus tour rolls ... Paterno: Decision difficult to not greet Clinton during stop
Clinton, Obama press for Texas delegates
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama are scrambling to secure more Texas delegates as the state pushes to settle the outcome of the March 4 caucus.
Obama led Clinton 59 percent to 41 percent in results reported from conventions held across the state before counting stopped for the night Saturday the latest stage of a process that prompted frustration and challenges from supporters of both candidates. Obama showed strength later in the count after his rival built a 60-40 edge in Saturday's initial results.
Results were in from about half of the approximately 280 conventions before the tallying was suspended for the night.
Texas Democrats hold both a presidential primary and caucus. Clinton won the March 4 primary with 51 percent to Obama's 47 percent, earning her 65 national convention delegates to Obama's 61.
The state's caucus began immediately after polls closed primary night and quickly devolved into chaos in many parts of the state after an unprecedented turnout of more than 1 million Democrats. An incomplete and unofficial count by the Texas Democratic Party showed Obama was leading Clinton in caucuses 56 percent to 44 percent on election night.
A total of 67 national convention delegates are ultimately at stake in the Texas caucuses, and party conventions throughout the state Saturday were the latest effort to divvy up the prize. It appeared unlikely the bottom line would be immediately apparent for Obama and Clinton in their drawn-out Texas wrangle.
Because of the huge Democratic turnout in Texas' primary and caucuses, registration took hours Saturday. At large conventions in Houston, Dallas and Austin, arguments erupted and confusion set in as complaints were lodged about the legitimacy of some delegates.
Many of the challenges were brought by Clinton supporters questioning the validity of Obama delegates. The Clinton campaign said it wouldn't lodge any challenges itself but that it was helping supporters who would.
Obama bowls for voters
ALTOONA, Pa. (AP) While Democrats increasingly worry about winning ugly, Barack Obama was losing beautifully at a bowling lane in this central Pennsylvania city.
"My economic plan is better than my bowling," Obama told fellow bowlers Saturday evening at the Pleasant Valley Recreation Center.
"It has to be," a man called out.
Obama dropped by the bowling lanes as part of his new emphasis on low-key, face-to-face campaigning during a six-day bus tour through the state. So for the time being, he is scaling back on the big, raucous rallies that have been his calling card.
The Illinois senator said he wanted to "take time for the retail politics that I enjoy and think helps people know me better. ... We'll probably save the rallies toward the end of the campaign."
Saturday night, it was Obama Bowl-a-Rama.
And it was clear from the start that Obama was way out of his league, certainly any bowling league.
Pennsylvania's April 22 primary is the next contest between Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton in their fight for the Democratic presidential nomination. Pennsylvania is the biggest single delegate prize remaining in the Democratic primaries.
Some Democrats worry the hard-fought, drawn-out race is already hurting the party's chances to win in November and Republicans hope they're right.
"I think it's a good competition, but I think the Democratic party is going to be blown apart," said Mark Irvin, a 49-year-old Republican who was bowling at the same time as Obama.
As Obama laced up his size 13  1/2 two-tone bowling shoes, he let everyone know he hadn't bowled since Jimmy Carter was president.
He shared a lane with Pennsylvania Sen. Bob Casey Jr., who endorsed him Friday, and local homemaker Roxanne Hart. As the game went on, several small children bowled with Obama as well.
Paterno: Hard decision on Clinton stop
STATE COLLEGE, Pa. (AP) Penn State football coach Joe Paterno, a noted Republican, says he thought long and hard before deciding against greeting Bill Clinton when the former president visited campus on behalf of his wife's presidential campaign.
Clinton pitched the Penn State ties of Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton on Thursday during a stop in State College, reminding the mostly youthful audience that her father and brother both played football at Penn State. In fact, brother Hugh Rodham, a 1972 graduate, was a backup quarterback under Paterno.
"I had a little bit of soul search I had to do when President Clinton was here the other day," Paterno said Saturday. He said he felt that perhaps he should welcome Clinton out of respect for his status as a former president.
But in the end, Paterno said, "I didn't want to get into that because of my situation, because I couldn't vote for either one of them because I'm a Republican." He later declined to say whether he was supporting Sen. John McCain, the presumptive GOP nominee.
Hilary Clinton's father grew up in Scranton and is buried there, and the former first lady still has relatives in Pennsylvania. During his visit, Bill Clinton also fondly recalled the "Peachy Paterno" ice cream at the school's creamery during an earlier visit to Happy Valley.
Paterno's son and quarterbacks coach, Jay Paterno, supports Clinton's rival, Sen. Barack Obama, who is scheduled to make a campaign stop at Penn State on Sunday. The younger Paterno said at the opening of Obama's campaign office in State College that his choice was rooted in what's best for his five children.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton has no scheduled campaign events. Barack Obama campaigns in Pennsylvania.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain has no scheduled campaign events.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"We just need to relax and let this happen. Nobody's talking about wrecking the party. Everywhere I go, all these working people say: 'Don't you dare let her drop out. Don't listen to those people in Washington, they don't represent us.'" Bill Clinton , responding for calls for his wife to drop out of the race for the Democratic presidential nomination.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Twenty-six percent of whites supporting Hillary Rodham Clinton have no more than high school diplomas; while 13 percent of whites backing Barack Obama have not gone beyond high school, according to figures from exit polls of voters in 27 Democratic primaries where both candidates competed. The figures exclude Florida, Michigan and all caucuses.
Compiled by Ann Sanner and Jerry Estill.
 Load-Date: March 31, 2008

 

End of Document
