

221 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Friday
The Associated Press
March 28, 2008 Friday 11:14 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1348 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama gains endorsement in key upcoming primary state ... Clinton says she is in race for long run ... McCain launches first television ad of general election hoping to get a jump on Democrats ... Obama suggests pastor realizes his comments were offensive ... Leahy says Clinton should quit ... Poll finds Obama leading Clinton nationally
Pennsylvania senator endorses Obama
PITTSBURGH (AP) Pennsylvania Sen. Bob Casey endorsed Democrat Barack Obama on Friday, a move that could help the presidential candidate make inroads with white working-class voters dubbed "Casey Democrats" in the Keystone State.
Appearing on stage beside the Illinois senator, Casey told a boisterous rally, "I believe in my heart that there is one person who's uniquely qualified to lead us in that new direction and that is Barack Obama."
Pennsylvania's April 22 primary will allocate 158 delegates, the biggest single prize left in the drawn-out nomination battle between Obama and Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York. Clinton is leading Obama in the state, by 12 points in one poll this month.
Casey is a first-term senator and the son of a popular former governor of the state. Casey is Catholic and, like his father, is known for his opposition to abortion and support of gun rights. His support could help Obama make inroads among Catholic voters, who have preferred Clinton to Obama in earlier primaries and strongly favor her in Pennsylvania polls.
Casey said that he called Clinton Thursday night to tell her of his decision. "She was very gracious. We know that she's a great senator, she's a great leader," he said.
Clinton: In the race for the long run
HAMMOND, Ind. (AP) If Hillary Rodham Clinton is feeling heat from pundits and party elders to quit the race and back Barack Obama, you'd never know it from her crowds, energy level and upbeat demeanor on the campaign trail.
"There are millions of reasons to continue this race: people in Pennsylvania, Indiana and North Carolina, and all of the contests yet to come," Clinton told reporters Friday. "This is a very close race and clearly I believe strongly that everyone should have their voices heard and their votes counted."
The former first lady weathered a two-pronged blow Friday, with influential Pennsylvania Sen. Bob Casey Jr. endorsing Obama and another Senate colleague, Vermont Democrat Patrick Leahy, urging her to step aside. But to hear Clinton tell it, it was just another day in an epic primary battle whose result is still not known.
"I believe a spirited contest is good for the Democratic Party and will strengthen the eventual nominee," she said. "We will have a united party behind whomever that nominee is. ... I look forward to campaigning over the next several months."
Traveling across Indiana, the former first lady was greeted by large, enthusiastic audiences who roared their approval at her proposals to help fix the state's economic challenges.
McCain launches general election ad
DENVER (AP) Republican John McCain launched his first television ad of the general election Friday, portraying himself as a courageous leader with the knowledge and experience to keep the country safe as a wartime commander in chief.
"The American president Americans have been waiting for," the ad says, juxtaposing footage of the Arizona senator campaigning with clips of himself imprisoned in Vietnam three decades ago.
Images of him then and now are superimposed with newspaper headlines that call him a hero who embodies American values, has a vision for the future and is ready now to serve from day one.
The ad campaign is part of a broader push by the Republican Party's presidential pick to introduce himself to voters on his terms.
For now, the 60-second ad will air only in New Mexico a signal that McCain plans to compete in that swing state come the fall in what aides call a strong statewide buy. In the meantime, aides anticipate that portions of the commercial will run on cable and broadcast news programs nationally in the coming days, assuring him of broader coverage.
Obama suggests pastor is contrite
WASHINGTON (AP) Democrat Barack Obama seemed to suggest in an interview aired Friday that his former pastor has acknowledged that his controversial remarks were inappropriate and hurtful, although there are no public accounts of the Rev. Jeremiah Wright having done so.
"Had the reverend not retired and had he not acknowledged that what he had said had deeply offended people and were inappropriate and mischaracterized what I believe is the greatness of this country, for all its flaws, then I wouldn't have felt comfortable staying there at the church," Obama said on ABC's "The View."
Obama spokesman Bill Burton said the senator's remarks did not imply that Wright has expressed misgivings about his statements.
"Sen. Obama was clearly saying that were Rev. Wright not retiring, he would need to be assured that the reverend understood why what he had said had deeply offended people and mischaracterized the greatness of this country," Burton said.
Wright has not spoken publicly since the campaign controversy flared up. He canceled plans this week to speak in Florida and Texas.
Obama has said the two have spoken since the Illinois senator gave a speech on the controversy last week in Philadelphia.
Leahy says Clinton should withdraw
BURLINGTON, Vt. (AP) Sen. Patrick Leahy is suggesting that Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton abandon her White House run.
The chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee and six-term Vermont lawmaker said there is no way that Clinton is going to win enough pledged delegates to get the nomination. Leahy told Vermont Public Radio, in a show that aired Thursday, that Clinton ought to withdraw and should be backing Sen. Barack Obama. But Leahy said that's obviously a decision only Clinton can make.
In a statement issued Friday, Leahy who has endorsed Obama for the Democratic presidential nomination said Obama's lead appears to be insurmountable and that Obama's endorsement by U.S. Sen. Bob Casey is the latest sign of how the race is going.
"Sen. Clinton has every right, but not a very good reason, to remain a candidate for as long as she wants to," Leahy said in the statement. "As far as the delegate count and the interests of a Democratic victory in November go, there is not a very good reason for drawing this out."
Poll: Obama leads Clinton nationally
WASHINGTON (AP) Sen. Barack Obama is ahead of Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton in the Democratic presidential contest, according to a Gallup Poll released Friday. Obama leads nationally with 50 percent to the New York senator's 42 percent.
Obama's 8-percentage-point lead in this Gallup Poll is the Illinois senator's first statistically significant lead in surveys by this organization since the controversy arose over sermons by the candidate's former pastor, the Rev. Jeremiah Wright. It ties Obama's largest lead in this survey since Gallup began nightly polling in early January.
The Gallup Poll was conducted March 25-27 and involved telephone interviews with 1,218 Democratic and Democratic-leaning voters. It had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points. The survey was a tracking poll, in which Gallup interviews voters every night and uses the results from the three most recent evenings.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton holds events on the economy in Indiana. Barack Obama campaigns in Pennsylvania.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain attends a fundraising luncheon in Las Vegas.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I believe in this guy like I've never believed in a candidate in my life, except my father." Sen. Bob Casey Jr., the son of a popular late governor, speaking to the press after endorsing Democrat Barack Obama.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Twenty-eight percent of whites supporting Democrat Barack Obama earn under $50,000 a year, compared to 37 percent of those supporting his rival Hillary Rodham Clinton, according to figures from exit polls of voters in 27 Democratic primaries where both candidates competed. The figures exclude Florida, Michigan and all caucuses.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 29, 2008

 

End of Document
