

224 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Tuesday
The Associated Press
March 26, 2008 Wednesday 2:22 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1257 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Clinton says account of hostile fire in Bosnia was a mistake ... Obama gives $240,000 to charity last year ... McCain leaves housing crisis options on table, puts limits on government assistance ... Clinton says she would have split with Obama's pastor ... Nancy Reagan endorses McCain ... Party squabbles parallel '84 for Democratic convention's lady of the House ...
Clinton calls Bosnia account a mistake
GREENSBURG, Pa. (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton said Tuesday she made a mistake in claiming that she came under hostile fire in Bosnia 12 years ago, as rival Barack Obama's campaign continued to challenge her credibility.
In a recent speech and interviews, the New York senator described a harrowing scene in Tuzla, Bosnia, in which she and her daughter, Chelsea, had to run for cover as soon as they landed in 1996. But video footage of the day showed a peaceful reception in which a young girl greeted her on the tarmac.
Clinton told reporters in Pennsylvania on Tuesday that she erred in describing the scene, which she now realizes after talking with aides and others.
"So I made a mistake," she said. "That happens. It proves I'm human, which you know, for some people, is a revelation."
The more important issue, she said, is whether she would be a better commander in chief than Obama or Republican presidential candidate John McCain. Clinton and Obama are competing for votes in Pennsylvania's April 22 primary.
Clinton's aides had tried to control the Bosnia flap Monday, saying the New York senator "misspoke."
But Clinton had to address the issue herself Tuesday, after repeated airings of the 1996 video clips caused critics to ridicule her.
Obama gives $240,000 to charity
WASHINGTON (AP) Democrat Barack Obama gave nearly a quarter of a million dollars to charity last year as he entered the presidential race, significantly more than during the nine previous years combined.
The Illinois senator has yet to release his 2007 tax return. His campaign said Tuesday that it will be made public by Tax Day, April 15, while at the same time disclosing that he gave $240,000 to charity last year.
Obama donated $150,892 to charity from 1998-2006.
Obama posted his 2000 to 2006 returns on his campaign Web site Tuesday to pressure rival Hillary Rodham Clinton to do the same. His campaign repeatedly has criticized Clinton for failing to release tax returns for the years since she and her husband left the White House in 2001.
Clinton, campaigning in Pennsylvania, said she hoped to release the returns "within the next week."
The returns Obama posted online already had been provided to The Associated Press, along with returns from 1998 and 1999.
The Obamas' income increased dramatically in the past decade.
Obama and his wife, Michelle, earned $181,507 to $272,759 each year from 1998-2004.
Their income jumped to $1.6 million in 2005, Obama's first year in the Senate, with the rerelease of his first book, "Dreams from My Father." They made nearly $1 million in 2006, half of it from his second book, "The Audacity of Hope."
McCain leaves housing crisis options on table
SANTA ANA, Calif. (AP) Republican John McCain said Tuesday the government isn't in the business of saving and rewarding banks or small borrowers who behave irresponsibly though he offered few immediate alternatives for fixing the growing housing crisis.
"I will consider any and all proposals based on their cost and benefits," the certain GOP presidential nominee, who has acknowledged the economy is not his strongest subject, told local business leaders south of Los Angeles.
Democrats accused him of lacking the skills needed to lead a country on the brink of recession.
"Instead of offering a concrete plan to address the crisis at all levels, McCain promised to take the same hands-off approach that President Bush used to lead us into this crisis," Democratic Party Chairman Howard Dean said in a statement.
The housing turmoil has rocked Wall Street and is dominating the presidential race as the nation faces an economic downturn. The Federal Reserve has intervened, including essentially bailing out the investment house Bear Stearns. The Fed also has provided billions in short-term loans to banks to help with their problems.
McCain, in the midst of a weeklong Western fundraising swing, focused on the home-financing crisis at an event in the Republican bastion of Orange County as he tried to rebut Democratic criticism of his economic credentials.
Clinton would have left Obama's church
GREENSBURG, Pa. (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton said Tuesday she would have parted company with a minister who talked about America the way Barack Obama's pastor has.
Clinton's comments marked a clear shift in her handling of the Obama church controversy, which she had generally avoided until now. Some Democrats see Obama's refusal to dissociate himself from the Chicago church and its recently retired minister, Jeremiah Wright, as his stickiest campaign challenge so far.
"I think that given all we have heard and seen, he would not have been my pastor," Clinton said at a news conference, after being asked if Obama should have left the church. She declined to say what Obama should have done.
Over the years, Wright has preached fiery sermons to his predominantly black congregation in which he shouted "God damn America" for its treatment of minorities. He has said the U.S. government invented AIDS to destroy "people of color." He also suggested that U.S. policies in the Middle East and elsewhere were partly responsible for the 2001 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington.
Videos of the remarks have circulated widely on the Internet and news programs.
In a highly publicized speech last week, Obama sharply condemned Wright's remarks. But the Illinois senator refused to repudiate his longtime spiritual mentor, saying he could no more disown Wright than he could disown his white grandmother.
Nancy Reagan endorses McCain
SANTA ANA, Calif. (AP) Former first lady Nancy Reagan endorsed John McCain for president Tuesday, as the Arizona senator continued to collect backing from leading Republicans who might help him win over critical conservative voters.
Now certain to win the GOP nomination, McCain is on the West coast this week to raise money. He stopped by the Southern California home of President Reagan's widow to accept the endorsement.
"I'm very pleased and honored to have the opportunity again to be with Mrs. Reagan and to receive her endorsement for the nomination of my party and for president of the United States," McCain said in a five-minute appearance with the former first lady in the driveway of her gated home. "President Reagan and Mrs. Reagan remain an inspiration to all of us, as an example of honorable and courageous service to the nation."
In turn, she said only, "Ronnie and I always waited until everything was decided and then we endorsed. Well, obviously, this is the nominee of the party."
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton campaigned in Pennsylvania. Barack Obama wrapped up a Caribbean vacation.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain campaigned in California.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"So I made a mistake. That happens. It proves I'm human, which you know, for some people, is a revelation." Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton, commenting on her recent remarks about a trip she took as first lady to Bosnia in 1996.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Fifteen percent of Pennsylvanians are senior citizens, a larger percentage than all but two other states. This group has been among Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton's most reliable supporters.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 26, 2008

 

End of Document
