

226 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Sunday
The Associated Press
March 23, 2008 Sunday 7:05 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 736 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama campaign says Bill Clinton should know better than to attack patriotism ... Clinton as senator: Small steps, home-state cheerleading and unexpected comity with the GOP
Obama adviser faults Bill Clinton speech
MEDFORD, Ore. (AP) Former President Clinton is using divisive tactics and unfairly trying to question Barack Obama's patriotism, a retired general who has a prominent role in the Democrat's campaign said Saturday.
Merrill "Tony" McPeak said he was astonished and disappointed by recent comments Bill Clinton made while speculating about a general election between Obama's Democratic rival, Hillary Rodham Clinton, and Republican John McCain.
Standing next to Obama on stage at a campaign stop in southern Oregon, the retired Air Force chief of staff repeated Bill Clinton's comments aloud to a silent audience.
The former president told a group of veterans Friday in Charlotte, N.C.: "I think it would be a great thing if we had an election year where you had two people who loved this country and were devoted to the interest of this country. And people could actually ask themselves who is right on these issues, instead of all this other stuff that always seems to intrude itself on our politics."
McPeak, a co-chairman of Obama's campaign, then said to his Oregon audience: "As one who for 37 years proudly wore the uniform of our country, I'm saddened to see a president employ these tactics. He of all people should know better because he was the target of exactly the same kind of tactics."
That apparently was a reference to Bill Clinton's 1992 presidential campaign, when he was accused of dodging the Vietnam War draft.
Howard Wolfson, a spokesman for Hillary Clinton's campaign, said Saturday that McPeak's comments were a "deliberately pathetic misreading of what the president said." Wolfson said the remarks had nothing to do with Obama and were merely meant to underscore the need to keep the presidential race focused on issues.
Clinton got along with GOP in Senate
WASHINGTON (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton arrived in the Senate before she had even surrendered the title of first lady.
An anything-but-typical freshman, she surprised skeptics with how well she fit in to a chamber where reputations are usually built over decades.
She didn't big-foot colleagues. A junior senator in the minority party, she put her head down and went to work.
She sought out the longest-serving senator in history, West Virginia's Robert Byrd, to receive a tutorial on the art of legislating, even though he had been an outspoken critic of her husband during the impeachment debate.
She waited her turn to speak, and when she did talk, it was clear she had done her homework.
By most accounts she was seen as a serious legislator who tended to her state's interests. She was re-elected in 2006 in a cakewalk.
But there is no blockbuster legislation with her name on it. No soaring oratory still rings in the ears.
Some campaign promises went unfulfilled, notably her promise to create 200,000 jobs in upstate New York.
Her vote to authorize the Iraq war and other moves toward the center caused liberals to grouse that she had betrayed her roots.
And the skills that make for a successful junior senator are not necessarily those that shout presidential leadership.
Citing the "cumbersome" rules under which the Senate operates, Clinton told an Associated Press reporter last year, "I'm somebody who just gets up every day and tries to push that decision a little bit further every day."
For all her hard work, she brought baggage to the Senate that could not be shed.
Clinton points to her role in putting together $20 billion in aid for New York after the Sept. 11 attacks as one of her greatest Senate achievements.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton is in Chappaqua, N.Y. Barack Obama is in Chicago.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain is overseas on a congressional trip.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"She surprised people. There was a lot of skepticism among many of her colleagues about the degree to which she would be a team player. ... She was sensitive to that concern and tried to address it." Former Senate Democratic leader Tom Daschle on Hillary Rodham Clinton's early days in the Senate.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Theodore Roosevelt campaigned in 12 of the 13 Republican presidential primaries in 1912. He won 9, but William Howard Taft was picked at the convention to be the party's nominee.
Compiled by Ann Sanner and Jerry Estill.
 Load-Date: March 24, 2008

 

End of Document
