

229 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Thursday
The Associated Press
March 20, 2008 Thursday 8:50 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1191 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama campaign says splitting Michigan delegates with Clinton would be fair ... McCain visits London, hails bravery of UK troops in Iraq ... Obama ties economic woes to Iraq war during campaign stop in W. Va. ... Clinton counting heavily on Bayh in Indiana ... McCain campaign suspends aide for circulating video of Obama, pastor ... Group gets permission to question National Archives over Clinton's phone logs
Michigan delegate split debated
WASHINGTON (AP) The drive for a second Michigan presidential primary collapsed Thursday, and a fresh dispute broke out between Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton over the fate of the state's 128 national convention delegates.
Obama's campaign said a fair resolution would be to split them evenly with Clinton. Aides to the former first lady instantly rejected the idea and said they would consider a mail-in primary even though Obama has raised concerns about the security of a vote by mail organized so quickly.
Obama leads the overall competition for convention delegates, and Clinton has been leading the effort to hold a revote in Michigan, eager for a chance to close the gap on her rival.
The state held a primary in January, so early in the year that it violated party rules. As a result, it was stripped of its delegates. Obama and several other Democratic candidates removed their name from the Michigan ballot and all Democratic candidates agreed not to campaign there.
Michigan Democratic leaders had proposed a do-over primary, to be conducted by the state on June 3 with funding by private donors. But lawmakers showed a lack of enthusiasm for a bill authorizing the vote, and state Senate adjourned Thursday without taking it up.
McCain lauds UK troops in Iraq
LONDON (AP) John McCain on Thursday hailed the bravery of British and U.S. soldiers yet refrained from calling publicly for Britain to slow the pace of its troop withdrawal from southern Iraq.
McCain discussed Iraq with British Prime Minister Gordon Brown in their first-ever meeting a 45-minute discussion in London that also touched on the economy and climate change, McCain said.
McCain's political fortunes are linked to the war he strongly backs. McCain, the Republican presidential nominee-in-waiting, said Iraq would likely be the defining issue of the election.
Brown has said he hopes to cut British forces, based near the southern city of Basra, from 4,000 to about 2,500 in coming months.
McCain said this week, however, that pulling out of Iraq quickly would be a mistake that would boost Iran and al-Qaida.
The visit to London was part of McCain's weeklong tour of Middle East and Europe. He also had a $1,000 per person fundraising lunch in the city.
Obama ties economic woes to Iraq war
CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) Barack Obama blamed the Iraq war for higher oil prices and skyrocketing debt Thursday as he sought to tie the unpopular war to the slumping economy in working-class West Virginia.
The Democratic hopeful is trying to cut into Hillary Clinton's base in West Virginia. The state's demographics appear to favor Clinton, whose support is strongest among older white voters and blue-collar workers.
"When you're spending over $50 to fill up your car because the price of oil is four times what it was before Iraq, you're paying a price for this war," Obama said. "When Iraq is costing each household about $100 a month, you're paying a price for this war."
By linking the economy to the war, Obama is playing to his perceived strength as someone who spoke out against the war as a state lawmaker in Illinois. He has criticized Clinton for only recently opposing the war and said Thursday that her criticism of Republican John McCain's war policies lacks teeth.
In Indiana, Clinton leans on Evan Bayh
TERRE HAUTE, Ind. (AP) At times Thursday it was hard to tell who was running for president in Indiana Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton or the man who never left her side, Sen. Evan Bayh, a popular politician and perhaps the former first lady's best hope for winning the state's May 6 primary.
The moderator of her round-table with a half dozen workers in a Terre Haute cafe? Bayh.
The man who introduced her to the crowd outdoors, handled two questions during her brief news conference, and talked up her candidacy at every opportunity? Bayh, the former governor, current senator and Terre Haute native whom Hoosier voters never seem to tire of.
Surrogates have proven especially vital to Clinton in her bid to stop Barack Obama's momentum in late-voting industrial states.
Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland helped Clinton win his state this month, and Pennsylvania Gov. Ed Rendell's all-out support is helping her stay ahead in polls there, where Democrats will vote April 22.
McCain aide suspended for relaying video
WASHINGTON (AP) Republican John McCain's campaign suspended a staffer who sent out a provocative video linking Democratic presidential contender Barack Obama to the comments of his spiritual mentor, the Rev. Jeremiah Wright.
The staffer, a low-level aide named Soren Dayton, sent out a link Thursday to the YouTube video, titled "Is Obama Wright?" on the social messaging Web site Twitter.
The campaign suspended him a few hours later, although it wouldn't say for how long.
"We have been very clear on the type of campaign we intend to run and this staffer acted in violation of our policy," campaign spokeswoman Jill Hazelbaker said. "He has been reprimanded by campaign leadership and suspended from the campaign."
The video mixes Wright's most incendiary remarks with snippets from Obama speeches and interviews, which are edited to make the senator seem to be sputtering and unpatriotic. The Politico, a Washington-based newspaper, reported that the two-minute video was the work of Lee Habeeb, a former producer of the Laura Ingraham Show, a conservative talk program.
Judge allows questioning in Clinton suit
WASHINGTON (AP) A federal judge on Thursday forced the National Archives to undergo questioning by a conservative group seeking the release of Hillary Rodham Clinton's telephone logs during her years as first lady.
The telephone logs cover 20,000 pages.
In an unusual move, U.S. District Judge James Robertson authorized a lawyer for the group Judicial Watch to explore in coming weeks why the archives processes some requests before others.
The archives will have to produce at least one witness to answer Judicial Watch's questions.
The Clinton presidential library has hundreds of pending requests for the release of records. On Wednesday, the archives disseminated more than 11,000 pages of Mrs. Clinton's daily calendars from her White House years.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton campaigns in Indiana. Barack Obama stops in West Virginia.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain is overseas on a congressional trip.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"He's a man who's worked for everything he's achieved. That's something I can't say." West Virginia Sen. Jay Rockefeller, joking as he introduced Barack Obama at the University of Charleston.
STAT OF THE DAY:
There were 12 Democratic primaries and 13 Republican primaries in 1912, the first election year where more than a handful of states held primaries.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 21, 2008

 

End of Document
