

230 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Wednesday
The Associated Press
March 19, 2008 Wednesday 9:15 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1173 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Schedules show Hillary Clinton was home on the day when husband had sex with intern Lewinsky ... Obama says he, not Clinton, can be trusted to end the war ... Clinton challenges Obama to back new primaries in Michigan, Florida ... McCain backs Israeli reprisals in Gaza, saying government must defend its people
First lady Clinton and the intern crisis
WASHINGTON (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton was home in the White House the day her husband had an infamous sexual encounter just outside the Oval Office with intern Monica Lewinsky, according to Sen. Clinton's schedule, released Wednesday among 11,000 pages of papers from her years as first lady.
The words of the schedules are dry, but they take on emotional weight when coupled with revelations about the sex scandal that eventually came to light. A year later, the first lady's schedules show her pressing ahead with public events and showing her face as the scandal upended her life and threatened Bill Clinton's presidency.
The papers also shed light on her struggle for health care reform early in the Clinton administration, her scaling back when that effort failed, her travels abroad and the legal woes that dogged the Clintons in the White House.
It's unlikely she would be surprised at this late date to learn that the president was cheating on her while she was at home in the White House. But the release of the documents reminds voters anew about Bill Clinton's affair and the impeachment proceedings that brought Washington to a halt for a year.
The National Archives in Washington and former President Clinton's presidential library in Arkansas jointly released the first lady's schedules after months of pressure from critics who say the Clintons were delaying the disclosure. The issue has dogged Clinton in her bid for the White House.
In all, 11,046 pages have been made available. Nearly 4,800 pages have parts blacked out. Archivists said that's to protect the privacy of third parties. Schedules for more than 30 days of activities were not included in this release.
Obama: Trust me to end the war
FAYETTEVILLE, N.C. (AP) Barack Obama suggested Wednesday that Hillary Rodham Clinton could not be trusted to end the Iraq war because she only started opposing it when she began her bid for president.
In a speech not far from North Carolina's Fort Bragg military base, the Democratic presidential hopeful told military families and local officials that the war has emboldened al-Qaida, the Taliban, Iran and North Korea.
"Ask yourself," Obama told the crowd, "Who do you trust to end a war: someone who opposed the war from the beginning, or someone who started opposing it when they started preparing a run for president?"
Obama used the five-year anniversary of the Iraq invasion to again cast himself as the only true anti-war candidate, one who openly opposed the invasion as a state lawmaker. He renewed criticism of Clinton for voting to authorize the use of force against Iraq.
Clinton campaign spokesman Phil Singer responded: "The reality is that Senator Obama took practically no action to end the war until he started his White House run while Senator Clinton has been a consistent critic of Iraq for many years."
Obama also teased likely Republican nominee John McCain for a foreign policy gaffe Tuesday in which McCain, touring the Middle East, said several times that Iran was training al-Qaida in Iraq. Iran is a predominantly Shiite Muslim country and has been at pains to close its borders to al-Qaida fighters of the rival Sunni sect. After another senator on the trip, Joe Lieberman, I-Conn., whispered into his ear, McCain finally corrected himself to say Iran was training Shiite militants.
"Maybe that is why he voted to go to war with a country that had no al-Qaida ties," Obama said to laughter and applause.
Clinton calls on Obama to back primaries
DETROIT (AP) Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton bluntly challenged rival Barack Obama to agree to new primaries in Michigan and Florida on Wednesday and said it was "wrong, and frankly un-American" not to have the two delegations seated at the Democratic National Convention.
"Senator Obama speaks passionately on the campaign trail about empowering the American people," said the former first lady, who trails her rival in delegates won to date. "Today I am asking him to match those words with actions."
Obama has yet to declare his support or opposition, although his campaign has raised a number of procedural and legal questions about the most recent proposal for an early June primary in Michigan.
"The proposal offers a rerun for the state but not for all the voters," Bob Bauer, Obama's election lawyer, wrote in a memo during the day. He warned of the possibility of numerous legal challenges and embarrassment to the party.
Florida and Michigan both held primaries in January on a schedule that violated Democratic Party rules, and have been stripped of their convention delegates as a result.
McCain backs Israeli reprisals in Gaza
SDEROT, Israel (AP) Touring a war-battered town, Sen. John McCain said Wednesday he understands Israel's tough response to Palestinian rocket fire, adding that there is no point in negotiating with the Gaza Strip's Islamic Hamas regime.
The Republican presidential nominee-in-waiting also praised the moderate Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, saying he is committed to reaching a peace deal with Israel though McCain is not meeting Palestinians this time.
McCain's visit to Israel is part of a weeklong trip through the Middle East and Europe. After a day of meetings with Israeli leaders, he visited Sderot, the southern Israeli border town that has been the target of thousands of crude Palestinian rockets in recent years.
"That is not a way for people to live," McCain said. "No nation in the world can be attacked incessantly and have its population killed and intimidated without responding. That's one of the first obligations of government, to provide security for its citizens." Israel has been widely criticized for military operations aimed at stopping the rocket attacks, as well as its blockade of Gaza.
While billed as routine congressional business, the visit appeared to be aimed at burnishing McCain's leadership credentials and courting Jewish voters for next fall's election. Jews make up large voting blocs in several key swing states, including Florida and Michigan, and could help influence the outcome of the election.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton meets with veterans and supporters in West Virginia and campaigns in Detroit. Barack Obama delivered a speech on Iraq and holds a town-hall style meeting in North Carolina.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain is in Israel on a congressional trip.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"We have a security gap when candidates say they will follow Osama bin Laden to the gates of hell, but refuse to follow him where he actually goes." Democrat Barack Obama, referring to Republican John McCain's vow to chase down bin Laden.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Florida enacted the first presidential primary law in 1901.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 20, 2008

 

End of Document
