

234 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Saturday
The Associated Press
March 15, 2008 Saturday 7:08 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 828 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama denounces pastor's inflammatory remarks against the United States ... McCain fears terrorists in Iraq may try to influence election ... Obama acknowledges indicted businessman helped raise up to $250,000 for his campaigns
Obama denounces pastor's comments
WASHINGTON (AP) Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama on Friday denounced inflammatory remarks from his pastor, who has railed against the United States and accused the country of bringing on the Sept. 11 attacks by spreading terrorism.
Obama called the statements appearing on television and the Internet "completely unacceptable and inexcusable" in a Fox News interview and said they didn't reflect the kinds of sermons he had heard from the Rev. Jeremiah Wright while attending services at Chicago's Trinity United Church of Christ.
Obama, a member of the church since the early 1990s, said he would have quit Trinity had such statements been "the repeated tenor of the church. ... I wouldn't feel comfortable there."
Earlier Friday, Obama responded by posting a blog about his relationship with Wright and Trinity on the Huffington Post. Wright brought Obama to Christianity, officiated at his wedding, baptized his daughters and inspired the title of his book, "The Audacity of Hope."
Obama wrote that he's looked to Wright for spiritual advice, not political guidance, and he's been pained and angered to learn of some of his pastor's comments for which he had not been present. Obama told MSNBC that Wright had stepped down from his campaign's African American Religious Leadership Committee.
"I categorically denounce any statement that disparages our great country or serves to divide us from our allies," Obama said in his blog posting.
McCain fears stepped up attacks in Iraq
SPRINGFIELD, Pa. (AP) Republican John McCain said he worries that terrorists might try to influence the November general election with increased attacks in Iraq.
"Yes, I worry about it," he said Friday, responding to a question at a town hall-style forum. "And I know they pay attention, because of the intercepts we have of their communications."
The questioner asked if McCain feared al-Qaida in Iraq or another group might attack in an effort to aid the Democratic nominee, because Democratic Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama both favor a withdrawal of U.S. forces.
McCain told reporters later that al-Qaida remains smart and adaptable despite an increase of U.S. troops in Iraq.
"We have had great success with the surge, but to think they're not capable of orchestrating really strong attacks ... I think is an underestimation of the enemy," McCain said.
"We still have the most lethal explosive devices coming across the border from Iran into Iraq," he said. "We still have suicide bombers landing at the airport in Damascus and coming into Iraq as we speak.
"So I would not be surprised if they make an attempt. I believe that we can counter most of it, as we are countering. But there will still be spikes and difficulties and challenges associated with this conflict. Otherwise, I'd be advocating that they come home," he said.
McCain plans to visit Iraq this weekend on a weeklong overseas trip that includes Israel, Britain and France.
Obama: Rezko raised up to $250K
CHICAGO (AP) Presidential candidate Barack Obama said Friday that he got more political money from indicted Chicago businessman Antoin "Tony" Rezko than he has previously acknowledged.
Rezko helped raise up to $250,000 for his various political races, Obama's campaign said. The campaign had previously put the figure at $150,000 but now says that amount was only for his 2004 Senate race.
And in interviews with two Chicago newspapers, the Democrat again said it was a mistake to involve Rezko in his purchase of a new home not just because Rezko was under federal investigation but because he was a contributor and political activist.
Still, Obama said he did nothing unethical.
"He never once asked me for any favors, or ever did any favors for me," the Illinois senator said in an interview with the Chicago Sun-Times. "He never gave me any gifts or gave me any indication he was setting me up to ask for any favors in the future."
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton participates in St. Patrick's Day events in Pennsylvania. Barack Obama holds a town hall meeting in Indiana.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain leaves for an overseas congressional trip.
QUOTE OF THE DAY: "I've made it abundantly clear that I would much rather lose a campaign than a war." John McCain on the effect his unwavering support for the Iraq war might have on his candidacy.
STAT OF THE DAY:
John McCain, the GOP's likely presidential nominee, easily carried loyal Republicans, conservatives and white, born-again and evangelical Christians, according to an exit poll of Mississippi voters. But nearly one in five said they were dissatisfied with him as the nominee, while four in 10 said he is not conservative enough.
Compiled by Ann Sanner and Ronald Powers.
 Load-Date: March 16, 2008

 

End of Document
