

235 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Friday
The Associated Press
March 14, 2008 Friday 9:58 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1120 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Michigan Democrats work on plans for a June 3 statewide presidential primary ... Clinton and Obama agree to disagree with trash-talking supporters ... Republican presidential hopeful McCain takes Amtrak, flies commercial to cast votes ... Clinton calls for investigation of rising oil prices.
June 3 is target for Michigan do-over
WASHINGTON (AP) Michigan Democrats agreed Friday to push a do-over primary in early June to give them a say in the close presidential race between Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama.
Amid talks with the two campaigns, the four Michigan Democrats said in a statement they were "focusing on the possibility of a state-run primary in early June which would not use any state funding." Rep. Carolyn Cheeks Kilpatrick, one of the Democratic participants, said a likely date is June 3.
"This option would require the passage of legislation by the state legislature, and we look forward to working with the members of the legislature in the coming days to see if this option can be made a reality," the Democrats said.
Other Michigan Democrats working on the plan were Democratic National Committee member Debbie Dingell, Sen. Carl Levin and United Auto Workers President Ron Gettelfinger.
To go forward, any plan would require the approval of the two campaigns, the Democratic National Committee, state party leaders and Gov. Jennifer Granholm, who is backing Clinton.
Clinton won a primary the state held in January, but Obama's name wasn't on the ballot. He had it removed because the primary was held too early to comply with national party rules, meaning no delegates were at stake.
Florida Democrats said they will make a decision by Monday on whether to hold a dual mail-in and in-person re-vote. But the plan floated this week faces opposition from the state's Democratic congressional delegation, and Obama has also expressed concerns about security and accuracy of a mail-in vote organized so quickly. Democratic National Committee rules require the vote to be scheduled by June 10.
Democratic rivals agree to play nicer
WASHINGTON (AP) On this presidential rivals Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton can agree: They sometimes disagree with their trash-talking supporters and will try to cool it.
Advisers to the Democratic candidates shed some light Friday on the private chat the two candidates had Thursday on the Senate floor. The talk lasted three or four minutes in full view of reporters watching on the balcony above who could see them talking, but not hear what they said.
"They approached one another and spoke about how supporters for both campaigns have said things they reject," said Clinton spokesman Phil Singer. "They agreed that the contrasts between their respective records, qualifications and issues should be what drives this campaign, and nothing else."
An Obama adviser, speaking on a condition of anonymity about the private conversation, gave a similar account, while stressing that it was Obama who approached Clinton on the subject. They committed to making sure that their supporters don't get overheated in the future, the adviser said.
With Clinton and Obama in such a close race for the nomination, the campaign has grown increasingly acrimonious. Surrogates and aides to the candidates have stirred racial and gender divisions that Democrats fear will leave the eventual nominee badly damaged and battered heading into the general election.
Clinton calls for probe of rising oil prices
PITTSBURGH (AP) Democratic Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton on Friday called for a federal investigation into the rising price of oil but stopped short of advocating federal price controls.
The candidate also outlined several steps she would take as president to address the cost of energy and said rival Barack Obama would be no better than Republican John McCain when it came to achieving U.S. energy independence.
"When you look past the words and actually examine their deeds, both Senator Obama and Senator McCain have sided with Dick Cheney and with big oil," Clinton said at a news conference inside a family run gas station here.
The former first lady has repeatedly criticized Obama for voting for an energy bill in 2005 that reflected some of the vice president's priorities, including benefits for the nuclear power and coal industries.
Clinton said the government should undertake a vigorous investigation into the recent hike in oil prices, saying the public had no clue why the price of oil had risen as high as $107 a barrel in recent weeks.
"What's going on deserves further scrutiny. A lot of it doesn't make sense to me," Clinton said. "It's very opaque. I just don't believe we have adequate information to make a judgment."
The New York senator said the government should stop putting oil into the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, noting it is about 97 percent full and that it was irresponsible for the government to buy oil at such an elevated price. She said as president she would consider releasing some of the oil in the Reserve to help drive down the price.
McCain travels Amtrak like everyone else
SPRINGFIELD, Pa. (AP) John McCain traveled like a man of the people Friday morning, riding an Amtrak train to Philadelphia after a late night of voting in Washington.
"Nice to see you, nice to see you," McCain said to workers and passengers who greeted him on the 8 a.m. high-speed Acela Express train.
McCain, accompanied by a campaign aide, was left alone by the public as he sat in the first-class car for much of the 1 1/2 hour trip.
He drank coffee and read several newspapers The Washington Post, The New York Times, Wall Street Journal and USA Today. And he talked on his cell phone with a campaign adviser for several minutes.
The night before, the Arizona senator had flown from Philadelphia to the nation's capital for votes on the federal budget.
As Republican presidential nominee-in-waiting, McCain had a campaign charter plane at his disposal.
But he took a commercial flight so that he could fly into Washington Reagan National Airport, nearer the Capitol, and he returned to Philadelphia by train.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton holds events in Pittsburgh. Barack Obama is in Chicago.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain held a town hall meeting in Springfield, Pa.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"When I sign up to support a candidate, it's to the end. I actually supported Custer, but I did leave right before the attack." David Paterson, who takes office Monday as New York governor, on his support for Democratic Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Votes cast in the Michigan Democratic primary: 593,837.
An unofficial total of votes in the Florida Democratic primary, with some absentee ballots still outstanding: 1,684,390.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 15, 2008

 

End of Document
