

236 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Thursday
The Associated Press
March 13, 2008 Thursday 9:30 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1302 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama says McCain switched on taxes to win Republican nomination ... Fla. vote-by mail primary redo unlikely because of concerns ... MoveOn enlists film, music stars to judge Obama ad contest ... Ferraro says media is being unfair to Hillary Rodham Clinton ... Play-nice ethic intrudes on the roughest game of all: politics
Obama criticizes McCain on taxes
CHICAGO (AP) Democratic Sen. Barack Obama said Thursday that Sen. John McCain reversed his position on President Bush's deep tax cuts in order to win the Republican presidential nomination, one of his sharpest criticisms yet of the Arizona senator he hopes to face this fall.
Criticizing GOP efforts to extend major tax cuts from Bush's first term and to eliminate the estate tax, Obama said: "These are all steps that John McCain rightly said were irresponsible when they first came up."
"He made a decision to reverse himself on that," Obama told reporters as he flew from Chicago to Washington for a series of Senate votes on budget issues.
"That was how, I guess, you got your ticket punched to be the Republican nominee," he said of McCain. "But he was right then, and he's wrong now."
McCain has said he supports extending the tax cuts, which he initially voted against, because the economy is struggling and tax reductions offer some stimulus.
McCain spokesman Brian Rogers said in a statement that if Obama is nominated "the American people will have a clear choice: John McCain will cut taxes while Senator Obama will raise them, hurting our economy and costing jobs for hardworking Americans."
Fla. presidential primary redo unlikely
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. (AP) Florida Democrats on Thursday proposed a vote-by-mail presidential primary to solve the high-stakes delegate dispute while acknowledging the plan's chances are slim.
Democrats in Florida and Michigan have been struggling to come up with an alternative to ensure their delegates are seated at the national convention this summer after the party punished them for holding early primaries. The pressure to resolve the issue has increased amid the protracted fight for every delegate between Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama.
Karen Thurman, chairwoman of the Florida Democratic Party, offered a mail-in/in person proposal for voting and urged state leaders, the national party and the presidential candidates to sign on. Under the plan, all of Florida's 4.1 million Democrats would be mailed a ballot. They could send it back, or cast a ballot in one of 50 regional voting centers that would be set up. The election would end June 3, a week before a Democratic National Committee deadline to name delegates.
The estimated cost is $10 million to $12 million.
Asked if the plan will be implemented, Thurman said, "I have a feeling that this is probably closer to not, than yes."
Thurman will review comments from Democratic leaders and make a decision by Monday on whether to proceed with the revote. But she acknowledged that Obama has had concerns and the Democratic National Committee won't support a proposal unless both candidates also back it.
Ferraro says media is unfair to Clinton
SMITHFIELD, R.I. (AP) Former vice presidential candidate Geraldine Ferraro said Thursday that the media have been unfair to Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, who she supports for president.
"I don't know if it's just cause they don't like her. I don't know what it is," Ferraro said at a women's summit at Bryant University.
Ferraro later elaborated for reporters, saying Clinton was treated unfairly in a Democratic presidential debate last October in Philadelphia. The former first lady was "attacked for two hours not only by her opponents in the debate but also by the press," she said.
Ferraro stepped down Wednesday from an honorary position with Clinton's campaign after suggesting in a newspaper interview that Clinton rival Barack Obama would not be succeeding as a presidential candidate if he weren't black.
"It's interesting to see that the rest of the country, the press, has caught up with me," Ferraro said. "Now, 'Saturday Night Live' has put it in the forefront and all of a sudden, now people are saying, 'Yeah, we did treat her a little bit unfairly.'"
Ferraro refused Thursday to revisit her specific comments about Obama or her resignation, but said comments about race or gender are being used for political gain in the presidential campaign.
"So if somebody comes out and criticizes me and calls me whatever and that helps their campaign against Hillary, they're going to do it," she said. "I've been in national politics. I've had that happen to me a few times in my lifetime."
Movie stars help with Obama ad
WASHINGTON (AP) Barack Obama's advertising team is getting some friendly competition from film pros with Oscar clout like Ben Affleck and Matt Damon.
The liberal group MoveOn.org, reprising a 2004 ad contest against President Bush, has enlisted the actors to help select an ad supporting Obama's campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination. MoveOn plans to air the winning commercial on national television, but organizers hope the real benefit could come simply from media attention, Internet buzz and the star power behind it.
"The spirit of the contest is to put into video form what it is that you think will help push Obama over the top," said Iliyse Hogue, the campaign director for MoveOn.org Political Action.
Participants in the "Obama in 30 Seconds" contest will have until April 1 to submit entries. MoveOn members, which the organization places at 3.2 million, will be able to vote on their favorites by watching them on the MoveOn Web site. The top 15 entries will then be judged by a panel of liberal activists, recording artists and Hollywood notables.
Among them will be Affleck and Damon, both Academy Award-winning actors and writers. Also judging will be actor Steve Buscemi, film director Oliver Stone, singer songwriters Moby, Eddie Vedder and John Legend, civil rights leader Jesse Jackson and hip-hop entrepreneur Russell Simmons.
Insults and tender sensibilities
WASHINGTON (AP) If the presidential campaign were kindergarten, rude people could be sent for a time-out or made to write "hope and change" on the blackboard until they are nice.
In kindergarten, you're not allowed to call anyone a monster or make fun of someone's middle name.
But this is politics, in a land where freedom of speech is carved into the rock of the republic, and these are grown-ups with thick skins stretched over awesome amounts of self-esteem.
It's a land that has known and survived the scorched earth politics of the late Republican Lee Atwater, the shark grin of Democratic strategist James Carville, the "rhymes with witch" and "Ozone man" wisecracks of recent years, and the ghosts of distant ages who knew what nasty campaigning was really about.
It's America. You got a problem with that?
A cycle of insult and puffy indignation has taken hold in the contest between Democratic Sens. Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton, with supporters of Republican Sen. John McCain gleefully pitching in.
It's been a time to denounce, dissociate, distance and regret, to nurse tender sensitivities, and to see the occasional offender cut from a campaign. Geraldine Ferraro, who resigned a Clinton post Wednesday, was the latest to go.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama are in Washington.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain is in Washington.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I think it's impossible. I do think that we will have a dream team. I just don't think it will be those two names." Democratic House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, speaking about her party's presidential candidates, Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama.
STAT OF THE DAY:
An unofficial total of votes in the Mississippi Democratic primary, with some absentee ballots still outstanding: 411,495.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 14, 2008

 

End of Document
