

237 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Wednesday
The Associated Press
March 12, 2008 Wednesday 11:46 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1249 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Ferraro leaves Clinton post after furor over Obama comments ... Florida Democrats to offer plan for vote-by-mail presidential primary ... Obama beats Clinton in racially polarized Mississippi Democratic primary ... AFL-CIO calls McCain 'Bush 3,' targets his record on labor, economic issues ... From April to June contests, Democrats do the math in planning strategy
Ferraro leaves Clinton post
WASHINGTON (AP) Geraldine Ferraro stepped down Wednesday from an honorary post in Hillary Rodham Clinton's presidential campaign amid a controversy regarding her comments that Barack Obama wouldn't be succeeding in the presidential race if he weren't black.
Ferraro notified Clinton by letter that she would no longer serve on Clinton's finance committee as "Honorary New York Leadership Council Chair."
Obama has called Ferraro's comments "ridiculous" and his campaign aides have called on Clinton to denounce the statement.
"I think they were wrong-headed," he said at a Chicago news conference. "The notion that it is a great advantage to me to be an African American named Barack Obama and pursue the presidency, I think, is not a view that has been commonly shared by the general public."
In a letter to Clinton, first reported by CNN, Ferraro says: "Dear Hillary, I am stepping down from your finance committee so I can speak for myself and you can continue to speak for yourself about what's at stake in this campaign. The Obama campaign is attacking me to hurt you. I won't let that happen. Thank you for everything you've done and continue to do to make this a better world for my children and grandchildren. You have my deep admiration and respect, Gerry."
Campaign spokesman Howard Wolfson said Ferraro left the post on her own initiative. Clinton has said she disagrees with Ferraro's remarks.
Florida Dems weigh mail-in plan
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. (AP) Florida Democrats plan to propose a vote-by-mail presidential primary despite objections from members of the state's congressional delegation to a do-over vote.
State Senate Democratic leader Steve Geller said the party hopes to have a proposal ready by Thursday that would allow a 30-day review period and a vote by the party's executive committee April 12 on whether to hold the election. A likely deadline for mail-in ballots to be returned would be June 3.
Democrats in Florida and Michigan have been scrambling to come up with an alternative to ensure their delegates will be seated at the national convention in Denver this summer. The Democratic National Committee punished the states for moving their primaries ahead of Feb. 5 and stripped them of all their delegates.
Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton won Florida and Michigan, although Clinton was the only major candidate on the ballot in Michigan.
"In my view there are two options honor the results or hold new primary elections. I don't see any other solutions that are fair and honor the commitment that 2.5 million voters made in the Democratic primaries in those two states," Clinton said Wednesday.
Rival Sen. Barack Obama has said he is concerned about accuracy and fairness with a mail-in vote organized so quickly.
Michigan Democratic Party leaders were considering several options to get their delegates seated, including a mail-in vote or a state-run Democratic primary that would be held in May or June and paid for by Democratic donors.
Obama wins Mississippi Democratic race
WASHINGTON (AP) With a six-week breather before the next primary, Hillary Rodham Clinton turned her attention to Pennsylvania and beyond to counter the latest in a string of victories by Barack Obama in Southern states with large black voting blocs.
Obama won roughly 90 percent of the black vote in Mississippi on Tuesday, but only about one-quarter of the white vote. That was similar to the breakdown that helped him win South Carolina, Alabama, Georgia and Louisiana before losing to Clinton in Texas and Ohio, which have similar voter demographics to neighboring Pennsylvania.
Overall, with 99 percent of the vote counted, Obama had 61 percent to Clinton's 37 percent.
Obama, in claiming his victory in Mississippi, said he expects to be the Democratic nominee and "the party is going to be unified."
AFL-CIO targets McCain's economic record
WASHINGTON (AP) The AFL-CIO said Wednesday it will have union protesters follow GOP presidential nominee-in-waiting John McCain around the country to demand explanations on his positions on economic and labor issues.
The effort is part of a wide-ranging campaign aimed at linking McCain with what union officials call the Bush administration's failed economic policies.
In addition to the protests, the nation's largest labor federation also plans to devote part of its record $53.4 million grass-roots mobilization campaign fund to criticizing McCain through workplace leafletting, volunteer door-knocking, telephone calls, e-mail, direct mailings and an anti-McCain Web site.
McCain's campaign denounced the plans.
"The AFL-CIO's campaign against John McCain isn't about working families, it's about partisan politics," spokesman Brian Rogers said. "While they spend millions of dollars on old-style attack politics that the American people are sick and tired of, John McCain is working to move America forward with a positive, optimistic vision for our future."
Democrats do the math
FAIRLESS HILLS, Pa. (AP) Facing a revived Hillary Rodham Clinton, Democrat Barack Obama has dropped a tenet of his early strategy that seemed vital to his January successes: the conviction that he can win almost anywhere if he has enough time to engage voters.
With the important Pennsylvania contest six weeks away a near eternity in presidential primaries Obama is minimizing his chances here, even though a victory would effectively finish Clinton. His aides are emphasizing instead the need to campaign in North Carolina, Indiana and other presumably friendlier states that will vote even later.
Clinton, meanwhile, is banking heavily on Pennsylvania. A solid win here could sustain her claim to late-season momentum and the ability to win big, industrial states.
Obama's revised strategy is, essentially, a mathematical calculation. If Clinton wins a few more delegates than he does in Pennsylvania, Obama figures he can offset them in the nine states and territories scheduled to vote later.
His current lead of roughly 100 delegates would stay about the same, the thinking goes. That would position him to tell the all-important superdelegates this summer there is no justification for them to tip the nomination to Clinton.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton attends a presidential forum in Washington; Barack Obama is in Chicago.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain held a town hall meeting in Exeter, N.H.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Senator Obama was up in Iowa, maybe not so up in New Hampshire, but he was the same Barack Obama on the one day as the other steady, reliable. You know, no shock Barack kind of guy, no drama Obama. So when that red phone rings at 3 a.m. you want a guy with this kind of temperament to answer that telephone." Gen. Merrill "Tony" McPeak, a former Air Force chief of staff
STAT OF THE DAY:
Six in 10 Barack Obama supporters said he should pick Hillary Rodham Clinton as his vice presidential running mate if he wins the Democratic presidential nomination, according to interviews with voters leaving polling places in Mississippi. A smaller share of Clinton's voters, four in 10, said she should place him on the ticket.
Compiled by Ann Sanner and Jerry Estill.
 Load-Date: March 13, 2008

 

End of Document
