

239 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Monday
The Associated Press
March 10, 2008 Monday 10:03 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1115 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama ridicules idea of second spot on a Clinton ticket ... McCain aims to ignite campaign with money, bio and issues tours ... Bush backs into acknowledging a Democrat could win the White House this year ... New Philadelphia mayor, who is black, sticks with early endorsement of Clinton
Obama ridicules notion of VP slot
COLUMBUS, Miss. (AP) Democrat Barack Obama ridiculed the idea of being Hillary Rodham Clinton's running mate Monday and said voters must choose between the two for the top spot on the fall ticket.
The Illinois senator used his first public appearance of the week to knock down the notion that he might accept the party's vice presidential nomination. He noted that he has won more states, votes and delegates than Clinton so far.
"I don't know how somebody who is in second place is offering the vice presidency to the person who is first place," Obama said, drawing cheers and a long standing ovation from about 1,700 people in Columbus, Miss.
Saying he wanted to be "absolutely clear," he added: "I don't want anybody here thinking that somehow, 'Well, you know, maybe I can get both.' Don't think that way. You have to make a choice in this election."
"I am not running for vice president," Obama said. "I am running for president of the United States of America."
Obama had never suggested he might accept a second spot on the ticket. But until Monday he had not ridiculed the notion so directly, even if he did not completely rule it out in Shermanesque terms.
McCain seeks to reintroduce self
PHOENIX (AP) Sen. John McCain is finding out what the Republican presidential nomination is worth this week.
Then he plans to buff his foreign policy credentials, remind the nation of his long military history and try to frame the issues for the November election in three separate tours while his two Democratic opponents continue to struggle for their party's nomination.
"Whenever you're the nominee of your party, I think people will want to re-examine the candidate," the senator said before leaving Arizona following a weekend at home. "I'd like to believe that all 300 million Americans know me, but unfortunately, that's not the case. I'll have to work hard to attract their votes."
But first, the 71-year-old McCain had a full medical screening on Monday.
While McCain has previously been treated for skin cancer, he said there was nothing that precipitated his visit, which included a full medical workup. He said his dermatologist also performed a cancer screening during the past few weeks. Results from all the exams will be released April 15, he said.
"Everything's fine," McCain told reporters during a news conference.
McCain's next step Monday was raising campaign cash. He was headed to a fundraiser in St. Louis.
He planned to continue Tuesday in New York, Wednesday in Boston, Thursday in Pennsylvania and Friday in Chicago to counter an explosion in giving to the Democratic contenders who each set personal bests in February.
Bush kinda gives Clinton a chance to win
WASHINGTON (AP) President Bush admitted Monday that it's possible a Democrat could win the White House this year.
Mind you, he didn't come out and say it like that.
Speaking at a White House celebration of women's history month and international women's day, Bush extolled the value of women occupying high places in an administration.
"My advice to the next president is to surround him or her with strong, fearless women," Bush said.
The remark didn't seem planned. As Bush waded into that sentence, he slowed and then stopped briefly after he said "him." Perhaps he realized that in speaking to a roomful of powerful women at an event dedicated to boosting the role of women in society, he couldn't exactly leave out the possibility of a female president of the United States. Whatever went through his mind, the "or her" sounded belatedly tacked on and landed him rhetorically in political territory he probably would have preferred to avoid.
Since Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton is the only woman in the race, the effect was an acknowledgment from the Republican occupant of the White House and leader of the GOP that she could win this fall.
Bush, of course, has endorsed Republican John McCain.
Philly mayor sticking with Clinton
PHILADELPHIA (AP) Michael Nutter, this city's newly installed black mayor, is not wavering in his support for Hillary Rodham Clinton, even though her rival Barack Obama is expected to easily carry Philadelphia in Pennsylvania's Democratic presidential primary.
Nutter, a reform-minded former city councilman who took office in January, endorsed Clinton in December while she was the front-runner.
Since then Obama's bid to become the first black president has garnered more votes, more delegates and more donations than the New York senator's equally historic bid to become the first female president.
Revived by March 4 wins in Ohio, Texas and Rhode Island, she is now favored to win Pennsylvania, in part because overall the state is demographically so much like neighboring Ohio. But given Obama's overwhelming support so far from blacks, there is little doubt that the Illinois senator will prevail among Philadelphia's 1.4 million residents and its nearly equal numbers of black and white voters.
Nutter's reaction: "This notion that somehow there is a monolithic black vote is just a myth."
He has promised to campaign aggressively for Clinton "just like I campaign for myself," doing events and raising money. He said he supports her policies and thinks she has the best chance to win in November. "Our best matchup is Clinton-McCain," he said, referring to Arizona Sen. John McCain, who has locked up the Republican presidential nomination.
In a tight contest where every delegate has become important, Nutter's backing could prove very helpful for Clinton if he can help hold down Obama's margin of victory in Pennsylvania's largest city. In addition to Nutter, she also has the backing of former two-term mayor, Gov. Ed Rendell.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton is in Pennsylvania. Barack Obama campaigns in Mississippi.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain holds a fundraiser in St. Louis.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"If I'm not ready, how is it that you think I should be such a great vice president?" Democrat Barack Obama, speaking at a campaign event in Mississippi about rival Hillary Rodham Clinton suggesting that he is not ready to be president but hinting that she might pick him as a running mate.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Jesse Jackson garnered 45 percent of the vote compared with Al Gore's 33 percent in Mississippi's Democratic primary in 1988. More than 359,000 votes were cast in that election; about 76,000 people voted in the 2004 primary.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 11, 2008

 

End of Document
