

240 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Sunday
The Associated Press
March 9, 2008 Sunday 7:13 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 926 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama defeats Clinton in Wyoming caucuses, the latest prize in epic Democratic race ... Democrat wins Ill. special election to fill former House Speaker Hastert's seat ... Iraq veteran says in Democrats' radio address that McCain's war policies would hurt country ...
Obama wins Wyoming caucuses
CASPER, Wyo. (AP) Sen. Barack Obama captured the Wyoming Democratic caucuses Saturday, seizing a bit of momentum in the close, hard-fought race with rival Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton for the party's presidential nomination.
Obama generally has outperformed Clinton in caucuses, which reward organization and voter passion more than do primaries. The Illinois senator has now won 13 caucuses to Clinton's three.
Obama has also shown strength in the Mountain West, winning Idaho, Utah, Colorado and now Wyoming. The two split Nevada, with Clinton winning the popular vote and Obama more delegates.
But Clinton threw some effort into Wyoming, perhaps hoping for an upset that would yield few delegates but considerable buzz and momentum. The New York senator campaigned Friday in Cheyenne and Casper. Former President Clinton and their daughter, Chelsea, also campaigned this week in the sprawling and lightly populated state.
Obama campaigned in Casper and Laramie on Friday, but spent part of his time dealing with the fallout from an aide's harsh words about Clinton and suggestions that Obama wouldn't move as quickly to withdraw U.S. forces from Iraq if elected. In Casper, Obama said Clinton had no standing to challenge his position on the war because she had voted to authorize it in 2002.
Clinton, buoyed by big wins in Ohio and Texas last Tuesday, said she faced an uphill fight in Wyoming. Her campaign also holds out little hope for Tuesday's primary in Mississippi, which has a large black population.
Obama had 61 percent, or 5,378 votes, to Clinton's 38 percent, or 3,312 votes, with all 23 Wyoming counties reporting.
Obama won seven delegates and Clinton won five. In the overall race for the nomination, Obama led 1,578-1,468, according to the latest tally by The Associated Press. It will take 2,025 delegates to win the Democratic nomination.
Dem. wins election to fill Hastert seat
CHICAGO (AP) A longtime Republican district fell to the Democrats Saturday when a wealthy businessman and scientist snatched former House Speaker Dennis Hastert's congressional seat in a closely watched special election.
Democrat Bill Foster won 53 percent of the vote compared to 47 percent for Republican Jim Oberweis. With all 568 precincts reporting, Foster had 52,010 votes to Oberweis' 46,988.
"Tonight our voices are echoing across the country and Washington will hear us loud and clear, it's time for a change," Foster told cheering supporters Saturday evening.
Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee Chairman Chris Van Hollen said Foster's win is a rebuke of the Bush administration and of the GOP's apparent presidential nominee, John McCain, who helped raise money for Oberweis.
"This is going to send a political shock wave across the country in this election year," Van Hollen said.
Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama, who made a TV ad praising Foster, said in a statement that voters "sent an unmistakable message that they're tired of business-as-usual in Washington."
The National Republican Congressional Committee downplayed the significance of the loss and said the back and forth between Democrats for the presidential nomination shows that one election doesn't indicate a trend.
Iraq veteran says McCain policy is wrong
WASHINGTON (AP) Speaking on behalf of the Democratic Party, an Iraq combat veteran said Saturday that apparent GOP nominee John McCain should not win the presidential election because he would continue the war in Iraq.
Roger Martinez, who served as an Army ranger in Afghanistan and Iraq, noted in the Democrats' weekly radio address that President Bush endorsed McCain this week. Bush said McCain "won't flinch in the face of danger" and McCain strongly supports the U.S. efforts in Iraq. Electing a leader who would continue Bush's policies in Iraq would be a mistake, Martinez said.
"Our country and our armed services cannot afford another leader like President Bush who would keep our overstretched military in Iraq for 100 years while ignoring the other threats our country faces both at home and around the world." McCain has said that U.S. troops could be in Iraq for many years if those troops were no longer being injured or killed.
"I honor and thank John McCain for his years of military service to our country," said Martinez, who is studying at the University of Texas at San Antonio. "But I don't think he offers the right leadership on Iraq or understands how to reinvigorate our economy here at home."
"We vigorously dispute the Democrats' assertions," said McCain campaign spokesman Brian Rogers.
"Only John McCain has the experience, judgment and courage to lead us to victory and bring our troops home with honor," Rogers said.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama have no public events.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain has no public events.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"The one message coming out of 2008 so far is that what happens today is not a bellwether of what happens this fall," NRCC communications director Karen Hanretty said, responding to the GOP's loss of the seat vacated by Dennis Hastert, the former Republican speaker of the House.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Bill Clinton won the 1992 Democratic primary in Mississippi with 73 percent of the vote.
Compiled by Ann Sanner and Ronald Powers.
 Load-Date: March 10, 2008

 

End of Document
