

241 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Saturday
The Associated Press
March 8, 2008 Saturday 8:13 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 916 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Clinton sets low expectations for contests in Wyoming and Mississippi ... McCain rejects televangelist backer's views Catholics find offensive ... Former DNC chair urges fellow superdelegates to follow own judgment, not state votes ...
Clinton lowers expectations in Wyo.
CHEYENNE, Wyo. (AP) As Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton and Sen. Barack Obama were set to compete for a small scattering of delegates in Wyoming, Clinton cast herself as the underdog and said the odds are not in her favor.
Clinton's campaign has sought to set low expectations for the Saturday caucuses in Wyoming as well as next week's primary in Mississippi, states where her campaign believes Obama has a better shot at winning.
"I said, 'Well you know what, I'm going to go to Wyoming anyway I know it's an uphill climb, I'm aware of that," Clinton told an audience of more than 1,500 at a community college in Cheyenne. "But, you see, I am a fighter, and I believe it's worth fighting for your votes."
She set a similar tone while campaigning in Mississippi Thursday night and Friday morning. She said a win for her in that state would be a heavy lift because of Obama's appeal there. Twelve delegates will be awarded in Wyoming's caucuses, followed by 33 on Tuesday in Mississippi.
The relatively small number of delegates in these states, not seen as important weeks ago, have gained value now that the race is down to a numbers game, following Clinton's triple-win this week in Texas, Ohio and Rhode Island, where she narrowed the gap with Obama.
While Clinton has dispatched her husband, the former president, and her daughter to Mississippi and Wyoming, she has limited her own appearances in the two states. The New York senator, whose voice was hoarse when she ended her day in Casper on Friday, planned to take a rare two-day break over the weekend.
McCain rejects anti-Catholic views
NEW ORLEANS (AP) Republican presidential candidate John McCain repudiated any views of a prominent televangelist who endorsed him last month "if they are anti-Catholic or offensive to Catholics."
McCain has come under fire since televangelist John Hagee endorsed him on Feb. 27, but until Friday his response had been tepid. The Arizona senator merely said he doesn't agree with everyone who endorses him. He said Friday he had been hearing from Catholics who find Hagee's comments offensive.
Hagee, leader of a San Antonio megachurch, has referred to the Roman Catholic Church as "the great whore" and called it a "false cult system" and "the apostate church" "apostate" means someone who has forsaken his religion.
On Friday, McCain took a stronger stance on Hagee's views in an interview with The Associated Press.
"We've had a dignified campaign, and I repudiate any comments that are made, including Pastor Hagee's, if they are anti-Catholic or offensive to Catholics," McCain said.
"I sent two of my children to Catholic school. I categorically reject and repudiate any statement that was made that was anti-Catholic, both in intent and nature. I categorically reject it, and I repudiate it," McCain said.
"And we can't have that in this campaign," McCain said. "We're trying to unite the country. We're uniting the country, not dividing it."
Former Dem leader's advice on vote
NEW YORK (AP) A former Democratic Party chairman and backer of Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton has written to fellow superdelegates urging them to support their preferred candidate, not the one who has more pledged delegates at the end of the nomination process.
Steve Grossman, who chaired the DNC under President Clinton from 1997-1999 and serves as a major Hillary Clinton fundraiser, wrote "superdelegates were not selected by the national party to be either potted plants or rubber stamps."
"Some commentators, observing the current deadlock between Senators Clinton and (Barack) Obama as they vie for the Democratic presidential nomination, have suggested that as superdelegates, our function is to be mindless tabulators of primaries and caucuses won, or popular votes amassed," Grossman wrote.
Obama currently leads Clinton in the delegate count 1,571-1,462 and has the edge among pledged delegates 1,361-1,220. But Clinton leads among the superdelegates the party officials and elected leaders 242-210.
"Despite the superdelegates' lifetimes spent working on state, national and international issues, and thinking seriously about the grave challenges and the dangerous adversaries facing our country, these commentators demand that we suspend our independent judgments and jettison our profound responsibilities to the party and, frankly, to the country itself," he added.
An analysis by The Associated Press has found that neither Clinton nor Obama will be able to reach the 2,025 threshold through pledged delegates alone. That means some 800 unpledged superdelegates may ultimately decide who wins the nomination.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama have no public events.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain has no public events.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"If it had been up to me, we would have never been in this war. It was because of George Bush, with an assist from Hillary Clinton and John McCain, that we got into this war." Barack Obama at a town hall meeting in Casper, Wyo.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Republicans make up 136,536 of the 218,063 registered voters in Wyoming. Democrats number 59,130, while unaffiliated voters total 21,806, according to March 4 figures from the Wyoming Secretary of State's Office.
Compiled by Ann Sanner and Ronald Powers.
 Load-Date: March 9, 2008

 

End of Document
