

243 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Thursday
The Associated Press
March 6, 2008 Thursday 9:21 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1241 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama raises $55 million in February, beats Clinton on money front ... McCain is noncommittal on veep choice ... Clinton aide compares Obama to independent prosecutor Kenneth Starr ... DNC's Dean urges do-over contests in Florida, Michigan, but won't help pay for them ... AP Poll: More people identify with Democrats since presidential voting started ... Democratic voters take lead in some historically GOP counties in Ohio
Obama raises $55 million in February
WASHINGTON (AP) Democrat Barack Obama raised a record $55 million in February for his presidential campaign, eclipsing rival Hillary Rodham Clinton's own substantial fundraising for the month. All told, Obama has raised $193 million during his yearlong bid for the White House.
The campaign's announcement Thursday came two days after Obama lost three of four primaries to Clinton. Clinton's victories stopped his winning streak and extended the race into an unpredictable future.
Obama's February total was his second fundraising record. He raised $36 million in January, more than any other presidential candidate who has ever been in a contested primary.
Riding her victory wave, Clinton's camp announced Thursday that she raised $4 million online since Tuesday's presidential primary successes in Ohio, Texas and Rhode Island.
The Clinton campaign said it had raised the money from the time polls closed Tuesday through noon Thursday. It reported 30,000 new donors. The influx of money made their online total raised for this month $6 million, the campaign announced.
McCain noncommittal on veep choice
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. (AP) Republican John McCain praised Florida Gov. Charlie Crist, a potential running mate, as they campaigned together Thursday, although he sidestepped questions about a vice presidential choice.
During his first campaign appearance since clinching the GOP presidential nomination, McCain said he has not even begun looking at vice presidential candidates.
"You know, obviously, we have just begun that process, and we, in fact, have not even outlined how we're going to go about this," McCain said at a news conference after he and Crist shook hands with people at a diner. "We're looking at how the process was conducted by other candidates and nominees of their party.
"But I know one thing about Governor Crist," he added. "And that is that he is a great governor. He does a great job. And I think that ... there are many ways for him to serve the country."
When McCain wrapped up the Republican presidential nomination Tuesday with victories in Texas and Ohio, attention turned to his running mate. McCain, who is 71, has said his foremost concern is finding someone capable of serving in his place.
Clinton aide compares Obama to Starr
WASHINGTON (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton's campaign on Thursday compared rival Barack Obama to independent prosecutor Kenneth Starr, the Clintons' chief nemesis of the 1990s.
Clinton herself declined to comment on the comparison, made by her chief spokesman in a conference call with reporters and also in a memo distributed by the campaign.
Clinton spokesman Howard Wolfson said Obama's statement that he plans to be more critical of Clinton's record is reminiscent of the attacks the Clintons endured during the investigations in the 1990s.
"I for one do not believe that imitating Ken Starr is the way to win a Democratic primary election for president," Wolfson said during the call.
Starr was appointed independent counsel in 1994 to investigate the Clintons' real estate dealings known as Whitewater. His investigation grew to include other topics, including the death of deputy White House counsel Vince Foster, a close friend of Hillary Clinton's, and the Monica Lewinsky affair. Starr's findings formed the basis for Bill Clinton's impeachment.
Obama spokesman Bill Burton said the comparison is "absurd" when Clinton has been calling for more scrutiny of Obama's record.
Dean urges do-overs in Fla, Mich
WASHINGTON (AP) The former head of the Democratic National Committee on Thursday doubted whether current chairman Howard Dean would be able to get approval for a plan for do-over presidential nomination contests in Florida and Michigan.
"It'll be a hellacious battle," said Don Fowler, a former party head who sits on the party's rule-making committee.
Before the primaries started, "Howard Dean had enough votes to get most everything he wanted. Now that this thing has gone as far as it has and the lines have formed according to candidates. I'm not sure how that vote would shake out now," said Fowler, who has endorsed Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Dean has urged Florida and Michigan party officials to come up with plans to repeat their presidential nominating contests so that their delegates can be counted. Officials in Michigan and Florida have expressed renewed interest in holding repeat presidential nominating contests so their votes will count in the epic Democratic campaign.
The DNC stripped both states of all delegates for holding the primaries too early, and all Democratic candidates including Clinton and rival Barack Obama agreed not to campaign in either state. Obama's name wasn't even on the Michigan ballot
AP Poll: More say they're Democrats
WASHINGTON (AP) More people say they are Democrats than said so before voting started in this year's presidential contests while the number of Republicans has remained flat, a survey showed Thursday.
The Associated Press-Ipsos poll had additional bad news for the GOP: The number of independents and moderates satisfied with President Bush and the country's direction has dipped to record or near-record lows.
The poll showed 52 percent call themselves Democrats, up from 45 percent in an AP-Ipsos survey in mid-December. Thirty-five percent say they are Republicans, about the same as December's 37 percent.
Ohio counties see an influx of Democrats
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) Some counties in swing-state Ohio that have long been dominated by Republican voters find themselves suddenly teeming with Democrats.
Democratic presidential candidates received roughly 2.2 million votes to Republicans' 1 million in Tuesday's election, which saw record turnout for an Ohio primary.
From the 2004 primary to the 2008 contest, the number of Democratic voters in Ohio increased by 76 percent. The number of Republicans increased by 11 percent. It's a trend that could have large repercussions for the general election in this crucial state.
Ohio's open primary system enables voters to choose on the spot which primary they want to vote in. Poll workers are supposed to give voters who are switching parties a form to sign that attests the voter upholds the ideals of that party. The voter is then automatically registered as a member of that party at least until the next primary.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton held a news conference in Washington before attending a Democratic Party dinner in Mississippi. Barack Obama is in Chicago, with no public events.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain campaigns in Florida.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"We're going to have the funds we need to keep this campaign going, to keep Hillary Clinton's message out there." Clinton's senior adviser Ann Lewis, in discussing the campaign's fundraising totals after Tuesday's presidential primary successes.
STAT OF THE DAY:
In the 1992 presidential election, Republican George H.W. Bush won Wyoming with more than 39 percent of the vote, compared with Democrat Bill Clinton's 34 percent.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 7, 2008

 

End of Document
