

248 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Saturday
The Associated Press
March 1, 2008 Saturday 8:59 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 992 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Bill Clinton says he's 'proud' of political fights of the '90s ... McCain tries to distance himself from pastor cited for anti-Catholic remarks ... Clinton campaign revises what would allow her to continue beyond Tuesday's primaries ...
Former president proud of battles
MANSFIELD, Ohio (AP) Former President Bill Clinton struck back at his wife's critics, defending her role in the divisive political battles waged with Republicans in the 1990s.
"I'm kind of proud of those fights," he told a crowd of about 200 people gathered Friday at a middle school in Mansfield.
Democratic presidential hopeful Barack Obama often depicts his rival, Hillary Rodham Clinton, as tied down by the past, selling himself as the candidate of the future. He said Thursday that he would be more willing than Clinton to work with Republicans.
At his last stop on a long day of campaigning across Ohio in the run-up to Tuesday's primary, Bill Clinton displayed no signs of slowing down.
He told about 200 people in New Philadelphia that the former first lady was a public servant first, an election official second.
"She is a lifetime public servant but a recent elected official," he told the crowd of about 200 gathered at Kent State University. "Her opponent has been in more elections than her."
Clinton said it was his idea to visit the rural, less frequented parts of Ohio on his wife's behalf. He said he wants her to focus on bigger cities like Cleveland and Columbus and do television advertisements.
"I like to go to the small towns and the out-of-the-way places where other politicians don't go," Clinton said.
He acknowledged earlier in the day that voters are torn between Obama and Clinton, but he also said his wife is the only candidate who has proved she can bring about change.
McCain seeks distance from pastor
PHOENIX (AP) John McCain is refusing to renounce the endorsement of a prominent Texas televangelist who Democrats say peddles anti-Catholic and other intolerant speech.
Instead, the Republican presidential candidate issued a statement Friday afternoon saying he had unspecified disagreements with the San Antonio megachurch leader, John Hagee. Hagee endorsed him at a news conference Wednesday in San Antonio.
"However, in no way did I intend for his endorsement to suggest that I in turn agree with all of Pastor Hagee's views, which I obviously do not," McCain said in the statement.
His campaign issued the statement after two days of criticism from the Democratic National Committee, the Catholic League and Catholics United.
Democrats quoted Hagee as saying the Catholic Church conspired with Nazis against the Jews and that Hurricane Katrina was God's retribution for homosexual sin, and they recited his demeaning comments about women and flip remarks about slavery.
"Hagee's hate speech has no place in public discourse, and McCain's embrace of this figure raises serious questions about John McCain's character and his willingness to do anything to win," said Tom McMahon, executive director of the Democratic National Committee.
McCain was pressed on the issue in Round Rock, Texas. Hagee "supports what I stand for and believe in," McCain said.
"When he endorses me, that does not mean that I endorse everything that he stands for and believes in," McCain said. "I don't have to agree with everyone who endorses my campaign."
He added that he was "proud" of Hagee's spiritual leadership of his congregation at the 17,000-member Cornerstone Church.
Clinton tries to raise bar for Obama
WACO, Texas (AP) Recasting what would keep her campaign alive, Hillary Rodham Clinton's advisers say that if rival Barack Obama loses any of Tuesday's four presidential primaries, it would show Democrats are having second thoughts about him.
In an e-mail and conference call Friday to reporters, Clinton's campaign sought to raise the stakes for the Illinois senator in next week's primaries and also laid the groundwork to keep her campaign alive if the results are disappointing.
Obama heads into Tuesday's primaries in Texas, Ohio, Rhode Island and Vermont riding a streak of 11 consecutive primary and caucus wins and leading the former first lady in the popular vote, committed delegates and fundraising.
In the conference call, senior Clinton strategist Howard Wolfson seized on those facts to reshape expectations about the Democratic contest.
"They are outspending us at least two to one in Ohio and Texas," Wolfson said. "If they are unable to win these states, it sends a very clear signal that Democrats want this campaign to continue. Obama has every advantage going into this election. If Senator Obama is in fact the de facto nominee, he ought to win all four."
A loss for Obama in even one of the four states Tuesday would indicate Democrats have developed a case of "buyer's remorse," Wolfson said. "It would show that Senator Obama is having trouble closing the deal with Democrats."
As recently as Feb. 20, Clinton's husband, former President Clinton, was singing a different tune about what it would take to keep her candidacy afloat beyond Tuesday.
"If she wins in Texas and Ohio, I think she'll be the nominee," the former president told a Beaumont, Texas, audience.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton campaigns in Texas. Barack Obama holds a rally in Rhode Island.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain has no scheduled events. Mike Huckabee campaigns in Texas.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"We've had a red phone moment," Barack Obama said, responding to a new Clinton ad in which she says she's the candidate best able to handle a crisis. "It was the decision to invade Iraq. And Senator Clinton gave the wrong answer."
STAT OF THE DAY:
Roughly 30 percent of registered voters in Rhode Island, or approximately 180,000 people, could cast ballots in Tuesday's presidential primary, Rhode Island Secretary of State A. Ralph Mollis estimates. During the last seriously contested primary here in 2000, about 82,000 residents voted.
Compiled by Ann Sanner and Ronald Powers.
 Load-Date: March 2, 2008

 

End of Document
