

254 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Sunday
The Associated Press
February 24, 2008 Sunday 8:13 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 769 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
California a tough climb for any GOP nominee ... 'Soul Man' Sam Moore tells Obama to stop using his song ... GOP delegates in American Samoa support John McCain
'Soul Man' to Obama: Cool it
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) Hold On: Stop using my song.
That's the message to Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama from soul singer Sam Moore of Sam & Dave fame.
The singer said Saturday that he's sent a letter to the Obama campaign asking them to stop using one of the duo's signature songs, "Hold On, I'm Comin'," at campaign rallies.
Moore says he's not endorsing Obama or anybody else at this time for president.
"No one called me, no one sent a telegraph, no one did anything. They just did it, and I think that's rather rude," Moore said from his home in Scottsdale, Ariz.
Tommy Vietor, an Obama campaign spokesman, responded in a brief e-mail Saturday that they received the letter and will stop using the tune.
Moore, a member of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, said the song is played frequently at campaign events, with supporters sometimes changing the lyrics to "Hold On, Obama's Comin'."
He said it gives people the wrong idea about his politics.
"My vote is a very private matter between myself and the ballot box," he said in the letter, which was faxed Friday and sent by mail Saturday to Obama and campaign officials Carolyn Mosley and John Kluczynski. "I reserve my right to determine who I will support when and if I choose to do so."
California tough test for GOP nominee
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) With John McCain as the likely GOP nominee, his supporters are turning to the difficult task of figuring out how to win California, a state that has not gone Republican in the presidential race in 20 years.
In primary elections held in other states, the Arizona senator has proved he can appeal to independent voters much the way Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, a Republican, did in his 2006 re-election. His supporters say he will do the same in the California general election.
"This senator will sell himself well in California, because people believe in his integrity, honesty and his track record," said former California Secretary of State Bill Jones, a McCain supporter, who spoke at the state Republican Party convention in San Francisco on Saturday.
But there are crucial differences between the race McCain will wage as a presidential candidate in California and the one that Schwarzenegger ran for governor.
For one thing, the two men have different positions on abortion, a litmus test issue. Like Schwarzenegger, most California voters support abortion rights. But McCain wants to ban the procedure.
The last GOP presidential candidate to oppose abortion and win the state was George H.W. Bush in 1988.
American Samoans back McCain
PAGO PAGO, American Samoa (AP) The American Samoa Republican Party announced Saturday that all nine of the delegates it will send to the GOP national convention support John McCain.
The delegates from the U.S. territory, about 2,300 miles south of Hawaii, helped McCain move closer to clinching the GOP nomination for president, giving him a total of 976 delegates. Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee is far behind with 254 delegates two less than Mitt Romney, who has quit the race and endorsed McCain.
It will take 1,191 delegates to secure the Republican nomination.
Earlier Saturday, the nine delegates from the U.S. Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands said they will be voting for McCain. The GOP on Guam is set to make its selection March 8.
Although they are helping to nominate presidential candidates, residents of U.S. Pacific island territories do not vote in the presidential election.
The close to 50 party members who showed up for the convention in American Samoa were surprised with a prerecorded audio message sent via the Internet from McCain.
"I can't tell you how excited I am to see the Republican Party of American Samoa take a major role in the presidential election," McCain said.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton campaigns in Rhode Island before traveling to Boston to raise money. Barack Obama is in Ohio.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain had no events listed. Mike Huckabee appears on CNN's "Late Edition."
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Mike Huckabee does not overstay his welcome. When it's time for me to go, I'll know. And I'll exit out with class and grace," Huckabee said during a skit on "Saturday Night Live." The Republican longshot then lingered on the set, ignoring repeated cues for him to leave the stage.
STAT OF THE DAY:
More than 1.2 million people voted in the 2004 Democratic presidential primary in Ohio.
Compiled by Ronald Powers and Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: February 25, 2008

 

End of Document
