

255 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Saturday
The Associated Press
February 23, 2008 Saturday 8:29 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 795 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Complex rules of caucuses could prolong fight for Democratic delegates ... President Clinton urges wife's supporters to participate in caucuses ... Analysis: McCain's money spat weakens his case that Obama must restrict fundraising
Campaigns could lose delegates
LAS VEGAS (AP) Winning the delegates wasn't enough. Now the Democrats running for president must keep them from straying.
The party's arcane system of caucuses and conventions has both campaigns working to keep delegates they had already claimed in Nevada, Iowa, Kansas and elsewhere.
At stake: 172 delegates in nine states, enough to shift the balance of the entire race. The Associated Press has awarded 109 of those delegates to Sen. Barack Obama, who has fared well in caucus states. The rest went to Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Most years, the complexities of party caucuses don't generate much interest after the campaigns have moved on. But in a nomination contest as close as this one, both sides are fighting to win and keep every delegate.
"We want to make sure we hold onto what we have," said Steve Hildebrand, Obama's deputy campaign manager.
In the overall race for the nomination, Obama leads with 1,362 delegates. Clinton has 1,266.5, getting the half-delegate from the Democrats Abroad primary. It will take 2,025 delegates to secure the Democratic nomination.
The first test to keep those national delegates is in Nevada on Saturday, when nearly 11,000 county delegates are due to report to 17 county conventions.
Bill Clinton urges Texas voters to attend caucuses
CORPUS CHRISTI, Texas (AP) Former President Clinton urged South Texas voters on Friday to attend caucuses March 4 in support of his wife, Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton.
He called the Texas primary one of the strangest in the country.
"Some people believe you will make Hillary win the daytime and they will take the delegates back at night," Clinton told about 200 people at his wife's local campaign headquarters.
About 200 other supporters stood outside the headquarters for the Democratic presidential candidate, according to a report for Saturday editions of the Corpus Christi Caller-Times.
Texas has a hybrid system part primary, part caucus that awards 228 delegates in all.
A total of 126 delegates will be decided through primary voting in 31 state senate districts. About half the districts have four delegates each, and others range from a low of two to a high of eight delegates.
Delegates are also awarded based on a candidate's percentage of the vote, so some districts may split their prize between Obama and Clinton.
"On March 4, Texas will be the only state in America where you can vote twice and not go to jail," the former president said.
Analysis: McCain loses leverage
NEW YORK (AP) Republican Sen. John McCain might well ride out his standoff with federal regulators over his withdrawal from public financing for the primaries.
The contretemps, however, could haunt him in the general election.
The Federal Election Commission's decision to challenge McCain has forced the Arizona senator and likely Republican presidential nominee to defy the government's top campaign finance regulator in an area of law that McCain himself has helped seed with regulations.
His defiance, legally defensible or not, threatens to strip him of the moral high ground he needs to level the financial playing field for the general election.
McCain has been trying to hold Democratic Sen. Barack Obama to an agreement made last year that if both become their respective party nominees, both would participate in the general election public finance system.
Obama has hedged, saying the terms he laid out last year were not a pledge. Such an agreement, after all, would force Obama to holster his vastly superior fundraising operation he has raised $138 million in his one-year quest and require him to confront McCain on equal financial footing. Under public financing, each candidate would get $85 million in government money and be prohibited from spending any money raised from contributors.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton holds town halls in Ohio before speaking at the State of the Black Union in New Orleans. Barack Obama campaigns in Ohio.
THE REPUBLICANS
No events noted.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I have always said that the one thing that I have not seen myself doing is running for elected office in the United States. ... I didn't even run for high school president. It's sort of not in my genes." Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice telling reporters she will not be anyone's running mate in the upcoming presidential election.
STAT OF THE DAY:
More than 5.6 million people in Ohio voted in the 2004 presidential election, compared with 4.7 million people who voted in the 2000 election.
Compiled by Ronald Powers and Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: February 24, 2008

 

End of Document
