

256 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Friday
The Associated Press
February 22, 2008 Friday 8:59 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 800 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
McCain says lobbyists who advise him are honorable ... Obama: It's a "scam" when professors assign the books they wrote ... Analysis: Her back against the wall, Clinton chooses graciousness over criticism ... Gearing up for general election, McCain swings through Midwest
McCain defends lobbyist ties
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) Sen. John McCain said Friday that while lobbyists serve as close advisers to his presidential campaign, they are honorable and he is not influenced by corruption in the system.
McCain, who has styled himself as an enemy of special interests, defended having lobbyists working for his campaign. He is the likely Republican presidential nominee.
"These people have honorable records, and they're honorable people, and I'm proud to have them as part of my team," McCain told reporters following a town hall meeting in Indianapolis.
The issue of lobbying and influence has arisen in published reports, first in The New York Times and then in The Washington Post, suggesting that McCain had an inappropriate relationship with a female lobbyist and advanced the interests of her clients. McCain on Thursday emphatically denied the reports.
Siding with McCain, the White House accused the Times of repeatedly trying to "drop a bombshell" on Republican presidential nominees to undermine their candidacies.
Obama discusses higher education plan
EDINBURG, Texas. (AP) Democrat Barack Obama has a problem with law school professors who write textbooks and require students to buy them.
"It's a huge racket," he told a small group at the University of Texas Pan American on Friday, his voice registering indignation.
Obama, a former constitutional law professor, delivered his verdict at a campaign appearance designed to draw attention to his plans for making college more affordable for lower and middle income students.
He supports a $4,000 tax credit to offset the cost of tuition, on condition that students commit to 100 hours of community service. He favors changing the law so federal Pell Grants keep pace with rising costs.
And he told the students they have to modify their wish lists if they want school administrators to hold down costs. "You can't have it both ways. You can't say to the administration, 'Keep the costs down, but we want a country club,'" the Illinois senator said.
But one student's remark about the cost of textbooks triggered a strong response.
"One of the biggest scams is law professors who write their own textbooks and then assign them to their students," Obama said. He added that they "make a mint" in the process.
Analysis: Clinton chooses graciousness
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton, the Democratic front-runner no more, sought to bury Barack Obama, but also to praise him in their latest campaign debate and revive her own White House hopes in the process.
"No matter what happens in this contest and I am honored, I am honored to be here with Barack Obama," she said Thursday at the conclusion of the 90-minute forum. "Whatever happens, we're going to be fine."
It was an unexpectedly gracious moment in a debate that was supposed to be a game changer for Clinton before the crucial Texas and Ohio primaries March 4. After losing 11 straight contests to Obama in a race now clearly breaking his way, the former first lady chose the high road and even delivered what sounded to many like the dress rehearsal for a campaign valedictory address.
In a round of television appearances Friday morning, Clinton said her remarks were intended as "a recognition that both of us are on the brink of historic change."
Clinton worked hard during the debate to draw contrasts with Obama on issues, pressing her argument that Obama's health care reform proposal would leave 15 million people uninsured. Obama has countered that Clinton's plan, which requires everyone to carry insurance, would force people to purchase coverage they can't afford.
But otherwise, Clinton steered away from any hard-hitting criticism of her rival.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton holds early voting events in Texas before campaigning in Ohio. Barack Obama campaigns in Texas.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain holds a town hall in Indianapolis. Mike Huckabee talks to the media in Colorado Springs, Colo.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"You know, I don't make predictions ... And I'm just going to wait and see what happens. After all, we've got to give the voters a chance to be heard." Democratic Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, when asked on ABC's "Good Morning America" about whether her husband, former President Clinton, was correct in saying that if she wins Ohio and Texas, she'll be the nominee.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Jimmy Carter was the last Democrat to win Texas in a presidential election. In 1976, he garnered 2,082,319 votes while Gerald Ford grabbed 1,953,300 votes.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: February 23, 2008

 

End of Document
