

257 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Thursday
The Associated Press
February 22, 2008 Friday 4:24 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1374 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Clinton and Obama debate in Austin, Texas ... McCain says report suggesting inappropriate relationship "not true" ... Obama wins Democrats Abroad global primary, his 11th straight victory ... FEC chair says McCain can't withdraw from public financing until loan questions resolved ... Change to Win labor federation backs Barack Obama for president ... Huckabee casts himself as Washington outsider best to address change ... Feingold says he's 'inclined' to support Obama in 2008 race
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton accused presidential rival Barack Obama of political plagiarism Thursday night in a campaign debate, but drew boos from the audience when she ridiculed him as the candidate of "change you can Xerox."
Obama dismissed the charge out of hand, then turned the jeers to applause when he countered. "What we shouldn't be spending time doing is tearing each other down. We should be spending time lifting the country up," he said.
The exchange marked an unusually pointed moment in an otherwise civil encounter in the days before March 4 primaries in Texas and Ohio contests that even some Clinton supporters say she must win to sustain her campaign for the White House.
Clinton has lost 11 straight primaries and caucuses, and trails her Democratic rival in the number of convention delegates needed to become the presidential nominee. Obama also won a pair of big union endorsements in the past two days.
In the debate, the two senators disagreed on the proper response to a change in government in Cuba following Fidel Castro's resignation, and sparred about health care, a core issue of the campaign.
Clinton said repeatedly that Obama's plan would leave 15 million Americans uncovered. He, in turn, accused the former first lady of mishandling the issue by working in secrecy when her husband was in the White House.
McCain says report is "not true"
TOLEDO, Ohio (AP) John McCain emphatically denied a romantic relationship with a female telecommunications lobbyist on Thursday and said a report by The New York Times suggesting favoritism for her clients is "not true."
"I'm very disappointed in the article. It's not true," the likely Republican presidential nominee said as his wife, Cindy, stood beside him during a news conference called to address the matter.
"I've served this nation honorably for more than half a century," said McCain, a four-term Arizona senator and former Navy pilot. "At no time have I ever done anything that would betray the public trust."
McCain described the woman in question, lobbyist Vicki Iseman, as a friend.
The newspaper quoted anonymous aides as saying they had urged McCain and Iseman to stay away from each other before his failed presidential campaign in 2000. In its own follow-up story, The Washington Post quoted longtime aide John Weaver, who split with McCain last year, as saying he met with lobbyist Iseman and urged her to steer clear of McCain.
Weaver told the Times he arranged the meeting before the 2000 campaign after "a discussion among the campaign leadership" about Iseman.
But McCain said he was unaware of any such conversation, and denied that his aides ever tried to talk to him about his interactions with Iseman.
Obama wins global primary
WASHINGTON (AP) Barack Obama won the Democrats Abroad global primary in results announced Thursday, giving him 11 straight victories in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination.
The Illinois senator won the primary in which Democrats living in other countries voted by Internet, mail and in person, according to results released by the Democrats Abroad, an organization sanctioned by the national party.
More than 20,000 U.S. citizens living abroad voted in the primary, which ran from Feb. 5 to Feb. 12. Obama won about 65 percent of the vote, according to the results released Thursday.
There is no comparable primary among Republicans, though the GOP has several contests this weekend in U.S. territories, including party caucuses in Puerto Rico Sunday.
McCain loan raises FEC questions
WASHINGTON (AP) The government's top campaign finance regulator says John McCain can't drop out of the primary election's public financing system until he answers questions about a loan he obtained to kickstart his once faltering presidential campaign.
Federal Election Commission Chairman David Mason, in a letter to McCain this week, said the all-but-certain Republican nominee needs to assure the commission that he did not use the promise of public money to help secure a $4 million line of credit he obtained in November.
McCain's lawyer, Trevor Potter, said Wednesday evening that McCain has withdrawn from the system and that the FEC can't stop him. Potter, who was FEC chairman in 1994, said the campaign did not encumber the public funds in any way.
"Well, it was done before in another campaign. ... We think it's perfectly legal. One of our advisers is a former chairman of the FEC, and we are confident that it was an appropriate thing to do," McCain told a news conference Thursday.
Change to Win endorses Obama
WASHINGTON (AP) The new Change to Win labor federation gave its first presidential endorsement to Democratic Sen. Barack Obama on Thursday, saying its 6 million members could help push him over the top and into the general election as the Democratic nominee.
"We think we can make a difference," chair Anna Burger said. "We think it's time to bring this nomination to a close."
The endorsement came after a teleconference between Change to Win's leaders and the heads of the seven unions that make up the federation. The federation's members will now head to the crucial election states of Texas, Ohio and Rhode Island for the upcoming March 4 primaries, as well as in Pennsylvania on April 22.
Change to Win has 175,000 members in Ohio, 60,000 in Texas and 25,000 in Rhode Island, Burger said. Besides leafletting, knocking on doors and advocating for Obama at workplaces, Burger said she expected more than 100,000 Change to Win voters to participate in the Ohio primary alone.
Huckabee casts himself as outsider
HOUSTON (AP) Republican Mike Huckabee portrayed himself Thursday as a Washington outsider who would solve problems his presidential rivals, all with Washington ties, have failed to address.
"What I see is a whole bunch of the same, even the ones who say they're going to change things," the former Arkansas governor told a couple hundred supporters at a morning rally in Houston.
"If you believe Washington has the answers, you've got plenty of choices for president. If you believe they're the ones who messed it up, then tell me and explain to me and justify to me why you would give someone who lives in Washington now, who works there, who is in the middle of the system, why you would give them the keys to make serious changes when they've been there and haven't made any yet?"
Feingold 'inclined' to back Obama
WASHINGTON (AP) Wisconsin Sen. Russ Feingold said he is "inclined" to support Barack Obama for president because of the Democratic candidate's victory in Feingold's state this week.
The Illinois senator won Wisconsin by a 17-percentage-point margin over Hillary Rodham Clinton, a New York senator.
Feingold, a Democrat who has a large following among liberals, declined to say definitively that he would support Obama. As one of 18 Wisconsin superdelegates, Feingold is free to back any candidate at the Democratic National Convention.
Feingold said that in making a final decision, he'll take into account whether a person is the right person for president and can win. "But the largest thought on my mind is what the people of the state indicated," he said.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama debate in Austin, Texas.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain stops in Ohio and Michigan. Mike Huckabee campaigns Texas.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I'm very disappointed in the article. It's not true." John McCain, the likely Republican presidential nominee, in response Thursday to a report by The New York Times that questioned his relationship with a female telecommunications lobbyist.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Forty years ago, just 14 states and the District of Columbia held presidential primaries. In 2008, there were 15 presidential primaries alone on Super Tuesday.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: February 22, 2008

 

End of Document
