

259 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Monday
The Associated Press
February 20, 2008 Wednesday 10:27 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 862 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama wins Wisconsin, Hawaii ... McCain inches closer to delegate goal ... Candidate wives' spar over remarks ... Candidates comment on Castro announcement ...   
Democrats vote in Wisconsin and Hawaii
WASHINGTON (AP) Barack Obama won the Wisconsin primary and the Hawaii caucuses Tuesday night, his 10th consecutive triumph over a fading Hillary Rodham Clinton in their epic struggle for the Democratic presidential nomination.
Obama cut deeply into Clinton's political bedrock, splitting the support of white women almost evenly with the former first lady and running well among working class voters in a blue collar battleground, according to polling place interviews.
The economy and trade were key issues in the race, and seven in 10 voters said international trade has resulted in lost jobs in Wisconsin. Fewer than one in five said trade has created more jobs than it has lost.
John McCain won the Republican primary with ease, dispatching former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee and edging closer to the 1,191 delegates he needs to clinch the nomination at the party convention in St. Paul, Minn., this summer.
McCain inches closer to delegate goal
WASHINGTON (AP) John McCain moved closer to clinching the Republican presidential nomination Tuesday, winning delegates in Wisconsin and in the state of Washington.
Barack Obama extended his delegate lead by winning the Democratic primary in Wisconsin over Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Overall, McCain had 942 delegates and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee had 245. It will take 1,191 delegates to claim the Republican nomination at this summer's national nominating convention.
Huckabee faces a nearly impossible task. He is close to needing help from Mitt Romney's former delegates just to remain a viable candidate. Romney has withdrawn from the race and endorsed McCain. But the former Massachusetts governor has little authority over his 253 delegates, most of whom will be free agents at the convention.
Candidate wives spar over remarks
BROOKFIELD, Wis. (AP) Cindy McCain, the wife of Republican presidential candidate John McCain, said Tuesday she's proud of her country a comment seen as a veiled reference to Michelle Obama's recent remark on patriotism.
"I'm proud of my country, I don't know about you, if you heard those words earlier. I'm very proud of my country. I'm proud to be a person who voted in elections and I hope that all of you will do so today," Cindy McCain said at a Wisconsin rally.
She appeared to be referring to a remark that the wife of Democratic candidate Barack Obama made Monday in Milwaukee.
"Let me tell you, for the first time in my adult life, I am really proud of my country. Not just because Barack is doing well, but I think people are hungry for change," Michelle Obama said.
Asked by reporters whether Mrs. McCain was referring to the remark by the Illinois Democrat's wife, John McCain said: "I don't think we have any comment on that." Then he turned to his wife and asked her whether she'd like to respond.
"I just wanted to make the statement that I have, and always will be, proud of my country," Mrs. McCain said a statement she reiterated later in Columbus, Ohio.
Candidates seek release of Cuban prisoners
WASHINGTON (AP) Presidential candidates Hillary Rodham Clinton, Barack Obama and John McCain called for the release of political prisoners in Cuba following Fidel Castro's resignation Tuesday.
All three candidates also said the United States should look for ways to encourage Democratic reforms in Cuba.
"We need a president who will work with countries around the world Europe, Western hemisphere to push Cuba now to join the community of nations and become a democracy, and I will certainly do that as president," Clinton told patrons at a diner in Parma, Ohio, where she is campaigning ahead of the state's March 4 Democratic primary.
In a statement released by her campaign, the New York senator said that if elected president, "I will engage our partners in Latin America and Europe who have a strong stake in seeing a peaceful transition to democracy in Cuba, and who want very much for the United States to play a constructive role to that end. The United States must pursue an active policy that does everything possible to advance the cause of freedom, democracy and opportunity in Cuba."
Obama, who is waging a hard-fought campaign with Clinton for the Democratic nomination, also urged that the U.S. be prepared to take steps to normalize relations with Cuba and to ease the trade embargo of the last five decades if the Cuban leadership "begins opening Cuba to meaningful democratic change."
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton had Ohio stops in Parma and Youngstown. Barack Obama campaigned in Texas.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain had events in Wisconsin and Ohio. Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee planned a news conference in Little Rock, Ark.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Freedom for the Cuban people is not yet at hand, " GOP Sen. John McCain, reacting to Castro's resignation.
STAT OF THE DAY:
826,356: The number of Democrats who voted in Wisconsin's 2004 presidential primary.
40: The winning percentage that went to eventual nominee Democratic John Kerry in Wisconsin.
 Load-Date: February 21, 2008

 

End of Document
