

264 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 for Thursday
The Associated Press
February 14, 2008 Thursday 11:08 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1197 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Former Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney endorses McCain ... Clinton wins New Mexico's Democratic caucus and adds one more delegate ... Black lawmakers rethink their support for Clinton ... Clinton outlines plan to crack down on special corporate interests ... Obama wins endorsement of food workers union, former Republican Sen. Lincoln Chafee ... Huckabee tells Wisconsin voters the game isn't over
Romney endorses McCain
BOSTON (AP) Republican campaign dropout Mitt Romney endorsed John McCain for the party's presidential nomination and asked his national convention delegates to swing behind the likely nominee.
"Even when the contest was close and our disagreements were debated, the caliber of the man was apparent," the former Massachusetts governor said, standing alongside his former rival at his now-defunct campaign's headquarters. "As a party, we come together."
"We all know this was a hard campaign ... and now we move forward, we move forward together for the good of our party and the nation," said McCain, who was campaigning in Vermont and Rhode Island earlier in the day and added a flight to Boston to accept the endorsement.
The two met privately before appearing together at a brief news conference Thursday.
McCain effectively sealed the nomination last week when Romney withdrew from the race; only former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee and libertarian-leaning Texas Rep. Ron Paul remain. But neither has a chance to catch McCain in the convention delegate hunt.
Clinton wins N.M. caucus vote
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton finally won the popular vote in New Mexico's Democratic caucus and picked up one extra delegate Thursday, nine days after Super Tuesday voting ended.
State Democratic Chairman Brian Colon made the announcement after a marathon hand count of 17,000 provisional ballots that had to be given to voters on Feb. 5 because of long lines and a shortage of ballots. The final statewide count gave her a 1,709-vote edge over rival Sen. Barack Obama, 73,105 or 48.8 percent of the total vote to 71,396 or 47.6 percent.
Clinton's victory in the popular vote swung the final unallocated New Mexico delegate into her column.
With the addition of New Mexico's delegate, the national delegate count stood at 1,276 for Obama and 1,220 for Clinton on Thursday.
Black lawmakers rethink Clinton support
WASHINGTON (AP) In a fresh sign of trouble for Hillary Rodham Clinton, one of the former first lady's congressional black supporters intends to vote for Barack Obama at the Democratic National Convention, and a second, more prominent lawmaker is openly discussing a possible switch.
Rep. David Scott's defection and Rep. John Lewis' remarks highlight one of the challenges confronting Clinton in a campaign that pits a black man against a woman for a nomination that historically has been the exclusive property of white men.
"You've got to represent the wishes of your constituency," Scott said in an interview Wednesday in the Capitol. The third-term lawmaker represents a district that gave more than 80 percent of its vote to Obama in the Feb. 5 Georgia primary.
Lewis, whose Atlanta-area district voted 3-to-1 for Obama, said he is not ready to abandon his backing for the former first lady. But several associates said the nationally known civil rights figure has become increasingly torn about his early endorsement of Clinton. They spoke on condition of anonymity, citing private conversations.
Clinton's recent string of eight primary and caucus defeats coincides with an evident shift in momentum in the contest for support from party officials who will attend the convention. The former first lady still holds a sizable lead among the roughly 800 so-called superdelegates, who are chosen outside the primary and caucus system.
Clinton challenges special interests
LORDSTOWN, Ohio (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton, criticized for taking corporate special interest contributions, proposed new restrictions Thursday on oil, insurance, credit card, student loan and Wall Street investment companies that she said would save middle-class Americans $55 billion a year.
"For seven long years, we've had a government of, by, and for the special interests, and we've had enough," the New York senator told an audience at a General Motors plant that she toured here. "It's time to level the playing field against the special interests and deliver 21st century solutions to rebuild the middle class."
She spoke just a day after rival Barack Obama stopped at a GM plant in Janesville, Wis., to unveil a $210 billion economic plan to create jobs in construction and environmental industries.
Clinton was in Ohio to press her strategy of focusing on the biggest March 4 primary states Texas and Ohio where she still holds the lead in polls. She is hoping for a comeback to stop a tide that has given Obama eight straight victories since Super Tuesday.
Food workers union backs Obama
MILWAUKEE, Wis. (AP) Barack Obama has won the backing of the United Food and Commercial Workers, a politically active union with significant membership in the upcoming Democratic battlegrounds.
The Illinois senator also picked up an endorsement Thursday from former Republican Sen. Lincoln Chafee of Rhode Island.
The 1.3-million member UFCW gives Obama an organizational boost in vital upcoming contests, with 69,000 members in the Buckeye state and another 26,000 in Texas. The two states have a large number of delegates and are where Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton hopes to stop Obama's winning streak on March 4.
The food workers also have 19,000 members in Wisconsin, which holds a primary Tuesday.
Chafee, who left the GOP last year and became an independent, said Obama has the intelligence, ideas and fortitude needed to be the next president.
Huckabee: The game isn't over
MADISON, Wis. (AP) Mike Huckabee told supporters they could help muddle expectations if they vote for him in Tuesday's state primary instead of John McCain, the likely Republican presidential nominee.
McCain has a commanding lead over Huckabee in the chase for convention delegates.
"We're not ready to simply say game over," Huckabee told about 500 people gathered at a downtown hotel. "If I win Wisconsin, there'll be some people scratching their heads at those anchor desks saying 'We don't understand this. We don't know what's going on.'"
THE DEMOCRATS
New York Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton campaigns in Ohio. Illinois Sen. Barack Obama has no scheduled events.
THE REPUBLICANS
Arizona Sen. John McCain holds events in Vermont and Rhode Island. Mike Huckabee campaigns in Wisconsin.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"As all of you saw over the past year, things can get pretty rough in a political campaign, and in the thick of the fight it's easy to lose sight of your opponent's finer qualities. But the truth of the matter is that in the case of Senator McCain I could never quite do that." Mitt Romney, a former Republican presidential candidate, in endorsing John McCain.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Eighty-seven percent of Americans think a president can have at least some influence on the way other countries view the U.S., according to an AP-Yahoo News survey released Jan. 31.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: February 15, 2008

 

End of Document
