

270 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 for Friday
The Associated Press
February 8, 2008 Friday 11:15 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1097 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Wisconsin congressman endorses Obama for president after backing Edwards ... McCain says talk of running mate is premature, but discounts need for regional balance ... Huckabee tells Kansans he still has a shot to be the GOP nominee ... Bush says 'prosperity and peace' are at stake in November presidential election
Obey switches endorsement to Obama
SEATTLE (AP) Wisconsin Congressman Dave Obey switched his support from John Edwards, who has withdrawn from the race, to Democrat Barack Obama.
Obey said in a statement Friday that he believes both Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton would make "outstanding" presidents, but he believes Obama has the best chance of giving the country a new beginning.
Washington Gov. Chris Gregoire also endorsed Obama on Friday at a rally in Seattle.
"He is leading us toward a positive feeling of hope in our country and I love seeing that happen," Gregoire said in an interview with The Associated Press. "I believe the nation faces significant challenges domestically and internationally and Obama is the person who has the ability to reach across artificial divides and move our nation forward. Barack is that kind of leader."
Washington holds its Democratic caucuses Saturday afternoon. Wisconsin primaries are Feb. 19.
McCain discounts ticket-balancing
NORFOLK, Va. (AP) On his first full day as the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, John McCain fended off discussion of specific potential running mates but made clear he sees no requirement to pick someone from a different region.
"I don't want to in any way sidestep the candidacy of Governor Huckabee," McCain told reporters here before flying off to Wichita, Kan., and Seattle. "He's in this race, and for me to dismiss him would be inappropriate and unrealistic."
Since McCain's chief rival, Mitt Romney, suspended his campaign Thursday, some party figures and commentators have suggested McCain might select Mike Huckabee as a vice presidential nominee to benefit from the Arkansas governor's proven appeal in the South, where McCain has less support.
"From a practical standpoint, I think former President Clinton and Vice President Gore showed us you don't have to be regionally different," McCain said. "I think America is such that, quote, regional differences don't play the role that maybe they did in earlier times." Clinton, a former Arkansas governor, and Sen. Al Gore of Tennessee made the first national ticket entirely from the South.
McCain held a morning round-table discussion on national security in the Navy town of Norfolk, Va., and the one-time Vietnam prisoner of war stuck to military issues, which have helped him make inroads with his conservative critics.
Obama on global warming
SEATTLE (AP) Democrat Barack Obama said Friday the nation must accept the costs of reducing carbon emissions to combat global warming, a key issue in this eco-conscious city in the Northwest.
Campaigning a day before Washington's presidential caucus, the Illinois senator said he would implement policies aimed at reducing carbon emissions by 80 percent by 2050. He also said automakers must be required to make vehicles more fuel efficient.
Such measures, he told reporters here, will raise prices for consumers and businesses initially, but will lead eventually to cost savings and reduced greenhouse gases.
"We have to put a price on all pollution," Obama said after visiting a large pipe-welding plant here.
He said the government would have to help lower-income households pay energy bills that would rise because of restrictions on carbon emissions.
He also made a subtle and indirect swipe at former president Bill Clinton, husband of his rival for the Democratic nomination, Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York.
The government's inaction on climate change "is the failure of a president who spent most of his time in office denying the very existence of global warming," Obama said, referring to President Bush. He added: "But it's also a failure of politics that predates George Bush and Dick Cheney," including Democratic and Republican administrations of the past few decades.
Huckabee tells Kansans he has a chance
OLATHE, Kan. (AP) Republican Mike Huckabee attempted on Friday to dispel the notion that rival John McCain has a lock on the Republican presidential nomination.
"We still believe that there's a chance to win this thing," Huckabee told reporters after his rally in this Kansas City suburb. "Any given day, a candidate can say one word that gets YouTubed and his campaign's done."
Huckabee and Texas Rep. Ron Paul remain in the race after Mitt Romney bowed out Thursday. Paul and Huckabee have narrow voting constituencies and are far behind McCain in the hunt for delegates to the GOP's nominating convention this summer.
In his speech, Huckabee made it clear that he plans to stay in the race.
"An election is about a choice, not a coronation," he said, adding that Americans deserve the chance to vote for an unapologetic conservative.
Kansas Republicans hold their caucus Saturday.
Bush rallies conservatives for campaign
WASHINGTON (AP) Without naming John McCain, President Bush marshaled the conservative wing of the Republican Party on Friday to back the presumed GOP presidential nominee in the upcoming battle against the Democratic Party.
"The stakes in November are high. This is an important election. Prosperity and peace are in the balance," Bush told about 2,000 people attending the Conservative Political Action Conference. "So with confidence in our vision and faith in our values, let us go forward, fight for victory and keep the White House in 2008."
Bush is not ready to weigh in formally on the election, even though Mitt Romney announced Thursday that he was suspending his campaign, virtually sealing the nomination for McCain. The president is, however, priming the GOP's conservative base to get ready to back McCain.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton holds events in Tacoma and Spokane, Wash. Barack Obama holds a rally in Seattle.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain holds a round-table discussion of national security in Virginia before stopping in Kansas and Washington. Mike Huckabee campaigns in Kansas.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"We have had good debates and soon we will have a nominee who will carry a conservative banner into this election and beyond." President Bush, speaking Friday at the Conservative Political Action Conference in Washington.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Democrat Barack Obama is seen as refreshing by 65 percent of Democrats and 38 percent of Republicans, according to an AP-Yahoo News survey released Feb. 1.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: February 9, 2008

 

End of Document
