

286 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Wednesday
The Associated Press
January 23, 2008 Wednesday 9:12 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1355 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama says Clinton engages in double-talk on issues like bankruptcy law, trade ... Romney counts on business resume to reassure voters ... Edwards criticizes Clinton for leaving South Carolina before primary ... McCain says U.S. economy can recover despite current anxiety ... Giuliani gets new peg for tax plan from lawmakers on Capitol Hill ... Pennsylvania Gov. Ed Rendell endorses Hillary Clinton in Democratic presidential race ... Former Arkansas Gov. Huckabee created fund for portrait, special events
Obama criticizes Clinton's candor
ROCK HILL, S.C. (AP) Democrat Barack Obama resumed his criticisms of rival Hillary Rodham Clinton's candor and trustworthiness Wednesday, saying she has indulged in double-talk on bankruptcy laws, trade and other issues.
Politicians "don't always say what they mean, or mean what they say," the Illinois senator told about 900 people at Winthrop University in Rock Hill, S.C. "That is what this debate in this party is all about."
Meanwhile, Obama's campaign complained Wednesday in a letter to the Nevada Democratic Party that Clinton benefited from numerous violations of party rules, including instances of early door closings and improper handling of voter preference cards, during the state's caucuses last Saturday.
Clinton won the caucuses with 51 percent of the popular vote to Obama's 45 percent. Under complicated delegate allocation rules, however, Obama could receive 13 delegates to Clinton's 12.
Romney focuses on business resume
SARASOTA, Fla. (AP) With recession fears growing, Mitt Romney's latest television ad is part resume, part resolve. And all reassurance.
"I know how America works because I spent my life in the real economy," says the man who made millions as a venture capitalist. "My plan will make America strong."
No mention of John McCain, Rudy Giuliani or Mike Huckabee, Republican presidential rivals whose campaign credentials lean heavily on government service. The point is unmistakable, all the same.
The ad is the most visible element of Romney's strategy for the final week of the Florida primary. After a series of early campaign setbacks and one notable triumph, the former Massachusetts governor and aides have concluded that even in a state with relatively low unemployment, economic anxiety is his best hope for a victory that could finally set him on a path to the nomination.
Also on Wednesday, Sen. Thad Cochran, R-Miss., endorsed Romney's bid for the White House.
"At this moment our nation faces unprecedented challenges, and Governor Romney has the experience, vision and values needed to strengthen our country for future generations," Cochran said in the statement released by the campaign.
Edwards jabs Clinton for leaving SC
BENNETTSVILLE, S.C. (AP) Democrat John Edwards criticized rival Hillary Rodham Clinton for leaving South Carolina in the run-up to the state's primary, saying residents should question whether the New York senator would return if she became president.
"After the debate she flew out and she's been gone and she won't be back until I don't know later in the week or until primary day," Edwards told a crowd of about 150 people here. "What are the chances she's coming back when she's president of the United States?"
Clinton took part in Monday night's debate in Myrtle Beach and then left to campaign in states scheduled to hold contests Feb. 5, including California, New Mexico and New Jersey. She's expected to return to South Carolina on Thursday, and her husband has been campaigning for her in the state this week
McCain says economy can make a comeback
ORLANDO, Fla. (AP) Republican John McCain said he believes the U.S. economy can recover despite anxiety over a prospective recession.
"Our economy is experiencing significant challenges," the Arizona senator said. "I believe the fundamentals of our economy are still strong. And, nothing is inevitable, and I am convinced that we can make a comeback."
McCain spent Wednesday morning at an Orlando company that makes spas and hot tubs, meeting with local business leaders and holding an economic round-table with them.
Also Wednesday, Retired Army Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf endorsed McCain's bid for the White House.
"Senator John McCain has served our country with honor in war and in peace," Schwarzkopf, who commanded U.S. forces in the 1991 Persian Gulf war, said in a statement released by the campaign. "He has demonstrated the type of courageous leadership our country sorely needs at this time."
Giuliani gets new peg for tax plan
ESTERO, Fla. (AP) Republican Rudy Giuliani reached to Washington to help him win Florida.
The former New York major has banked on his tax-cut message putting him over the top in this state's pivotal GOP primary next Tuesday, but what he's been saying for weeks has given him little traction.
On Wednesday, Giuliani found a new peg for his argument: that lawmakers in Congress who support him were introducing a bill on Capitol Hill that mirrors his tax proposals.
Among the sponsors of the proposal are Sen. Kit Bond, R-Mo., and Rep. David Dreier, R-Calif. They scheduled an afternoon news conference in Washington to pitch its ties to Giuliani.
Giuliani wasn't shy at all about claiming credit for the action occurring 1,069 miles away. He said Dreier consulted him before introducing the bill to see "if I thought it should be done now." Giuliani said he would wait on instructions from the lawmakers before actively lobbying other members on the legislation.
Pa. governor endorses Clinton
CARLISLE, Pa. (AP) Pennsylvania Gov. Ed Rendell said Wednesday he is backing Hillary Rodham Clinton for president, a key endorsement in a delegate-rich state that could be critical if the race remains unresolved after Super Tuesday.
Rendell said he has known Clinton for at least 15 years, was impressed with her as first lady and feels her performance as a New York senator has been "spectacular."
"She really cares about moving this country forward," Rendell said.
Pennsylvania's primary is April 22.
Huckabee created fund for portrait
LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (AP) Republican Mike Huckabee has not disclosed contributors to a private fund he used as Arkansas governor to raise money for his official portrait and for a ceremony in honor of the state quarter.
A 2001 law requires governors and certain other elected officials to disclose donations and gifts received on behalf of the state. Graham Sloan, director of the state Ethics Commission, said he believes that means Huckabee should have disclosed donors to the account.
The state helped manage the account while Huckabee was governor and the fund has since been closed, said Janis Harrison, director of administrative services for the state Department of Finance and Administration.
"It was a private bank account that was used to collect donations from people who wanted to contribute to state events so taxpayer money would not be used for those events," Harrison said Wednesday.
The Arkansas Democrat-Gazette first reported on the fund Wednesday and said it was revealed through a Freedom of Information Act request made by the newspaper.
Huckabee campaign spokeswoman Alice Stewart told the newspaper that Huckabee was not involved with the management of the fund. Stewart did not immediately return a call from The Associated Press on Wednesday morning.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton stops in Philadelphia before campaigning in New Jersey. Barack Obama and John Edwards talk to voters in South Carolina.
THE REPUBLICANS
Mitt Romney, Rudy Giuliani, John McCain and Mike Huckabee campaign in Florida.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"We'll certainly invite him to the inauguration party. We can see there." Democrat Barack Obama, speaking on ABC's "Good Morning America," about whether he would give President Clinton an age allowance on dancing. Obama had joked at Monday's debate that he would have to investigate Clinton's dancing abilities to determine whether the former president was the United States' first black president.
STAT OF THE DAY:
One in seven people surveyed last month in an AP-Yahoo News poll did not know Hillary Rodham Clinton represents New York in the Senate.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: January 24, 2008

 

End of Document
