

287 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Tuesday
The Associated Press
January 23, 2008 Wednesday 3:30 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1247 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Clinton, Obama trade accusations after rancorous debate ... Republican Fred Thompson quits race ... Huckabee aides forgoing paychecks or leaving campaign ... McCain takes aim on New York, rival Rudy Giuliani's turf ... Clinton to begin advertising in Oklahoma ... Romney uses "Economic Turnaround" for campaign backdrop ... Rep. Bennie Thompson backs Obama's ... Edwards earns union support, discusses details of economic plan
Clinton, Obama crossfire continues
WASHINGTON (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton said Tuesday that Barack Obama's frustration with losing prompted him to look for a fight in their latest debate. Obama said his rival and her husband, former President Clinton, were distorting his record.
"I think it's very clear that Senator Clinton ... and the president have been spending the last month attacking me in ways that are not accurate," Obama told reporters during a conference call shortly after she lashed out at him in a bitter exchange that carried over from Monday night's debate.
Speaking to reporters in Washington, Hillary Clinton belittled Obama's line of debate criticism against her as "rehearsed points."
"I think what we saw last night was that he's very frustrated," she said. "I believe that the events of the last 10 or so days, the outcome of New Hampshire and Nevada, have apparently convinced him to adopt a different strategy."
In the debate in Myrtle Beach, S.C., the two argued bitterly and in personal terms over issues such as Iraq and Bill Clinton's role in the campaign.
Clinton also was endorsed Tuesday by the United Farm Workers, adding another powerful union to her stable of organized labor supporters. The union is active in 10 states and represents 27,000 farm workers.
Thompson quits presidential race
NAPLES, Fla. (AP) Republican Fred Thompson, the actor-politician who attracted more attention as a potential presidential candidate than as a real one, quit the race after a string of poor finishes.
"Today, I have withdrawn my candidacy for president of the United States. I hope that my country and my party have benefited from our having made this effort," the former Tennessee senator said in a brief statement.
Thompson's fate was sealed last Saturday in the South Carolina primary, when he finished third in a state he had said he needed to win.
In the statement, Thompson did not say whether he would endorse any of his former rivals. He was one of a few members of Congress who supported Arizona Sen. John McCain in 2000 in his unsuccessful race against George W. Bush.
Some Huckabee aides forgoing paychecks
ATLANTA (AP) In a sign of the financial difficulties facing Republican Mike Huckabee, his presidential campaign said Tuesday that top advisers are working without pay and some aides have left.
"Most people are staying on," but a few have departed, adviser Ed Rollins said in an interview. "A number of people, including myself," have agreed to forgo their pay in order to spend as much as possible on television ads in vital states, Rollins said.
Campaign contributions continue to come in, he said. But he acknowledged that the former Arkansas governor is stretched thin as he tries to compete in Florida's primary next Tuesday and many of the two dozen states holding contests Feb. 5.
Huckabee told reporters late Monday he would evaluate the situation in Florida daily and decide whether to keep campaigning in the state.
McCain heads to Giuliani's turf
FORT WALTON BEACH, Fla. (AP) Republican John McCain is taking aim on New York, raising money on rival Rudy Giuliani's turf and picking up the endorsement of the former New York mayor's longtime nemesis former Sen. Alfonse D'Amato.
Polls showed the Arizona senator leading or tied with the hometown candidate in New York, which votes in two weeks and offers 101 delegates.
Buoyed by the prospects of winning in New York, McCain aides sent reporters a news release listing several dozen New York supporters.
As for D'Amato, he was switching his allegiance to McCain from Fred Thompson, who just withdrew from the race.
Clinton to begin advertising in Okla.
OKLAHOMA CITY (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton will begin running television ads in Oklahoma this week, making her the first presidential candidate of either major party to do so.
A 30-second commercial describing the senator from New York as the candidate "who stands up for all of you" will run on television stations across the state starting Wednesday, said campaign spokesman Isaac Baker.
Oklahoma is one of 22 states that will hold a Democratic primary or caucus on Feb. 5, or Super Tuesday.
Baker declined to say how much Clinton's campaign is spending on the ads.
Romney uses economy as backdrop
CORAL SPRINGS, Fla. (AP) Republican Mitt Romney showed off a new backdrop for his campaign events a few hours after the Federal Reserve cut interest rates and the stock market fell on recession fears.
"Economic Turnaround," it reads. The backdrop goes with another that says "Washington is Broken," a message the former Massachusetts governor uses on the stump.
Romney faces a tight race in Florida. "I intend to win, but I know so do the other guys," he said at a news conference.
Rep. Thompson backs Obama
WASHINGTON (AP) Rep. Bennie Thompson, chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee, endorsed Barack Obama on Tuesday, saying he favored the Illinois senator's position on the economy and his ability to energize new voters.
"I looked at the field," Thompson said during a conference call with Obama and reporters. "Although it's a good field, I think your message resonates a lot more with the American people."
Thompson said Obama's plan for the economy "hits directly at the heart of the problem that we are facing right now in this country."
Obama said Thompson, a Mississippi Democrat, was an important addition to the coalition of leaders that have joined his campaign. "He's been a voice for change who has strengthened our civil rights," he said.
Edwards earns union support
CONWAY, S.C. (AP) Democrat John Edwards won the endorsement of one of South Carolina's largest unions as he gave details of an economic plan his campaign said would offer his native state's struggling economy $1.5 billion in relief.
"Our country is no longer on the brink of a recession. I mean we're in one," Edwards said during a conference call with reporters Tuesday.
Meanwhile, the state's chapter of the Communications Workers of America gave the former North Carolina senator its support. The union has more than 2,200 active members and more than 1,700 retired members in South Carolina.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton held a news conference in Washington and town-hall style meetings in California and Arizona. Barack Obama and John Edwards campaigned in South Carolina.
THE REPUBLICANS
Mitt Romney and Rudy Giuliani campaigned in Florida. John McCain held a rally in Florida before heading to New York. Mike Huckabee campaigned in Atlanta before attending a fundraiser in Florida.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"While Senator Clinton and Senator Obama were hurling charges and countercharges at each other, I was thinking, 'I'm John Edwards and I represent the grown-up wing of the Democratic Party.'" Democrat John Edwards, in a conference call with reporters, discussing Monday night's debate.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Twenty percent of registered voters said they did not vote in the 2004 presidential election because they were too busy or had conflicting work or school schedules, according to the Census Bureau.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: January 23, 2008

 

End of Document
