

288 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Monday
The Associated Press
January 21, 2008 Monday 9:02 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1264 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Democrats honor King in South Carolina at chilly outdoor rally ... Republicans praise King's legacy, belief in equality ... McCain says he'll send his mom to wash actor Norris' mouth ... Romney says he'd be better than McCain, Giuliani on fixing economy ... Obama airs biographical ad on national cable ... Giuliani draws small crowds at Florida stops
Democrats honor King in SC
COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) The Democratic presidential contenders spoke warmly of Martin Luther King Jr. and sometimes of each other on Monday's national holiday honoring the slain civil rights leader.
In a ceremony on the steps of the state Capitol, Hillary Rodham Clinton, Barack Obama and John Edwards addressed an annual King Day rally sponsored by the NAACP. Five days before South Carolina's primary, the first this year in which black voters will play a significant role, thousands of people stood shivering in the cold to hear the speeches. Many held signs in support of one or another of the candidates.
Obama won the loudest and most enthusiastic reception, but Clinton and Edwards were also warmly welcomed. Polls show the Illinois senator leading the field in South Carolina, a state he needs to win to remain a co-frontrunner with Clinton after losing contests in Nevada and New Hampshire.
Clinton recalled hearing King speak in Chicago when she was a teenager, and implored voters to realize his vision of racial and economic equality by voting in Saturday's primary.
"The dream is nowhere fulfilled," she said. "Now we are called to rise up, speak up and finally get it done."
Clinton and Edwards both also praised Obama's pioneering candidacy.
"To be able to be on the stage in my native state with an extraordinary and talented young man who's running for the presidency of the United States and is African-American makes me so proud of my state," Edwards said.
Republicans praise King's legacy
WASHINGTON (AP) Republican presidential candidates praised Martin Luther King Jr.'s vision of freedom and equality Monday.
"On this day of remembrance, we honor Dr. King best by honoring his vision for racial harmony and continuing the worldwide struggle for those values for which Dr. King fought so courageously," John McCain said in a written statement.
Mitt Romney said King proved that one person can make a difference, but more work needs to be done. "The failure of our inner city schools is the great civil rights issue of our time," Romney said in a statement.
Rudy Giuliani said King's "strength of character continues to inspire our nation to form a more perfect union."
Mike Huckabee celebrated the holiday at a service at King's Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta.
McCain responds to Norris comment on age
MIAMI (AP) John McCain had a ready response Monday for actor Chuck Norris who said while campaigning for GOP rival Mike Huckabee that the Arizona senator is too old to handle the pressures of being president.
"I'm afraid that I may have to send my 95-year-old mother over to wash Chuck's mouth out with soap," McCain said after feigning anger.
On Sunday, Norris said at his Navasota, Texas, ranch while hosting a fundraiser for Huckabee that: "I didn't pick John to support because I'm just afraid that the vice president would wind up taking over his job in that four-year presidency."
Norris, 67, is four years younger than McCain, who will be 72 in August. Huckabee will be 52 in August.
Romney says he's the man to fix economy
ORLANDO, Fla. (AP) Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney compared himself favorably to two of his Republican White House rivals on Monday yet made no mention of a third, underscoring his strategy for next week's Florida primary.
In television interviews and personal appearances, Romney said that unlike himself, both Arizona Sen. John McCain and former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani would "have a relatively difficult time" strengthening an economy that is in danger of falling into a recession.
"I've spent my life, 25 years ... in the world of business," he said. "I know why jobs come and go."
McCain has been in the Senate for more than two decades, and Giuliani was a government prosecutor and two-term mayor before he began his own company.
At another point, Romney aligned himself with Giuliani, who has recently criticized McCain on tax cuts.
"I think on this one Rudy is right," Romney said. "John McCain voted against the Bush tax cuts. He says he would still do it again."
By contrast, Romney did not mention former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, a third rival in the race for the presidential nomination.
Obama airs biographical ad
WASHINGTON (AP) Democrat Barack Obama's campaign is airing an ad on national cable meant to introduce the Illinois senator in the more than 20 states that hold presidential nominating contests on Feb. 5.
The ad features three Obama admirers who fit into his story line. Harvard Law professor Laurence Tribe, who Obama aides have said was a mentor to Obama in law school, attests to his academic credentials as well as to his work as a Chicago community organizer. Republican Illinois state Sen. Kirk Dillard, who is supporting John McCain for the GOP nomination, presents Obama as a bipartisan lawmaker. U.S. Sen. Claire McCaskill, D-Mo., praises Obama's work on ethics legislation, an issue he often mentions to illustrate his legislative leadership.
"It was inspiring, absolutely inspiring to see someone as brilliant as Barack Obama take all of the talent and devote it to making people's lives better," Tribe says in the ad.
Though Obama's name may now be well-known in many U.S. households, voters outside the early voting states may know little of his background. The 60-second television spot is airing on CNN and MSNBC.
Giuliani sees small crowds in Fla.
DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. (AP) Rudy Giuliani's crowds have been a bit flat and small during a two-day, eight-event bus tour across Florida.
At his first event Monday, only a few dozen people showed up at the aptly chosen Presidential Ballroom at Church Street, a banquet facility near downtown Orlando. Giuliani was enthusiastically welcomed, mostly fervor aimed at the endorsement from New York Yankees' star outfielder Johnny Damon, who was accompanying the former New York mayor for the day.
In Sun City Center, Fla., on Sunday he got polite applause in a large, but half-empty, community hall. His team did fill the rooms at most of his other Sunday events, though most were small venues.
At a rally Monday afternoon in Daytona Beach, Giuliani asked early voters for to show their hands. About a dozen people in the crowd of about a couple of hundred raised their hands.
"Well, you can't vote again," he said to laughter. "But you can get somebody else to vote. I need your vote."
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton, Barack Obama and John Edwards spoke at an NAACP rally to honor Martin Luther King Jr. in Columbia, S.C. They are to debate in Myrtle Beach, S.C.
THE REPUBLICANS
Mitt Romney, John McCain and Rudy Giuliani campaign in Florida. Mike Huckabee attended an event in Atlanta before heading to Florida to campaign.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Every day our politics fuels and exploits divisions across races and region, across gender and party. It's played out on television, it's sensationalized in the media, and it's crept into the presidential campaign in a way that serves to obscure the issues." Democrat Barack Obama, in Columbia, S.C.
STAT OF THE DAY:
About seven in 10 supporters of Republican Mike Huckabee are evangelicals, roughly double rival Rudy Giuliani's percentage and triple Mitt Romney's, according to an AP-Yahoo News survey last month.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: January 22, 2008

 

End of Document
