

292 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Thursday
The Associated Press
January 17, 2008 Thursday 10:44 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1398 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES THURSDAY
Judge dismisses Nevada caucus challenge, in boost for Obama ... Clinton in California quotes King, tries mending relations with black voters ... Romney criticizes campaign lobbyists despite having some as advisers ... McCain proposes corporate tax break ... Thompson not ready to support economic stimulus package ... Huckabee says S.C. should decide whether to fly Confederate flag ... Edwards highlights rivals' weaknesses ... Giuliani applauds Bush for putting US on offensive against terrorism ... GOP delegates from early voting states sent to back of the room
Judge dismisses Nevada caucus challenge
LAS VEGAS (AP) A union with ties to Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton failed in court to prevent casino workers from caucusing at special precincts on the Las Vegas strip.
The ruling by U.S. District Court Judge James Mahan was presumed to be a boost for Clinton rival Barack Obama in the Democratic presidential caucuses Saturday because he has been endorsed by the union representing many of the shift workers who will be able to use the precincts on the Las Vegas strip.
"State Democrats have a First Amendment right to association, to assemble and to set their own rules," Mahan said.
Nevada's Democratic Party approved creation of the precincts to make it easier for housekeepers, waitresses and bellhops to caucus during the day near work rather than have to do so in their neighborhoods.
The Clinton campaign said it was not involved in the suit.
Clinton tries to mend ties to blacks
COMPTON, Calif. (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton pledged to improve economic opportunities for blacks if elected president and work for the rebirth of this largely black city, which is struggling with crime and poverty.
"Those who say it can't be done are usually interrupted by those who are doing it," Clinton said at a church in Compton, quoting black novelist James Baldwin.
Clinton is trying to mend fences with blacks after her contest with Barack Obama aggravated racial sensitivities.
Romney criticizes rivals' lobbyists
COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) Republican Mitt Romney said he could govern in the country's best interest because "I don't have lobbyists running my campaign," although Washington insiders are on his senior staff and registered lobbyists are top advisers.
One of them, Ron Kaufman, chairman of the Washington-based Dutko Group, regularly sits across the aisle from Romney on his campaign plane, participates in debate strategy sessions and last week accompanied Romney to a lunch in Myrtle Beach with Sen. Jim DeMint, R-S.C.
Another adviser, former Rep. Vin Weber, R-Minn., is chairman of Romney's policy committee. He also is chief executive officer of Clark & Weinstock, and his corporate biography says he "provides strategic advice to institutions with matters before the legislative and executive branches of the federal government."
Aides said later that Romney's comment was directed at rival John McCain, the Arizona senator whose campaign manager, Rick Davis, is a registered lobbyist.
McCain proposes business tax cuts
COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) Despite calls in Washington for short-term economic relief, Republican John McCain proposed a long-term economic plan that would lower the corporate income tax rate and provide a host of other tax breaks for business. "We will get through this rough patch, my friends," McCain told supporters.
The Arizona senator proposed cutting the corporate tax rate to 25 percent from 35 percent. Speaking to a rally under a tent in the rain, he said that would expand the economy.
McCain appeared to be resisting temporary economic relief for individuals, even as President Bush indicated support for a short-term boost and Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke called explicitly for it.
The Arizona senator also snared the editorial support of The Post and Courier of Charleston, giving him a sweep of this early voting state's three largest daily newspapers.
Rival Mitt Romney said Congress should take immediate action on a tax rebate plan to help stimulate the economy. "I believe that an economic stimulus plan is in order," he said, adding he would have one of his own soon.
Thompson would wait on economic stimulus
WEST COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) Republican Fred Thompson made light of Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke's call for a quick economic stimulus and said it might be best to leave the economy alone for now.
Thompson was answering questions in a restaurant where Bernanke could be seen on a TV urging short-term relief to avert a recession. Thompson was asked what he would do.
"You could probably get a 'Law & Order' rerun on TNT there if you wanted to switch that around a little bit," quipped Thompson, who acted on the series. When the host reminded him Bernanke is a South Carolina native, Thompson joked: "That looks a little boring to me. I don't care."
More seriously, he said he was not ready to embrace a stimulus package.
Huckabee says let SC decide on flag
MYRTLE BEACH, S.C. (AP) Republican Mike Huckabee said the government should stay out of disputes over the Confederate flag in South Carolina.
"You don't like people from outside the state coming in and telling you what to do with your flag," Huckabee, a former Arkansas governor, told supporters in Myrtle Beach.
He did not say whether he considers it offensive to fly the flag, a symbol of racism to some and Southern pride to others, saying only that the matter should be up to the states.
Edwards raps Obama, Clinton weaknesses
HENDERSON, Nev. (AP) Democrat John Edwards picked a snippet from the last presidential debate to criticize rivals Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Asked to name a weakness, Obama mentioned his messy desk and reliance on staff. Clinton faulted him for it, saying she was better prepared to oversee the bureaucracy.
Edwards said he was neither type and referred to his work as a lawyer who fought corporations.
Clinton "knows how to run the bureaucracy," Edwards told more than 200 supporters, while Obama is "saying, no, what we really need is a president of the United States who knows how to give a great speech."
"I think what we need in the next president of the United States is somebody with some guts and fight and determination."
Giuliani: Bush has kept nation safe
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. (AP) Republican Rudy Giuliani says President Bush should be praised for putting the U.S. on the offensive against terrorism.
"President Bush deserves much more credit for keeping our nation safe and secure," Giuliani told newspaper editors, writers and broadcasters at The Associated Press' annual legislative planning meeting. He called the terrorist threat "the major challenge of our day."
Giuliani said the offensive should include military action, if necessary, if Iran pursues its ambition to become a nuclear threat.
GOP delegates punished
WASHINGTON (AP) Five states that violated Republican rules by holding primaries and caucuses before Feb. 5 have already been stripped of half their delegates to this summer's national convention. On Thursday, the Republican National Committee's rules panel voted to impose another sanction: Delegates who are admitted to the convention from those states will be relegated to the back of the convention hall.
Ohio GOP Chairman Robert Bennett, who introduced the proposal, said delegates from states that followed the rules deserve the best seats.
The extra sanction ensures that states that held unauthorized early contests will still face a punishment of sorts if their delegates are eventually seated.
The penalized states are: New Hampshire, Wyoming, Michigan, South Carolina and Florida.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton holds an economy town hall meeting in California. Barack Obama also has events in California before heading to Nevada. John Edwards stops in California and Nevada.
THE REPUBLICANS
Mitt Romney campaigns in Nevada after snow canceled South Carolina events. Mike Huckabee, John McCain and Fred Thompson campaign in South Carolina. Rudy Giuliani talks to supporters in Florida.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I think what we need in the next president of the United States is somebody with some guts and fight and determination." Democrat John Edwards, speaking to supporters at an event in Nevada.
STAT OF THE DAY:
In the 2004 presidential election Republican George W. Bush won Nevada with 418,690 votes, compared with Democrat John Kerry, who garnered 397,190 votes.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: January 18, 2008

 

End of Document
