

293 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
January 17, 2008 Thursday 3:49 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1459 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Romney says economic focus that won in Michigan can play in the South ... Obama says he'd change approach to drug war ... Huckabee backs away from hiatus on immigration ... Clinton says preparation for president should be more than inspirational speeches ... With Southern contest looming, Thompson goes on the attack ... Edwards tells Nevada to start 'sea wave of change' by supporting him ... Florida rallies for Rudy ... McCain looks to appeal to South Carolina's reservists, retired military
Romney pledges to save Southern economy
BLUFFTON, S.C. (AP) Mitt Romney on Wednesday swapped talk of resurrecting the auto industry that helped him in Michigan with a pledge to pay attention to textile and other industrial job losses that have punished the South.
"You've seen it here, in furniture. You've seen the textile industry, where Washington watched, saw the jobs go and go," the Republican presidential contender told a group of senior citizens at a retirement center.
Saturday's South Carolina primary represents the first time Romney's camp faces something other than first-place expectations. Romney had predicated his campaign strategy on early wins in Iowa and New Hampshire, with a firewall of protection in Michigan, where he was born.
Second-place finishes in Iowa and New Hampshire triggered questions about Romney's electability, while a win in between in the Wyoming caucuses was largely greeted with a yawn.
Obama discusses approach to drug war
HENDERSON, Nev. (AP) Democrat Barack Obama said he would bring a new approach to drug crimes in response to a questioner who noted "if you were arrested when you were a teenager, then you never would be a candidate for the presidency."
Obama didn't comment on the reference to his teenage use of marijuana and cocaine, which he disclosed in his autobiography and which some of rival Hillary Rodham Clinton's supporters have raised. Instead, he said the government is not handling the drug problem "in an intelligent way."
"I'm not interested in legalizing drugs," Obama said. "But what I am interested in is putting more of an emphasis on the public health approach to drugs and less on the incarceration approach to drugs."
He said there should be more programs to keep young people from using drugs. And he said first-time offenders should be given help to overcome their drug use instead of being locked up at taxpayer expense.
Huckabee backs off immigration idea
TRAVELERS REST, S.C. (AP) Republican Mike Huckabee backed away from saying immigration should be suspended from countries that sponsor or harbor terrorists.
Trying to sharpen his rhetoric on illegal immigration, the presidential contender had called for a hiatus upon arriving in the state Tuesday. In a state where the issue inflames Republican voters, Huckabee is drawing a contrast with rival John McCain, who backs a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants.
On Wednesday, Huckabee said that instead of suspending immigration, he wants to review immigration policies.
"I think we just need to do a more thorough job of ensuring that when people come here, and they come from nations that the State Department has designated as terrorist nations, that we are diligent in background searches," Huckabee told reporters.
Despite the backtracking, Huckabee is walking a tough line on immigration; later Tuesday, he signed a "no-amnesty" pledge to oppose a special path to citizenship for illegal immigrants that is sponsored by Numbers USA.
Clinton: Vision, speeches not enough
LAS VEGAS (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton said Wednesday that inspirational speeches weren't adequate preparation for being president, a subtle dig at rival Barack Obama and his acknowledged lack of management experience.
In an interview with Bloomberg Television, the former first lady said she was taken aback by comments Obama in Tuesday night's debate in which he suggested it was more important for a president to bring vision to the job than to make sure "paperwork is being shuffled effectively."
The Illinois senator made similar comments in an interview published Tuesday in the Reno Gazette Journal, noting, "I'm not an operating officer. Some in this debate around experience seems to think the job of the president is to go in and run some bureaucracy."
Clinton took issue with Obama's approach.
"I think it's important that we have a president who understands that you have to run the government. We all need to be inspirational and set goals, and I've been doing that throughout this campaign," she said, never mentioning him by name.
Thompson critical of rivals
ABBEVILLE, S.C. (AP) With his presidential campaign riding on South Carolina's primary, Republican Fred Thompson on Wednesday hammered away at every contender in this state, which votes Saturday.
The former Tennessee senator said rival Mike Huckabee won't answer questions about his record, criticized John McCain's failed immigration proposal, and downplayed Mitt Romney's win in Michigan.
"Governor Romney was very effective in Michigan doing what he does best and that is tailoring his message to a particular audience," Thompson said.
Thompson has told South Carolina crowds that he's making his stand here. With three different winners for the major contests so far, "the nomination is very much up in the air," he told a restaurant crowd of 200 in Laurens, S.C.
Edwards calls himself an underdog
RENO, Nev. (AP) John Edwards painted himself as the underdog in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination, as he urged voters to support him in Saturday's party caucuses.
"You can start a sea wave of change that begins right here in Nevada, where you stand up and you speak out and as a result this wave of change sweeps across America, with the power that literally cannot be stopped," Edwards told a mostly union crowd of more than 1,000 people Wednesday.
"If you've been watching the national media for the last year or so, you might have thought there were only two Democrats in the election. But if you saw the debates last night, you saw there are three Democrats in this election."
"Florida is Rudy country, signs say
PANAMA CITY, Fla. (AP) Supporters of former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani waved red-and-blue signs declaring "Florida is Rudy country" during a rally Wednesday.
If it isn't, his Republican presidential campaign may be finished.
With three major primary losses, Giuliani is betting that Florida, with all of its New York transplants, will give him a victory Jan. 29 that will boost him past his opponents when more than 20 states, including California and his home state, vote on Feb. 5.
"There's going to be a very hotly contested and very important primary right here in Florida and Floridians will have the chance to have their votes counted," Giuliani later said at a fire station in Gulf Breeze.
At an evening event in nearby Pensacola he again stressed Florida's importance to his campaign strategy.
"I want your vote tomorrow," he said.
McCain looks to appeal to SC military
GREENVILLE, S.C. (AP) Republican presidential hopeful John McCain sought to appeal directly to South Carolina's reservists and retired military members as he highlighted his military record Wednesday.
McCain, a veteran and former Vietnam prisoner of war, emphasized the need to overhaul health care for the military and retired military. He cited abuses uncovered in the treatment of Iraq and Afghanistan veterans at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.
"We will take care of them and we will expand the VA (Veterans Administration) system," McCain told about 100 supporters at a community center here.
Speaking to reporters later, he brushed aside a question suggesting his momentum was flagging after losing the Michigan primary to former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney.
McCain said he planned a lot of "hard work" in the next three days in stumping across the state. "I'll win here in South Carolina and that's all there is to it."
He also earned the endorsement of Sen. Tom Coburn, R-Okla., on Wednesday.
THE DEMOCRATS
The top Democratic candidates Hillary Rodham Clinton, Barack Obama and John Edwards campaign in Nevada. Obama heads later in the day to an economic roundtable in Van Nuys, Calif.
THE REPUBLICANS
Mitt Romney, Mike Huckabee, John McCain and Fred Thompson campaign in South Carolina. Rudy Giuliani campaigns in Florida.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"The writers strike needs to end soon. He's got to come up with some good lines." Republican Mike Huckabee, responding to rhetoric coming from rival Fred Thompson, an actor and former Tennessee senator.
STAT OF THE DAY:
On terrorism, 29 percent of those polled trust Republicans more, compared with 22 percent who prefer Democrats, according to an AP-Yahoo News survey conducted last month.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: January 17, 2008

 

End of Document
