

298 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
January 12, 2008 Saturday 12:52 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1419 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Senior Giuliani campaign staffers forgo paychecks, a sign of possible money troubles ... Clinton offers economic plan to make it easier for people to pay mortgages, energy bills ... McCain draws crowds while campaigning along S.C. coastline ... Anemic crowd greets Romney as he returns to Michigan ... Huckabee criticizes Thompson, says he wasn't for Reagan way ... Edwards says SC primary race remains unpredictable ... Arizona Gov. Napolitano endorses Obama.
Giuliani staffers forgo paychecks
MYRTLE BEACH, S.C. (AP) About a dozen senior campaign staffers for Rudy Giuliani are forgoing their January paychecks, a sign of possible money trouble for the Republican presidential candidate and last year's national front-runner.
"We didn't ask anybody to do it," Giuliani told reporters Friday after a town hall meeting at a charter school in Coral Springs, Fla.
"Some people volunteered to do it because they wanted to stretch out the money," he said. "We've got quite a bit of money and they wanted to make sure that we had even more money for the end of this situation in Florida, so we could have enough on the air or whatever."
At the end of December, the campaign had $12.7 million cash on hand, $7 million of which could be used for the primary, said Mike DuHaime, Giuliani's campaign manager and one of those who now is working for free. He disputed the notion of a cash-strapped operation and said Giuliani continues to bring in money; several fundraisers are scheduled this week in Florida.
Clinton offers economic stimulus plan
CITY OF COMMERCE, Calif. (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton on Friday called for Congress to pass an economic stimulus package that could cost as much as $110 billion to help low-income families keep their homes, to subsidize heating costs this winter and perhaps refund some taxes.
The Democratic presidential hopeful, on a two-day swing through this key Feb. 5 primary state, called on Congress to work with the White House to pass a $70 billion "immediate jump-start" to help people spend more money in the market and perhaps follow with another $40 billion in tax refunds.
"This economy may be working for some people, but it sure isn't working for everybody," said Clinton, standing in an International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers hall with union members.
The proposal, Clinton's campaign said, would provide 37 million Americans with energy assistance. Hundreds of thousands more families would get help to avoid foreclosure, according to the proposal.
McCain draws crowds along S.C. coastline
SUMMERVILLE, S.C. (AP) John McCain and his gang of South Carolina backers took their campaign roadshow to a trio of restaurants along the coastline Friday, one week before the state's primary.
At each event, the Arizona senator was flanked by state Attorney General Henry McMaster, South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham and state House Speaker Bobby Harrell.
"I could not be more comforted by the people who are here with me," McCain said then mixed his words of praise with teasing comments.
The last rally of the day got off to a rough start. More than 500 people waited in the parking lot as traffic jammed Route 78 and delayed McCain's arrival. When McCain took the microphone, the sound failed.
"It's a conspiracy," he joked. "I knew I shouldn't have told that Irish joke!"
Small crowd greets Romney's Mich. push
WARREN, Mich. (AP) Despite embracing Michigan as the heart of his bid to revive his campaign, Republican Mitt Romney was greeted by an anemic crowd Friday as he began his final push for votes in the crucial primary.
No more than 150 people were on hand for his appearance at Macomb Community College's Center for Alternative Fuels, in a space set up for an audience twice that size. Romney delivered an unusually short, 13-minute address, breaking with recent practice and taking no questions from his audience.
Later, in Lansing, the audience was crowded into a conference room at the Small Business Association of Michigan. Romney spoke 20 minutes and took two questions one of which was a statement thanking him for coming.
In each location, he tugged at a variety of heart strings as he pleaded for support in his effort to rebound from second-place finishes in the Iowa caucuses and New Hampshire primary both of which he worked hard to win.
Huckabee raps Thompson on Reagan comment
DETROIT (AP) Republican presidential candidate Mike Huckabee criticized rival Fred Thompson, saying he wasn't always supportive of Ronald Reagan.
During a debate Thursday, Thompson questioned Huckabee's commitment to the Reagan Revolution, favored, still, in the South. Thompson called his opponent a liberal on economic issues and foreign policies.
"It was real interesting hearing Fred Thompson talk about Ronald Reagan last night," Huckabee said at a news conference with reporters Friday. "Because Fred Thompson supported Gerald Ford in 1976 and not Ronald Reagan. He supported Howard Baker in 1980 and not Ronald Reagan. I appreciate his recent conversion, but some of us were for Ronald Reagan back in the early days; our legacy goes back a little further."
Speaking at the Detroit Economic Club, Huckabee promoted a 23 percent national sales tax to replace the entire tax system, a plan even he acknowledges is unpopular in Congress.
Huckabee also said he earned the endorsement of the 160,000-member International Painters and Allied Trades in the Republican primary.
Later, speaking with reporters, the former Arkansas governor said that provisions guaranteeing a level playing field should be part of new trade agreements with South Korea, Colombia and Panama.
"I am a free trader. I know there's some question about that, but there shouldn't be," he said. "I just believe that all our efforts on free trade need to make sure that both sides are playing by the same set of rules and that no one's cheating."
Edwards says SC remains unpredictable
SUMMERVILLE, S.C. (AP) Presidential candidate John Edwards said Friday he feels "at peace" campaigning in his native South Carolina, though he acknowledges that how Democratic primary voters will receive his populist message remains anyone's guess.
"It's just unpredictable who will vote, what they'll be focused on," Edwards told The Associated Press after taking questions at a town hall meeting. "As long as I make it clear that I'm fighting for middle-class families and against entrenched money interests, I think I will run very strong here."
Confidence in his campaign comes in spite of Democratic rivals who have overshadowed Edwards in the Iowa caucuses, won by Sen. Barack Obama, and the New Hampshire primary, won by Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton. Edwards placed second in Iowa and third in New Hampshire.
Arizona governor endorses Obama
PHOENIX (AP) Arizona Gov. Janet Napolitano endorsed Democrat Barack Obama for president on Friday, citing his message of hope in supporting his candidacy over rivals Hillary Rodham Clinton and John Edwards.
Napolitano visited the Obama campaign office in Phoenix and joined him in a conference call with reporters.
"This endorsement is based on my belief in your leadership and vision and the fact that we need a new message of hope and solidarity of coming together in Washington, D.C.," Napolitano said.
The endorsement is a major gain for Obama in his race against chief foe Clinton. Napolitano, one of several female governors, is the most prominent Democrat in Arizona. Her endorsement could be significant in a state now regarded as winnable by a Democrat after decades as a near-lock for Republicans; the state holds its primary Feb. 5.
THE DEMOCRATS
Barack Obama holds a rally with the Culinary Workers Union in Las Vegas. John Edwards talk to voters in South Carolina, while Hillary Rodham Clinton campaigns in California.
THE REPUBLICANS
Fred Thompson greet voters in South Carolina. John McCain also campaigns there before heading to Michigan for a Lincoln Day Dinner. Mike Huckabee and Mitt Romney talk to voters in Michigan.
Rudy Giuliani holds a town hall meeting in Florida.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"If you're running for office you can't run for office and not say, 'I am an agent of change.' That's just American politics. If I were running for office at this point I'd be saying, 'Vote for me I'm going to be an agent of change.'" President Bush, interviewed on NBC's "Today."
STAT OF THE DAY:
About one in five respondents in an AP-Yahoo News Survey last month considers Republican Mike Huckabee attractive, including 18 percent of Democrats and 30 percent of Republicans.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: January 12, 2008

 

End of Document
