

299 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
January 10, 2008 Thursday 9:31 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 692 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
2004 Democratic nominee Kerry endorsing Obama for president, bypassing Clinton, Edwards ... McCain seeks victory in South Carolina, site of 2000 fall ... Richardson ends campaign for Democratic presidential nomination, endorses no one
2004 Democratic nominee Kerry endorses Obama
CHARLESTON, S.C. (AP) Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts, the 2004 Democratic presidential nominee, endorsed Sen. Barack Obama for the White House on Thursday in a timely slap at Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton as well as Edwards, who his own vice presidential running mate.
Quoting a black American hero in endorsing the man who hopes to be the first black president, Kerry told a cheering crowd, "Martin Luther King said the time is always right to do what is right." Now is the time, Kerry said, to declare "that Barack Obama can be, will be and should be the next president of the United States."
Kerry delivered his endorsement in South Carolina, two weeks before that state's primary, when Clinton is riding a wave of enthusiasm following her victory over Obama in the New Hampshire primary.
Kerry said there were other candidates in the race whom he also had worked with and respected.
"But I believe more than anyone else, Barack Obama can help our country turn the page and get America moving by uniting and ending the division we have faced," Kerry said.
McCain seeks second-shot win in S.C.
CHARLESTON, S.C. (AP) John McCain is hoping the South Carolina that votes next week will be a different South Carolina than the one that spoiled his presidential hopes eight years ago.
He has reason to hope: An influx of newcomers is just as Republican but not necessarily as conservative as native South Carolinians. The Arizona senator appeals not only to conservatives but also to party moderates and independents, groups that helped him win Tuesday's New Hampshire primary and become a serious contender in the contests beyond.
The "come heres" or "come-yas," as natives call them have swelled the retirement and resort communities along the state's coast. These transplants are more moderate on the conservative hot buttons of abortion and gay rights. Yet their devotion to the GOP and disdain for the Democrats is even more intense than the "been-here" Republicans, who often have personal and cultural ties to the Democratic Party's old "Dixiecrat" wing.
Republicans in this state hold their primary Jan. 19; Michigan goes before it, on Tuesday.
Richardson drops presidential bid
SANTA FE, N.M. (AP) New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson ended his long-shot bid for the Democratic presidential nomination Thursday after poor finishes in the first two contests in Iowa and New Hampshire.
He praised all of his Democratic rivals but endorsed no one. He encouraged voters to "take a long and thoughtful look" and elect one of them president.
Richardson said that although his support at the polls lagged the front-runners, many of his leading rivals had moved closer to his positions on such issues as the war in Iraq and educating young Americans at home.
"Despite overwhelming financial and political odds, I am proud of the campaign we waged ... and most importantly the influence we had on the issues that matter the most to the future of this country," Richardson said.
On a less serious note, he estimated the long campaign had included 200 debates. He quickly amended that to 24 but said "it felt like 200."
THE DEMOCRATS
Barack Obama and John Edwards talk to voters in South Carolina, while Hillary Rodham Clinton campaigns in Las Vegas. Dennis Kucinich makes a stop in Troy, Mich.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain and Mike Huckabee hold events with supporters before joining the other GOP candidates for a presidential debate in Myrtle Beach, S.C.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"In the unlikely story that is America, there has never been anything false about hope." Barack Obama, speaking at a rally in Charleston, S.C.
STAT OF THE DAY:
A third of voters say they would seriously consider voting for a third-party candidate. That includes 26 percent of Democrats, 31 percent of Republicans and 49 percent of independents, according to an AP-Yahoo News survey taken last month.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: January 11, 2008

 

End of Document
