

300 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
January 10, 2008 Thursday 5:10 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1399 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama hints of sharper edge against Clinton; McCain presses for Michigan win ... Bloomberg begins nationwide effort to gauge support ... Romney pulls ads in South Carolina, Florida ... Obama wins support of powerful Nevada union... Edwards seeks to repeat his 2004 Democratic primary win in SC ... McCain says he's proved he can get the support of Republicans to win an election ... Huckabee looks to gain votes, shed pounds in SC ... Thompson 'makes his stand' in South Carolina
GOP, Democratic races wide open
WASHINGTON (AP) Barack Obama talked of introducing some Chicago smackdown to his politics of hope Wednesday, seeking a rebound after Hillary Rodham Clinton grasped victory in the New Hampshire primary. In the wide-open Republican contest, John McCain pressed to build on his New Hampshire win and named experience, knowledge and judgment as his calling cards in the races ahead.
Clinton pored over election strategy in the first blush of her surprising success and indicated she'd compete in every big Democratic contest coming up this month rather than try to cherry pick her way to the nomination.
"I'm going to keep going as we take on all the rest of the contests between now and February 5th," she said, back home in New York to "get grounded and take a deep breath" after a victory that surprised her own campaign, confounded the pollsters and shocked nearly everyone else. Two dozen states vote Feb. 5.
Obama spoke to supporters Wednesday in New Jersey and was also scheduled to attend a private fundraiser in New York.
"People are standing up. They're shouting out and shouting clear that the time for change has come," Obama told nearly 2,000 people at an afternoon rally at Saint Peter's College in Jersey City, N.J.
Mayor analyzing '08 run
NEW YORK (AP) New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg has begun detailed polling and highly sophisticated voter analysis in all 50 states as he considers an independent bid for president, associates said Wednesday.
The exhaustive data collection quietly started months ago, and when the analysis begins shortly, it will provide the data-obsessed billionaire businessman with the information he will use to decide whether to launch a third-party run for the White House.
Romney pulls ads in SC, Fla.
BOSTON (AP) Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney has decided to pull his advertising from South Carolina, where he was hoping to take on Mike Huckabee and John McCain, and from Florida, where Rudy Giuliani has been spending time and money.
"We feel the best strategy is to focus our paid messaging in Michigan," where Romney was born and his father George was governor, spokesman Kevin Madden said Wednesday.
The decision comes on the heels of back-to-back second-place finishes in Iowa and New Hampshire for the former Massachusetts governor. Romney had invested heavily in both states, counting on the two to give him the momentum toward the nomination.
Earlier on Wednesday, Romney had assured his top financial backers that he will win the upcoming Michigan primary, as he and his staff worked to soothe supporters unsettled by his losses in the Iowa caucuses and New Hampshire primary.
"It's just getting started," the presidential contender told hundreds of supporters gathered at a convention center for a follow-up to the "National Call Day" that raised an unprecedented $6.5 million a year ago.
Powerful Nevada union backs Obama
LAS VEGAS (AP) Presidential candidate Barack Obama won the support of the 60,000-member Culinary Workers Union in Nevada Wednesday, a coup for the Democrat that could boost his candidacy against Hillary Rodham Clinton in the state's nominating contest.
Leaders of the Culinary Workers Union, Local 226 announced the endorsement a day after Obama narrowly lost the New Hampshire primary to Clinton.
Culinary secretary-treasurer D. Taylor praised the senator's work with a sister union in Chicago. He took a jab at the mostly white electorate that had so far shaped the race in New Hampshire and Iowa.
"We're not just Wonderbread here, we got pumpernickel, we got whole wheat, we got rye. We're excited about that. That's America. That's why Senator Obama excites us and excites the country," Taylor said.
Obama has also won an endorsement from the Nevada chapter of the Service Employees International Union. The influential union represents 17,500 health care and county workers in Nevada.
Edwards looks to reboot campaign in S.C.
CLEMSON, S.C. (AP) John Edwards, hoping to repeat a 2004 Democratic primary win here, pitched himself as the state's native son and reminded several hundred students of his roots Wednesday at Clemson University.
He used the phrase "I know what your lives are like," or slight variations, three times and then again at a news conference.
"I know what's happening, I know what's happening in the South, I understand it in a very personal way," Edwards said.
Edwards is hoping another win here, or a strong second, would reboot his campaign after he finished second in the Iowa caucuses and third in the New Hampshire primary. South Carolina holds its Democratic primary on Jan. 26.
McCain heads to Mich. with confidence
GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. (AP) John McCain said Wednesday he will continue to argue that he's the Republican most capable of reforming government and protecting the country the identical pitch that won him New Hampshire.
"The Republican establishment has never embraced me in my entire life. But I think we just proved that we can get the support of enough Republicans to win an election," McCain told reporters on his plane en route to Grand Rapids, Mich., where he held a rally.
Supporters of McCain, who was stung by political attacks in this early voting state's 2000 primary, have set up what they're calling a "Truth Squad" to counter negative campaigning as the presidential race heads to South Carolina.
Huckabee eager for S.C. votes
SPARTANBURG, S.C. (AP) Republican Mike Huckabee set out to gain some votes and shed some pounds in more familiar Southern territory, hoping to tap a bloc of support from voters attuned to his Republican brand of economic populism and social conservatism.
Coming off a third place finish in New Hampshire, the former Arkansas governor was eager to gain some votes and shed some pounds.
Huckabee, the winner of last week's Iowa caucuses, boasted of beating rivals Rudy Giuliani and Fred Thompson in New Hampshire. "Both of them should have had far better numbers," Huckabee said aboard his plane from Manchester, N.H., to Spartanburg, S.C.
A fitness advocate who has lost more than 100 pounds, Huckabee fretted that he had put on 10-12 pounds while on the campaign trail. "That's as much from not getting my running in as anything," he said.
Thompson 'makes his stand'
SUMTER, S.C. (AP) Republican presidential candidate Fred Thompson is dismissing his doubters, shrugging off other early primary states and refusing to talk about a future that has anything to do with acting as he pins his campaign hopes on early voting South Carolina.
"It's going to work out for me in South Carolina and I'm not going to talk about any other scenario other than that," the former Tennessee senator and actor said during an Associated Press interview Wednesday, the second full day of his 11-day tour through the state.
"For me, I make my stand in South Carolina. And I need help from South Carolina and I need them to stand with me," he said.
Thompson finished in the bottom among GOP candidates the night before in New Hampshire. Recent polls in South Carolina show former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee leading, with Thompson's support tough to read.
THE DEMOCRATS
Barack Obama holds a rally in New Jersey while John Edwards attends a rally in South Carolina.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain talks to voters in Michigan before holding rallies in South Carolina. Mitt Romney stops at a fundraiser in Boston before meeting with voters in Michigan.
Mike Huckabee has several events in South Carolina and appeared on Comedy Central's "The Colbert Report."
Rudy Giuliani speaks to voters in Florida. Fred Thompson campaigns in South Carolina.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I come from Chicago politics. We're accustomed to rough and tumble." Democratic presidential hopeful Barack Obama.
STAT OF THE DAY:
On health care, 41 percent of those polled in an AP-Yahoo News survey last month trust Democrats more, compared with 17 percent who prefer Republicans.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: January 11, 2008

 

End of Document
