

302 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
January 7, 2008 Monday 10:34 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1365 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Candidates snipe at each other, Clinton's voice catches on eve of NH primary ... Romney cites Obama's Iowa win as reason GOP voters should rethink a vote for McCain ... Campaigning takes a toll on Obama's voice ... Edwards shows no signs of flagging as he speaks on the trail ... Friends and foe descend on Giuliani as he campaigns ahead of NH primary ... Bloomberg presidential bid may hinge on bipartisanship among other candidates.
Candidates scramble before NH primary
NASHUA, N.H. (AP) Barack Obama, the new Democratic front-runner, told cheering supporters, "You're the wave and I'm riding it." Hillary Rodham Clinton, her voice breaking, told voters in a little cafe that her White House quest is not just political.
"It is very personal for me," she said in Portsmouth.
The presidential contenders hurtled toward Tuesday's New Hampshire primary, tired, spent and some still sniping at each other hopefully or painfully aware of the stakes.
John McCain ran late to his fifth rally of the day, and apologized to the crowd that jammed a downtown plaza in Manchester. "As you can imagine, there's little traffic today," he said a reference to so many candidates in town.
Iowa's GOP winner, Mike Huckabee, meanwhile, paid tribute Monday to New Hampshire's "Live Free or Die" motto and history of being first, from declaring its independence in colonial times to holding the nation's first primary.
"I hope you're also going to be (first) tomorrow, going out there and proving you're also the first people having a primary that believe Mike Huckabee ought to be the next president of the United States," Huckabee said at a stop in Mason, N.H.
Romney cites Obama win as warning to GOP
STRATHAM, N.H. (AP) Republican presidential hopeful Mitt Romney argued that GOP voters would make a mistake if they supported rival John McCain in Tuesday's New Hampshire primary.
The former Massachusetts governor cited the success of Democrat Barack Obama defeating veteran senators Hillary Rodham Clinton, Joe Biden and Chris Dodd in last week's Iowa caucuses with a campaign theme of "Change We Can Believe In."
"I think Barack Obama would be able to do to John McCain exactly what he was able to do to the other senators who were running on the other side," Romney told reporters after a speech to employees at the Timberland shoe company in Stratham, N.H.
Romney said Clinton may not be the nominee and Republican voters might have to rethink who they want to face Obama. "And if they think, 'Who can post up against Barack in these debates,' and in the message that's taken to Washington, they're going to recognize that a long-serving U.S. senator is not the best matchup," he said.
Told about Romney's comments on McCain's chances against Obama, McCain smiled but took a pass.
"I don't have any response to that. I'll let the voters make a decision about how well I would match up. My first priority is to win this primary before I start to consider the quote match up," McCain told reporters on his campaign bus. "I've got to focus on the task at hand."
Later at luncheon speech to the Nashua Rotary Club, Romney reprised his theme of recent days: That as the Iowa caucus results showed voters want fresh leadership in Washington, he is the only outsider capable of delivering it.
"There's no way that somebody inside Washington, a Washington insider, is going to be able to turn Washington inside out," he said. "It's one reason why I'm running.
Campaigning affects Obama's voice
CLAREMONT, N.H. (AP) The long days of campaigning were taking a toll on Democrat Barack Obama he mixed up the words of one of his signature campaign lines during a rally Monday morning. "The time for come has change," Obama said, speaking in a high school gymnasium.
He also saw a doctor Sunday about losing his voice. The advice, Obama told the audience here, was "shut up."
"I can't do that," the Illinois senator said. Aides were serving him hot tea to soothe his vocal cords between stops on his 18-hour schedule Monday.
In Lebanon, N.H., Obama criticized rival Hillary Rodham Clinton for chastising him in a weekend debate for raising "false hopes" about what he can deliver for the country. Obama said President Kennedy didn't look at the moon and decide getting there would be a false hope, and Martin Luther King didn't decide segregation couldn't end.
"If anything crystalized what this campaign is about, it was that right there," Obama said of Clinton's comment in the debate. "Some are thinking in terms of our constraints, and some are thinking about our limitless possibilities."
Edwards points to Clinton as status quo
LAKEPORT, N.H. (AP) Democrat John Edwards showed no sign of flagging after a stump-a-thon that saw him giving speeches every couple of hours through Sunday night and into Monday morning.
In a shot at Clinton, he said: "The candidate Democrat or Republican who's taken the most money from drug companies is a not a Republican, it's a Democrat, and she's in this race tomorrow morning."
"There's nothing illegal about it ... but it is the status quo," Edwards said.
In Bedford, N.H., Edwards refused to entertain reporters' questions about what he would do if he wins no primaries.
"I reject the premise of that question completely," he said, vowing to carry his campaign to the Democratic National Convention and then win White House.
Friends and foe descend on Giuliani
NASHUA, N.H. (AP) Rudy Giuliani spent the last full day of campaigning for the New Hampshire primary among friends and foes, some of whom traveled north from New York to criticize their former mayor.
It was a battle of signs at a Nashua diner, where the Republican's supporters chanted and waved signs in an effort to outdo supporters of Democrat John Edwards who had come to New Hampshire from New York with anti-Giuliani signs.
One woman inside the diner pressed a sign against the window for the crowd, and cameras, outside to see: "NYC says no to Rudy." Giuliani supporters tried to block it with a large sign of their own.
Speaking to reporters, Giuliani said he was not concerned about his strategy of focusing on states that vote after Iowa and New Hampshire.
"There is no question that from the beginning of the campaign we focused on the primaries beginning in late January and early February," Giuliani said. "We think this will not be decided by then and when we get there, we'll be in a very strong position."
Summit fuels Bloomberg 2008 talk
NORMAN, Okla. (AP) New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg's potential independent bid for president depends largely on whether the major party candidates embrace the political center and eschew the divisiveness prevalent in Washington, said Democrats and Republicans who participated in a summit Monday with the mayor.
The bipartisan gathering attracted former senators, one-time governors and a current lawmaker. But the main draw for the media, students and political junkies at the University of Oklahoma was Bloomberg, the multibillionaire businessman whose change in party affiliation last summer to independent captured front-page headlines.
Weather forecast for Concord, N.H., on Tuesday, the day of the New Hampshire primary:
Temperature: High of 58 degrees; Low of 41 degrees.
Conditions: Mostly cloudy, with winds at 5 to 10 mph.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton, Barack Obama, John Edwards and Bill Richardson campaign in New Hampshire.
THE REPUBLICANS
Mitt Romney, John McCain, Mike Huckabee and Rudy Giuliani talk to voters in New Hampshire. Ron Paul canceled his New Hampshire events and will appear on the "Tonight Show" with Jay Leno, while Huckabee is scheduled to appear on CBS's "Late Show" with David Letterman.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I couldn't do it if I just didn't, you know, passionately believe it was the right thing to do. You know, I've had so many opportunities from this country, I just don't want to see us fall backwards." Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton, responding to a sympathetic voter in Portsmouth, N.H., about how she keeps going in the grueling campaign.
STAT OF THE DAY:
In the 2004 presidential election Democrat John Kerry won New Hampshire with 340,511 votes, compared with Republican George W. Bush, who garnered 331,237 votes.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: January 8, 2008

 

End of Document
