

306 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
January 4, 2008 Friday 5:00 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1402 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama and Huckabee celebrate caucus victories ... Clinton brushes aside third-place finish ... Edwards says caucuses a victory for change ... Romney stumbles in Iowa despite heavy spending ... Giuliani sticks to Florida strategy
Obama and Huckabee celebrate caucus victories
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Sen. Barack Obama swept to victory in the Iowa caucuses Thursday night, pushing Hillary Rodham Clinton to third place and taking a major stride in a historic bid to become the nation's first black president. Mike Huckabee rode a wave of support from evangelical Christians to win the opening round among Republicans in the 2008 campaign for the White House.
Obama, 46 and a first-term senator from Illinois, told a raucous victory rally his triumph showed that in "big cities and small towns, you came together to say, 'We are one nation, we are one people and our time for change has come.'"
"They said this day would never come. They said our sights were set too high. ... But on this January night, on this defining moment in history, you have done what the cynics said we couldn't do. You did what the state of New Hampshire can do in five days," Obama said.
Nearly complete returns showed the first-term lawmaker gaining 37 percent support. Former Sen. John Edwards of North Carolina appeared headed for second place, relegating Clinton, the former first lady, to a close third.
Huckabee celebrated his own victory over Mitt Romney and a crowded Republican field. "A new day is needed in American politics, just like a new day is needed in American government," the former Arkansas governor told cheering supporters. "It starts here but it doesn't end here. It goes all the way through the other states and ends at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue."
Huckabee, a preacher turned politician, handily defeated Romney despite being outspent by millions of dollars and deciding in the campaign's final days to scrap television commercials that would have assailed the former Massachusetts governor. His triumph more robust than Obama's, he was winning 34 percent support, compared to 25 percent for Romney. Former Sen. Fred Thompson and Sen. John McCain battled for third place.
With the New Hampshire primary only five days distant, Clinton and Edwards vowed to fight on in the race for the Democratic nomination.
Not everyone was going on. Democratic Sens. Chris Dodd of Connecticut and Joe Biden of Delaware left the race after failing to generate appreciable support in Iowa.
"There is nothing sad about tonight. We are so incredibly proud of you all," Biden told his supporters. "I feel no regret."
Clinton brushes aside third-place finish
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Sen. Hillary Clinton, unbowed by a third-place finish in the Iowa Democratic caucuses, hailed a "great night for Democrats" and said the strong turnout pointed for sure to the election of a Democratic president in November. She said she would "keep pushing as hard as we can."
The former first lady, who had once held a commanding lead in polls here, congratulated caucus winner Sen. Barack Obama and the second-place finisher, former Sen. John Edwards. She promised cheering supporters she would take "this enthusiasm and go tonight to New Hampshire." The state holds its primary on Jan. 8.
"We're going to keep pushing as hard as we can," she said. Supporters chanted, "Hillary, Hillary."
With former President Bill Clinton and their daughter, Chelsea, standing to one side of her and former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright to the other, Clinton said, "I am so ready for the rest of this campaign and I am so ready to lead."
"This is a great night for Democrats," she said. "We have seen an unprecedented turnout here in Iowa and that is good news because today we are sending a clear message that we are going to have change and that change will be a Democratic president in the White House in 2009."
Edwards says caucuses show that voters want change
WASHINGTON (AP) Democrat John Edwards told The Associated Press that the Iowa caucus showed that voters are choosing change over the status quo, and he vowed a vigorous campaign into New Hampshire.
Edwards, who lost a close race to Illinois Sen. Barack Obama, said he would continue running as the candidate for middle-class Americans. Edwards finished second and Hillary Rodham Clinton was a close third.
"I mean, we were grotesquely outspent in Iowa 5-to-1 and the fact that I'm as strong as I am now under these circumstances indicates that this message of change and standing up to corporate greed and fighting for the middle class and jobs really matters," the 2004 vice presidential nominee said in an interview with The Associated Press
He said he would distinguish himself from Obama in New Hampshire by arguing that he is the candidate who can deliver the change that voters have shown they want.
"What's clear from the Iowa caucus results is that change won and the status quo lost," Edwards said via telephone from his hotel room in Iowa.
Romney stumbles in Iowa despite heavy spending
WEST DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Republican Mitt Romney failed Thursday to pick up the first of two back-to-back wins he hoped would propel him toward his party's presidential nomination, losing the Iowa caucuses five days before what is now for him a pivotal New Hampshire primary.
The former Massachusetts governor, who spent more time and money in this state than his rivals, was upset by former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, a late-blooming challenger who ultimately became a target of Romney's negative advertising.
During the past two months, Romney surrendered a double-digit lead in the polls, in part on the strength of Christian conservative support for Huckabee, a former Southern Baptist minister. Romney, trying to become the first Mormon president, has faced questions from some evangelicals who consider his faith a cult.
After being introduced by Dan Jansen, the speed skater who competed in four Olympic Games before winning a gold medal, Romney said in his concession speech: "Well, we won the silver and congratulations to Gov. Huckabee for winning the gold. Nice job."
Romney added: "You win the silver in one event, it doesn't mean you're not going to come back and win the gold in the final event, and that we're going to do."
Romney insisted the Iowa results with outsiders like Huckabee and him finishing one-two and freshman Illinois Sen. Barack Obama winning on the Democratic side showed voters want change in Washington.
"We need new faces in Washington, and I intend to be one of them," Romney said.
Giuliani sticks to Fla. strategy despite Huckabee win
HIALEAH, Fla. (AP) Republican presidential hopeful Rudy Giuliani praised rival Mike Huckabee for his win in the Iowa caucuses on Thursday a contest Giuliani skipped yet insisted his own early-state campaign could win over the long haul.
"I think we're in good shape. We're ahead in maybe 16, 18 of the 29 states that are coming up," the former New York mayor said. "This was the first one. I think it's one that, quite honestly, we didn't expect that we would win. And we didn't put a lot of resources into it. And now we'll move on to the others."
Giuliani holds an early lead in polls in Florida, which conducts its primary Jan. 29, and he hopes a strong showing here will offset poor results in early-voting states. He spoke in interviews on MSNBC and CNN.
Next stop: New Hampshire primary on Tuesday, Jan. 8.
At stake: 12 GOP delegates; 22 Democratic delegates.
Polls show: Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama tied among Democrats; Mitt Romney and John McCain in a close race among Republicans.
2004: John Kerry won the state with 50 percent in the presidential election.
Weather forecast for Concord, N.H., on Friday:
Conditions: Cloudy in the morning, partly sunny by afternoon.
Temperature: Highs in the mid-20s.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, John Edwards and Bill Richardson were scheduled to campaign Friday in New Hampshire.
THE REPUBLICANS
Mitt Romney, John McCain and Mike Huckabee were scheduled to campaign Friday in New Hampshire.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Everybody has their own strategy." Republican presidential candidate Rudy Giuliani while campaigning in Florida during the Iowa caucuses.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Number of Democrats listed on a sample ballot for New Hampshire primary: 21.
Number of Republicans listed on a sample ballot: 21.
Source: New Hampshire secretary of state, http://www.sos.nh.gov
Compiled by Douglass K. Daniel
 Load-Date: January 5, 2008

 

End of Document
