

308 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
January 2, 2008 Wednesday 12:23 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1270 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Candidates make last minute appeals in Iowa ... Romney's house parties combine football and politics ... Huckabee opts for Leno on caucus eve ... Romney puts up more of his money, but how much?... 2 Iowa polls, 2 different results.
2 Days to Iowa: Upbeat ads, late appeals
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Republican and Democratic presidential candidates rolled out upbeat television ads and packed their schedules with campaign events on the first day of 2008 and one of the last before Iowa's caucuses.
With polls showing both races close, candidates made last-minute appeals for support.
Republican Mike Huckabee, stopping in Sergeant Bluff in western Iowa, implored about 200 people "to go with a commitment, in essence a fervent spirit" to the caucuses Thursday "no matter what the weather" and vote for him. Huckabee, the former Arkansas governor, and Mitt Romney, the former Massachusetts governor, are fighting for first on the GOP side.
Among Democrats, Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York and Barack Obama of Illinois are in a close fight for the lead with former Sen. John Edwards of North Carolina not far behind.
Seizing on the favorable results of a Des Moines Register poll, Obama and his wife, Michelle, fired up supporters in a Des Moines high school gymnasium. She talked of "when Barack is the next president" and her husband referred to her as "the next first lady."
Clinton's campaign emphasized a CNN poll that showed her ahead. In Ames she joked about the extremes to which she would go for support. "If you want to look inside my mouth to figure out whether you want to vote for me, that's fine, too. Whatever it takes," said Clinton, recalling a campaign stop in an arena that normally holds cattle auctions.
In New Hampshire, Republican Mitt Romney began airing an ad aimed at independents who might oppose President Bush's policies, urging voters to "vote for tomorrow" and not "for yesterday."
Mitt's House Parties
JOHNSTON, Iowa (AP) Republican Mitt Romney got supporters off their couches on New Year's Day by combining football and politics at a series of house parties.
As people waited at the second "House Party Huddle" of the day, kids bashed one another with large, red plastic foam mitts that read "Mitt '08." The adults jockeyed for space with the more than three dozen journalists who also packed into the home. On one wall, it read: "Christ is the center of our home, a guest at every meal and a silent listener to every conversation."
"He made it, he made it. He's coming, " shouted a young girl as Romney walked through the door.
"Can we fit a few more people, what do you think?" said Romney, moving through the packed room.
He told a story about his 18-month-old grandson, Parker, saying that on airplanes the child walks down the aisles telling everyone 'Hi' and shakes their hands. "People come up and say someday he ought to run for president someday," Romney said. "They have no idea. I think he's planning on it."
Edwards' 36-hour campaign marathon
AMES, Iowa (AP) Democrat John Edwards embarked on a 36-hour campaign marathon, focusing on pocketbook issues while launching a new wave of advertising on the airwaves and in print. He dismissed a spate of polls showing that he had sunk to third place in the race.
"I don't need a poll to tell me that we're moving and moving in the right direction every single day," said Edwards.
He campaigned with his family and Mari Culver, wife of Iowa Gov. Chet Culver.
"I am rolling up my sleeves, traveling with the campaign," said Mrs. Culver, who like Edwards is a former trial lawyer and has long known the candidate.
Edwards was met by about 500 people jammed into a ballroom at the student union at Iowa State University as he began the overnight campaign push, aimed at energizing backers and delivering them to the precinct caucuses Thursday. He planned a rally in Atlantic at midnight and had a stop at 2:15 a.m. in Creston and an early breakfast in Centerville at 5:15 a.m.
Meanwhile new television and newspaper ads focused on Edwards' populist message. A TV spot features a worker who lost his job when the Maytag factory in Newton closed suggesting Edwards is the most likely candidate to fight to get his job back.   
Huckabee choses Leno on caucus eve
SERGEANT BLUFF, Iowa (AP) On the eve of the Iowa caucuses, Republican presidential hopeful Mike Huckabee will trade jokes with Jay Leno on NBC's "Tonight Show."
While his rivals will be making a final appeal to the state's voters, Huckabee will fly to Los Angeles to tape the show with Leno, who returns to the air Wednesday without striking writers.
A similar late-night appearance backfired on rival Fred Thompson, who irked voters in New Hampshire by skipping a Republican debate last fall at the University of New Hampshire to announce his candidacy on Leno's show.
The unconventional move is somewhat fitting for Huckabee who broke with tradition on Monday, eschewing campaigning to go for a run and get a shave and haircut in front of his media entourage. He also held an odd news conference in which he announced he had decided against going negative with a critical TV ad against Republican Mitt Romney and then played the ad for the media.
Romney uses more personal funds, doesn't say how much
JOHNSTON, Iowa (AP) Mitt Romney, the wealthiest candidate in the presidential contest, indicated that he again supplemented his fundraising by tapped his fortune during the past three months.
With assets between $190 million and $250 million, Romney had already pumped more than $17 million of his own money into his campaign by the end of September. Without the personal funds, Romney's campaign would have been operating at a deficit.
"I'm sure I made additional contributions in the fourth quarter, but I don't have any numbers for you," he said Tuesday. "And, we're not going to get into the numbers until sometime probably in the middle of the month. Right now we're focused on votes. I'm sure I made some additional contribution."
Campaigns don't have to file end of year campaign finance reports until Jan. 31.
Weather forecast for Des Moines, Iowa, on Thursday, the day of the caucuses:
Temperature: High of 29 degrees; Low of 22 degrees.
Conditions: Mostly sunny, chance of precipitation 20 percent.
Expected turnout: About 120,000 to 150,000 people are expected to vote in the Democratic caucuses, while 80,000 to 90,000 are likely to participate in the GOP contest.
Two Iowa polls, two different stories
Which poll to believe? Either the Democratic race is a dead heat or Barack Obama has a slight lead. In the Republican race, it's either tied ... or Mike Huckabee has a slight advantage. New surveys in Iowa on the eve of the caucuses give readers a choice. Here are the numbers, in case you want to keep a scorecard against the real vote Thursday night.
Democrats: CNN has Hillary Rodham Clinton at 33 percent, Obama 31 percent, John Edwards 22 percent. The Des Moines Register poll had Obama at 32 percent, Clinton 25, Edwards 24.
Republicans: CNN has Mitt Romney at 31 percent and Huckabee at 28 percent. The Register poll had Huckabee on top at 32 percent and Romney at 26.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"They're all pretty much the same I think there's just a few small minor things that separate each one." Mark Morris, an electrician from Des Moines who came out to see Romney, on the Republican candidates.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Six in 10 Democrats say Hillary Rodham Clinton has the best chance in their party of winning the presidency. More than four in 10 Republicans name Rudy Giuliani. None of the other candidates comes close, according to a recent Associated Press-Yahoo News survey.
 Load-Date: January 2, 2008

 

End of Document
