

309 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 31, 2007 Monday 10:35 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1306 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Huckabee unveils ad against Romney but says he won't air it on TV as Iowa caucuses near ... Nonpartisan summit renewing speculation about a third-party presidential bid by NY mayor ... Iowa voters says they received push-polls about Democratic candidates ... Clinton references rivals' "applause lines" on standing up to special interests ... Sensing momentum, Edwards tightens populist focus ... McCain makes last-week push into New Hampshire
Huckabee says won't air anti-Romney ad
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Mike Huckabee said Monday he wouldn't run a TV ad he'd prepared blistering Republican rival Mitt Romney as dishonest. Then he showed it to a room packed with reporters and cameramen.
Huckabee, who has sharply intensified his criticism of the former Massachusetts governor in recent days, tried to reclaim the high road in the midst of a news conference three days before Iowa's presidential caucuses. He told reporters the event had been called to announce the hard-hitting new ad but he had changed his mind about running it on TV.  "We are now committed from now through the rest of the caucuses, that we will run only ads that talk about why I should be president, and not why Mitt Romney should not," he said. "The tipping point was this morning. I just realized that this is not how we run our campaign in this state. We have run it positive. We have gotten here by being positive."
Polls show the race very close between Huckabee and Romney in Iowa. The former Arkansas governor's double-digit lead has evaporated amid a series of Romney ads assailing Huckabee.
The 30-second spot accused Romney of "dishonest attacks" on him and on GOP contender John McCain and then criticized Romney on taxes, spending, guns, health care and abortion. "If a man's dishonest to obtain a job, he'll be dishonest on the job. Iowans deserve better," Huckabee said in the ad.
Summit heightens Bloomberg speculation
NEW YORK (AP) Mayor Michael Bloomberg's participation in a meeting next week of independent and centrist politicians is renewing the "will he or won't he" speculation about whether he'll mount a third-party bid for president.
On the eve of next week's New Hampshire primary, Bloomberg will meet in Oklahoma with politicians who consider themselves like-minded nonpartisans for a conference described as a warning to the Republican and Democratic candidates.
"It is a message to the two parties: please rise to the occasion. If you don't, there is always a possibility out there of an independent," said former Democratic Sen. David Boren of Oklahoma, an organizer of the gathering.
Some see it as a message that Bloomberg, a billionaire former businessman, is thinking about joining the fray.
Voters report push-polling in Iowa
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) In the final days of a close campaign, likely caucus-goers in Iowa report receiving phone calls providing unflattering information about all three major Democratic presidential hopefuls.
Some of the calls say Sen. Barack Obama's health plan leaves millions uninsured, while others say John Edwards' plans for a troop withdrawal from Iraq is dangerous or that Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton cannot defeat Republicans in the fall, according to recipients.
The use of anonymous phone calls to spread derogatory information about candidates is a frequent occurrence, particularly in the final few days of a campaign. It is often difficult or even impossible to determine the group behind the effort, since they do not readily identify themselves.
Clinton: I can take on special interests
KEOKUK, Iowa (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton took gentle jabs at top rivals Barack Obama and John Edwards Monday after suggesting she wanted no part of the two men's recent squabbles.
She told hundreds of supporters here that she would be more effective at standing up to entrenched interests in Washington than either Obama or Edwards both of whom have tried to position themselves as agents of change.
"There's lot of talk in this campaign about special interests. Who's going to be harder on special interests. These are great applause lines and speeches, people get excited," Clinton said. "I submit to you there isn't anybody running who's taken on more special interests and taken on more incoming fire and survived than I have."
Without mentioning him by name, Clinton also appeared to mock Edwards's fired-up speaking style.
"It's not something you have to do by yelling and screaming. Save your energy. Get the job done," she said about battling special interests. "Instead of generating a lot of heat, rolling your hands and jumping up and down, sit down and figure out how we're going to beat them."
Edwards focuses on populist message
SPENCER, Iowa (AP) Democrat John Edwards, sensing momentum as Iowa prepares to launch the presidential nominating season, tightened focus on his sharply populist message and warned that his rivals "will do the political thing" if they capture the nomination.
"You're going to say we want this country back," Edwards said. "When you stand up loudly and clearly with backbone and courage, you're going to start a wave of change right here in Iowa."
Edwards hammered his theme as he swept through heavily rural northwest Iowa, and in new campaign commercials he's launching just two days before Iowa's precinct caucuses.
For months, the former North Carolina senator has stood third in virtually all polls looking at Thursday's leadoff precinct caucuses. But in recent days, those surveys have shown him in a virtual tie with better financed rivals Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama.
Seeking to capitalize on the momentum in the final days before Thursday's caucuses, Edwards' campaign purchased a full-page ad in the Des Moines Register and will begin airing a new 60-second commercial focusing on his theme of fighting against powerful corporations and special interests. The television commercial features a worker who lost his job when the Maytag Corporation shuttered its Iowa operations.
McCain: NH can't be bought
HANCOCK, N.H. (AP) Republican presidential contender John McCain is looking to shore up support in New Hampshire where polling suggests he might foil those who wrote his political obituary after a rough summer.
The Arizona senator, touting on his experience and his biography, plans to spend most of the next week here to slingshot his campaign forward. He won the state in 2000 by 19 percentage points over then-Texas Gov. George W. Bush. He now hopes his scrappy campaign can again defeat a well-funded rival, this time former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney.
"You cannot buy an election in the state of New Hampshire. You have to earn their respect and then earn their votes," McCain said in an oft-repeated jab. He's done it before.
McCain planned a full day of campaigning in the first-in-the-nation primary state, where voters cast their ballots in just more than a week.
THE DEMOCRATS
Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, Barack Obama of Illinois, Chris Dodd of Connecticut and Joe Biden of Delaware, as well as former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards and New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson campaign in Iowa. Ohio Rep. Dennis Kucinich and former Alaska Sen. Mike Gravel campaign in New Hampshire.
THE REPUBLICANS
Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, and former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson campaign in Iowa. Arizona Sen. John McCain campaigns in New Hampshire.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I just feel like we ought to change the tone of the debate, and I'm going to start with me." Republican Mike Huckabee, at a news conference to announce he would not air a TV ad against rival Mitt Romney. He then showed it to reporters.
STAT OF THE DAY:
In the 2000 presidential election Democrat Al Gore won Iowa with 638,517 votes, compared with Republican George W. Bush, who garnered 634,373 votes.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: January 1, 2008

 

End of Document
