

312 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 29, 2007 Saturday 12:10 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1427 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Edwards seeks to wrest change mantle from Democratic rivals ... Clinton shifts focus to economy on stump, television ... McCain defends Musharraf during Iowa campaign visit, Clinton calls for independent probe ... Giuliani touts health care plan ... Romney yields spotlight routinely to wife Ann...Romney goes after McCain in New Hampshire ad, Huckabee in Iowa commercial
Edwards says he's the change candidate
INDEPENDENCE, Iowa (AP) Democrat John Edwards says he's the candidate who can best bring about change an attempt to wrest the popular change mantle from his chief rivals.
It's an issue that Democrats Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama have sparred over for months, with Clinton arguing that it takes more than a desire to change to get things done that it takes the kind of experience she's had for more than 35 years. Obama says that continuing with the same Washington players but expecting a different result is too much of a gamble.
Edwards, who rails at special interests and greedy corporate America during his campaign stops, was jabbing at his top two rivals during a stop in northeastern Iowa.
While Edwards didn't mention Clinton by name, he criticized her for taking campaign contributions from special interests.
"Now, I now that some people would argue that you can take money from the people who represent the powerful interests in Washington ... that you can take their money and make a deal with them. I don't believe that, I don't think anything will change if you do that," he told a crowd of about 150 people.
Clinton focuses on economy
STORY CITY, Iowa (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton sought to shift the campaign's focus to bedrock pocketbook issues, pointing on the stump and on television to solutions she's proposed to deal with a looming crisis for millions of middle-class homeowners.
"We're just at the beginning of this crisis," said Clinton. "Since March I have urged the Bush administration to act."
Clinton sought to couple the financial crunch in the housing industry with then potential for chaos in Pakistan ton make the same point voters need to pick a candidate with the experience to move quickly to deal with crisis. She made that argument on Thursday after the assassination of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, and added pocketbook issues to the mix as she opened her swing on Friday.
"Once you start a cascade of foreclosures it is hard to reverse the deterioration you will see in communities," said Clinton, who warned that Bush's response has been inadequate.
At the same time, Clinton launched a new television ad in Iowa titled "President" where she makes the case for her proposals to deal with the housing crisis, including a freeze on foreclosures and on increases in variable rate mortgage interest rates, along with tax relief for middle-class families.
McCain stands up for Musharraf; Clinton demands independent probe
WEST BURLINGTON, Iowa (AP) Republican John McCain defended Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf on Friday against criticism in the wake of Benazir Bhutto's assassination.
Speaking to about 50 people packed into a cafe in southeast Iowa, McCain said U.S. politicians should keep in mind that Musharraf has been a largely reliable ally who agreed to hold elections.
On the Democratic side, Hillary Rodham Clinton called for an independent, international investigation into Bhutto's death perhaps by the United Nations.
"There is no reason to trust the Pakistani government after Musharraf has essentially muzzled the press and undermined the judiciary," Clinton told New Hampshire reporters in a conference call.
McCain, however, said an independent investigation may not be necessary.
"Before we jump into the United Nations or someone else having an investigation and by the way their record of investigations hasn't been superb let's take the matter at hand," he told reporters aboard his campaign bus in New Hampshire. "My priority right now is not who investigates this. My priority right now is restoring law and order, getting the political process back on track and making sure this situation is contained and controlled."
Guiliani touches down in Iowa, touts health care plan
FORT DODGE, IOWA (AP) Fresh from campaigning in Florida, Republican Rudy Giuliani touched down in Iowa to tout his health care plan and predict that it would put people back in control of decisions about their medical care.
He told about 120 people gathered in the Fort Museum's Opera House that for his plan to work, he needs more than 60 million Americans to buy their own health insurance and open personal health savings accounts.
Giuliani said his plan would cut by half the nation's health care costs and let people personalize health insurance policies to meet their needs. The former New York city Mayor said he would push for a $15,000 personal income tax exemption to let families buy their own policies. Families could keep whatever amount is left over to open a personal health account to pay for catastrophic costs, he said.
That would allow families to increase their deductibles and lower their premiums, Giuliani said. Families also could increase coverages for illnesses and pre-existing conditions.
Although he's trailing in polls of Iowa Republicans, Giuliani said he is ahead in polls in 16 of the 29 states that have caucuses or primaries scheduled on or before Feb. 5. He is focusing on big states like Florida, whose primary is Jan. 29.
"Nobody's going to win all the primaries," Giuliani said. "It's who wins the most."
Romney yields spotlight to wife Ann
Mitt Romney campaigned through a string of small towns in conservative western Iowa during the day, and he routinely ceded the spotlight to Ann, his wife of 38 years.
He "stood by me" she said, recalling how her 1998 diagnosis of multiple sclerosis affected her physically and caused her to become depressed.
"It was so amazing to have Mitt by my side during those darkest hours and remind me that it didn't matter how bad it got, that we would be OK and there would always be a better day," she said.
"I know what kind of character he has," she said, adding that it and his other qualities would make him an "extraordinary president" if he wins the White House.
Romney unveils ads against 2 rivals
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Seeking the advantage in two states, Mitt Romney launched new hard-hitting ads against his top presidential rivals Friday, criticizing Mike Huckabee on foreign policy and spending in an Iowa commercial while assailing John McCain on taxes and immigration in a spot for New Hampshire.
The subjects of the ads brushed off the criticism and suggested they were proof that Romney's campaign was in trouble in the days before the first tests of the 2008 nomination process.
"Who is ready to make tough decisions? Mike Huckabee? Soft on government spending," Romney's latest ad against Huckabee says. It also portrays his opponent anew as weak on immigration and crime and quotes President Bush's secretary of state: "His foreign policy? 'Ludicrous,' says Condoleezza Rice."
In New Hampshire, Romney's first tough spot against McCain asks: "Is he the right Republican for the future? McCain opposes repeal of the death tax. And voted against the Bush tax cuts twice. McCain pushed to let every illegal immigrant stay here permanently. Even voted to allow illegals to collect Social Security."
THE DEMOCRATS
Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, Barack Obama of Illinois, Chris Dodd of Connecticut and Joe Biden of Delaware, as well as former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards and New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson campaign in Iowa. Rep. Dennis Kucinich campaigns in New Hampshire.
THE REPUBLICANS
Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, and former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson campaign in Iowa. Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani holds a news conference in Orlando, Fla., before heading to Iowa. Arizona Sen. John McCain campaigns in New Hampshire.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Waiting on that president's desk in the Oval Office will be problems that are incredibly difficult, that present challenges to our leadership in the world, to our moral authority, to our economy, to the kind of society we are and want to be." Hillary Rodham Clinton on what awaits the new president in January 2009.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Overall, 42 percent of Democrats are very or extremely satisfied with the amount of attention their favored candidates are giving to the issues that matter most to them. Only 32 percent of Republicans feel that way about their candidates. AP-Yahoo News survey
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 29, 2007

 

End of Document
