

320 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 20, 2007 Thursday 10:56 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1946 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Colorado Republican Tom Tancredo drops out of GOP presidential race, endorses Romney ... Giuliani heads home after hospital checkup for flu-like symptoms ... Romney says Huckabee would be a good vice president, not president ... Clinton says candidates without international experience might be no better than Bush ... Obama looks to NH independents for support ... Opponents criticize Huckabee for agreeing to reduce sentences for meth offenders ... McCain says he has never done favors for lobbyists, interest groups ... Bush offers guidance to '08 candidates, says GOP will hold the White House ...
Tancredo drops bid for White House
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Rep. Tom Tancredo dropped out of the race for the Republican presidential nomination Thursday and endorsed rival Mitt Romney.
Tancredo, a five-term congressman from Colorado, had based his campaign on fighting illegal immigration and has run television ads that link lax border control to terrorist attacks, rape and other crimes. He has consistently polled at the bottom of the crowded Republican field.
He announced his withdrawal two weeks before Iowa begins the presidential nominating process with the precinct caucuses.
Tancredo said he decided to drop out in part because of concern that his presence could split the vote for other candidates who have taken a hard line on immigration, helping those who would take a less restrictive approach.
"I fear remaining in this race, one which I cannot win, would contribute to the nomination of one of these candidates," he said.
Giuliani heads home after hospital stay
ST. LOUIS (AP) Republican presidential candidate Rudy Giuliani was released from a St. Louis hospital Thursday after undergoing tests for flu-like symptoms and spending the night.
"I feel great. Take care. Merry Christmas, I'm feeling fine thanks to the hospital. They did a great job," Giuliani said as he left Barnes-Jewish Hospital en route to returning to New York.
The former New York mayor felt the symptoms while campaigning for the nomination in Missouri, and they soon became worse, campaign spokeswoman Katie Levinson said late Wednesday. She did not describe the symptoms beyond those being commonly associated with the flu.
In a statement Thursday, the campaign said doctors had performed a series of precautionary tests and the results were normal.
Giuliani's wife, Judith, told reporters in New York about the circumstances surrounding his surprise stay in the hospital.
"A decision was made last night when he had a severe headache and flu-like symptoms on his way home from Missouri to land the plane. EMS then performed a small evaluation and decided that for precautionary measures they would take him to Barnes-Jewish Hospital," she said.
Judith Giuliani said he would have a follow-up visit with his physician.
Romney: Huckabee would make a fine VP
ORANGE CITY, Iowa (AP) Republican presidential hopeful Mitt Romney does not think rival Mike Huckabee should be commander in chief, yet Romney said Thursday Huckabee would make a fine running mate.
"He's a wonderful person. He'd make a great vice president," Romney said at a forum in northwest Iowa.
"But I also think the issues we're dealing with today are very important issues, and it's important for people to understand where we stand on issues," said Romney, the former Massachusetts governor. "You note that I don't ... call him names or say there's something wrong with him."
At the forum, Romney was asked why he is criticizing Huckabee's record, whether Huckabee would make a good second-in-command and whether Romney, a Mormon, would be comfortable with a Southern Baptist minister like Huckabee on the ticket. Romney did not address the latter question; Huckabee, also a former Arkansas governor, shares his faith with the evangelical Christians who have fueled his rise in polls.
The questioner, attorney Ruth Kocisko, said later she is a registered Democrat who plans to attend the Democratic caucuses on Jan. 3.
Clinton touts international experience
GRUNDY CENTER, Iowa (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton warned Iowans Thursday against voting for a candidate who doesn't have foreign policy experience, suggesting her leading rivals would be no better than President Bush in that regard.
"It is tempting any time things seem quieter for a minute on the international front to think that we don't need a president who is up to speed on foreign affairs and military matters," Clinton said.
"Well, that's the kind of logic that got us George Bush in the first place," she said to laughter from her friendly audience at a high school auditorium. "Experience in foreign affairs is critical for ending the war in Iraq, averting war in Iran, negotiating a Middle East peace and dealing with North Korea."
Clinton's advisers described her speech two weeks before the Iowa caucuses as a closing argument against top rivals Barack Obama and John Edwards, as well as Republican candidates with little international experience. Obama has served three years in the Senate, while Edwards served one six-year term, yet both are running head-to-head with Clinton in Iowa, arguing that the country needs a new direction.
Clinton was accompanied by military and diplomatic leaders from her husband's administration, and they spent 30 minutes lauding her experience around the world.
Obama appeals to NH independents
EXETER, N.H. (AP) Democratic presidential contender Barack Obama sought Thursday to shore up support among New Hampshire independents, a key bloc that can vote in either party's presidential primary here and one where he enjoys a slight lead over rival Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Obama, touting his message of changing Washington, told a roundtable of independent voters he would not to let his administration's aides lobby him once they leave, would make government transparent and cut out lobbyists' influence. Many of the promises were lifted directly from Obama's standard stump speech but tailored to the six independent voters the campaign picked to meet privately with him.
The voters asked the Illinois senator if he would fight the system and not be corrupted, something he has spent much of his campaign talking about.
Obama seized the opportunity to emphasize his outsider status, having arrived in Washington in 2005. He has pivoted his relative lack of experience into a strength.
Huckabee criticized for meth bill
LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (AP) Mike Huckabee's Republican rivals, fighting back as he surges in the presidential race, are tagging him as soft on crime because of a law he signed as Arkansas governor that gave some methamphetamine offenders more credit for good behavior.
"Mike Huckabee's solution? Early releases for meth dealers," Fred Thompson's campaign proclaims.
Huckabee's home state, as well as Iowa where voters will caucus in two weeks in the first nomination contest, has passed legislation restricting access to the principal ingredient in methamphetamine. The law Huckabee's rivals are referring to meant that some meth offenders, instead of serving 70 percent of their sentences would have to serve at least half if they behaved.
Opponents also point to Huckabee's record of pardons and commutations: He had a hand in twice as many as his three predecessors combined, granting 1,033 pardons and commutations in his 10 1/2 years in office. The acts of clemency benefited the stepson of a staff member, murderers who worked at the governor's mansion, a rock star and inmates who received good words from their pastors.
He answered critics of his record on methamphetamine Thursday, singling out former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney in particular.
Sentences "for meth dealers in my state are more than twice as harsh as they were in his state," Huckabee told an audience gathered in a hotel conference room in Marshalltown, Iowa. "When people get desperate, they say desperate things, and sometimes dishonest things."
Romney tried to keep the heat on, pledging in Indianola, Iowa, to stop a "plague of meth" in the United States.
"I'm very proud of the fact that we, in my state, when I was governor, made it tougher for people with meth labs," Romney told about 60 people at a forum at a country club. "I want to make sure that we do everything in our power to keep kids off this terrible, pernicious, captivating drug."
McCain: I never favored a lobbyist
WASHINGTON (AP) Sen. John McCain, rising in the polls as a Republican presidential candidate, defended his integrity Thursday, declaring he had "never done any favors for anybody lobbyist or special interest group."
McCain made the remark to reporters in Detroit when questioned about a report that The New York Times was investigating allegations of legislative favoritism by the Arizona Republican.
McCain acknowledged that his presidential campaign aides have had discussions with the newspaper regarding its inquiries.
"I have not been in talks with The New York Times. They've been communicating with our staff and with us," McCain said. "I've never done any favors for anybody lobbyist or special interest group that's a clear, 24-year record."
McCain and four other senators were accused two decades ago of trying to influence banking regulators on behalf of Charles Keating, a savings and loan financier later convicted of securities fraud. The Senate Ethics Committee said McCain had used "poor judgment" but also said his actions "were not improper" and warranted no penalty.
McCain was faced with the question Thursday after the online Web site, the Drudge Report, said his aides and advisers had been trying to dissuade the newspaper from publishing a story.
New York Times spokeswoman Catherine J. Mathis declined to comment on the matter.
Bush offers tips to '08 candidates
WASHINGTON (AP) President Bush, who has largely refused to comment on the 2008 presidential campaign, offered general guidance Thursday to his successor without talking about any specific candidates.
"You can't be the president unless you have a firm set of principles to guide you, as you sort through all the problems the world faces," Bush said at a news conference.
"And I would be very hesitant to support somebody who relied upon opinion polls and focus groups to define a way forward for a president," he said, without identifying any such candidates by name.
Bush said he will be doing his part in the race by raising money for the party and helping to unite Republicans after the primaries. "I'm confident we'll hold the White House. And I'm confident we can pick up seats in both the Senate and the Congress," he said.
THE DEMOCRATS
Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, Joe Biden of Delaware and Chris Dodd of Connecticut talk to voters in Iowa. New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson and former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards also have events in the early voting state.
Sen. Barack Obama of Illinois meets with voters at several events in New Hampshire.
THE REPUBLICANS
Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney and former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson campaign in Iowa. Colorado Rep. Tom Tancredo announced he was dropping out of the race.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I think they get swallowed up. I don't want to say it's like an Old Boys' club, but if you go in and your ideas are different ... it doesn't fit in with the people who are running the establishment, you're that wacky person over there." Sallyann Hawko, a New Hampshire independent, speaking about politicians in Washington at a roundtable with Democrat Barack Obama.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Fifteen percent of those who support thrice-married Republican Rudy Giuliani have reservations about someone who is divorced, according to a November AP-Yahoo News survey.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 21, 2007

 

End of Document
