

326 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 15, 2007 Saturday 5:17 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 2147 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Edwards can't get matching funds for $4.2 million ... Clinton rejects top adviser's comments on Obama and teenage drug use ... Thompson says he's not worried about predictions for Iowa ... Huckabee pushes national sales tax in New Hampshire ... Romney focuses on immigration in Iowa trip ... Obama offers bit of health care advice
Edwards can't get some matching funds
WASHINGTON (AP) John Edwards cannot get federal matching funds for some $4.2 million raised through a Democratic Web site.
The Federal Election Commission decided Friday on a 4-1 vote that the money was not matchable because federal rules do not include those contributions.
About 53,000 Edwards supporters donated through the ActBlue site. The Web site gets dollars designated to any Democratic federal candidate. It then passes the money to the authorized committees of the candidates.
The Edwards campaign has said it always knew there could be a legal problem with the ActBlue money, so it never counted the funds toward the match it expects to get.
"Although today's decision by the FEC is a setback to the progressive grass-roots movement, our campaign has all the resources it needs to aggressively make our case to voters," Edwards spokesman Eric Schultz said. "Even without the ActBlue contributions included, we will meet our projected $10 million in matching funds."
Edwards became eligible for matching funds on Nov. 1. The former North Carolina senator can supplement his fundraising with millions of dollars from the Presidential Public Funding Program, which is financed by taxpayers who set aside $3 for the fund in their tax returns.
FEC commissioners in the majority said that while they want more people to participate in the process, the regulations were clear. Commissioner Ellen Weintraub opposed the decision, saying the rules were outdated because they existed before the Internet.
"We need to take another look at this regulation and we need to revamp it for the future because it clearly was not intended to cover this situation," she said.
Commission regulations prevent matching contributions drawn from a committee's account even if individuals designated those dollars to go to a presidential candidate.
ActBlue is a registered political committee.
Clinton rejects official's Obama comment
JOHNSTON, Iowa (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton on Friday denounced the comments of an official in her campaign who resigned after raising questions about drug use by Barack Obama.
Clinton was asked about the official's comments about Obama as she campaigned in Iowa, where the controversy has become an issue less than three weeks before the state's leadoff caucuses.
"As soon as I found out that one of my supporters and co-chairs in New Hampshire made a statement, asked a series of questions, I made it clear it was not authorized, it was in no way condoned, I didn't know about it and he stepped down," Clinton said.
A day earlier, Bill Shaheen, a national co-chairman for Clinton and a prominent New Hampshire political figure, had resigned. He and the Clinton campaign had been criticized after he suggested Obama's admitted use of drugs as a teenager could be used against the Illinois senator if he became the Democratic presidential nominee.
Clinton, speaking during a taping of Iowa Public Television's "Iowa Press" program and during a meeting with reporters afterward, sought distance from that comment.
"I made it very clear as soon as I heard about it that I not only disapproved, it did not reflect the campaign I am running," said Clinton. "I did personally apologize, the gentleman in question has stepped down from the leadership role in my campaign."
Asked if the issue of Obama's drug use should be an issue, Clinton said, "Not in my campaign."
Thompson appears confident about Iowa
JACKSON, Miss. (AP) For someone who's trailing in the polls, Republican presidential candidate Fred Thompson sounds confident heading into next month's Iowa caucus.
Thompson, a former Tennessee senator, stopped in Mississippi on Friday to attend a private fundraiser and pick up the endorsement of the Wesleyan Center for Strategic Studies, a Washington-based conservative Methodist group.
"I'm getting ready to focus on the state of Iowa, which I think is kind of tailor-made for the way I campaigned in Tennessee, where I went 20 points down to 20 points ahead and did it again two years later," Thompson said Friday.
Huckabee pushes national sales tax in NH
BOSCAWEN, N.H. (AP) Republican presidential hopeful Mike Huckabee said eliminating federal income taxes in favor of a national sales tax would help save Social Security an odd pitch in a state where residents pay no state income or sales taxes.
"Instead of basing our national budget off of payroll taxes for Social Security ... it means the base of funding is much broader," said Huckabee, whose shoestring campaign has surged nationally and in Iowa, which holds caucuses five days before New Hampshire's Jan. 8 primary.
"That's important because we have a declining number of people who actually live by their wages," the former Arkansas governor told workers at the Elektrisola plant in Boscawen, where workers make wires for electric guitars like those Huckabee plays, among other things.
The tax plan Huckabee has proposed, called the "FAIR tax," would eliminate federal income and investment taxes and replace them with a 23 percent federal sales tax. The poor would pay no net sales tax up to the poverty level, and every household would receive a rebate equal to sales taxes paid on essential goods and services.
Huckabee also named Republican political strategist Ed Rollins as his national campaign chairman. Rollins was national campaign director for Ronald Reagan in the 1984 presidential election in which Reagan won 49 states.
Romney focuses on immigration
CARROLL, Iowa (AP) Republican Mitt Romney chided two of his leading rivals on illegal immigration Friday in a region of Iowa where the issue is among the hottest topics in the race for the state's leadoff precinct caucuses.
"This is a pretty important topic and there are differences by the way," Romney told about 100 people at a country club in northwest Iowa.
He repeated his frequent claim that rival Rudy Giuliani "presided over a sanctuary city" when he was mayor of New York City, but Romney reserved his sharpest words for Mike Huckabee. As governor of Arkansas, Romney said, Huckabee not only pushed for higher taxes but used some of that money to offer government benefits to people in the country illegally.
Romney also used his immigration pitch to make the case that Washington has been unable to resolve the issue and voters should seek answers from an outsider.
Obama offers his own bit of health care advice
CEDAR RAPIDS, Iowa (AP) At a session with five Iowans facing different economic and health care hardships in Cedar Rapids, Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama offered his own bit of health care advice.
Katherine Marcano, a 22-year-old community college student who works a graveyard shift and is raising her 16-year-old sister and 14-year-old cousin, had just finished describing how her schedule allowed her a mere three hours of sleep. How do you stay awake? Obama wanted to know. Energy, drinks and coffee, Marcano replied.
"You're doing heroic work," Obama said. "And I'm worried about you because I don't know that you should be drinking that Red Bull all the time."
Two hours later, in Manchester, Iowa, Obama had worked her into his stump speech.
"There is no reason why we should not provide her the financial aid that she needs," he told supporters gathered at the Delaware County Recreation Center.
Polls show Obama in a tight race in Iowa with Hillary Rodham Clinton and John Edwards. A new poll in New Hampshire, where Clinton had been leading, showed Obama and Clinton tied with Edwards trailing.
On Friday, the Obama campaign announced that a precinct captain for Clinton's campaign from Mt. Pleasant, Iowa, had defected to Obama after objecting to what she said were attacks by the Clinton campaign.
The Obama campaign posted on its Iowa Web site a video of Susan Klopfer replacing a sign in her yard bearing Clinton's name with one in support of Obama.
"I was really surprised to see personal attacks from one Democrat to the other Democrat," she says in the video. "The negative stuff, it just isn't going to work. It's not going to work here in Iowa."
Richardson sees need for consensus
CONCORD, N.H. (AP) Bill Richardson said Friday that several of his rivals, including Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, have engaged in personal criticism.
Richardson suggested that the divisions within his own Democratic Party scare voters and will handcuff the next president. As the early state contests enter their final month, the New Mexico governor said he would continue to stay positive and overtake his better-funded candidates with an electability argument.
"I believe I am the candidate that can bring the country together. The fact that I'm staying positive is a reason for my moving into double digits," Richardson told reporters after an AARP forum.
He immediately corrected himself: "I come in and out of them."
Richardson, who in fact remains in single digits in most recent polling, called on his rivals to stay polite and proper.
Wyoming Democratic leader and Obama backer warns about Clinton nomination
CHEYENNE, Wyo. (AP) The Wyoming Democratic Party chairman, a backer of Barack Obama, warned on Friday that a Hillary Rodham Clinton nomination could threaten Democratic gains in the West because she would drive Republicans to the polls.
"In Wyoming, if Democrats are going to have a chance, the race is decided by moderate Republicans and independents," John Millin said Friday. "The extreme radical, right-wing Republicans ... will show up to vote against her. And those people, of course, while they're there, are going to vote for all the other Republicans on the rest of the ballot."
Millin's comments came a week after Wyoming Gov. Dave Freudenthal, also a Democrat, expressed frustration with all the presidential candidates both Democrat and Republican.
"None of them have actually spoken to issues that matter in the West," Freudenthal said in a Dec 5. interview.
Millin wrote an op-ed piece for Friday's edition of The Denver Post. In it, he made it clear that he supports Obama.
"If Hillary Clinton is our party's nominee, every Democratic candidate in Wyoming will be painted with that same liberal, big government brush," Millin wrote in the article. "We will also be the target of locker-room jokes that rightfully belong to Bill Clinton."
Clinton spokesman Isaac Baker defended the candidate in an e-mail to the AP.
"As poll after poll shows, Hillary Clinton is clearly the most electable," Baker said. "She knows when to find common ground and when to stand her ground, and that's what it will take to win in 2008."
Maine governor endorses Clinton
AUGUSTA, Maine (AP) Maine Gov. John Baldacci endorsed Hillary Rodham Clinton on Friday, becoming the eighth governor to back the New York senator in her race for the Democratic presidential nomination.
"It will take a leader with Hillary's strength and experience to bring the change that America needs," Baldacci said. "She will be ready to lead on her first day in office."
Oregon Gov. Ted Kulongoski endorsed Clinton on Thursday. Other governors who have thrown their support behind her include New York's Eliot Spitzer, New Jersey's Jon Corzine, Ohio's Ted Strickland, Maryland's Martin OMalley, Arkansas' Mike Beebe and Michigan's Jennifer Granholm.
THE DEMOCRATS
Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York releases an ad featuring her daughter Chelsea and her mother Dorothy Rodham. She also makes a stop in Iowa before heading to New York for an evening fundraiser.
Sens. Barack Obama of Illinois, Joe Biden of Delaware, Chris Dodd of Connecticut campaign in Iowa. Former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards also has events in the state.
New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson holds town hall meetings in New Hampshire.
THE REPUBLICANS
Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney meets with voters in Iowa.
Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee campaigns with actor Chuck Norris at events in New Hampshire.
Sen. John McCain of Arizona meets voters in South Carolina.
Former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson receives endorsements in Jackson, Miss.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I don't fear anybody else or anything else as long as I'm right with the Lord and he's right with me." Former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson, when asked at a news conference if he felt threatened by the gains his Republican rival, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, has made with Christian conservatives.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Nearly 60 percent of John McCain's supporters say they have at least some reservations about supporting a candidate who is over 70, according to an AP-Yahoo News survey. The Republican presidential hopeful is 71.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 16, 2007

 

End of Document
