

328 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 12, 2007 Wednesday 11:01 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1464 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Cut federal spending, GOP presidential rivals say in final pre-Iowa debate ... Romney says 'attacking religion' going too far after Huckabee questions ... Clinton official: Obama's drug history could hurt in November if he's Democratic nominee ... Edwards' anti-crime proposal to include more police officers, tools to fight methamphetamine abuse ... Clinton joins calls for probe of alleged contractor assault ... McCain launches new ad, touting Union Leader endorsement in NH ... Giuliani launches new radio ad in NH highlighting his economic record.
GOP contenders say cut spending
JOHNSTON, Iowa (AP) Republican presidential rivals called for deep cuts in federal spending Wednesday in a debate remarkably free of acrimony, and agreed the reductions they seek need not require painful sacrifice by millions who rely on government services.
"The sacrifice we need from the American people is saying, 'Let the programs go that don't work. Don't lobby for them forever," said former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, one of nine GOP presidential hopefuls sharing an Iowa stage little more than three weeks before the state's caucuses provide the first test of the campaign.
Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani called for across-the-board cuts of up to 15 percent, including reduced federal spending on health care. "Rather than relying on a nanny government, let's rely on people to decide their own health care," he said.
The debate was the Republicans' last before the Iowa caucuses on Jan. 3, and it punctuated a remarkable period of turmoil in their race for the presidential nomination.
Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee has eroded Giuliani's lead in nationwide polls, and he has overtaken Romney in public surveys of likely caucus-goers in Iowa.
Romney: Attacks on religion go too far
BOSTON (AP) Republican Mitt Romney retorted to questions about his faith by rival Mike Huckabee on Wednesday, declaring that "attacking someone's religion is really going too far."
In an article to be published Sunday in The New York Times, Huckabee, an ordained Southern Baptist minister, asks, "Don't Mormons believe that Jesus and the devil are brothers?"
Romney, vying to become the first Mormon elected president, declined to answer that question during an interview Wednesday, saying church leaders in Salt Lake City already had addressed the topic.
"But I think attacking someone's religion is really going too far. It's just not the American way, and I think people will reject that," Romney told NBC's "Today" show.
Huckabee has been surging in recent opinion polls, taking the GOP lead in Iowa and pressing closer to Rudy Giuliani in polling.
Huckabee maintains that his question in the interview was taken out of context.
Clinton official: Obama drug use concern
CONCORD, N.H. (AP) A top adviser to Hillary Rodham Clinton's campaign said Wednesday that Democrats should give more thought to Sen. Barack Obama's admissions of illegal drug use before they pick a presidential candidate. Obama's campaign said Clinton's people were getting desperate.
Bill Shaheen, a national co-chairman of Clinton's campaign, raised the issue during an interview with The Washington Post, posted on washingtonpost.com. Clinton's campaign did not have an immediate comment.
Shaheen, an attorney and veteran organizer, said much of Obama's background is unknown and could be a problem in November 2008 if he is the Democratic nominee. He said Republicans would work hard to discover new aspects of Obama's admittedly spotty youth.
"It'll be, 'When was the last time? Did you ever give drugs to anyone? Did you sell them to anyone?'" said Shaheen, whose wife Jeanne is the state's former governor and is running for the U.S. Senate next year.
Edwards proposes anti-crime plan
IOWA CITY, Iowa (AP) Democratic presidential candidate John Edwards unveiled an anti-crime initiative Wednesday that would increase the number of police patrols, combat methamphetamine production in rural areas and renew the ban on assault weapons.
"We now know that crime in America is not just an urban problem, or just a rural problem, it's a huge American problem and we have got have provide support for strong and fair law enforcement in every single community in the country," Edwards said in a conference call with reporters.
The proposal is part of Edwards current bus tour through Iowa and was coupled with the endorsement of 38 Iowa law enforcement officials, including nine county sheriffs.
The Edwards plan also would finance programs protecting women against domestic violence, help ex-offenders through literacy programs, drug treatment and startup jobs, and expand support for mental health and literacy programs for people in custody.
Edwards has said in the past that he would pay for some of his priorities by rolling back President Bush's tax cuts on taxpayers who make more than $200,000 each year. He also has proposed increasing government revenues by raising the tax rate on capital gains to 28 percent for the wealthiest taxpayers.
The proposal would cost roughly $1.5 billion annually, according to the campaign.
Clinton: Investigate alleged assault
WASHINGTON (AP) Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton on Wednesday urged top Bush administration officials to investigate a former contractor's allegations she was raped and detained by co-workers in Iraq.
The New York senator called for the probe of Jamie Leigh Jones' allegations in a letter addressed to Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, Defense Secretary Robert Gates and Attorney General Michael Mukasey.
"These claims must be taken seriously and the U.S. government must act immediately to investigate Ms. Jones's claims," Clinton said in the letter released Wednesday.
Jones filed a federal lawsuit in May against Halliburton Co., its former subsidiary, KBR Inc., and others claiming she was raped while working for a Halliburton subsidiary at Camp Hope, Baghdad, in 2005.
McCain's new NH ad touts endorsement
CONCORD, N.H. (AP) Republican John McCain is making a final push in New Hampshire with a new ad that highlights his endorsement from the only statewide newspaper there.
Polls show the Arizona senator about even with Rudy Giuliani for second place behind Mitt Romney in a state where economic issues trump most others.
"One man has a plan to cut taxes for 25 million middle-class families," an announcer says in the 30-second spot. "Bold solutions to our toughest problems. A conservative plan to cut your taxes. Fight wasteful government spending."
The ad features quick cuts of McCain in town hall-style meetings, billowing American flags and a front-page endorsement in the New Hampshire Union Leader.
Giuliani launches new radio ad in NH
CONCORD, N.H. (AP) Republican presidential hopeful Rudy Giuliani on Wednesday launched a new radio ad in New Hampshire that plays up his economic record as mayor of New York.
"We need accountability in the spending of our money so that people have confidence in government again," Giuliani says in the 60-second ad.
The ad touts his economic achievements, including 23 tax cuts, resulting in $9 billion saved. The ad notes he eliminated 20,000 bureaucrats and would do the same to Washington. He contends that by cutting taxes, government actually collects more income.
Giuliani's strategy in New Hampshire has been to hit his economic message hard in the state that lacks an income or sales tax. He remains in a tight race for second place with Sen. John McCain of Arizona.
While Giuliani cut taxes 23 times, the record has come into question because Giuliani initiated only 15 of those cuts and opposed one of the largest, accepting it only after a five-month negotiation with his City Council. Seven of those cuts started at the state level. One was initiated by the City Council.
THE DEMOCRATS
New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson discusses his jobs and education policy in Sioux City, Iowa. Former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards also campaigns in the state.
THE REPUBLICANS
The candidates participated in an afternoon debate in Iowa.
Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani, former Tennessee senator Fred Thompson and Arizona Sen. John McCain also have planned stops in the state.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Times have changed. It's changing and race still plays a factor in so much in South Carolina but, you know, more and more people are figuring it out if you cut your skin, whether you're black or white, we all bleed red." Joe Erwin, former chairman of the South Carolina Democratic Party in endorsing White House hopeful Barack Obama.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Two-thirds of Americans say their lives are happy, though more Republicans than Democrats say so, 72 percent to 64 percent, according to an AP-Yahoo News survey.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 13, 2007

 

End of Document
