

329 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 12, 2007 Wednesday 4:01 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1859 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
If Clinton loses Iowa: Her 'Plan B' ... Minuteman Project leader backs Huckabee ... Romney ignores questions about Iowa race ... McCain: Improving veterans' care top aim ... Ron Paul releases new television ad ... Storm affects campaigning in Iowa ... Huckabee's 1992 words get new attention ... Conservative publication endorses Romney ... Iowa debates this week ... Stage employees back Clinton ... Bloomberg: a bachelor president?
Clinton readies New Hampshire 'firewall' to slow Obama if he wins in Iowa
MANCHESTER, N.H. (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton's backup plan if she falters in Iowa can be summed up in two words: New Hampshire.
Clinton's Democratic team is preparing television ads here criticizing Barack Obama's health care plan and working to build what campaigns call a firewall. If the Obama presidential campaign ignites in Iowa, she wants to be ready to cool him off in a state where her organization is strong and her support has proven durable.
This past weekend, the Clinton campaign already had volunteers going door-to-door with fliers criticizing Obama on health care, and possible TV ads against him were screened for focus groups.
Advisers to the New York senator acknowledge there's been uneasiness as Obama has risen in national and several early state polls, including Iowa and New Hampshire. But they insist their master blueprint emphasizing Clinton's experience, toughness and ability to withstand Republican attacks remains sound.
Founder of anti-illegal immigrant group backs Huckabee
COUNCIL BLUFFS, Iowa (AP) The founder of the Minuteman Project, the anti-illegal immigrant group, endorsed Republican Mike Huckabee on Tuesday, while Huckabee dismissed a presidential rival's immigration criticism as the work of "the tattletale in the third grade."
At a news conference hastily arranged to cope with a crippling ice storm, Huckabee brought out Minuteman head Jim Gilchrist, whose private group patrols the Mexican border on its own to keep out illegal immigrants.
Gilchrist said he settled on Huckabee as the candidate whose plans were most likely to halt "this illegal immigrant invasion problem."
Huckabee leads in Iowa where caucuses in less than a month launch the presidential nominating season. Rival Mitt Romney, who has spent millions in the state and for months was the leader, began running a TV ad Tuesday assailing Huckabee on immigration.
"It's the first one of the season and we're honored to be in the middle of it," said Huckabee. "I think the people of Iowa, who have been through this so many times, will vote for somebody who has a plan for the future of America, not just somebody who is looking around and saying, like the tattletale in third grade, 'Let me tell you what this guy is doing.'"
Romney shrugs off questions about Iowa race
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Down in the polls to Republican presidential rival Mike Huckabee, Mitt Romney made it clear Tuesday that he'd rather not discuss his standing.
The former Massachusetts governor had other things to do, such as shake a few business owners' hands, pat the backs of a few shoppers and greet workers on their lunch break at a downtown food court.
"I thought it would be a little fuller," Romney lamented as he and his wife, Ann, set off to meet potential supporters inside Des Moines' network of covered walkways connecting downtown buildings to a food court and various shops. "There's nobody here!" his wife said.
With dozens of reporters and cameras clogging the hallways, Romney ignored repeated questions about the race and his first critical TV ad against Huckabee. He was whisked away by aides after 30 minutes of glad-handing.
McCain: Congress must pass legislation improving veterans' care
INMAN, S.C. (AP) Republican presidential hopeful John McCain said Tuesday his top domestic priority is improving veterans' health care, and he criticized Congress for not passing legislation to fix the problems at military hospitals.
McCain, a Navy pilot who was held captive in North Vietnam, said reports of shoddy patient care at Walter Reed Medical Center in Washington, which emerged in February, are a disgrace.
"Our men and women who are serving in the military were living in deplorable conditions," he told a crowd of 100 people including veterans packed into a pancake house in the northwestern part of this early voting state. "Maybe if we had a few more people who know what it's like to serve in the military, as the brave Americans sitting in front of me had, maybe we would've gotten that legislation done."
A presidential commission led by former Sen. Bob Dole and former health secretary Donna Shalala urged change last summer that would boost benefits for family members helping the wounded, establish an easy-to-use Web site for medical records and overhaul the way disability pay is awarded.
Congress has still not passed the so-called Wounded Warrior bill to repair the system, McCain said.
Ron Paul releases new television ad on health care
ARLINGTON, Va. (AP) Republican presidential hopeful on Tuesday released a new television ad on the subject of health care that will begin running in Iowa and New Hampshire.
In the 30-second spot, a narrator talks about the Texas congressman's desire to give consumers more control over their health care by stopping pharmaceutical interests, insurance companies and government bureaucrats from interfering with doctor-patient decisions.
"I say we need Ron Paul for president. One, he's a doctor, he's seen it all," the narrator says. "Two, he's got the right idea, take the power from the big business and the bureaucrats and give it back to patients and the doctors they choose. Now that's the right medicine."
Paul is an obstetrician-gynecologist.
Storm affects campaigning in Iowa
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) A major winter storm that hit Iowa on Tuesday with ice in the south and snow in the north also hit the campaign trail.
Former President Clinton canceled events in eastern Iowa. He had campaigned in the state for his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, on Monday. Democrat John Edwards canceled events in Clinton, Davenport and Muscatine.
Huckabee in 1992: No gays in military, no women in combat, don't kill Saddam
LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (AP) The U.S. shouldn't try to kill Saddam Hussein in Iraq, Mike Huckabee declared when he first ran for office. No women in combat anywhere. No gays in the military. No contributions in politics to candidates more than a year before an election.
His statements are among 229 answers Huckabee offered as a 36-year-old Texarkana pastor during his first run for political office in 1992. In that unsuccessful race against Sen. Dale Bumpers, Huckabee offered himself as a social conservative and listed "moral decay" as one of the top problems facing the country.
Now that he's a front-runner for the Republican presidential nomination, he's being asked anew about some of the views and comments he expressed in the survey by The Associated Press. Over the weekend, he said he wouldn't retract answers in which he advocated isolating AIDS patients from the general public, opposed increased funding for finding a cure and said homosexuality could pose a public health risk though he said today he might phrase his answers "a little differently."
National Review endorses Romney in Republican race
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) National Review, a decades-old magazine of conservative commentaries, endorsed Mitt Romney for the GOP presidential nomination Tuesday, saying he's the Republican whose positions best appeal to social, national security and economic conservatives alike.
"For Republicans to have any chance of winning next year, they're going to need a candidate who can keep the conservative coalition together," said Rich Lowry, the magazine's editor. The endorsement will appear in an editorial in the magazine's last issue of the year, just three weeks before Iowa Republicans hold the lead-off caucuses in the nomination race.
Iowa debates to air live on cable, public television and the Internet
IOWA CITY, Iowa (AP) Cable networks Fox New Channel, CNN, C-SPAN and MSNBC planned to air presidential debates sponsored by Iowa Public Television and The Des Moines Register. These are the last debates before the Jan. 3 caucuses
Republicans will debate Wednesday and Democrats will debate Thursday. Both debates air at 2 p.m. EST.
Earlier this year Democratic presidential candidates rejected Fox News Channel's efforts to sponsor a debate after liberal groups and some of the candidates accused the Rupert Murdoch-owned network of being biased against Democrats.
Stage employee union backs Clinton for president
WASHINGTON (AP) The International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees endorsed Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton for president Tuesday, less than three weeks after settling a strike that shut down more than two dozen Broadway shows.
The union represents more than 100,000 members in the motion picture, theatrical and television professions.
The New York senator by far has the most union endorsements of any presidential candidate, with at least 10 national unions lined up behind her candidacy.
Bloomberg would be only bachelor candidate playing the presidential field
NEW YORK (AP) For all of his billions, Mayor Michael Bloomberg lacks one thing all the current presidential candidates proudly display: a spouse.
The country has not elected a bachelor president since 1884, when Grover Cleveland won the White House despite newspapers huffing that "a man who will not marry a woman and take care of her has no right to be a president."
Singles haven't had much luck getting nominated either. The last unwed candidate chosen by a major party was Adlai Stevenson, the divorced Democrat who lost to Republican Dwight Eisenhower twice in the 1950s.
Bloomberg, 65, has a companion of seven years, Diana Taylor, and essentially lives with her. Their arrangement and his star-studded past love life would present him with new political territory to navigate if he runs.
THE DEMOCRATS
 Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York holds a public conversation with billionaire financier Warren Buffett in San Francisco.
 Former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards cancels events in Iowa due to poor weather.
THE REPUBLICANS
 Sen. John McCain of Arizona campaigns in South Carolina, winding up the day at a Christmas parade in Spartanburg.
 Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani greets supporters in Santa Monica, Calif.
 Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney meets with voters in Des Moines, Iowa.
 Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee holds an event in Council Bluffs, Iowa.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I'm a Southern boy and when we see weather like this we close everything. We just shut down, go get milk and bread, even if we don't normally have milk and bread, and that's the routine. Then we hole up in our homes for a day and then it melts and we're back to business." Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, after the wintry weather delayed his arrival to western Iowa and forced the cancellation of several stops.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Veterans had a higher voting rate in the 2004 presidential election than non-veterans, 74 percent to 63 percent, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 12, 2007

 

End of Document
