

333 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 7, 2007 Friday 11:18 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 2062 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Huckabee second in national GOP race ... Romney says he didn't hire illegal help ... Thompson raps Huckabee's Iran knowledge ... The 'O factor' and it's not Obama ... McCain to return to the Senate if not elected president ... Edwards calls on Clinton to take firm stand on tough issues.
AP Poll: Huckabee leaps into second place in national GOP race, hurting Giuliani and Thompson
WASHINGTON (AP) Mike Huckabee has vaulted from nowhere into second place in the Republican presidential race, riding a burst of support from evangelicals, Southerners and conservatives, a nationwide poll showed Friday.
The surge by the former Arkansas governor has come largely at the expense of Fred Thompson, according to the national survey by The Associated Press and Ipsos. Thompson has dropped after failing to galvanize the party's right-wing core as much as some had expected.
Rudy Giuliani remains the front-runner, yet while his support long has been steady it shows signs of fraying. Huckabee's growing strength in the South has come as the former New York mayor's support there has dropped, the poll found.
The poll showed Giuliani at 26 percent among Republican and GOP-leaning voters, about where he has been since spring. Huckabee has 18 percent, up from 10 percent in an AP-Ipsos survey a month ago and 3 percent in July.
Arizona Sen. John McCain has 13 percent, Mitt Romney 12 percent and Thompson 11 percent.
Poll: Political phone calls, visiting campaign workers swamp people in Iowa, NH, SC
WASHINGTON (AP) Next time you phone Aunt Betty in Des Moines and she answers with a bark, don't take it personally. Folks in Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina have gotten lots of unsolicited telephone calls and visits lately from presidential campaigns. So says a telephone poll.
Eight in 10 Iowa Republicans and Democrats say they have gotten recorded phone calls about the 2008 contest, according to a poll of three early voting states released Friday by The Associated Press and the nonpartisan Pew Foundation. It's close to seven in 10 in New Hampshire and four in 10 in South Carolina, where the primaries are slightly later.
Almost two-thirds of Iowa Democrats and more than half from the party in New Hampshire say they've been called by actual people about the campaigns, compared with nearly half of Republicans in the two states. In South Carolina, it's closer to one-fifth for members of both parties.
If that's not enough, about one-third of Democrats in Iowa and New Hampshire say they have been visited at home by campaign workers. The figures are more like one in 10 among Republicans in those states, and very few in South Carolina.
Romney says he's not to blame for illegal workers at his home, that it was contractor's fault
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Republican Mitt Romney denies any responsibility for hiring illegal immigrants as workers at his home, insisting it was the fault of contractors and calling for tighter federal guidelines to verify the status of workers.
Asked by a reporter Friday if he shouldn't go the "extra mile" because of his business background and his strong advocacy of clamping down on illegal immigration in his presidential bid, the former Massachusetts governor shot back: "And what's the extra mile? So for instance, if I go to a restaurant, do I make sure all the waiters there are all legal?"
"We have a country where there's not an employment verification system that allows companies to know who's in the country legally and illegally. And I've certainly never proposed that homeowners have a responsibility when they hire a contractor or company to then go out and inquire of the company's employees whether they happen to be legal or not. That's not the course of this country. It's even potentially against the law," he said.
He was responding to reports that undocumented yard workers and painters engaged in work at his Massachusetts home.
On another topic, Romney said his speech a day earlier on "Faith in America" was about just that and was not intended to build support for his campaign among conservative Christians.
Thompson raps Huckabee for lack of knowledge about Iran report
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) Republican presidential candidate Fred Thompson on Friday criticized rival Mike Huckabee, saying it was "surprising" a presidential candidate wouldn't know about a newly released intelligence report that said Iran suspended its nuclear weapons program in 2003.
"For a presidential candidate not to know that or not to keep up with that I think is very surprising," said the former Tennessee senator.
Huckabee, a former Arkansas governor, told reporters earlier this week he was not aware of the National Intelligence Estimate report on Iran.
Thompson has been tripped up by news events himself. In September, he said he was not aware that the Supreme Court had decided to hear arguments on the constitutionality of lethal injection as a means of execution. And early in his campaign, Thompson sidestepped a question about the Terri Schiavo right-to-die case, saying he didn't remember the details.
Barack Obama taps Oprah mania to bring in voters hopes they'll stay as supporters
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Even before Oprah Winfrey adopts her familiar pose microphone in hand in the unfamiliar venue of the presidential campaign, Barack Obama is already reaping the benefits of her high-wattage celebrity backing.
Thousands of Iowans have flocked to his office, and have 1,385 signed up as volunteers to score tickets to see the talk show diva and magazine queen. The campaign declines to say how many tickets have been distributed for two events Saturday in Iowa but says no one will be turned away from the unique opportunity to attract new voters.
After all, Obama is engaged in a tight, three-way race with Hillary Rodham Clinton and John Edwards and the Jan. 3 caucuses are less than four weeks away.
Winfrey has never backed a political candidate before, but on behalf of her Chicago hometown senator is making the two stops in Iowa Saturday in Des Moines and Cedar Rapids before heading Sunday to South Carolina and New Hampshire with Obama and his wife. The campaign moved the biggest event to the 80,000-seat University of South Carolina football stadium after running out of the 18,000 tickets originally available.
McCain will return to the Senate if he loses GOP presidential race
HAMPSTEAD, N.H. (AP) John McCain has an automatic response to the question of what he'd do if he lost the GOP presidential nomination contest.
"If not, back to the Senate," the Arizona Republican said Friday, without missing a beat.
He'd have two more years left in his fourth term. What about running for a fifth term in 2010?
"I haven't even thought about it much but right now, I can see no reason not to run again," he said, adding that an ultimate decision wouldn't be made until late 2009 if, of course, his second presidential run is thwarted.
Age 71, McCain has served in the Senate since 1986.
He said he'd quit working before his health declines, saying: "I want to retire before I reach a point where I'm not at my peak abilities."
McCain made the comments as he chatted with reporters on his campaign bus on the fifth day of a six-day New Hampshire bus tour.
Edwards says presidential contenders such as Clinton should take firm stands on tough issues
MANCHESTER, N.H. (AP) Democrat John Edwards on Friday criticized rival Hillary Rodham Clinton, saying candidates who seek the White House should take strong, clear stands on difficult issues like Social Security.
Clinton has said she doesn't want to put forward a specific plan now to shore up Social Security, but would wait for recommendations from a bipartisan commission because any plan will need the support of Democrats and Republicans to be enacted.
Asked about her stance at an AARP-Divided We Fail lunch on health and financial security, Edwards told seniors: "If you want to be president of the United States, you should lead. Leadership means taking clear, strong positions for the American people. ... I've said very clearly what I would do, not said I'm going to wait and figure this out later."
Edwards, a former North Carolina senator, also touted his health care plan, which would require that all Americans sign up for health insurance. He estimates his plan could cost up to $120 billion and would be paid for with higher taxes on those earning more than $200,000 a year.
Huckabee immigration plan calls for Mexico border fence, more patrol agents
BLUFFTON, S.C. (AP) Republican presidential contender Mike Huckabee says he'd seal the Mexican border, hire more agents to patrol it and make illegal immigrants go home before they could apply to return to this country.
"It's tough, but I also think it's fair, giving people 120 days to go back and then start the process all over," the former Arkansas governor said Friday. "People will say, 'Well, how will they go back?' Well, they got here. They'll figure out the same way they got here to go back."
Huckabee said he would have a border fence in place by July 2010 and defended his plan to send illegal immigrants home before they could apply for U.S. citizenship. Those who did not return home within four months would be deported and have to wait 10 years before they could legally re-enter the country, he said.
His proposal is similar to those of several of his GOP rivals, though in the past he has been more forgiving of some immigrants who were in the U.S. illegally. As Arkansas governor, Huckabee attempted to make children of illegal immigrants eligible for scholarships and in-state college tuition.
LAS VEGAS (AP) Barack Obama will be the first presidential candidate to air television ads in Nevada, commercials that highlight the Democrat's argument that he is a Washington outsider.
The ads will begin Tuesday statewide.
The ad, dubbed "Take It Back," includes clips from Obama's speech launching his candidacy. It notes his work on ethics reform and his rejection of campaign contributions from "PACs and Washington lobbyists who have too much power today."
Obama has accepted federal lobbyists' money in past races and has taken money from lobbyists working at the state level.
The ad previously aired in Iowa and New Hampshire.
The campaign said it plans to run ads through the holiday season until Nevada's Jan. 19 caucuses.
Democrats have been on the airwaves in other early states for weeks. Nevada, which has never held such an early caucus, largely has remained a paid media-free zone. Campaigns have focused on organizational efforts, arguing most voters were not yet engaged in the race.
New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson was the first Democrat to run radio ads in the state, when he aired English and Spanish ads in July.
THE DEMOCRATS
Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York holds a "Take Your Buddy to Caucus" event in Des Moines, Iowa. Sen. Joe Biden of Delaware also campaigns in the state.
Sen. Barack Obama of Illinois has a concert in Chicago to raise campaign cash.
Former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards speaks to New Hampshire voters at events around the early voting state.
Rep. Dennis Kucinich of Ohio holds a fundraiser in Charlottesville, Va.
THE REPUBLICANS
Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney campaigns in Iowa.
Sen. John McCain of Arizona talks to voters at town hall meetings in New Hampshire.
Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani makes remarks to the Illinois Manufacturers' Association and has a town hall meeting in Chicago.
Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee holds a fundraiser in North Carolina before heading events in South Carolina.
Former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson has a stop in Ohio before campaigning in Iowa.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I can understand a lot of it in the South. People in the South want to know someone understands SEC (Southeastern Conference) football and knows what WD-40 and duct tape will do. But from the rest of the country even if they don't know what duct tape and WD-40 will do they certainly do know they want a president who has had a struggle, who has not just had life handed to him." Republican Mike Huckabee, on a nationwide AP-Ipsos poll released Friday that shows him in second place among GOP candidates, riding support from evangelicals, Southerners and conservatives.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Women were more likely than men to vote in the 2004 presidential election, 65 percent compared with 62 percent, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 8, 2007

 

End of Document
