

334 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 7, 2007 Friday 3:10 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1903 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Romney confronts voter skepticism about his Mormon faith ... Clinton: Bipartisan solution needed on Social Security ... Edwards not concerned with recent S.C. poll ... Obama writes for South Carolina law journal ... Huckabee maintains silence about his religious views ... Poll: Hispanic shift toward Democrats ... Richardson asks state workers for help ... McCain says Iraq lacks experienced statesmen ... Clinton, Romney shift their campaign strategies.
Romney: 'Moral convictions,' not faith, binds him to all Americans
COLLEGE STATION, Texas (AP) Republican Mitt Romney, confronting voters' skepticism about his Mormon faith, declared Thursday that as president he would "serve no one religion, no one group, no one cause," and said calls for him to explain and justify his religious beliefs go against the profound wishes of the nation's founders.
At the same time, he decried those who would remove from public life "any acknowledgment of God," and he said that "during the holiday season, nativity scenes and menorahs should be welcome in our public places."
In a speech less than a month before the first nomination contests, Romney said he shares "moral convictions" with Americans of all faiths, though surveys suggest up to half of likely voters have qualms about electing the first Mormon president.
"I believe in my Mormon faith and I endeavor to live by it," Romney said. "My faith is the faith of my fathers. I will be true to them and to my beliefs."
Clinton says bipartisan solution need to fix Social Security
GILFORD, N.H. (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton said Thursday that it would be a mistake to back a specific solution now to fix Social Security since any fix will require a compromise backed by both Democrats and Republicans.
The presidential candidate and New York senator spoke at Gunstock ski area, where she briefly described her health care, education, governmental accountability and tax plans before taking questions from the crowd.
Responding to a question about whether she would consider higher payroll taxes on higher wage-earners to fix Social Security, Clinton said that likely would be among the many ideas considered by a bipartisan commission.
"I think these are all ideas a bipartisan commission has to look at, but I think it's a mistake for Democrats to be throwing these ideas out when they know we can't do anything unless Democrats and Republicans hold hands and jump together," Clinton said.
Edwards says he's not concerned about AP-Pew poll showing him at third place in S.C.
SENECA, S.C. (AP) Democratic presidential candidate John Edwards said Thursday he was not worried that an AP-Pew poll released this week shows him in a distant third place in his home state of South Carolina.
Hillary Rodham Clinton is leading with 45 percent, followed by Barack Obama at 31 percent, according to the survey. Edwards has 10 percent.
The poll also showed that health care was a top concern among the state's Democrats, and the majority of likely primary voters said the New York senator would do the best job improving the system.
"The vast majority of South Carolina voters have not decided what to do yet," Edwards said. "And I have a different approach. My approach is to shake up Washington and take on insurance companies and drug companies, which I've been doing my whole life. They'll respond."
Edwards also reacted to President Bush's plan to help homeowners with rising mortgage payments, saying it doesn't go far enough. Edwards said he would freeze interest rates for seven years instead of the five years called for in a plan Bush announced Thursday.
Obama writes essay for South Carolina law journal
CHARLESTON, S.C. (AP) Democrat Barack Obama's solution for some of the crises he believes the nation faces? Lawyers.
It may be expected, considering that the Illinois senator and presidential hopeful is a Harvard-educated lawyer. His comments come in an inspirational introduction to the January edition of the Law Review at the Charleston School of Law.
"This is a moment when America needs its lawyers to look outward and ask what they can do to be the catalysts and architects of a better world," Obama said in the essay, which was posted online Thursday. "Lawyers should help make real the American dream and protect people from abuse and injustice around the globe."
Obama, who was elected the first black president of the Harvard Law Review, also reiterated criticisms of the Bush administration.
"Our constitutional system has been assaulted by an overreaching Executive Branch cloaked in secrecy and hostile to precedent and evidence-based, decision-making," Obama wrote in the 1,000-word essay. "Our image and influence abroad has been weakened, and our ability to pass on to future generations a world that is more free, more fair, and more secure is threatened even as the world most needs America's vision and leadership."
Obama spokesman Kevin Griffis said the law journal contacted the campaign during the summer.
Huckabee maintains silence about his religious views
GREENSBORO, N.C. (AP) Maintaining his silence about his religious beliefs, Republican and Baptist preacher Mike Huckabee declined Thursday to outline his views on women in the ministry but praised a presidential rival for speaking about his own faith.
Huckabee said he did not see Mitt Romney's speech Thursday in which the former Massachusetts governor vowed to serve the interests of the nation, not the Mormon church he worships in, if elected president. But he praised Romney for doing it.
"I think it's a good thing and healthy for all of us for people to discuss faith in the public square," Huckabee, a former governor of Arkansas, said outside a private fundraiser. "I have nothing but respect for his coming forth and sharing what he did. I've been very clear about my own personal views. I think all of us who seek the office of president should be candid with the American people."
But when asked whether he believes women should serve in a church's pastoral leadership an oft-discussed issue among Southern Baptist congregations Huckabee said the topic shouldn't be a campaign issue, and he kept quiet about his views.
"It's so irrelevant to being president that I wouldn't even get into that," Huckabee said before meeting with about 350 supporters at the start of a three-day swing through the Carolinas. "Churches have different views on that and my personal views are completely immaterial as it would relate to being president."
Hispanics shifting back toward Democrats after years of edging toward GOP, poll shows
WASHINGTON (AP) Hispanics are returning to the Democratic Party after several years of drifting toward the Republicans, with many saying Bush administration policies have been harmful to their community, a poll showed Thursday.
By 57 percent to 23 percent, more Hispanic registered voters say they favor Democrats than Republicans, according to a survey by the nonpartisan Pew Hispanic Center.
That 34 percentage point Democratic edge which includes people who said they lean toward either party has grown since July 2006, when a Pew poll measured a 21 point difference. Then, 49 percent of registered Hispanic voters said they favored Democrats and 28 percent chose Republicans.
Among Hispanics who are registered Democrats, 59 percent said they want Hillary Rodham Clinton to be their party's presidential candidate, followed by 15 percent who prefer Barack Obama. Among Hispanic Republicans, Rudy Giuliani leads Fred Thompson, 35 percent to 13 percent.
Richardson asking state workers to pack bags, volunteer for his presidential campaign
SANTA FE, N.M. (AP) Democratic presidential hopeful Bill Richardson has a Christmas wish for some of the state government employees in his administration: pack your bags and head to Iowa.
The two-term governor is asking governmental appointees and other state employees to volunteer to help his campaign by traveling to Iowa before the Jan. 3 leadoff presidential contest.
Several of the governor's top administrators already have hit the campaign trail in Iowa and New Hampshire. Others plan to be in Iowa for the critical final days before the caucus.
"I've got quite a few friends in Iowa so I am looking forward to going back up there and campaigning hard enough to keep my butt from freezing," says Environment Secretary Ron Curry.
McCain: There are no Thomas Jeffersons in Iraq
STRATHAM, N.H. (AP) Republican presidential candidate John McCain said any hope for political reconciliation in Iraq should be tempered, telling voters in New Hampshire that the country lacks any experienced statesmen.
"I'm frustrated with the Iraqi government. I'm sure those of you who follow the situation are, too. I would remind you that there are no Thomas Jeffersons in Iraq," McCain told employees of Timberland during a town-hall style meeting.
The Arizona senator said Iraq has no tradition of grand politics. He said the legislators there are still figuring out how to run their country and the organizations there are lagging.
McCain has long been a critic of the political conditions in Iraq. He said leaders there need to take greater responsibility, although he is not willing to withdraw the U.S. military forces as punishment.
McCain also marked Pearl Harbor Day on Thursday a day early. During the meeting, McCain told voters they should use the day to remember veterans and all they have done for the country.
Clinton and Romney shift course in White House race
WASHINGTON (AP) For at least a year, Mitt Romney worked to keep his Mormon faith away from the center of his campaign for the White House. And for months, Hillary Rodham Clinton largely avoided criticizing her Democratic rivals.
No longer.
Now, locked in unpredictable, tight races in the leadoff Iowa caucuses, both the Democratic senator from New York and the Republican former governor of Massachusetts are shifting course. Clinton's decision to assail Sen. Barack Obama and Romney's speech Thursday on religious faith are seen by pros in both parties as signs that the status quo carried potential dangers.
"It was Napoleon who said, 'No plan has ever survived contact with the enemy,'" said Mark Mellman, a Democratic pollster who is not affiliated with any candidate in the 2008 race. "The truth is these campaigns are really for the first time coming into contact with the enemy. And so they've got to change plans."
THE DEMOCRATS
Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York campaigns in New Hampshire before holding a holiday reception in Washington.
John Edwards makes stops in South Carolina.
Sen. Chris Dodd of Connecticut holds town halls in Iowa.
THE REPUBLICANS
Mitt Romney delivers a speech on his Mormon religion at the George Bush Presidential Library in College Station, Texas.
Sen. John McCain of Arizona talks to voters in New Hampshire.
Rudy Giuliani campaigns in Florida.
Mike Huckabee makes stops in North Carolina.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"When I place my hand on the Bible and take the oath of office, that oath becomes my highest promise to God. If I am fortunate to become your president, I will serve no one religion, no one group, no one cause, and no one interest. A president must serve only the common cause of the people of the United States." Mitt Romney
STAT OF THE DAY:
Democrat John F. Kennedy, the nation's first Roman Catholic president, defeated Republican Richard Nixon with 34,226,731 votes in 1960. Nixon garnered 34,108,157 votes.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 7, 2007

 

End of Document
