

340 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 1, 2007 Saturday 2:52 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 2133 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Man takes hostages in NH Clinton office before surrendering ... Candidates pitch to party leaders ... McCain: 'I will beat her like a drum' ... Giuliani: Kids of illegal immigrants OK ... Presidential race turns a negative page ... Obama, Bloomberg dine together in NYC ... Clinton campaign: Knock off misleading ad
Man takes hostages in NH Clinton office
ROCHESTER, N.H. (AP) A distraught man wearing what appeared to be a bomb walked into a Hillary Rodham Clinton campaign office Friday and demanded to speak to the candidate during a hostage drama that dragged on for nearly six hours before he peacefully surrendered.
Shortly after releasing the last of at least four hostages, Leeland Eisenberg walked out of the storefront office, put down a homemade bomb-like package and was immediately surrounded by SWAT team with guns drawn.
The suspect clad in gray slacks, white dress shirt and a red tie was put on the ground, handcuffed and taken two blocks to the police office in the back of a tactical response vehicle.
The man walked into the office shortly before 1 p.m. and took several hostages, police and witnesses said. He let a woman with an infant go immediately and at least one other woman got out about two hours later.
The last hostage walked from the office seconds before the man surrendered shortly after 6 p.m. The hostage then ran down the street toward the police roadblocks surrounding Clinton's office.
Police said earlier no one had been injured, and that appeared to still be true at the end.
In Washington, Clinton told reporters that "this has been a very hard day for us in the campaign" as she thanked law enforcement for their work in ending the standoff and thanked her campaign workers for their work. She was flying to New Hampshire to deliver those messages in person.
Romney fights back in Iowa, New Hampshire
CEDAR RAPIDS, Iowa (AP) Republican Mitt Romney, his once-strong leads evaporated in Iowa and fragile in New Hampshire, faces a dual threat as the first voting nears Mike Huckabee on the right in Iowa and Rudy Giuliani on the left in the Northeast.
The former Massachusetts governor is responding by fiercely assailing Huckabee's record on immigration and taxes while equating Giuliani with Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Romney said Friday that Huckabee was guilty of "raising taxes time and again. He raised sales taxes, gasoline taxes, grocery taxes, even taxes on nursing home beds." Romney also noted anew that the ex-governor of Arkansas supported giving in-state tuition breaks to illegal immigrants.
Turning to Giuliani, the former New York mayor, Romney said, "It would be very difficult for our party to win the White House if our nominee was so similar to Hillary Clinton on abortion, on same-sex civil unions, on guns, on sanctuary cities and on a record of ethical lapses and I'm referring to the Bernie Kerik matter."
The twin challenges confronting Romney and his willingness to aggressively confront them in the homestretch underscore the volatility of the nomination race five weeks before voting begins. He has yet to run negative TV or radio ads; his aides are weighing whether to do so.
Democratic party leaders hear warnings, appeals from presidential candidates
VIENNA, Va. (AP) Democratic presidential candidates called for sacrifice, a more attentive Democratic Party and an end to divisive political strategies as they pitched their candidacies to the staunchest of Democrats.
Bill Richardson, John Edwards and Barack Obama addressed party officials who make up the Democratic National Committee at the committee's fall meeting here, their last opportunity to speak to such a gathering before the first presidential voting begins in January.
Richardson did not go easy on the party, taking a shot at the Democratic controlled Congress for its failure to accomplish more and calling on the party to win back the confidence of Americans.
"That begins with proving that we're listening to them," he said.
Edwards blamed Republicans and Democrats for isolating Washington from the rest of the country, while Obama called for tossing out past electoral strategies to embrace independents and disaffected Republicans. Without mentioning front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton's name, Obama suggested that if she were to win the nomination, Republicans would reprise the divisions of the 1990s.
McCain promises to beat Hillary Clinton 'like a drum'
NORTH MYRTLE BEACH, S.C. (AP) Republican presidential candidate John McCain said Friday that if he wins the party's nomination he will beat Democratic front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton "like a drum."
Asked if there were any Republicans he hoped to beat in the same fashion, the Arizona senator laughed and said, "I hope all of them."
"As your nominee, as a Republican nominee, I will be very respectful of Senator Clinton. But I will beat her and I will beat her like a drum," he told about 100 supporters outside a small restaurant. "There are fundamental differences between us in philosophy."
Later, McCain told reporters he had made a similar declaration in the past.
"That's a line I used, frankly, in 2000 when I said I could beat Al Gore like a drum. It got good coverage then," he said.
At a later stop, McCain said he was better suited to take on Clinton than Rudy Giuliani because he has "a record of being conservative."
Giuliani says children of illegal immigrants should be able to keep US citizenship
BLUFFTON, S.C. (AP) Republican White House hopeful Rudy Giuliani said Friday he wouldn't try to change laws that make citizens of children born in the U.S. to illegal immigrants, noting that it's a matter determined by the Constitution.
"That's a very delicate balance that's been arrived at, and I wouldn't change that," Giuliani said in response to a question while campaigning at Sun City Hilton Head, a sprawling retirement community down the South Carolina coast from Charleston.
In Wednesday night's Republican debate, Giuliani and nomination rival Mitt Romney traded accusations of being soft on illegal immigration, and Giuliani took pains to deny that New York was a "sanctuary city" for illegal immigrants during his tenure as mayor.
While New York has never used the designation, it offers protections allowing illegal immigrants to report crimes, send kids to school or seek medical treatment without fear of being reported similar to those in cities that label themselves sanctuary cities.
Anti-Romney ad marks new phase a negative one in presidential race
MANCHESTER, N.H. (AP) Mitt Romney is the target, abortion is the issue, and the $100,000 ad buy will change the tone of the Iowa and New Hampshire presidential primaries.
This weekend marks the first negative TV advertising in the two early voting states as the campaign headed into the critical weeks before the first voting, with an independent group's claim that the former Massachusetts governor has flip-flopped a sometimes crippling charge in presidential politics. Analysts say similar negative ads are likely against his chief GOP rival, Rudy Giuliani, whose positions on gun control and immigration are markedly different from those he espoused as New York mayor.
The anti-Romney ad campaign, by a Republican group that supports abortion rights, is fairly modest in scope. But it may open the door to bigger ad buys targeting other candidates and topics, several campaign veterans said.
"This will be the beginning of it," said Patrick Griffin, a Manchester-based advertising executive who handled President Bush's 2000 media effort in New Hampshire.
Obama, Bloomberg chat over breakfast eggs in NYC
NEW YORK (AP) Mayor Michael Bloomberg has promised not to play favorites in the presidential race, but he can't seem to stay away from it he and Democratic candidate Barack Obama had a breakfast date in Manhattan.
The billionaire mayor and the Illinois senator chatted over eggs and potatoes early Friday at a New York luncheonette, in what could be the first of several sit-down meetings Bloomberg may have with the declared candidates.
The mayor allows his aides to openly promote speculation that he will run for president, but continues to deny any interest in doing so. He has said he intends to inject himself into the national dialogue to try to influence the debate.
"We are trying to push our agenda because it helps New Yorkers, and because what's worked in New York will work elsewhere," said Bloomberg spokesman Stu Loeser. "There are a lot of people we'd like to speak to and we're going to continue to press our case."
Obama picked up the check for the $17.34 meal with Bloomberg, and left a $10 tip, according to their waitress, Judith Perez.
Clinton campaign calls on Obama campaign to halt misleading ad
CONCORD, N.H. (AP) Presidential contender Hillary Rodham Clinton's campaign chief on Friday had a simple message for rival Barack Obama's camp: Stop running a misleading television ad.
Clinton campaign manager Patti Solis Doyle sent the letter to her counterpart, David Plouffe, and told him the ad contains incorrect information about Obama's health care plan. The ad claims Obama's plan would provide insurance for everyone, but critics say the Illinois Democrat's plan would leave 15 million people without insurance.
"On an issue of this magnitude, Americans are looking for more than a nice ad or a good speech. It's not enough for Senator Obama to say he covers everyone, especially when that is inaccurate," Solis Doyle wrote. "Until the time comes when Senator Obama has a plan that will cover everyone, you should stop running this false advertisement. The American people deserve an honest debate about health care."
Obama's ad has been running for weeks in Iowa, where polls show a tight contest between Clinton, Obama and John Edwards. The ad went on the air in New Hampshire this week. The Obama campaign said it had no plans to take down the ad.
"The Clinton campaign didn't say a word when this ad was released a month ago, and the only thing that's changed since then is the poll numbers," Obama spokesman Bill Burton said in a statement.
Confederate flag supporters upset by Romney, Thompson
COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) A group that supports the flying of the Confederate flag called two Republican presidential candidates "scalawags and carpetbaggers" Friday for their criticism of the divisive banner during this week's GOP debate.
The Sons of Confederate Veterans said it was upset by remarks by former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson and former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney. A news conference outside Romney's headquarters is planned for Tuesday.
"This will kick off a concerted effort by the SCV to let scalawags and carpetbaggers know that the road to the White House hits a dead end when they smear the good name of our Southern ancestors," Don Gordon, an official with the state division of the organization, said in a statement.
The flag, long seen as a symbol of racism by some and as an emblem of Southern pride by others, once flew atop the Capitol in this early voting state. A 2000 compromise removed it from the dome, though it remains on the Statehouse grounds and flies next to a Confederate soldier memorial beside one of the busiest streets in the city.
WASHINGTON (AP) Fred Thompson says his image as "a slow-talking, slow-walking Tennessee boy" may contribute to the belief by some that he doesn't work hard. But he says the facts tell a different story.
"I started out in a factory when I was a kid in a small town in Tennessee, worked and borrowed my way through school, was a federal prosecutor in my 20s, a Watergate counselor when I was 30, and got elected to the United States Senate twice by 20-point margins," said the former Tennessee senator running for the GOP presidential nomination. He noted before his presidential run he worked jobs in both radio and television and served on government advisory boards as well as having two children under age 5.
"If a man can be lazy and do all that, I recommend it to everybody," Thompson said on CNN's "Larry King Live" Friday night.
THE DEMOCRATS
The candidates attend the Democratic National Committee's fall meeting in Vienna, Va., except Sen. Chris Dodd of Connecticut who is campaigning in Iowa.
THE REPUBLICANS
Rudy Giuliani holds a town hall in South Carolina before heading to another in Florida.
Mitt Romney makes campaign stops in Iowa.
Sen. John McCain of Arizona meets with voters in South Carolina.
Mike Huckabee and Rep. Tom Tancredo of Colorado speak at separate events in New Hampshire.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Too many politicians from both parties are choosing self-preservation over principle, compromise over convictions." Democrat John Edwards.
STAT OF THE DAY:
More Republicans than Democrats say they feel frustrated about the election, 39 percent to 28 percent, according to a recent AP-Yahoo News survey.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 1, 2007

 

End of Document
