

341 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
November 30, 2007 Friday 12:10 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1706 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Queries Giuliani doesn't want ... Edwards pledges new partnership with counties ... Clinton picks up endorsements from Robert F. Kennedy Jr. and a transit workers union ... Biden: Oil prices cost of Bush failures ... American Conservative Union chairman David Keene endorses Romney.
Security-billing case raises questions Giuliani has tried to avoid in campaign
CONCORD, N.H. (AP) The revelation that security costs for Rudy Giuliani's trysts with Judith Nathan were spread to obscure New York accounts exposes the former mayor to harsh questions his campaign wanted badly to avoid about character, truthfulness and a penchant for secrecy.
Conservatives who were already troubled by Giuliani's support for abortion rights and gay rights have further reason to wonder about the thrice-married candidate's morality.
People who argue Giuliani overplays his anti-terrorism experience can wonder whether it was security or protection from prying eyes he was receiving in the Hamptons.
And voters wary of the Bush administration's secrecy might be concerned about a candidate who, at minimum, surrounds himself with people who refused to answer questions when confronted with evidence suggesting the security costs were being squirreled away.
Throughout his candidacy, Giuliani has sought blanket absolution for his foibles by conceding generic "mistakes" and highlighting his bond to Nathan, now his wife. He has also stated to potential supporters, as he did in his first campaign commercial, "they're not going to find perfection" in his candidacy.
Edwards pledges new partnership with counties, boost in federal spending on special education
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Former Sen. John Edwards pledged a new partnership with the nation's counties if he wins the White House, including a commitment to more than double federal spending on special education over the next few years.
The Democratic presidential hopeful said the federal government has long promised to bear 40 percent of the cost of educating special needs children, but does not. He said he will submit a budget that "actually gets the federal government on track" to meet its commitment.
The campaign later said current federal funding is about $10.8 billion annually, and an additional $15 billion would be needed to reach the 40 percent level. It also said Edwards would pay for his plan by closing tax loopholes, collecting unpaid taxes and cutting wasteful spending. It provided no additional details.
Edwards made his remarks to an audience of several hundred officials from Iowa's 99 counties. The state's presidential caucuses on Jan. 3 mark the first test of the campaign, and Edwards and his rivals have long courted supervisors and other county officials in hopes of boosting their own grassroots appeal.
McCain: Some Japanese were hanged for waterboarding U.S. prisoners in WWII
ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. (AP) Republican presidential candidate John McCain reminded people Thursday that some Japanese were tried and hanged for torturing U.S. prisoners during World War II with techniques that included waterboarding.
"There should be little doubt from American history that we consider that as torture otherwise we wouldn't have tried and convicted Japanese for doing that same thing to Americans," McCain said during a news conference.
He said he forgot to mention that piece of history during Wednesday night's debate, during which he criticized former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney after Romney said he would not publicly say what interrogation techniques he would rule out.
Waterboarding makes the subject think he's drowning. Domestic and international treaties ban torture. It is believed the CIA used the waterboarding technique on three prisoners, the last time in 2003. The U.S. military formally banned it as an interrogation technique in 2006. CIA Director Gen. Michael Hayden prohibited waterboarding the same year.
Clinton picks up endorsement from environmental activist Robert F. Kennedy Jr.
WASHINGTON (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton was endorsed for president Thursday by Robert F. Kennedy Jr., an environmental activist and scion of one of the nation's most prominent political families.
Kennedy's father, Robert F. Kennedy, was a New York senator and candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination when he was assassinated in 1968.
Clinton also collected the endorsement of the 180,000-member Amalgamated Transit Union on Thursday, giving her more workers to help her campaign in the early primary states.
"Hillary's strong record of supporting working families and her detailed plans to promote economic fairness and rebuild the nation's infrastructure, including our mass transit systems, make her the clear choice for ATU members," union president Warren S. George said.
Clinton now has picked up early endorsements from nine national unions with a little over a month before the first presidential caucus in Iowa.
Thompson says video was meant to point out rivals' contradictions
PHOENIX (AP) Republican presidential candidate Fred Thompson said Thursday that his video questioning the conservative credentials of two opponents was meant to highlight policy contradictions in his rivals' past.
The video, aired during Wednesday's Republican presidential debate in Florida, showed years-old footage of former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney voicing support for abortion rights and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee backing tax hikes.
"I just wanted to point out what these gentlemen have been saying all their political career, up until they decided to run for president," Thompson said during his first appearance in Arizona as a presidential candidate.
The video was considered one of the first video attacks of the campaign.
Thompson said it's fine if politicians change their views over the years, but that voters should know about those contradictions.
"The question is do you look at their record for several years or do you look at what they are saying now in order to determine what they are going to do in the future," he said.
Thompson says video was meant to point out rivals' contradictions
Biden: High oil prices a result of failures in the Bush administration's policy
CONCORD, N.H. (AP) Presidential hopeful Joe Biden on Thursday planned to tell New Hampshire voters their high oil costs are to be blamed on the Bush administration's policies in the Middle East.
Biden's comments come as the Delaware Democrat escalates his criticism of the temporary increase of troops in Iraq. In recent days, Biden has called the so-called escalation a "fantasy" and said there is no evidence it is working.
"Remember, the stated purpose of the surge was to allow Iraqis to come together politically. There is no evidence none that that has happened. And there is no evidence none that it will happen so long as the Bush administration and its supporters stick to the failed strategy of trying to build a strong central government in Iraq that wins the trust of its people," Biden said in remarks prepared for delivery and provided to The Associated Press.
Biden, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, planned to tell voters in Portsmouth that high energy and gasoline prices are pegged to unease over the situation in the Middle East.
Romney endorsed by prominent conservative activist David Keene
WASHINGTON (AP) Republican presidential hopeful Mitt Romney was endorsed Thursday by David A. Keene, chairman of the American Conservative Union and a long time Republican strategist.
Unlike the last two presidential elections when conservatives united early behind George W. Bush, the support of the GOP's conservative base has been divided among the party's top tier candidates.
In a statement released by Romney's campaign, Keene said that "while I certainly can't pretend to speak for all or even most conservatives, the road that led me here today is one that many conservatives find themselves on and it is my hope that they will end up where I am today, convinced that Mitt Romney represents our best hope for 2008."
Republican gay advocacy group slams Romney in new radio ad over 'Mitt-flops'
WASHINGTON (AP) A Republican gay rights advocacy group accuses Mitt Romney of "Mitt-flops" in a new radio ad that criticizes the former Massachusetts governor on his tax record.
The ad by the Log Cabin Republicans notes that Romney signed legislation in 2003 that increased taxes on New Hampshire residents who worked in Massachusetts. It also says Romney raised taxes on businesses, a point Romney disputes by saying he was merely closing tax loopholes.
"Mitt Flops sounds like something you'd wear to the beach, but they could cost you," the ad states. "Let's see. Running for governor, Mitt Romney said he'd balance the budget without raising taxes. So what'd he really do? He raised taxes on some New Hampshire residents who worked in Massachusetts, taxing their income and their pensions."
The ad represents yet another anti-Romney campaign by an independent political group that is hitting the airwaves with six weeks before the New Hampshire primary. This weekend, the Republican Majority for Choice, a group that advocates abortion rights, is running television and newspaper ads in New Hampshire and Iowa accusing Romney of flip-flopping on abortion.
THE DEMOCRATS
Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton attends the Global Summit on AIDS and the Church in Lake Forest, Calif.
Sen. Barack Obama of Illinois hosts a fundraiser at the Apollo Theater in New York.
Former Sen. John Edwards speaks to the Iowa City Foreign Relations Council in Iowa.
Sen. Joe Biden of Delaware makes several campaign stops in New Hampshire.
New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson campaigns in New York.
THE REPUBLICANS
Fred Thompson holds a lunch fundraiser in Phoenix.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Right now, you're paying on average $3 a gallon for gas. And heating oil costs about $3.23 a gallon, a full dollar more than it did this time last year. What does that have to do with our Iran policy? Everything. Just connect the dots." Sen. Joe Biden, D-Del., in prepared remarks for a campaign stop in Portsmouth, N.H.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Seventy-four percent of women and 71 percent of men were registered to vote in the 2004 presidential election, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: November 30, 2007

 

End of Document
