

342 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
November 29, 2007 Thursday 12:21 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 2212 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Edwards sought Tar Heel tickets ... Clinton jabs at Obama over health care ... Dodd counts on a late surge in Iowa ... Republican group that supports abortion rights launches ad campaign against Romney ... Some Massachusetts Republicans, backing Giuliani, conduct "reality checks" of Romney's record ... Huckabee picks up endorsement from Jerry Falwell's son.
Edwards wanted coveted Tar Heel tickets when he set up poverty center at UNC
RALEIGH, N.C. (AP) When John Edwards returned to his alma mater in 2005 to found a poverty think tank, the multimillionaire attorney sought more than just a salary: He also wanted tickets to University of North Carolina sporting events.
The exact details of what Edwards asked of the Tar Heels remain a secret. Neither the school nor the Democratic presidential candidate is willing to release a "ticket wishlist" described in an e-mail between an Edwards adviser and the school's former law school dean.
"It seems absurd to me that Senator Edwards or the university would be treating these documents or this issue like it were a state secret," said Amanda Martin, a Raleigh-based attorney and general counsel of the North Carolina Press Association.
School spokesman Mike McFarland said only a select group of senior administrators such as deans and vice chancellors are provided or promised sports tickets in connection with the hiring process. Edwards was not in that category and received no tickets in connection with his university employment, he said.
The request for tickets would come as no surprise to Tar Heel fans. A single ticket to a men's basketball game the team is currently ranked No. 1 in the AP Top 25 has a face value of about $40 but fetches hundreds of dollars above that on the secondary market. For games against Tobacco Road rival Duke University, a ticket can sell for thousands.
Clinton says Obama health care plan far from universal in its coverage
ANKENY, Iowa (AP) Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton on Wednesday accused her leading Democratic presidential rival of flinching from the struggle to provide health care for all Americans and said, "I am not afraid of the Republican attacks" on the subject.
"We've got to put up a candidate who's willing to stand up for it and fight for it," the former first lady said in criticism aimed at Illinois Sen. Barack Obama.
Frequently accused of ducking key issues, Clinton said it was Obama who is seeking to finesse a difficult question. "He has called his plan universal, then he has called it 'virtually universal.' But it simply does not deserve that label," she said. "When it comes to truth in labeling, his plan simply flunks the test."
Obama, hoping to parry the attack, told reporters in a conference call that Clinton was making "more of a political point" than anything else. He said that while her plan nominally requires coverage for all, "she hasn't told anybody how she would enforce this mandate."
GOP abortion rights group cites Romney's past stance in TV and newspaper ad campaign
WASHINGTON (AP) A Republican group that backs abortion rights will start an ad campaign this weekend in Iowa and New Hampshire portraying Mitt Romney as a flip-flopper and drawing attention to a questionnaire he filled out in 2002 endorsing legal abortions.
The ads by the Republican Majority for Choice suggest Romney's current anti-abortion stance is politically motivated. The group will spend more than $100,000 to air a 30-second television spot in Iowa and New Hampshire and run full page ads Sunday in the Des Moines Register, the Concord Monitor and the New Hampshire Union Leader.
"He's an opportunist," Jennifer Blei Stockman, national co-chair of Republican Majority for Choice, said in an interview. "It's important for voters to know who they are voting for."
Stockman and other members of the group's board have donated to the presidential campaign of Romney rival Rudy Giuliani, an advocate of abortion rights. Stockman contributed $2,300 to Giuliani's campaign last May.
Giuliani aide dismisses report about New Yorkers footing bill for security expenses during mayor's visits with girlfriend
ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. (AP) Rudy Giuliani's presidential campaign on Wednesday dismissed a report that New York City taxpayers footed the bill for expenses incurred in a Long Island resort as the then-mayor began an extramarital affair with current wife Judith Nathan.
"These were all legitimate expenses incurred in protecting the mayor, and his police detail covered him wherever he went, 24/7," Tony Carbonetti, Giuliani's chief political adviser, said in an interview. "You just do what you do and the police go with you. That's just a fact of life when you're the mayor of New York."
Aides, however, offered no explanation for why the tens of thousands of dollars in costs, which they say were routine expenses for protection for the mayor, were billed to obscure city agencies.
The online publication, The Politico, obtained documents under New York's Freedom of Information Law that it says shows the expenses incurred while Giuliani visited the Hamptons had nothing to with the functions of little-known city offices that were responsible for regulating loft apartments, helping the disabled and providing lawyers for indigent defendants.
Languishing in polls, Dodd banking on late surge to survive in Iowa
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Languishing in the polls, Democrat Chris Dodd says he's banking on a late surge by Iowa supporters and might survive a finish as low as fourth in the state's leadoff caucuses if too few show up.
"Iowans make up their minds late in this process and the door is still wide, wide open here in terms of people deciding," Dodd says. "The last two weeks, they will make up their minds."
Dodd is banking heavily on a good showing in Iowa to boost his long-shot campaign. He's even moved his wife and two young children to the state, and is devoting far more campaign time to Iowa than virtually all of his rivals. The campaign announced Wednesday that he would skip the Democratic National Committee meeting in the Washington area later this week to campaign in Iowa.
Biden predicts that Iowa's caucuses will lead one top-tier candidate to end campaign
JOHNSTON, Iowa (AP) Democrat Joe Biden predicted Wednesday that one of the second-tier presidential candidates would upset a better-known rival in Iowa's leadoff caucuses, effectively ending that campaign.
A similar fate awaits those in the second tier who don't pull off an upset, he said.
"The fact of the matter is, if I don't come out of here in the top three, unless you're bunched up, then I'm out of here," Biden said during a taping of Iowa Public Television's "Iowa Press" program, which will air this weekend.
With little more than a month to go until Iowa's precinct caucuses, most polls have shown Democrats Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton in a virtual dead heat, followed closely by 2004 vice presidential nominee John Edwards.
Trailing far behind are Biden, Chris Dodd and Bill Richardson in a field certain to be winnowed significantly by the Jan. 3 caucuses.
"The top tier is frozen," said Biden, a Delaware senator. "They've spent millions of dollars and nothing is moving. I think people are still looking at that top tier, they're looking at whether they want to stay there."
McCain says not all illegal immigrants should be deported
CLEMSON, S.C. (AP) Suggesting compassion, Republican presidential candidate John McCain said not everyone in the U.S. illegally should be deported.
"If you're prepared to send an 80-year-old grandmother who's been here 70 years back to some country, then frankly you're not quite as compassionate as maybe I am," McCain said Wednesday in response to a question from a Clemson University student who described himself as the child of legal immigrants.
McCain's campaign slid earlier this year when he bucked the GOP base by supporting an immigration bill derided as offering amnesty for illegal immigrants. He now says the public won't accept any overhaul until the nation's borders are secure.
Foes examine Huckabee's Arkansas record
LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (AP) Mike Huckabee's presidential rivals are pointing to chinks in his record as Arkansas' governor from ethics complaints to tax increases to illegal immigration and his support for releasing a rapist who was later convicted of killing a Missouri woman.
The Republican presidential candidate has plenty to champion from his 10 1/2 years as governor including school improvements and health insurance for the children of the working poor. But his record has rough edges.
Other campaigns for the GOP nomination, watching Huckabee's rise in polls in Iowa, are starting to mine his past for political fodder. Take ethics, for example.
"People are starting to contact us and they're saying we want everything on Mike Huckabee," says Graham Sloan, director of the state's Ethics Commission.
What they'll find is 436 pages of documents chronicling Huckabee's various tangles with a commission he's derided as a political tool of Democrats. It's a panel that has held proceedings 20 times on the former governor and lieutenant governor.
Giuliani surrogates in Massachusetts launch Romney 'reality check'
BOSTON (AP) Some top Massachusetts Republicans aligned with former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani plan to fan out across the country, criticizing the record of former Gov. Mitt Romney as he battles Giuliani for the GOP presidential nomination.
Former Gov. Paul Cellucci and former Treasurer Joe Malone, joined by other surrogates, were announcing "The Romney Reality" check during a news conference Wednesday outside the Statehouse where Romney served for four years.
The initial focus was on taxes and other economic issues, topics likely to be discussed by Romney and Giuliani during a debate Wednesday night in St. Petersburg, Fla.
Huckabee picks up endorsement from son of the late Rev. Jerry Falwell
LYNCHBURG, Va. (AP) Republican presidential contender Mike Huckabee picked up an endorsement Wednesday from one of the sons of the late Rev. Jerry Falwell.
Huckabee, a Southern Baptist minister, also told some 8,000 students at a Liberty University convocation that pundits are at a loss to explain his rise in the polls in Iowa. He said the reason is support from evangelical Christians.
"I think there are people all over America praying for me," Huckabee said.
Huckabee had an appreciative audience for his pro-family campaign themes. Jerry Falwell Jr. said after Huckabee spoke that the former Arkansas governor is his choice for president. Falwell became chancellor of the Lynchburg school after his father, a TV preacher and former head of the Moral Majority, died in May.
Falwell's brother, the Rev. Jonathan Falwell, attended the convocation but said in an e-mail that he was not ready to endorse a candidate.
Waiting to debate his GOP rivals, Romney fails to score in flag football, that is
ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. (AP) Waiting for Wednesday night's debate, Mitt Romney played a little flag football with his sons and political supporters, including St. Petersburg Mayor Rick Baker and former Republican Party of Florida Chairman Al Cardenas.
He began the game on the sidelines, then came in as a substitute.
"If the mayor can play, I can play," Romney said.
During one fourth-down play, Romney almost ran for a touchdown before his son Matt roughly grabbed him with both arms instead of trying to grab one of the flags strapped to his waist.
"It's not tackle!" Romney, smiling, shouted after the play.
Watching from the sideline, his wife, Ann, said, "What if he gets hurt and can't debate tonight?"
Romney later removed himself from the game.
"A little rough and tumble," he said. "But there's no crying in football."
Most Democratic presidential candidates support federal funding for needle exchanges
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Most Democratic presidential candidates support lifting a ban on federal funding for needle exchange as a way to protect public health, according to a questionnaire released Wednesday by a coalition working to stop the spread of HIV/AIDS.
John Edwards, Barack Obama, Bill Richardson and Joe Biden met a deadline to answer three questions posed by a group of central Iowa agencies including the AIDS Project of Central Iowa and Planned Parenthood of Greater Iowa.
The questions, sent to Democratic and Republican presidential candidates, are part of the group's recognition of World AIDS Day 2007 on Saturday.
Rudy Giuliani and Mitt Romney declined to give responses, and there was no word from the other Republican and Democratic candidates. Hillary Rodham Clinton's campaign responded "yes" to the questions but was too late to be included in materials sent out by the coalition, said Becky Johnson of the AIDS Project of Central Iowa.
THE DEMOCRATS
Chris Dodd and Joe Biden address the Iowa Association of Counties in Des Moines.
Dennis Kucinich talks to students at a high school in Nashua, N.H.
THE REPUBLICANS
CNN and YouTube host a debate for the Republican candidates in St. Petersburg, Fla.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"People are starting to contact us and they're saying we want everything on Mike Huckabee." Graham Sloan, director of the Arkansas state Ethics Commission.
STAT OF THE DAY:
William Henry Harrison had the shortest tenure in office of any president one month.
Compiled by Joan Lowy.
 Load-Date: November 29, 2007

 

End of Document
