

6 All-Stars each for the World Series champs and the NL East leaders
The Associated Press
July 3, 2006 Monday 6:48 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 1030 words
Byline: By CONNOR ENNIS, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




With six All-Stars, the Chicago White Sox are tied with the New York Mets for most in the majors.
Just don't accuse AL manager Ozzie Guillen of favoritism.
"Whoever doesn't like it, play better next year and pick another manager," the White Sox skipper said Sunday.
The White Sox won't have any starters, unless pitcher Jose Contreras is given the nod for the July 11 game in Pittsburgh. But they'll have plenty of players on the bench. Slugger Jim Thome, first baseman Paul Konerko, outfielder Jermaine Dye, lefty Mark Buehrle and closer Bobby Jenks all made it, along with Contreras.
Chicago also could have a seventh player added in Internet balloting: catcher A.J. Pierzynski.
The Mets had four starters elected by fans, including third baseman David Wright and shortstop Jose Reyes each 23 and chosen for the first time.
"I'm real proud of my two pups," Mets manager Willie Randolph said. "That's an awesome accomplishment and a real honor for them."
They will be joined in the lineup by catcher Paul Lo Duca and outfielder Carlos Beltran. Starting pitchers Tom Glavine and Pedro Martinez also made it.
Another Mets pitcher could be added, too closer Billy Wagner is one of five candidates for the final NL spot in Internet balloting.
For the fourth straight season, the winner of the All-Star game will get home-field advantage in the World Series.
Detroit's Ivan Rodriguez was selected to start at catcher for the 11th time. He's now a 13-time All-Star, the most of any active player.
He edged Minnesota's Joe Mauer in fan balloting by less than 17,000 votes. The 23-year-old Mauer, who leads the majors with a .392 batting average, made it as a reserve.
"Every time I go there, it's like the first time," said Rodriguez, whose 11 starts tie him with Mike Piazza for the most among catchers.
Twenty-three players will be going for the first time, among them Philadelphia second baseman Chase Utley, elected by fans to start.
St. Louis first baseman Albert Pujols was the leading vote-getter among fans, chosen on more than 3.4 million ballots. It will be his third start.
As always, there were some notable snubs, including Los Angeles Dodgers first baseman Nomar Garciaparra, Boston pitcher Curt Schilling and Yankees ace Mike Mussina. Garciaparra, however, could be added through Internet balloting this week.
"I'm not worried about that," Garciaparra said. "Whether you make it or don't make it doesn't determine whether you're having a good year."
Some of baseball's biggest names will be missing, including Barry Bonds, Roger Clemens, Piazza, Ken Griffey Jr. and Randy Johnson.
The four starters for the Mets equals the number Boston had last year. The Red Sox were the first team with four starters since the 1976 Cincinnati Reds had five, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. The six All-Stars were also the most in franchise history for New York.
Also elected by fans to start for the National League were outfielders Jason Bay of host Pittsburgh and Alfonso Soriano of Washington.
Seven of the eight AL starters have started previously, with Boston second baseman Mark Loretta the only first-timer.
Yankees shortstop Derek Jeter will be making his seventh appearance, though it's only the second time he's been voted in as a starter. New York third baseman Alex Rodriguez is on the team for the 10th time, and this will be his ninth start.
The left side of both infields will be all players from the Big Apple.
Boston's David Ortiz, picked as the starting designated hitter last year, will get the start at first base. Teammate Manny Ramirez, the AL's leading vote-getter with more than 3.1 million, is on the team for the 10th time and was selected as a starter in the outfield for the eighth time. He'll be joined by Vladimir Guerrero of the Angels and Seattle's Ichiro Suzuki.
The Oakland Athletics, in first place in the AL West, had just one All-Star in pitcher Barry Zito. Emerging outfielder Nick Swisher was left off.
San Diego, on top in the NL West, was represented only by reliever Trevor Hoffman.
Some backups were selected via the player ballot, others by Guillen and NL manager Phil Garner of Houston in conjunction with the commissioner's office.
The other AL reserves were Toronto third baseman Troy Glaus, Texas shortstop Michael Young, Cleveland outfielder Grady Sizemore, Baltimore shortstop Miguel Tejada and Blue Jays outfielder Vernon Wells.
Yankees second baseman Robinson Cano and Toronto outfielder Alex Rios, each picked as a reserve, are injured and will be replaced by Seattle's Jose Lopez and Texas' Gary Matthews Jr., respectively.
The AL pitching staff includes starters Roy Halladay of Toronto, Minnesota ace Johan Santana, Kenny Rogers of Detroit, Scott Kazmir of Tampa Bay and Mark Redman of Kansas City. The relievers are Boston rookie Jonathan Papelbon, Toronto closer B.J. Ryan and Mariano Rivera of the Yankees.
Also selected as NL reserves were Atlanta catcher Brian McCann, shortstop Edgar Renteria and outfielder Andruw Jones; first baseman Ryan Howard of Philadelphia; Florida second baseman Dan Uggla and third baseman Miguel Cabrera; Colorado outfielder Matt Holliday; outfielder Carlos Lee of Milwaukee; St. Louis third baseman Scott Rolen; Houston first baseman Lance Berkman; and Pittsburgh third baseman Freddy Sanchez.
The NL pitching staff includes starters Brandon Webb of Arizona, Cincinnati's Bronson Arroyo, Chris Carpenter of St. Louis, Brad Penny of Los Angeles, Jason Schmidt of San Francisco and Chicago's Carlos Zambrano. The relievers include Tom Gordon of Philadelphia, Milwaukee's Derrick Turnbow and Colorado's Brian Fuentes.
Fans will have the chance to pick one more player for each team through Internet balloting. The five choices for the NL are Wagner, Garciaparra, Philadelphia outfielder Bobby Abreu, San Diego starting pitcher Chris Young and Milwaukee left-hander Chris Capuano.
The AL candidates are Pierzynski, rookie pitchers Justin Verlander of Detroit and Francisco Liriano of Minnesota, Cleveland slugger Travis Hafner and Baltimore catcher Ramon Hernandez.
AP Baseball Writer Mike Fitzpatrick in New York, AP sports writer Rick Gano in Chicago and AP freelance writer Joe Resnick in Los Angeles contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: July 4, 2006

 

End of Document
