

A look at the implications of the Supreme Court ruling on Guantanamo Bay detainees
The Associated Press
June 13, 2008 Friday 8:22 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 590 words
Byline: By BEN FOX, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN JUAN Puerto Rico
Body




The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that the 270 or so detainees at Guantanamo Bay can go to federal court to seek their release from indefinite detention. But the Bush administration and defense attorneys differ on the implications of Thursday's ruling, the third time the court has knocked down administration arguments that the suspects don't have rights under the Constitution.
Some questions and answers about what the ruling means:
Q: Did the Supreme Court set any detainees free?
A: No, at least not immediately. It opens a legal avenue for detainees to challenge their confinement and some may eventually win their freedom as a result.
Q: Did the Supreme Court close the detention center?
A: No, but the ruling undercuts the rationale for holding prisoners at the base in Cuba. The Bush administration claimed Guantanamo Bay was beyond reach of U.S. courts and the Constitution. The Supreme Court torpedoed that idea.
Q: How soon could Guantanamo be closed?
A: Probably not in the next few months. Since the Bush administration no longer has a strategic reason to keep the men in foreign territory, they could be moved to the United States. But the administration probably won't want to undertake that, especially since it has spent millions building facilities for them at Guantanamo Bay. Longer term, Barack Obama and John McCain have both said they want to close the detention center. Even if that happens, however, the Navy base at Guantanamo Bay would remain.
Q: So what exactly did the Supreme Court do?
A: The court declared unconstitutional a provision of a 2006 law that stripped detainees of the right to challenge their confinement a right known as habeas corpus in civilian courts. Challenges have been filed on behalf of nearly all the prisoners at Guantanamo Bay, but they had been on hold. Now federal courts can consider them.
Q: What can the federal courts do?
A: They can determine that a detainee should continue to be held, or they can decide the military lacks convincing evidence and order their release. Such an order would be months away at the earliest.
Q: Why is there opposition to habeas hearings?
A: U.S. officials say such hearings could make public their methods of intelligence-gathering and aid the enemy. Detainees' lawyers say the U.S. fears embarrassment if the hearings show the government has no evidence.
Q: Will this delay or stop the war-crimes trials, including those of the five 9/11 defendants?
A: The court did not order a halt to the trials and administration officials said they will proceed. But defense lawyers say they will use the ruling to challenge the charges against their clients, and to challenge the "enemy combatant" status that makes them subject to the military court. These moves will at least delay already slow trials.
Q: Will this prevent the military from filing new charges against other detainees?
A: No. The U.S. has charged 19 of the 270 prisoners and dozens more are expected to be charged soon.
Q: What does this mean for the bulk of the detainees who the government doesn't plan to charge?
A: That's unclear. The Pentagon has said about 130 of the prisoners are too dangerous to release, even though there are no plans to prosecute them. Some could conceivably get a court hearing now. The U.S. has identified dozens of other prisoners who can be released, but repatriating them has been difficult for a variety of reasons.
Q: Could Bush and Congress just change the law?
A: Not likely. Time is running out on the Bush administration and Congress is no longer controlled by his party.
 Load-Date: June 14, 2008

 

End of Document
