

A Q&A on the anthrax case: What's the evidence?
The Associated Press
August 6, 2008 Wednesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 552 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Court documents unsealed Wednesday lay out much of the government's case against former Army scientist Bruce Ivins, who was described by the Justice Department at a news conference as "the only person responsible" for the 2001 anthrax attacks. The documents don't go that far, but they address many of the lingering unanswered questions in the case. Among them:
Q: How could Army scientist Bruce Ivins gain access to powdered anthrax, since the biological defense program at Fort Detrick, Md., where he worked did not deal with the toxin in that form?
A: Investigators said he has used devices called lyopholizers, which can convert anthrax to powder, as well as biological safety cabinets, incubators and centrifuges in vaccine research. Such devices are considered essential for the production of the highly purified powdered anthrax that was mailed to two Senate offices, as well as to news media organizations and elsewhere in the fall of 2001. But some colleagues say it would have been difficult, if not impossible, for Ivins to do the conversion unnoticed. The court documents say Ivins was unable to provide "an adequate explanation for his late laboratory work hours" around the time of the attacks.
Q: How can the FBI link Ivins to the anthrax for certain?
A: The closest they come is connecting the particular strain of anthrax to a flask in Ivins' lab. The government used new, sophisticated genetic testing techniques developed for this investigation. Others may have had access to that flask but they would have had to go through Ivins to get it. Prosecutors say they ruled out everyone else as suspects but did not explain how.
Q: What motive would Ivins have had to unleash an attack?
A: It's not clear, but the documents mention the stress of his job and his poor mental state. Documents say Ivins was under pressure at work at the time of the attacks to assist a company that lost its federal approval to produce an anthrax vaccine the Army needed. Ivins believed the vaccine was essential for the anthrax program at his facility. He was criticized for his work with a vaccine additive that was suspected of causing Gulf War syndrome. Also he had said he had "incredible paranoid, delusional thoughts at times."
Q: Did Ivins travel to Princeton, N.J., where the anthrax letters are believed to have been mailed?
A: The Justice Department said he could have driven to Princeton during that period, although there is no direct evidence of his presence there. Authorities say Ivins had a bizarre fascination with a sorority, Kappa Kappa Gamma, that had office space near the mailbox from where the letters were mailed.
Q: Why target media organizations and politicians?
A: Ivins was angry when an investigative reporter sought information from his notebooks on the vaccine additive. He said in an e-mail, "We've got better things to do than shine his shoes and pee on command." He also said he was anti-abortion, and the Catholic anti-abortion movement has criticized Catholic lawmakers who voted for abortion rights. The documents pointed out that two prominent lawmakers in this category were former Sen. Tom Daschle, D-S.D., and Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., both recipients of the 2001 anthrax mailings.
Q: Has the FBI matched handwriting samples from the letters?
A: There was no such evidence in the documents.
 Load-Date: August 7, 2008

 

End of Document
