

An anniversary for the Willard, hotel to the powerful and political
The Associated Press
January 16, 2006 Monday 8:19 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 726 words
Byline: By ELIZABETH WHITE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




President-elect Abraham Lincoln stayed at the Willard Hotel in 1861 before warning in his inaugural address of "the momentous issue of civil war." A century later in 1963, Martin Luther King Jr. polished his "I Have a Dream" speech while a guest there.
Through several incarnations, what is now the Willard InterContinental Washington has served as host to powerbrokers and presidents during its more than 150-year past. The Washington landmark, a couple of blocks from the White House, also once faced demise before being reopened and restored.
The 334-guest-room hotel at 1401 Pennsylvania Ave. is marking the 20th anniversary of its reopening after being shuttered for nearly two decades with a year of programs celebrating its history and role in its hometown. "Willard 2006 A Hotel's Legacy, A Nation's History" events include a Shakespeare Theatre Company costume exhibition of the hotel's turn-of-the-century style at Peacock Alley a promenade that's now a place for afternoon tea but was once for those who wanted to see and be seen. Beginning in May the Library of Congress also will feature the hotel as part of the ongoing "American Treasures" exhibition.
"Besides being beautiful and being this cache of history, the Willard really signified a new prosperity for downtown Washington" with its 1986 reopening, said Barbara Bahny, the hotel's public relations director.
The site of the Willard has been home to a hotel since about 1818. Henry Willard, in partnership with his brothers over the years, bought the hotel in the mid-1800s, uniting six two-story and attic houses behind one facade.
The Willard was a temporary home to President Calvin Coolidge, who was waiting to move into the White House, and has been called the "Residence of Presidents" because so many have either stayed at the opulent hotel or at least attended functions there.
President Ulysses S. Grant would often relax after work by sitting in the Willard's lobby. But word spread, and people would seek him out there to petition their cases and causes. Grant popularized the term "lobbyist," a mainstay of today's political lexicon, to characterize his petitioners at the Willard.
Other notable guests include Lincoln, who racked up a $773.75 tab and had to use his first presidential paycheck to settle the bill (a copy of which is on display at the hotel), and Julia Ward Howe, who wrote the words to "Battle Hymn of the Republic" while there.
Author Nathaniel Hawthorne, covering the Civil War for The Atlantic Monthly, wrote "this hotel, in fact, may be much more justly called the center of Washington and the Union than either the Capitol, the White House or the State Department."
The Willard was demolished and rebuilt between 1900 and 1904 as the stately 12-story Beaux Arts structure it is today. It was designed by famed hotel architect Henry J. Hardenbergh, who also designed the Waldorf-Astoria and the Plaza in New York.
But it shut its doors to guests in 1968 because businesses were moving out of the city and there wasn't a base to sustain a luxury hotel, Bahny said.
The building fell into disrepair its elegant fixtures looted and was at one point headed for demolition, but the Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation sought proposals to restore it.
Photographer Carol M. Highsmith documented the Willard from 1980 to 1986.
"I feel like the restoration of the Willard really started America restoring its historic structures again," Highsmith said. "People were looking toward the nation's capital and saying, 'An urban center has been restored that's important to our nation.'"
Highsmith's photography, along with that of Frances Benjamin Johnston, who photographed the Willard in 1901, will be displayed in "Two Windows on the Willard: Photographs by Frances Benjamin Johnston and Carol M. Highsmith" at the American Institute of Architects from mid-September through January 2007. It will tour nationally afterward.
"Bringing the Willard back was absolutely one of the key elements in the restoration of Pennsylvania Avenue," said C. Ford Peatross, curator of architecture, design and engineering at the Library of Congress. "It fell on hard times. Fortunately, it was saved and brought back to its former glory."
On the Net:
Willard InterContinental Washington: http://www.washington.intercontinental.com/
Carol M. Highsmith: http://www.carolhighsmithportfolio.com
 Load-Date: January 17, 2006

 

End of Document
