

AP answers your questions on the news, from windy runways to the identity of superdelegates
The Associated Press
March 7, 2008 Friday 7:27 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1004 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama know who the superdelegates are their campaigns probably have them on speed dial.
But where could a curious voter find a complete list of these party leaders and elected officials the people who, in the end, may play a decisive role in determining the Democratic presidential nominee?
That's one of the four questions being answered in this week's "Ask AP," a weekly Q&A column where AP journalists respond to readers' questions about the news.
If you have your own news-related question that you'd like to see answered by an AP reporter or editor, send it to newsquestions(at)ap.org, with "Ask AP" in the subject line. Please include your full name and hometown so they can be published with your question.
I saw the video of the plane doing an abortive landing in Germany and I would like to know: Do American planes and airports allow or encourage planes to land in such a crosswind?
E. Bresler
Rhode Island
When planes prepare to land, air traffic controllers on the ground provide the cockpit with weather and wind data to supplement information available on the plane and can recommend that pilots circle around if gusts are particularly strong, said Doug Church, a spokesman for the U.S. controllers union. Once clearance is given, the decision to land rests with the pilot.
The acceptable wind speed when an aircraft American or otherwise takes off or lands depends on the age, weight and other attributes of the plane. The maximum crosswind considered safe for landing the Airbus A320 the plane flown by Lufthansa in the incident in Germany is 33 knots (38 mph) gusting to 38 knots (almost 44 mph), according to an Airbus spokeswoman.
For both takeoffs and landings, aircraft normally face into the wind for the best performance. The controllers' rule of thumb is that anything more than a tail wind of 10 knots (roughly 12 mph) means landing routes may need to be reconfigured, Church said.
On March 1, the day of the abortive landing at Hamburg Airport, the average wind speed was 16 mph, with maximum sustained winds of 36 mph and top gusts of 56 mph, according to Weather Underground. The speed and exact direction of the wind at the moment when the landing was attempted is not known.
Dan Caterinicchia
AP Business Writer, Washington
Where might we, the lowly "non-supers," find a list of just who these superdelegates are?
Jane Wittrup
Albuquerque, N.M.
All Democratic members of Congress and all Democratic governors and former presidents are automatically superdelegates by virtue of their positions. Many of the other superdelegates have not been named. Seven will be named when vacancies on the Democratic National Committee are filled before the convention this summer, and 76 more called "add-ons" will be named by state parties at their conventions this summer.
A list of superdelegates who have been named so far can be found on the Democratic Party's Web site; go here and click on "Unpledged Party leader and Elected Official Delegates as of ...":
http://tinyurl.com/33t2b7
On the Republican side, each state has three automatic delegates: the state's party chair, Republican National Committeeman and Republican National Committeewoman. In most states, these delegates function much like Democratic superdelegates, free to support any candidate they want. In others, they are bound by primary or caucus results.
You can see who holds these three positions in each state at the Republican Party Web site:
http://tinyurl.com/2lsycn
David Pace
News Editor for election projections, special projects and technology
AP Washington
The American media (notably the AP, The New York Times and The Washington Post) recently have carried numerous stories about the high rates of post-traumatic stress disorder among American veterans returning from Iraq. Are coalition soldiers suffering from PTSD (and associated ailments) at similar rates?
Michael Buerger
Bowling Green, Ohio
Let's focus on the experience of Britain's military, since that country has easily had the most troops in combat-heavy locations in Iraq other than the United States.
Though U.S. soldiers have been studied more extensively than the British, there have been several studies published in the British Medical Journal (among other publications) showing largely what you would expect that duration and frequency of troop deployments are linked to higher incidences of mental illness and post-traumatic stress disorder.
There have also been reports about the increasing strain on Britain's National Health Service and the crush of returning soldiers needing treatment both physical and psychiatric.
Maria Cheng
AP Medical Writer, London
How are pollsters able to accurately produce public-opinion polls by surveying people over the phone?
My understanding is that they use home phone numbers, even though, in today's society, many younger people only have cell phones. Does this method skew data in favor of people who still have landline service, or is there some statistical technique that allows them to correct data for this issue?
Ryan Lesh
Orlando, Fla.
The survey research industry is studying this closely, but so far the cell phone-only population isn't undermining general population polls.
It appears people who have only cell phones most often young, male and lower-income aren't much different from their demographic peers who can be reached by landline. Poll results typically are adjusted to Census population parameters including age, gender and race, and that tends to correct for the missing cell-only crowd.
Also, while their numbers have grown, only about 15 percent of U.S. households currently are cell-only so mathematically it is tough for that group to change overall survey estimates more than a point or two. Samples focusing on young people face more of a problem, though, as three in 10 of those age 18 to 29 now are cell-only, according to a federal study.
Mike Mokrzycki, AP Polling Director
For more information see this Public Opinion Quarterly article co-authored by Mokrzycki: http://tinyurl.com/38bpua
 Load-Date: March 8, 2008

 

End of Document
