

At the Movies: "The Road to Guantanamo"
The Associated Press
June 19, 2006 Monday 10:11 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 766 words
Byline: By DAVID GERMAIN, AP Movie Writer
Body




The filmmakers behind "The Road to Guantanamo" make no effort to present a balanced chronicle of three British Muslims who were held without charges for two years at the U.S. military prison in Cuba.
Given the horrifying news accounts of prisoner abuse and the recent suicides at Guantanamo, though, no one realistically can accuse the three young men of overstating the hardship, maltreatment and degradation the film depicts.
"The Road to Guantanamo" is a movie that will make Americans feel ashamed to be Americans, or at least ashamed of things done in their name. Yet it's one that Americans should see, a story that puts sympathetic faces on the bystanders caught up in the unyielding war on terror that has made the United States look like an angry, heedless bully to much of the world.
Directors Michael Winterbottom and Mat Whitecross mix interviews with the three men and narrative segments using actors to re-create their journey from Britain to Pakistan and Afghanistan, where they were captured and eventually shipped to Guantanamo Bay.
The film is a challenge to watch, not only for its harsh subject matter but also for its abruptness of style and relentless pace. Winterbottom and Whitecross (the latter a protege who collaborated on several of Winterbottom's films) treat their subjects' story with little dramatic adornment.
"The Road to Guantanamo" hurtles into the action as Asif Iqbal, then 19, leaves Britain for Pakistan to meet the woman his mother has arranged for him to marry shortly after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. Three friends Ruhal Ahmed, Shafiq Rasul and Monir Ali later join him there.
After a few days relaxing in Pakistan, they heed a call for humanitarian aid in Afghanistan, where they arrive just as the U.S. begins its post-Sept. 11 assault. Separated from the others, Monir vanishes and is never heard from again.
Asif, Ruhal and Shafiq are captured by Northern Alliance troops and turned over to U.S. forces, who hold them in Pakistan then transfer them to Guantanamo in early 2002.
The prisoners are held in small wire-mesh cages and subjected to humiliating abuse and brutal interrogation. They are chained in painful positions to a hook in the floor and bombarded with screeching music and strobe lights.
Their U.S. inquisitors show them a video tape of an Osama bin Laden rally and insist the prisoners were present. The allegation eventually was disproved when British officials learned all three were home in England at the time.
Winterbottom's eye for terrifying absurdity is well-suited to the story. Some of the images, particularly those of the men masked and bound in rows aboard cargo planes taking them to Cuba, are positively Orwellian.
The men finally were released in 2004. They have a lawsuit pending against the United States.
"The Road to Guantanamo" is a fitting companion piece to Winterbottom's brilliant, painfully authentic "In This World," a fictionalized story crafted in docudrama style about an Afghan boy and his cousin's perilous journey toward a new life in London.
Interviews with the real men are skillfully intercut with the dramatized sections featuring simple and sincere performances from three actors: Arfan Usman as Asif, Farhad Harun as Ruhal and Riz Ahmed as Shafiq.
A documentary on their experiences would have been powerful enough. So would a straight dramatization.
The combination of the two brings the best of both worlds, allowing viewers to hear these victims discuss their experiences in safety, with some distance from the events, and also live through it in the dramatized parts, which bring the horrors home.
The film includes snippets of news coverage of President Bush and Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld defending practices at Guantanamo. Bush says the prisoners are killers who don't share our values. Rumsfeld says prisoners there are treated in compliance with the Geneva Convention, "for the most part."
Those four words, for all the horror "The Road to Guantanamo" depicts, may be the most disturbing thing in the film.
"The Road to Guantanamo," a Roadside Attractions release, is rated R for language and disturbing violent content. Running time: 95 minutes. Three and a half stars out of four.
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: June 20, 2006

 

End of Document
