

Behind the Curtain: Rangel to meet the tax man
The Associated Press
September 17, 2008 Wednesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 719 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE One in an occasional series of stories offering inside looks at the government.
%byline(By LARRY MARGASAK%)
%bytitle(Associated Press Writer%)
%endtag(%)
WASHINGTON (AP) The Democratic congressman who writes the tax code will be meeting the tax collector. Republicans couldn't be happier.
Rep. Charles Rangel of New York, the gravelly voiced chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, discovered that he owes back taxes on rental income from his Dominican Republic beach villa.
Republicans, in the minority in both the House and Senate, desperately needed a new Democratic scandal. Before Rangel's ethical troubles became known and there has been no finding of wrongdoing the GOP was trailing 7-2 in the most serious corruption tally: lawmakers indicted or convicted since 2000.
For more details, you can Google congressional Republicans Ted Stevens, Rick Renzi, Larry Craig, Bob Ney, Randy "Duke" Cunningham, Tom DeLay and William Janklow. To make the Googling bipartisan, also see Democrats William Jefferson and James Traficant.
So far, Rangel has given Republicans these political gifts:
 An estimated tax bill of $5,000 from undeclared rental income at the Punta Cana resort in the Dominican Republic.
 A recent photo of the congressman, 78, fast asleep in a lounge chair at the resort, an arm dangling onto the sand.
 Use of official stationery to reach out to potential donors for an educational center named after who else? himself.
 Use of a rent-stabilized apartment in Harlem as a campaign office.
Republican leaders are demanding that Rangel get booted from his chairmanship, payback for the hammering they took from Democrats on the corruption issue.
Former GOP Rep. Mark Foley's affection for young male pages was one reason that House Republicans' 229-202 majority evaporated in the 2006 election. The Democrats are running the place now, with a current majority of 235-199.
Rangel has so far resisted Republican attempts to separate him from the chairmanship of his tax-writing committee but says he's willing to take his medicine if wrongdoing is found.
Every time a new allegation appears in the media, Rangel has a solution: Send it to the House ethics committee.
The Committee on Standards of Official Conduct, as it's formally named, has its Rangel work piling up as the panel of five Democrats and five Republicans is operating with an acting chairman and an acting chief counsel.
It was never known for speed anyway, sometimes taking years on major investigations. Most of its members don't want to be there.
Just ask Rep. Howard Berman, the California Democrat who reluctantly returned to the committee in 2006 to untangle a bitter partisan deadlock.
"An honor I could do without," he said upon rejoining the unpopular committee. After navigating the supersensitive Foley case, which focused on teenagers under the House's care, Berman hightailed it out of the committee's Capitol basement offices for good.
Congress is set to go home in two weeks to campaign for the Nov. 4 elections, and it's unclear whether members will return after the voting.
If history is any guide, committee Democrats will be reluctant to spend their time investigating one of their most powerful chairmen.
In the meantime, House Republican leader John Boehner and Rangel relentlessly go after each other.
"I have felt embarrassed for my friend, John Boehner, for believing that politically he has to do this," Rangel responded to yet another Boehner call for the New Yorker to vacate his chairmanship.
Boehner retorted: "I like Charlie Rangel. I think the world of Charlie, but the rules are the rules. The law is the law, and Charlie ought to do the honorable thing and step aside until the ethics committee has time to investigate this."
As for Rangel, the normally garrulous lawmaker hasn't been himself. He blows past reporters, refusing comment.
Some recent samples:
"I am unable to say anything."
"Do to me what you want, I'm not talking."
"Please don't feel offended if you ask your best questions and don't get an answer."
Or this reference to his military service during the Korean War:
"At this point in time I am unable to say anything except Charles Rangel, staff sergeant, RA57156282, 2nd Infantry Division."
Name. Rank. Serial Number.
Larry Margasak has covered Congress for The Associated Press for a quarter-century.
 Load-Date: September 18, 2008

 

End of Document
