

Bonds gives Giants the right to terminate his contract in the event of an indictment
The Associated Press
January 31, 2007 Wednesday 12:34 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 555 words
Byline: By RONALD BLUM, AP Baseball Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Barry Bonds gave the San Francisco Giants the right to terminate his $15.8 million, one-year contract if he is indicted.
The unusual provision, included in the deal that was completed Monday night, protects the team in case Bonds is charged in the federal government's steroids investigation.
Bonds' personal trainer, Greg Anderson, is in a California federal prison because he has refused to testify whether Bonds committed perjury when he told a 2003 grand jury he never knowingly used performance-enhancing drugs.
As part of the agreement, if Bonds is indicted the Giants have the right to terminate it under two sections of the Uniform Player Contract, a baseball executive said Tuesday, speaking on condition of anonymity because the team didn't announce that detail.
Under 7(b)(1), a team may terminate a contract if the player shall "fail, refuse or neglect to conform his personal conduct to the standards of good citizenship and good sportsmanship or to keep himself in first-class physical condition or to obey the club's training rules."
Section 7(b)(3) gives the team the right to end the deal if a player shall "fail, refuse or neglect to render his services hereunder or in any manner materially breach this contract."
In addition, the Giants have the less drastic option of converting Bonds' deal to nonguaranteed, the baseball executive said. Players with nonguaranteed contracts can be released before opening day for 30 or 45 days' termination pay, depending on the timing.
As part of the deal, Bonds gave up the right to ask the players' association to file a grievance if he is indicted and the contract is terminated. But nothing would stop the union from pursuing a grievance on its own.
Giants owner Peter Magowan declined comment and Jeff Borris, Bonds' agent, didn't want to elaborate on the inclusion of the clause.
Bonds was at AT&T Park on Tuesday and held a meeting with about 100 people from the team's staff, Giants spokesman Jim Moorehead said.
"It was a meet-and-greet session," Moorehead said.
On Monday, as the contract was being finalized, Magowan and Bonds met to put their ill will behind them. A day after the season ended, Magowan had said "we need to go in a new direction" and that "we do need to get younger and healthier."
Bonds was miffed by those remarks, said those around him. Before Thanksgiving, Magowan called the Bonds camp to clarify his comments and say he did not mean to offend the star.
Bonds became a free agent after completing a $90 million, five-year contract, and the sides agreed to the financial terms of a new contract Dec. 7. His new deal allows him to earn $4.2 million in performance bonuses: $500,000 for 250 plate appearances, $1 million each for 300, 375 and 450, and $700,000 for 525.
Under the new agreement, two of Bonds' trainers Harvey Shields and Greg Oliver no longer will be on the Giants' payroll. They also won't be permitted in restricted areas in any major league ballpark, such as the clubhouse.
"I have no problems with it," Bonds said. "(Oliver) and Harvey will be with me, just outside the ballpark."
As part of the agreement, Bonds gets to use a luxury suite at AT&T Park for five games and gets five free lower box seats for all road games. He also gets a hotel suite on road trips.
AP Sports Writer Janie McCauley in San Francisco contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: January 31, 2007

 

End of Document
