

Bush makes history in the private confines of the Oval Office
The Associated Press
July 19, 2006 Wednesday 11:52 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 870 words
Byline: By NEDRA PICKLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




There were no cameras to record it, but President Bush made history Tuesday in the confines of his Oval Office by vetoing the first bill of his presidency legislation that would have increased federal funding of embryonic stem cell research.
The ceremony came 40 minutes later, when Bush strode into the White House's grand East Room, packed with 18 families who have adopted leftover frozen embryos and have used them to bear 24 children and three more are on the way.
Bush was making the case that those children are the proper use of embryos. Others contend that leftover embryos that aren't donated could be used for research into curing life-altering diseases.
"This bill would support the taking of innocent human life in the hope of finding medical benefits for others," Bush said. "It crosses a moral boundary that our decent society needs to respect."
Most Americans disagree with the president, according to public opinion polls. A number of lawmakers expressed confidence the legislation would someday become law and some suggested Bush's stance could hurt Republicans in congressional elections this fall.
"Mr. President, we will not give up," said Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass. "We will continue this battle."
Bush was making good on a promise he made in 2001 to limit federally funded embryonic research to the stem cell lines that had been created by the time.
Bush's added his signature to the bottom of a two-page message that was promptly hand-delivered to the House of Representatives, where the legislation began. Just over five hours later, the House voted 235-193 to override the president's veto, 51 short of the two-thirds majority necessary.
"If we are to find the right ways to advance ethical medical research, we must also be willing when necessary to reject the wrong ways," his message said. "For that reason, I must veto this bill."
Bush has made 141 veto threats during his time in office, and the Republicans controlling Congress typically respond by changing bills to his liking. His single veto is a departure from the practices of other recent presidents Bill Clinton had 37, Bush's father had 44 and Ronald Reagan had 78.
Supporters of embryonic stem cell research have had powerfully moving proponents on their side, including the late "Superman" star Christopher Reeve and actor Michael J. Fox, who suffers from Parkinson's disease.
Bush tried to put a face on his position, too. On stage behind the president and in the audience were two dozen cheerful children wearing their Sunday best who were born from those leftover embryos.
"These boys and girls are not spare parts," Bush said. "They remind us of what is lost when embryos are destroyed in the name of research."
Also in the crowd were four embryo donor families and four patients who have been aided by adult stem cells. Those cells are found in various tissues, including bone marrow. Bush supports research involving adult stem cells.
As he vetoed the bill, he signed another that was passed unanimously in both chambers that would ban "fetal farming," the prospect of raising and aborting fetuses for scientific research. "Human beings are not a raw material to be exploited, or a commodity to be bought or sold, and this bill will help ensure that we respect the fundamental ethical line," Bush said, drawing a shout of "Amen!" from one of the fathers on stage with him.
Bush said he was disappointed that Congress failed to pass a third bill that would encourage adult stem cell research. Opponents said it would have given lawmakers political cover for opposing the embryonic stem cell bill. But Bush said it would fund vital and ethical research, and he would direct his administration to pursue this kind of science.
Pleadings from celebrities, former first lady Nancy Reagan and some fellow Republicans had failed to move Bush. He acted after two days of often wrenching emotional debate in Congress, punctuated by stories of personal and family suffering, that had cast lawmakers into the intersection of politics, morality and science.
House and Senate Democrats said Bush's calls for bipartisanship on other issues will be undermined by his veto of a bill that succeeded with the support of lawmakers of both parties.
Some are predicting the veto could hurt GOP congressional candidates in close races this November. And the issue split the Republican senators who are thinking about running to replace Bush in the White House in 2008.
Sens. Sam Brownback of Kansas, Chuck Hagel of Nebraska and George Allen of Virginia sided with Bush in opposing the bill. Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist of Tennessee and Sen. John McCain of Arizona voted for the increased federal funding.
"I am pro-life, but I disagree with the president's decision to veto the Stem Cell Research Enhancement Act," said Frist, a heart surgeon. "Given the potential of this research and the limitations of the existing lines eligible for federally funded research, I think additional lines should be made available."
Rep. Diana DeGette, D-Colo., a co-sponsor of the House bill, submitted 11,000 signatures urging Bush to sign the measure and said of his veto: "He is doing that on the backs of tens of millions of Americans."
On the Net:
http://www.whitehouse.gov
 Load-Date: July 20, 2006

 

End of Document
