

COLLEGE FB PACKAGE: Time to honor the best (and worst) of the first half of the season
The Associated Press
October 17, 2007 Wednesday 9:03 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 679 words
Byline: By RALPH D. RUSSO, AP College Football Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




USF ranked ahead of USC.
Appalachian State beats Michigan and it's not even be the most surprising result of the season.
Looking for a Heisman front-runner? Good luck, though you might want to try Kentucky.
And who would have thought after watching last season's BCS national title game that Ohio State would be No. 1 before Florida?
At the midway point of an unpredictable season, it's time to hand out some awards. Not everybody will be happy to receive one:
Most surprising team (positive)
SOUTH FLORIDA Coach Jim Leavitt's squad had been tabbed a team on the rise, and there was some preseason buzz about the Bulls. However, it's safe to say no one saw USF as the No. 2 team in the country halfway through the season. How serious should USF be taken? Well, they have the best set of cornerbacks in the country in Mike Jenkins and Trae Williams, the best pass rusher in defensive end George Selvie and a dynamic dual-threat quarterback in Matt Grothe. So the answer is: very.
Most surprising team (negative)
TCU The Horned Frogs were talked about as a BCS buster when the season started, with a defense that figured to be one of the best in the nation. Instead, TCU is 4-3 and already in a big hole in the Mountain West with a 1-2 conference mark and loses to Wyoming and Air Force. With defensive end Tommy Blake away from the team for most of the season for reasons that remain somewhat unclear the Frogs' highly touted defense has been a bust. TCU has allowed 60 points and 402 yards rushing the past two games.
Best coaching job
JIM GROBE, Wake Forest Expectations were modest for the Demon Deacons after last year's dream season. Then they opened the season with loses to Boston College and Nebraska and quarterback Riley Skinner was hurt in the process. It looked like Wake was about to go back to being Wake. Instead, Grobe has guided his team to four straight wins, including a big comeback against Maryland and a second straight victory against a Florida State team with twice as much talent as Wake.
Worst coaching job
BILL CALLAHAN, Nebraska Year 4 of the Callahan era may very well be the last. The Cornhuskers' biggest problems are on defense, where the Blackshirts rank last in the Big 12. Callahan's an offensive guy, but the head coach has to take at least some of the blame when his coordinator doesn't get the job done. And it's not like that West Coast offense has been humming along. The Huskers are seventh in the conference on that side of the ball and lucky to be 4-3.
Best games
1) Kentucky 43, LSU 37, 3OT.
2) Boise State 69, Nevada 67, 4OT.
3) California 31, Oregon 24.
Biggest upsets
1) Stanford 24, USC 23
2) Appalachian State 34, Michigan 32
3) Syracuse 38, Louisville 35.
Most puzzling result
UTAH 44, UCLA 6 Huh? The Utes scored 19 points and got their starting quarterback and running back injured while losing their first two games. The week after they dismantled UCLA with a backup quarterback, the Utes lost 27-0 to UNLV. Sure, the Bruins have since handed Notre Dame its only victory, but they had to use a walk-on quarterback in the second half of that one. UCLA QB Ben Olson was still healthy for the Utah game.
Most exciting team
NORTHWESTERN Led by quarterback C.J. Bacher, the Wildcats have won two straight games in overtime by a combined score of 97-89. They also beat Nevada 36-31 and lost to Duke 20-14, which snapped the nation's longest losing streak.
Worst team in BCS conference
MINNESOTA The Gophers' only victory was to Miami of Ohio in double overtime, and Minnesota became the first team from a BCS automatic-qualifying conference to lose to Florida Atlantic. First-year coach Tim Brewster gets a pass because there wasn't much left behind by Glen Mason.
Best conference
SOUTHEASTERN CONFERENCE The Pac-10 is the only other league that can even make a case.
Worst BCS conference
ATLANTIC COAST CONFERENCE The Big Ten isn't looking too good either, but the ACC takes it for an abundance of mediocrity.
One voter's Heisman Trophy ballot
Subject to change at any moment.
1) Andre Woodson, qb, Kentucky
2) Chase Daniel, qb, Missouri
3) Mike Hart, rb, Michigan.
 Load-Date: October 18, 2007

 

End of Document
