

Consumers see relief at the gas pump and the doctor's office
The Associated Press
January 18, 2007 Thursday 11:21 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 754 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Americans finally saw some relief when they filled up their gas tanks and visited their doctors.
A retreat in energy costs from last summer's record highs and the smallest rise in doctor charges in more than a half century helped to keep the lid on consumer prices.
The Labor Department reported Thursday that the Consumer Price Index rose 2.5 percent in 2006, the best showing on inflation in three years.
And in further good news, workers got a boost in the paychecks with the biggest jump in wages, after adjusting for inflation, in nine years.
That 2.1 percent gain in wages, after removing the effects of inflation, followed three straight years in which wages had fallen even as many corporations were enjoying record profits.
Democrats focused on those wage declines to argue in last fall's congressional elections that President Bush's economic policies were failing the middle class.
Analysts attributed the rise in real wages to the slowdown in inflation and to a low unemployment rate, which meant companies had to pay more to attract qualified workers.
"Things have finally come together for workers after a long period of tough conditions," said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody's Economy.com.
The 2.5 percent rise in consumer prices was nearly a full percentage point below the 3.4 percent increase in 2005.
In addition to a significant retreat in energy prices in the second half of the year, following 2 1/2 years of big increases, medical costs also went up last year at the slowest pace in eight years, an overall gain of 3.6 percent.
Gasoline pump prices did jump again in December, helping push up the CPI by 0.5 percent for the month. But analysts said gasoline costs should fall again in coming months, reflecting recent declines in crude oil, which closed Thursday at $50.48 per barrel in New York trading, far below the $77-plus record set in July.
The Fed is expected to keep interest rates on hold until midyear when analysts believe the slowing economy and moderating inflation will give the central bank room to start cutting rates.
On Wall Street, the Dow Jones industrial average fell 9.22 points to close at 12,567.93, reflecting in part diminished hopes for a quick Fed rate cut in light of a string of stronger-than-expected economic reports.
On Thursday, the Commerce Department reported that construction of new homes rose by 4.5 percent in December. It was the second straight monthly increase and a signal, according to some analysts, that the worst of the housing slump may be over.
The CPI report showed that core inflation, which excludes energy and food costs, rose 2.6 percent last year, compared with 2.2 percent gains in both 2004 and 2005. It was highest increase since a 2.7 percent jump in 2001.
Economists, however, said this increase was influenced heavily by a rise in housing costs, reflecting higher demand for rental units as the five-year boom in home sales cooled.
They also noted that core prices have slowed sharply in recent months, rising at an annual rate of just 1.4 percent in the October-December period, just half of the 2.8 percent rise in the late summer. The Fed's comfort zone for core inflation is between 1 percent and 2 percent.
David Wyss, chief economist at Standard & Poor's in New York, predicted that consumer prices would rise by just 1.9 percent this year, reflecting a continued retreat in energy prices.
"We think lower oil prices and a slower economy will keep inflation under control," he said.
For 2006, energy prices slowed to a 2.9 percent increase after soaring by 17.1 percent in 2005 and 16.6 percent in 2004 as global oil markets were roiled by Middle East tensions and heavy demand.
Also helping restrain inflation last year was the sharp slowdown in medical prices, typically one of the fastest growing expense for consumers. For 2006, physician charges rose by just 1.7 percent, the smallest increase in 57 years. Prescription drug prices rose by just 1.9 percent, the smallest gain in 33 years.
Analysts credited the move by Wal-Mart to introduce a $4 generic prescription drug program, which was matched by other big retailers, to helping hold down drug costs.
Hospital costs continued to race ahead, however, rising by 6.1 percent last year, the biggest gain since 2003.
Clothing prices, which had fallen for eight consecutive years, posted a small increase of 0.9 percent in 2006. Airline fares and new car prices were both down for the year.
On the Net:
Consumer inflation: http://www.bls.gov/cpi
Housing construction: http://www.census.gov/newresconst
 Load-Date: January 19, 2007

 

End of Document
