

Excerpts from the House ethics report on the page scandal
The Associated Press
December 8, 2006 Friday 11:11 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 1011 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Excerpts from the House ethics committee's report on its investigation of the page scandal involving former Rep. Mark Foley, R-Fla.:
"In its review of this matter, the investigative subcommittee was disturbed by the conduct of some of those who dealt with allegations regarding the conduct of former Representative Foley. When confronted with such allegations, the response of some individuals was limited to that necessary to shift notice and responsibility to those they believed more responsible for dealing with such matters."
"Others tried repeatedly to elevate the matter, but encountered obstacles in the chain of command that limited the effectiveness of their efforts."
"The investigative subcommittee finds that the weight of the evidence supports the conclusion that Speaker Hastert was told, at least in passing, about the e-mails by both Majority Leader Boehner and Rep. Reynolds in spring 2006."
"Like too many others, neither the majority leader nor Rep. Reynolds showed any curiosity regarding why a young former page would have been made uncomfortable by e-mails from Rep. Foley."
"The evidence establishes that concerns began to arise about Rep. Foley's interactions with pages or other young male staff members shortly after Rep. Foley took office in 1995."
"Several members and staff were also aware of other conduct by Rep. Foley regarding pages or former pages, including concerns raised by former Clerk Jeff Trandahl and former Foley chief of staff Kirk Fordham about Foley's close interaction with pages. Those concerns were raised directly with Rep. Foley on multiple occasions, and were also brought to the attention of at least two persons in the office of the speaker, chief of staff Scott Palmer and counsel Ted Van Der Meid."
"The weight of the evidence supports a conclusion that Kirk Fordham talked to Scott Palmer about Fordham's concerns about Rep. Foley's conduct, and that Palmer later talked to Rep. Foley. Similarly, the evidence shows that Jeff Trandahl raised his concerns with Ted Van Der Meid on several occasions, but Van Der Meid testified that those discussions did not conclude with any requests or decisions to take any action."
"Trandahl testified that he further explained to Rep. (John) Shimkus (in November 2005) that 'this is exactly the perception problem I've warned Mark Foley about multiple times' and that he characterized Rep. Foley to Rep. Shimkus as a 'ticking time bomb.'"
"The subcommittee finds that at a minimum Rep. Shimkus (chairman of the House Page Board) had an obligation to learn more facts regarding the e-mails before concluding that he should handle the matter himself without informing the other members of the page board or seeking their input."
"The investigative subcommittee's conclusion that the evidence does not support further investigative or disciplinary proceedings should not be read as a conclusion that the members, officers and employees whose conduct was reviewed acted properly at all times in connection with their knowledge or handling of information concerning improper conduct involving members and current and former House pages.
"To the contrary, the investigative subcommittee finds a significant number of instances where members, officers or employees failed to exercise appropriate diligence and oversight, or should have exercised greater diligence and oversight, regarding issues arising from the interaction between former Rep. Mark Foley and current or former House pages."
"As a general matter, the subcommittee observed a disconcerting unwillingness to take responsibility for resolving issues regarding Rep. Foley's conduct. Rather than addressing the issues fully, some witnesses did far too little, while attempting to pass the responsibility for acting to others. Some relied on unreasonably fine distinctions regarding their defined responsibilities. Almost no one followed up adequately on the limited actions they did take."
"The investigative subcommittee cannot determine conclusively the motivation for those who failed to fulfill their responsibilities. However, the investigative subcommittee identified several factors that may have been in play. Some may have been concerned that raising the issue too aggressively might have risked exposing Rep. Foley's homosexuality, which could have adversely affected him both personally and politically. There is some evidence that political considerations played a role in decisions that were made by persons in both parties. The wishes of the page's family for privacy could have also provided a convenient justification for failing to pursue the matter more aggressively for those who were already so inclined."
"In the case of former Rep. Foley, a 54-year-old-man who made unwelcome communications with teenage former House pages, the evidence adduced by the investigative subcommittee would almost certainly have subjected him to disciplinary proceedings had he not resigned."
"The content of the instant messages is materially different, and far more reprehensible, and had any House member, officer or employee known about the instant messages they would have been obligated to do far more than was done in response to the e-mails. The investigative subcommittee finds no evidence, based on the testimony before the Subcommittee, that any Member, officer or employee had such knowledge of the instant messages prior to their publication on September 29, 2006."
"The Investigative Subcommittee concludes that Van Der Meid, as the speaker's liaison with the clerk, and therefore as the staff person within the speaker's office with responsibility for page-related issues, showed an inexplicable lack of interest in the e-mails and the resolution of the matter with Rep. Foley, particularly in light of his prior knowledge regarding concerns raised by Jeff Trandahl about Foley's close albeit not sexual interaction with pages. Van Der Meid had also heard from Trandahl about the alleged incident involving Rep. Foley being intoxicated outside the page dorm."
On the Net: http://www.house.gov/ethics/Page Report Cover.htm
 Load-Date: December 9, 2006

 

End of Document
