

Hollywood on the Potomac: Where the stars will be
The Associated Press
January 14, 2009 Wednesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 987 words
Byline: By JAKE COYLE, AP Entertainment Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




If you thought the Golden Globes was a party, just wait until you see Barack Obama's inauguration. Next week, Washington will look a lot like a colder version of Hollywood.
Here's a roundup of who will be where, keeping in mind that in the mad rush to D.C., schedule changes may occur.
THE BIG SHOW
 On Sunday, tradition will be upheld with a free star-studded concert on the National Mall, starting at 2:30 p.m. Among the many performers: Bruce Springsteen, U2, Beyonce, Usher, Garth Brooks, Stevie Wonder, John Mellencamp, Shakira, Mary J. Blige, Herbie Hancock, Josh Groban, John Legend and James Taylor. Denzel Washington, Jamie Foxx, Martin Luther King III and Queen Latifah will read. Obama will stop by and HBO will broadcast "We Are One: The Obama Inaugural Celebration at the Lincoln Memorial."
WHERE'S OPRAH
 Winfrey will host a live episode of "The Oprah Winfrey Show" from the Kennedy Center Opera House on Monday. She'll also host a second episode on Wednesday. Winfrey has not announced her plans on Inauguration Day.
WHERE'S SPIKE
 Spike Lee will appear at a daylong symposium at Howard University on Monday to discuss topics including the impact of Obama on Black America. Also there will be Rev. Al Sharpton, Rep. Jesse Jackson, Jr., Dr. Cornel West and Dr. Henry Louis Gates. Lee will also host an after-party Tuesday evening.
OTHER CONCERTS
 BET will hold an awards ceremony, the BET Honors, Saturday at the Warner Theater to honor Mary J. Blige, filmmaker Tyler Perry, Ervin "Magic" Johnson and others. Gabrielle Union will host and performers include Queen Latifa, Ne-Yo, Anita Baker and Joss Stone.
 The Hip-hop Caucus will host a concert Saturday at Ibiza with Common, Mary J. Blige and Nelly.
 Jessica Alba will host a kickoff event by youth voter initiative Declare Yourself on Sunday dubbed "A New Birth of Citizenship." Maroon 5 and DJ Samantha Ronson will perform.
 "Kids' Inaugural: We Are the Future" will be held Monday night at the Verizon Center and air on the Disney Channel. Performing will be Miley Cyrus, the Jonas Brothers and Bow Wow. Michelle Obama and Jill Biden will host with their families.
 The "America Feels Kinda Cool Again Inaugural Gala" will feature the Beastie Boys, Sheryl Crow and Citizen Cope on Monday at the 9:30 club.
 Jay-Z will perform a concert "In Concert on the Eve on Change" at the Warner Theater on Monday.
 Aretha Franklin will play a free concert at the Kennedy Center with Nuttin' But Stringz and the Let Freedom Ring Choir on Monday.
 Manifest Hope will finish a three-day-long, Inauguration-themed art exhibit with a party featuring performances by Santogold, Moby and De La Soul.
THE OFFICIAL BALLS
 The Neighborhood Ball: ABC will broadcast this ball for Washington residents at the Washington Convention Center. Performing will be Mariah Carey, Jay-Z, Beyonce, Alicia Keys, Faith Hill and Mary J. Blige.
 The Youth Ball: This ball is for people aged 18 to 35 to celebrate "the role young Americans can play to serve their communities." After announcing and then junking a similarly themed ball, MTV will broadcast it. Fall Out Boy is among the acts attending.
 The other eight official balls are: the Home States Ball, the Commander in Chief Ball, the Biden Home State Ball, the Mid-Atlantic Ball, the Western and Southern Regional Ball, the Midwest Regional Ball, the New England Ball and the Southern Regional Ball.
THE UNOFFICIAL BALLS
 The "Dreams of My Father" American Scholars Inaugural Ball will take place Sunday at the Four Seasons and feature Alicia Keys, Macy Gray and LL Cool J.
 The Voto Latino Inaugural Party will on Sunday include Marc Antony, Rosario Dawson, Tony Plana and Wilmer Valderrama.
 The Hip-Hop Inaugural Ball will take place Monday at the Harman Center and be hosted by Russell Simmons, LL Cool J, T.I. and Young Jeezy
 The Huffington Post Preinaugural Ball will be held Monday night at the Newseum and feature performances by Sting and will.i.am. Attendees will include Tom Hanks, Steven Spielberg, Denzel Washington, Shakira, Jon Bon Jovi, Halle Berry and Ashton Kutcher.
 The Green Inaugural Ball will be held Monday at the Portrait Gallery and be hosted by Al Gore.
 Muhammad Ali will attend the Kentucky Inaugural Ball on Monday at the Marriott Wardman Hotel.
 The nonprofit arts and entertainment advocacy group Creative Coalition will hold a gala to be headlined by Elvis Costello and Sting at the Harman Center for the Arts on Tuesday. Also attending will be Anne Hathaway, Spike Lee, Tim Robbins, Maggie Gyllenhaal and others.
 The Purple Ball, Tuesday at the Fairmont Hotel, will be hosted by Lou Gossett Jr. and Il Divo will perform. Expected to attend are: Ashley Judd, Patricia Arquette, John Cusack, Tim Robbins, Ed Harris, Ashley Judd, Josh Lucas, Amy Brenneman, Brendan Fraser, Susan Sarandon and Lisa Marie Presley.
 There will be two American Music Balls: The Legends Ball, hosted by Dionne Warwick and featuring Chaka Khan and George Clinton; and the Urban Ball hosted by Ludacris and featuring Cedric the Entertainer and Monica. Both will be held Tuesday at the Marriot Wardman Park Hotel.
 BET will host an inaugural ball at the Mandarin Oriental hotel Tuesday. The network will broadcast an hour special to coincide with the ball, which will include a performance by Wyclef Jean.
 The Equality Ball, hosted by the Human Rights Campaign, will be held Tuesday at the Mayflower Hotel with appearances by Cyndi Lauper, Melissa Etheridge and Rufus Wainwright.
 The Inaugural Peace Ball, Tuesday at the Smithsonian Postal Museum, will be hosted by Harry Belafonte and include Joan Baez, Graham Nash and Jackson Brown.
 Rihanna will perform at the Recording Industry Association of America Inaugural Ball to benefit Feeding America on Tuesday.
 Nas, Josh Groban, Slash and Robert Randolph are among those performing at the Heroes Red, White & Blue Inaugural Ball (benefiting military families and veterans) on Tuesday at the Warner Theater.
 Load-Date: January 15, 2009

 

End of Document
