

Lobbying trial: The case of the e-mails and the Bush administration's former top procurement official
The Associated Press
May 24, 2006 Wednesday 7:13 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 559 words
Byline: By PETE YOST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Justice Department prosecutors intend to use hundreds of e-mails to paint a picture of corruption in the first trial in the Jack Abramoff influence-peddling scandal, a case in which the evidence is a paper trail rather than the lobbyist's own testimony.
Government lawyers apparently won't call confessed felon Abramoff to the witness stand as they try to convict David Safavian, the Bush administration's former top procurement official, of lying and obstruction.
A jury of 10 women and two men was to hear opening statements starting Wednesday in what is anticipated to be a two-week trial in the courtroom of U.S. District Judge Paul Friedman, a 1994 appointee of President Clinton.
A five-count grand jury indictment says Safavian concealed from investigators Abramoff's efforts to acquire part of the Naval Surface Warfare Center in Silver Spring, Md., and to lease a downtown Washington landmark, the Old Post Office on Pennsylvania Avenue.
The constant e-mail traffic between the two men will put Abramoff's aggressive tactics on display, showing how he badgered Safavian for information about the properties while showering his longtime friend with invitations, including a trip to Scotland that Safavian accepted.
Abramoff wanted the Maryland property for a private school he founded. He sought a lease of the Old Post Office for some of his Indian tribal clients who wanted to develop it.
At the time, Safavian was chief of staff to the administrator of the General Services Administration, which oversees federal property. He later moved to the White House and became administrator of the office of federal procurement policy.
With several members of Congress under investigation, prosecutors appear to be holding Abramoff back for bigger cases they are trying to pull together. Keeping Abramoff away from the courtroom for now also means the disgraced lobbyist won't be subjected to cross-examination by Safavian's lawyers, who are unlikely to take the risky step of calling Abramoff themselves.
While prosecutors try to bury Safavian in the e-mails he exchanged with Abramoff, Safavian's lawyers plan to depict the Justice Department as overreaching in bringing charges against the procurement official.
The defense team says prosecution excesses began early in the probe when investigators were looking for Abramoff associates who might be able to implicate the lobbyist in wrongdoing.
Prosecutors believe Safavian was in that category, so they brought a weak case against him in an effort to pressure him into turning on his old friend, the defense has said.
Safavian chose to fight rather than cooperate. And his possible cooperation against Abramoff became a moot point when the lobbyist entered guilty pleas early this year in Washington, D.C., and Florida.
Abramoff is now the government's main weapon in an investigation aimed primarily at Capitol Hill.
A former aide to Rep. Bob Ney, R-Ohio, is expected to testify this week about a suggestion from Safavian for inserting language into legislation that would have conveyed to Abramoff GSA-controlled property in Maryland, federal prosecutor Peter Zeidenberg said at a pretrial hearing.
Neil Volz, Ney's former chief of staff, has pleaded guilty to conspiring to corrupt the congressman on behalf of Abramoff. Ney, who has denied wrongdoing, also is to be investigated by the House ethics committee.
 Load-Date: May 25, 2006

 

End of Document
