

Lott says he'll resign Senate seat effective at the end of the year
The Associated Press
November 27, 2007 Tuesday 12:24 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 901 words
Byline: By MICHAEL KUNZELMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PASCAGOULA Miss.
Body




Mississippi Sen. Trent Lott announced Monday he will leave a 35-year career in Congress in which he epitomized the Republicans' political takeover of the South after the civil rights struggles of the 1960s.
Lott said he wanted to leave on a "positive note" after winning re-election last year to a leadership post and fostering legislation for rebuilding the Gulf Coast after Hurricane Katrina. He was first elected to Congress on the coattails of Richard Nixon's re-election landslide in 1972 with 78 percent of the vote in Mississippi. He won election to the Senate in 1988, succeeding retiring veteran Democrat John Stennis.
His decision to retire by year's end occurred five years after he was bounced as the leader of his party in the Senate over remarks praising a Senate colleague that were interpreted as endorsing segregation.
Former House Speaker Dennis Hastert also made his retirement official Monday. Hastert, R-Ill., submitted his resignation effective 11:59 p.m. EST in a letter to Illinois Gov. Rod Blagojevich.
Hastert, who made a farewell speech to House colleagues 11 days ago, said he timed his resignation to give Blagojevich time to call a special election for Feb. 5, an already established primary day in the state, to fill his unexpired term.
Hastert, 65, was the longest serving Republican speaker in history, assuming the post in 1999 and losing it last January when Democrats regained control of the House after the 2006 elections.
Lott, 66, rebounded a year ago, winning re-election to a fourth term in the Senate and narrowly defeating Tennessee Sen. Lamar Alexander for the party's No. 2 post lining up and counting votes as GOP whip behind Minority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky.
He becomes the sixth Senate Republican this year to announce retirement. Democrats effectively hold a 51-49 majority in the chamber, including two independents who align themselves with Democrats. Lott's retirement means that Republicans will have to defend 23 seats in next year's election, while Democrats have only 12 seats at stake.
Lott said he wants to spend more time with his family and to pursue other job opportunities, possibly teaching. He ruled out any health concerns, but he said it's time for a younger voice to represent Mississippi in the Senate.
"I don't know what the future holds for us," he said on behalf of himself and his wife, Tricia. "A lot of options, hopefully, will be available."
Republican Gov. Haley Barbour will name someone to temporarily replace Lott. Barbour announced a special election for Nov. 4, 2008.
Barbour won a second term this month, and said he will not name himself as Lott's replacement and will not run for the Senate.
Lott said he had not planned to run for re-election in 2006, but he changed his mind after Hurricane Katrina devastated Mississippi's Gulf Coast and demolished his beachfront home in Pascagoula.
"They didn't quit, so I couldn't quit," he said of his neighbors.
More than two years later, however, Lott said Congress has completed most of the work it needs to do to help the Gulf Coast recover.
"It's still going to be a while, obviously, before we get through all the aftermath of Katrina," he said, "but the legislation that needed for the most part to be put on the books (has) been completed."
Lott was ousted as his party's Senate leader in 2002 over remarks he made at retiring Sen. Strom Thurmond's 100th birthday party that were interpreted as support for Southern segregationist policies. President Bush did not stand behind Lott after his remarks about Thurmond, increasing pressure on the lawmaker to step down as minority leader.
Asked about his conversation Sunday with the president, Lott said: "He was very kind in his remarks. Over the years we've had our ups and downs, good times and bad times, both of us." Lott said Bush "felt like I'd be missed in my role" as minority whip.
Bush issued a statement calling Lott "an outstanding advocate" for his state and a leader who remained "true to his principles."
Sen. Jon Kyl, R-Ariz., announced through a spokesman that he would seek to move up from GOP Conference chairman to Lott's post as the vote-counting whip, the Republicans' number-two spot in the Senate after Minority Leader Mitch McConnell.
Lott said he started thinking about retirement in August and realized over Thanksgiving dinner with relatives that he wanted to spend more time with his family.
Lott's term runs through 2012. He said new restrictions on lobbying that take effect after Dec. 31 "didn't have a big role" in his decision to retire. The regulations extend the "cooling off" period for lobbying by former members of Congress from one to two years.
His seat is likely to remain Republican. GOP Rep. Chip Pickering of Mississippi, a former Lott aide who recently announced his retirement from the House, is widely seen as a potential successor. Pickering issued a statement calling Lott "a great statesman but did not say whether he would seek the Senate job.
Former Democratic Gov. Ronnie Musgrove, who served one term before being defeated by Barbour in 2003, said Monday that he is considering running for the seat.
Republican Rep. Roger Wicker and Democratic former state Attorney General Mike Moore also are possible contenders for the Senate seat.
AP Special Correspondent David Espo, AP White House Correspondent Terence Hunt and AP writer Laurie Kellman contributed to this story from Washington.
 Load-Date: November 27, 2007

 

End of Document
