

Nashville mayoral candidates spend night on the streets to learn about lives of the homeless
The Associated Press
June 20, 2007 Wednesday 9:41 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 613 words
Byline: By LUCAS L. JOHNSON II, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NASHVILLE Tenn.
Body




One man tried in vain to sleep on a park bench. Two others swallowed their pride as they went into restaurants, broke but hungry. With no bathroom available, another one used the woods.
All four men agreed to be homeless for a night before returning Wednesday to their real lives as candidates for Nashville mayor.
The candidates promised advocates for the homeless that they would spend one night on the streets before the Aug. 2 election. The Nashville Homeless Power Project hopes the experience makes them more sensitive to the hundreds of people in the city with no place to live.
"I was struck by the number of people I saw sleeping in downtown Nashville," said candidate Karl Dean, the city's former law director. "There's no simple answer, but we've got to do something."
The National Coalition for the Homeless has been organizing similar experiences for college students and others for the past 25 years. But the group's executive director, Michael Stoops, said it was the first time political candidates agreed to take part.
"I think all people who run for office should be in touch with people living in poverty," Stoops said. "I think it should be a requirement."
The participants, chaperoned by current and former homeless people, were supposed to find a legal place to stay the night, spend at least 20 minutes sleeping on a park bench and ask strangers for spare change.
Much of that was more than the candidates could handle. Dean and David Briley, a city council member, didn't panhandle, and all four men wandered the streets until Wednesday morning rather than attempt to find a shelter.
"I never really got a chance to rest," said Buck Dozier, another council member. He tried sleeping on a slab of concrete.
Homeless people got a chance to ask the candidates questions about the experience Wednesday. The first question caught them a bit off guard: Where did you use the bathroom?
Briley said he never got the urge. Dean and Dozier said they used the same restaurants where they asked for water and food. Howard Gentry, the city's vice mayor, had a more typical experience: "I went one time in the grass and one time in the woods."
More than 1,500 homeless people stay in the Nashville area on an average night, according to recent data from the National Coalition for the Homeless. Nationally that number is more than 744,000, the coalition says.
Other politicians around the country have done similar experiments to better understand issues surrounding poor and homeless people.
Oregon Gov. Ted Kulongoski and his wife recently took part in the "food stamp challenge" spending just $3 a day each on their meals to match the amount spent by the average food stamp recipient in Oregon. A state senator from Connecticut also spent three weeks living on food stamp funds.
Former Nashville Mayor Bill Boner went undercover as a homeless person while he was a Democratic congressman in 1986, one year before he became mayor. He said the experience opened his eyes.
"The true value of a city is how we treat the homeless, those who aren't as well off," said Boner, who now teaches a high-school government class.
Two other Nashville mayoral candidates former U.S. Rep. Bob Clement and businessman Kenneth Eaton have agreed to spend a night homeless at a later date. A seventh candidate, Cheryl Lynn Tisdale, did not make the promise.
About two years ago, Nashville implemented a 10-year plan to set up 1,800 units of housing for chronically homeless people, and all the candidates say they support the plan.
Tommy Howard, who is homeless, said the experience was good for the candidates, even for just one night.
"It let them see what we go through," Howard said. "It's a struggle."
 Load-Date: June 21, 2007

 

End of Document
