

New Al-Jazeera's English channel hits the airwaves, or at least the bandwith
The Associated Press
November 15, 2006 Wednesday 11:24 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 791 words
Byline: By DAVID BAUDER, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Al-Jazeera's English-language channel began operation on Wednesday, promising a fresh perspective on international news, but virtually no American television viewers could see it.
Broadcasting from the station's headquarters in Doha, Qatar, Al-Jazeera English led its 3 p.m. EST newscast with a report from Kinshasa on the Congo elections, saying it was the only television network to land an interview with incumbent President Joseph Kabila.
The network is an offshoot of the 10-year-old Arabic-language Al-Jazeera, which has angered leaders in the Middle East and in Washington. It wore that reputation as a badge of honor Wednesday, showing a film clip of outgoing U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld referring to an Al-Jazeera report as "vicious, inaccurate and inexcusable."
Despite extra months for negotiating because a planned spring launch was scrapped, the network had only one small satellite system and two online services in the U.S. offering it Wednesday. The network was streamed for free on its Web site, but it could sometimes be difficult to reach and offered blurry pictures.
"Eighty million people around the world want to see Al-Jazeera, but no one in America is capable of seeing it," said Will Stebbins, the network's Washington bureau chief. "If I were an American, I would be frustrated having cable systems decide for me."
Unlike other news networks, Al-Jazeera English is striving to offer international news from multiple perspectives, free of any geographic or cultural reference points, he said.
Al-Jazeera English hired more than 500 staffers, luring journalists from American and British networks, including former CNN anchor Riz Khan and reporter Lucia Newman, the BBC's David Frost and former ABC News correspondent Dave Marash.
With two anchors seated before a slowly shifting world map, the afternoon newscast offered stories at greater length than most U.S. news networks. The report from Africa lasted five minutes, as did the following story, about missile attacks in Israel.
An anchor prefaced a question about how even one civilian death in Israel hurts the government by saying there have been disproportionate casualties among Palestinians.
The third story was about Gen. John Abizaid, the top U.S. commander in Iraq, testifying Wednesday before Congress.
A sportscast led with soccer tournaments in Europe, and had a feature about the Iraqi national soccer coach. There was a brief story on the Boston Red Sox bidding $51.1 million to negotiate with Japanese pitcher Daisuke Matsuzaka.
A weather report led with the forecast for the Arabian peninsula and Europe, before checking on conditions "over at the other side of the pond."
The station appeared eager to show its global reach, moving to live reports from correspondents in Sudan's Darfur region, Iran, Zimbabwe and Brazil and breaking in with a report on a tsunami warning in Japan. Stebbins said he believed Al-Jazeera English would have an edge over competitors because it has more reporters in the southern hemisphere.
Al-Jazeera, which is bankrolled by Qatar's royal family, said its signal would reach 80 million households with cable and satellite TV, mainly in the Middle East and Europe. Its chief competitors are CNN and the British Broadcasting Corp.
In London, BBC Global News Director Richard Sambrook said Al-Jazeera may take away some of his network's viewers, but the new channel's reach stands far below BBC World's 270 million homes.
"They've made a very confident start, which isn't surprising since they have a large budget and had a long time to prepare," Sambrook said.
But Al-Jazeera's Third World focus could backfire, Sambrook said.
"They clearly want to differentiate themselves from the BBC and CNN by representing developing countries," he said. "It will take some time to see whether they can do that and still keep broad appeal. That may limit their audience."
Al-Jazeera's feisty Arabic news channel is well known for angering leaders in the West and the Arab world, where it has been banned from operating in 18 countries at various times. Four Arab nations still bar its reporters.
Al-Jazeera English will be available to American customers of GlobeCast, the subsidiary of a French company that offers satellite TV service.
The other companies Al-Jazeera English said it had agreements with are Jump TV, which describes itself as "the world's leading broadcaster of ethnic TV over the Internet" and VDC, a service that offers TV on the Internet to about 10,000 customers in the U.S. The network said it also has an agreement with Fision, a digital service in Houston that isn't operating yet.
Associated Press correspondent Jim Krane in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, contributed to this report.
On the Net:
http://english.aljazeera.net
 Load-Date: November 16, 2006

 

End of Document
