

New York hopes the weather will cooperate to let the Thanksgiving Day parade balloons fly
The Associated Press
November 23, 2006 Thursday 11:23 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 566 words
Byline: By CRISTIAN SALAZAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Strong wind gusts and intermittent rain swirled over Manhattan early Thursday as fans of Big Bird and Snoopy waited to see if the weather would take the air out of the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade.
The decision on whether it is safe for some or any of the event's famous balloons to float through Midtown might be made as late as 8:30 a.m. half an hour before the parade's scheduled start, said Jarrod Bernstein, a spokesman for the New York City Office of Emergency Management.
If the answer is no, it would be only the second time the hot-air balloons have been grounded in the parade's 80-year history. The last time was 1973.
City officials said the decision will be based on information from the National Weather Service, wind-measuring instruments along the route, and their own judgment.
"You don't want to ground the balloons and all of a sudden have the wind die," said Jarrod Bernstein, a spokesman for the New York City Office of Emergency Management.
Parade organizers may be able to fly some of the balloons even if the wind is too strong for others, and the parade's floats, bands and other attractions will go on regardless of the weather.
Wind gusts could reach 35 mph Thursday, and rain and temperatures in the 40s were forecast. City guidelines call for grounding the parade's trademark balloons, such as Snoopy and Garfield, if winds reach 23 mph and gusts exceed 34 mph.
Those rules were put in place after 45 mph winds sent a Cat in the Hat balloon careening into a metal pole during the 1997 parade, leaving a woman in a coma.
During last year's event, two sisters, ages 11 and 26, were hurt by debris when a giant M&M's balloon snagged a streetlight. A city report said the mishap was not caused by the weather, but rather discrepancies between parade guidelines and actual conditions along the route.
Parade organizers have some flexibility in flying the balloons if the wind is strong. Some could be tethered to vehicles and essentially act as floats. The parade will also have a handful of "balloonicles" balloons powered by motorized vehicles that are less susceptible to wind because they are grounded.
To protect against accidents, seven wind-measuring devices have been installed along the parade route, Bernstein said. Police officers assigned to each balloon will be able to communicate changing conditions to the handlers, who will in turn adjust the flight pattern.
The parade this year will feature 33 floats with themes as varied as Charlotte's Web and Barbie, almost a dozen marching bands from across the country, and celebrities including singers Barry Manilow, Gloria Estefan and Ciara.
John Piper, who directs the Macy's studio that makes the balloons and floats, said he is most excited for people to see a new balloon inspired by the classic novel "Around the World in 80 Days."
"I think it's going to be just amazing," said Piper, who has been a part of the parade for 26 years.
Late Wednesday, spectators stood in light rain and cheered as the massive balloons were spread out flat on blue carpet and inflated on Manhattan's Upper West Side.
About 600 theater-loving children from Camp Broadway will perform the parade's opening number. They will be clowning, singing, tapping, drumming and dancing their way through the city.
Ten-year-old Taylor Rosenberger is performing as a clown.
"I'm excited," he said. "We actually get a float."
On the Net: http://www.macys.com
 Load-Date: November 24, 2006

 

End of Document
