

North Korea's twin strategy: Wind up the tension, but leave the door open for talks
The Associated Press
July 7, 2006 Friday 11:28 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 767 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER TORCHIA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEOUL South Korea
Body




North Korea has a few more cards to play if it wants to turn up the tension generated by a series of missile tests. It could fire more missiles, threaten to stage a nuclear test, stage troop exercises near the border with South Korea or send up fighter jets in an attempt to harass U.S. spy planes.
For now, though, the North Koreans might be inclined to assess the political fallout from their missile launches, as the diplomatic debate picks up at the United Nations and across Northeast Asia. Their chief goal is direct talks on security guarantees and economic aid with their No. 1 enemy, the United States.
"Now, the ball is in the U.S. court," said Baek Seung-joo, an analyst at the state-run Korea Institute for Defense Analyses in South Korea.
But Washington appears unwilling to reward North Korea's pressure tactic by agreeing to talks, a sign that the standoff will persist. Delays could favor North Korea, which is believed to be making nuclear bombs that could boost its political leverage in the long run, and doesn't need to worry about a leadership change because a dictator is in charge.
North Korea may be trying to startle Washington into granting concessions, but the missile tests follow a pattern of military maneuvers and posturing in North Korean diplomacy that dates back 50 years. For dictator Kim Jong Il, the ultimate goal is regime survival, rather than an act of war that would trigger overwhelming U.S. retaliation.
With that historical perspective in mind, North Korea's missile barrage on Wednesday appears to have been a calculated stunt that was months in the making, a negotiating ploy designed to nudge the international community so far, but not too far.
North Korea has plenty of experience in crossing so-called "red lines" laid down by the rest of the world, calibrating its provocations to avoid a heavy backlash. In early 2003, it reactivated nuclear facilities that were frozen in a 1994 deal with Washington, expelled U.N. inspectors and announced its withdrawal from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Intentional or not, the timing of the nuclear crisis arguably favored the North Koreans because their main foe, the United States, was preoccupied in the run-up to the invasion of Iraq. Today, the international community has a new distraction in Iran, which is suspected of pursuing its own nuclear weapons program and is considering a package of incentives to halt uranium enrichment.
Pyongyang's missile tests Wednesday recalled its reputed taste for warmongering, but a government statement after the launches was notable for its bland language and step-by-step justification of its actions.
North Korea "is not a signatory to the Missile Technology Control Regime and, therefore, is not bound to any commitment under it," an unidentified Foreign Ministry spokesman said in a statement. He said the North's moratorium on long-range missile tests had been valid only as long as the U.S. and North Korea were in negotiations.
The statement was devoid of the insults and fiery rhetoric that often characterize North Korean comments about the United States and Japan, suggesting Pyongyang wanted to portray itself as the level-headed player in the dispute.
Now that North Korea is in the spotlight, it might refrain from attention-grabbing stunts pending the outcome of talks in foreign capitals and at the United Nations. The United States and Japan are supporting a draft U.N. Security Council resolution that would sanction North Korea for its missile tests, but China and Russia are resisting such punitive action.
Chief U.S. nuclear negotiator Christopher Hill traveled to Northeast Asia, and U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice plans to visit South Korea later in the month. China's head nuclear negotiator, Wu Dawei, said he would go to North Korea soon to urge a return to stalled six-party talks on its nuclear program.
If North Korea emerges relatively unscathed from the debate but without diplomatic gains, though, it could be emboldened to push further with another provocation.
The tactic of negotiating against a backdrop of conflict dates to the 1950-53 Korean War, when armistice talks dragged on for more than two years over issues such as prisoner exchanges and a demarcation line, as men continued to fight and die.
North Korea's modern maneuvers contain one simple message for Washington about direct talks, said Kim Keun-shik, a foreign policy expert in South Korea.
According to Kim, the missile message was: "We won't take any other path. It's up to you."
Christopher Torchia was chief of bureau in Seoul for The Associated Press from 1999-2004.
 Load-Date: July 8, 2006

 

End of Document
