

Notes from the ethics special session of the Louisiana Legislature
The Associated Press
February 19, 2008 Tuesday 4:56 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 886 words
Dateline: BATON ROUGE La.
Body




The House's ethics committee on Monday postponed a vote on a bill that would impose a spending limit on lobbyists, after a lengthy debate over where to set that limit.
The bill, backed by Gov. Bobby Jindal, would bar lobbyists from spending over $50 excluding tax and tip on individual meals with lawmakers and other elected officials.
Rep. Charmaine Marchand said the limit should be raised to $75. A $50 cap would be "a little onerous," she said, and make it difficult for lobbyists to find restaurants inexpensive enough to stay under the limit.
"If it's $50, I think we're going to be eating at Taco Bell," said Marchand, D-New Orleans.
Rep. Mert Smiley disagreed, saying a $50 limit would help erase the public perception that lobbyists get undue influence over elected officials by buying them expensive dinners and wines.
"The whole deal we're talking about is perception," said Smiley, R-Port Vincent. "I don't know what number we could come up with that would satisfy the public. Maybe zero. I think $50 is a good compromise."
The panel rejected Marchand's amendment with a 14-5 vote, retaining the bill's $50 cap.
The sponsor, Senate President Joel Chaisson, D-Destrehan, agreed to put off a vote on the bill until Tuesday so another amendment can be considered. The measure has already passed the full Senate.
The House panel also approved a Senate-backed bill that would force lobbyists to report their incomes. It moves next to the full House for debate.
Many of the records of the governor's office would be available to the public and removed from a blanket public records exemption if the Senate agrees to a bill that won House approval Monday.
Rep. Wayne Waddell said his bill would treat most of the agencies in the governor's office like all other state agencies, which are mainly required to let citizens view their records and documents. The bill would limit the public records exemption for the governor's office to the records of the governor, his chief of staff and his executive counsel.
Gov. Bobby Jindal's administration opposed the bill when it came up for debate in a House committee, but Waddell said he would continue to work with the administration on ways to remove their objections.
Waddell, R-Shreveport, said much of the governor's objections involved confidential negotiations with business investors, but he said those negotiations are exempt from the public records law through a separate exemption for the state's economic development office.
However, Waddell said the Jindal administration wasn't totally satisfied with the bill, which was approved in an 89-7 vote and heads next to the Senate for debate.
Jindal has called lawmakers into a three-week special session to make changes to ethics laws and to push the idea of more transparency in state government.
"The governor has pointed out that we need transparency, and you have to start at the top and go down," Waddell said.
After struggling to get through committee, a campaign finance bill has hit another snag on the Senate floor.
The bill, backed by Gov. Bobby Jindal, would require candidates to list details of their donors' employers.
The measure was designed to help track if employees are trying to violate campaign finance laws by "bundling" evading limits on campaign contributions by sending more money to candidates through their employees. The bill, by Sen. Robert Kostelka, R-Monroe, would force candidates to report the employer of each campaign contributor who gives more than $250 or to at least attempt to find out that information and report it.
Kostelka tried to win a floor vote on the bill, but was hounded by questions from senators who wondered if it would accomplish anything.
"Many of us feel that it's fluff, for lack of a better word," said Sen. Robert Adley, R-Benton.
A 22-15 vote kept the bill bottled up in the Senate. To bring it up for a vote to pass the bill, Kostelka would require support from a majority of the Senate.
Third-party groups who run political ads or send out political mailers would have to put their names on those ads to identify themselves, under a bill that was approved unanimously Monday by the Senate.
Senators who spoke in support of the measure said it would require more transparency of third party groups who often slam candidates for political office without clear disclosure of who's sponsoring the ads and direct mail pieces.
"We've all been slandered by third party groups ... Many times there are instances whereby the candidate likes to keep the white hands and make our friends and neighbors the bad guys," said Sen. Rob Marionneaux, D-Livonia, sponsor of the bill.
A violation of the measure could carry a fine of up to $10,000 and a prison sentence of up to six months. The bill heads next to the House for debate.
The Senate also voted 37-2 for a bill that would require groups organized under Chapter 527 of the Internal Revenue Code which in some cases allows donors to give unlimited amounts of money without disclosure to disclose their political fundraising and expenditures in Louisiana. The bill (Senate Bill 29) goes to the House.
"I'm just trying to get clarification of what in the hell I've got to report."
-- Lobbyist Carmack Blackmon, asking a House committee to clean up the language in a bill that would require lobbyists to file monthly reports of their spending.
 Load-Date: February 20, 2008

 

End of Document
