

On the Net: Regret the Error follows the media's more amusing mistakes
The Associated Press
January 2, 2007 Tuesday 8:40 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 550 words
Byline: By JAKE COYLE, AP Entertainment Writer
Body




Many people including reporters have hopes for the new year of being better, improved and less prone to errors of all kinds. But the mistakes will inevitably come, and for the media, Web site RegretTheError.com will be there waiting.
Regret The Error compiles the corrections, retractions, clarifications and trends "regarding the accuracy and honesty of the media" (including The Associated Press).
Founded and edited by Craig Silverman, the site every year publishes its "Crunks" awards for the most amusing and lamentable mistakes made in publications across the country.
Silverman dubbed 2006 "the Year of the Belated Apology," noting apologies from the Tallahassee Democrat, the Charlotte Observer and the Raleigh News & Observer for decades-old coverage of civil rights and segregation.
The correction of the year was bestowed upon a correction from the British Sun, which followed up a report of drunken debauchery at the birthday party of 16-year-old Princess Eugenie with a near-total retraction, which partly read: "no revelers dived into bedrooms in search of drunken romps."
Also in the running was a correction from the Chicago Tribune that apologized for an editorial that stated that Florida Cresswell, a candidate for Illinois state government, was convicted in 1999 for battery and stealing Tupperware. He was convicted for stealing an actual battery and Tupperware from a van.
Colorado's Rocky Mountain News won for best numerical error for a story on Kirstie Alley that said she "ate twenty-six, seven, eight thousand calories a day" instead of "six, seven, eight thousand calories a day." And Reuters was awarded the typo of the year for accidentally referring to recalled "beef panties" that were feared to be contaminated with E. coli.
I hope the above copy omitted any errors and thus prevented the irony of finding itself on RegretTheError.com.
Video OF THE WEEK: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v(equals)0yRaDRUwcJw
As Ben Stiller continues to cement his status as one of the biggest comedic box-office draws with "Night at the Museum," it's worth remembering where it (more-or-less) all started for Stiller: "The Ben Stiller Show," which aired in 1992-1993. The sketch show is still oddly under-appreciated despite giving an early boost to the careers of Judd Apatow, David Cross, Bob Odenkirk, Andy Dick and Janeane Garofalo. In this clip, Casey Kasem politely humors Stiller's "Insistent Man."
DOWNLOAD THIS: "There Was a Time (I Got to Move)," James Brown
When hearing that James Brown had passed away early Christmas morning, thousands undoubtedly dove mournfully into their record collections to respectfully pay homage to the man behind some of the funkiest, most incendiary pieces of music ever recorded. There are, of course, dozens of great tracks to choose from "Soul Power" to "Payback" but the one I immediately went for was the less-heard classic "There Was a Time (I Got to Move)" a drawn-out version of Brown's "There Was a Time" that can be found on iTunes and on the album "Funk Power 1970: A Brand New Thang." Over the funkiest groove you've ever heard, Brown croons soulfully: "People, sometimes I don't think you realize, I'm singing the song with tears in my eyes."
EDITOR'S NOTE What's your favorite Web site? E-mail AP Entertainment Writer Jake Coyle at fcoyle(at)ap.org
 Load-Date: January 3, 2007

 

End of Document
