

Public gets the chance to weigh in on how to improve the National Mall in Washington, D.C.
The Associated Press
November 16, 2006 Thursday 8:41 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 611 words
Byline: By STEPHEN MANNING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




The National Mall is often called "America's front lawn," but National Park Service officials have heard that many people believe that lawn needs some landscaping.
As part of a yearlong project to tidy up the vast and grassy park in the center of the nation's capital, the National Park Service is taking public comments on what changes need to be made. They collected the first batch Wednesday at a public forum in Washington.
The early answers: More bathrooms, better parking options, sprucing up the heavily used sidewalks and improving security. And do something about those scabby brown patches of dead grass that most homeowners would be ashamed to have on their own front lawns.
National Park officials don't paint such a dire picture of the Mall's current condition. But they do say that years of wear and tear from 25 million visitors each year, concerts, protests, presidential inaugurations and the occasional state funeral have taken a toll.
Michael Heaney, the senior director of the National Parks Conservation Association, said that overuse of parks like the Mall threatens their infrastructure.
"There is a real danger of loving these places to death," said Heaney.
The Park Service will take comments from the public through next spring, then develop a final plan for changes by the end of the year. Planners have to weigh the desire to protect the Mall and its monuments from overuse while considering the needs of visitors who want to see and use the park.
The Mall stretches from the U.S. Capitol to the Potomac River, and includes long vistas of grassy land and wooded sections. The Washington Monument rises from the middle, museums line the stretch near the Capitol, and monuments and memorials to presidents and wars are sprinkled throughout.
Most of the Mall was declared a finished work by Congress in 2003, meaning the new project won't deal with moving monuments or building new ones expect for three that were already planned.
Some of the public's proposals include adding bathrooms. When the museums close, there are no public bathrooms on the popular eastern portion, said Susan Spain, the National Mall Plan Project Executive for the Park Service.
But adding new ones won't be an easy task. When the Jefferson Memorial was built, it was deemed inappropriate to build bathrooms at such a reverential site.
"Adding bathrooms or any facility in a location like this can be highly controversial," she said.
Most of the people at Wednesday's forum were Washington residents. But the Park Service has also set up an online forum to gather public input.
Comments at the forum ranged from concerns about large tents and equipment set up for concerts and other events to whether there were proper signs guiding visitors from the Metro subway system to the sights.
The owners of a company that offers guided tours on Segways said they hoped the Park Service would change restrictions they said bar the two-wheeled vehicles from the Mall's pathways.
Some Washington residents wanted the Mall to be more accessible to those who live in the city. Tanya Washington, a third-generation Washingtonian, said she rarely goes down for large events such as the Fourth of July fireworks because they are so crowded. And she said the lawn needs to be a bit greener.
"Pay attention to the grass," Washington said.
However, some visitors said they were able to look past the Mall's flaws. Alex Garcia, of Puerto Rico, was awed by the grandeur of the Mall and its place at the heart of the capital.
"It's not such a big deal, the grass," said Garcia as he looked at posters of the Mall outside the forum. "The whole thing is great."
On the Net:
http://www.nps.gov/nationalmallplan
 Load-Date: November 17, 2006

 

End of Document
