

Q&A: The state of the financial bailout
The Associated Press
March 29, 2010 Monday 08:21 PM GMT

 Copyright 2010 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 610 words
Byline: By DANIEL WAGNER, AP Business Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




The government is planning to unload its stake in Citigroup, for a potential profit of about $7.5 billion. Here are some questions and answers about the state of the $700 billion bailout, which was approved by Congress in October 2008.
Q: How much has the government paid out?
A: It depends how you count. The Treasury Department says it has paid out $380 billion. Counting what the Treasury has committed but not paid out, the number is $493 billion. Counting promises for future administration programs that are still being developed including some money already repaid the full number is $545 billion.
Q: That's a pretty big difference. Are they spinning the numbers?
A: Not necessarily. But the Treasury has confused some people by failing to explain what each number means. Consider the $50 billion the administration set aside to help homeowners avoid foreclosure. The amount paid out is only $1 billion, because mortgage companies can't collect all of the money until they have successfully helped homeowners. The amount "legally committed" is $38 billion, because that's how much has been set aside for the mortgage companies. The remaining $12 billion will be used for a new set of initiatives the White House rolled out last week.
Q: How much has the government gotten back?
A: Treasury says it has been repaid $176 billion, and has canceled a $5 billion promise to pay for losses on assets at Bank of America and Citigroup. On top of that, the Treasury has received $13.7 billion for interest payments and dividends from companies that hold bailout money. And the Treasury has made $4.4 billion by selling stock warrants, which allow it to buy company stock at a fixed price in the future. So Treasury has paid out $380 billion and taken in a total of about $194 billion. That number will grow after the government's Citigroup sale.
Q: Is that a good return on investment?
A: Officials say taxpayers are making a profit on the bailouts and getting a good return. It's way too early to know if that's true. The main bank bailout program is on track to turn a profit, thanks to regular interest and dividend payments from healthy companies. But taxpayers can expect to lose billions on bailouts of the auto industry, auto finance companies and insurance giant American International Group Inc.
Q: The eight big banks that got the first bailouts have paid the money back. How much was gained or lost on the banks?
A: Assuming the sale of Citigroup stock nets Treasury $7.5 billion, it will have collected $22.9 billion on warrants, stock sales, interest, dividends and fees from those companies. That's about a 14 percent return on the $165 billion that was ultimately invested in the big banks. By comparison, the broad-based Standard & Poor's 500 stock index has lost about 3 percent since the bailout was passed.
Q: Where is the government losing money?
A: Treasury expects the bailout to cost taxpayers $117 billion, officials said. The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office expects it to cost $109 billion, according to a report issued this month. The White House's Office of Management and Budget puts it at $127 billion. They expect the big losses to come from the auto industry bailouts, AIG and foreclosure prevention programs.
Q: Could anything go wrong that could change these numbers?
A: A fresh wave of bank failures from souring commercial real estate loans could shrink the expected return on bank bailouts, or turn it into a loss. Three bailed-out banks have failed, and the government will lose the $2.6 billion it paid to them. Eighty banks failed to make their dividend payments in February, a sign they're struggling and may be unable to repay.
 Load-Date: March 30, 2010

 

End of Document
