

Quotes from the candidates on the NH primary
The Associated Press
January 9, 2008 Wednesday 4:40 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1043 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Quotes from the candidates on Tuesday's New Hampshire primary:
DEMOCRATS
New York Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton
 "I come tonight with a very, very full heart, and I want especially to thank New Hampshire. Over the last week I listened to you, and in the process, I found my own voice. I felt like we all spoke from our hearts, and I'm so gratified that you responded. Now together let's give America the kind of comeback that New Hampshire has just given me."
Illinois Sen. Barack Obama
 "You know, a few weeks ago, no one imagined that we'd have accomplished what we did here tonight in New Hampshire. No one could have imagined it. For most of this campaign, we were far behind. We always knew our climb would be steep. But in record numbers, you came out, and you spoke up for change. And with your voices and your votes, you made it clear that at this moment, in this election, there is something happening in America."
Former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards
 "So up until now, about 0.5 percent of Americans have voted; 99 percent-plus have not voted. And those 99 percent deserve to have their voices heard, because we have had too much in America of people's voices not being heard. I have met too many Americans whose voices have not been heard in this democracy. ... That's what this battle is about. It is not about me. It is about the cause of giving voice to all of those whose voices are not being heard in this democracy."
New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson
 On whether he would consider running as vice president: "You know, I am going to win, first of all. But secondly, no, I'm not interested. I've been in Washington. I love to be governor of New Mexico. I can get on my horse, be with my family, look at the New Mexico sunsets, do something with New Mexico, a state I love. You know, you guys are obsessed that Washington is the end for everyone. It's not for me. I'm going to win this nomination. So that's going to be academic. And you watch. We've got 50 states to go. You guys are already crowning winners. Let's wait. Let's see what the rest of the country has to say about electing a president."
REPUBLICANS
Arizona Sen. John McCain
 "When the pundits declared us finished, I told them I'm going to New Hampshire where the voters don't let you make their decision for them. And when they asked, 'How are you going to do it? You're down in the polls. You don't have the money.' I answered, 'I'm going to New Hampshire, and I'm going to tell people the truth.' We came back here to this wonderful state we've come to trust and love. And we had just one strategy: to tell you what I believe. I didn't just tell you what the polls said you wanted to hear. I didn't tell you what I knew to be false. I didn't try to spin you. I just talked to the people of New Hampshire. I talked about the country we love, the many challenges we face together, and the great promise that is ours to achieve."
Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney
 "You know, in all those events, as we've listened to so many people from across the state, we hear time and time again a similar message, and that is that people are frustrated. They're concerned about the future of our country, particularly our leadership in Washington. They feel that Washington is broken. And they've heard time and again promises that haven't been fulfilled by Washington. ... And I believe that it's time to send somebody to Washington who will actually get the job done. Thanks, you guys. I don't think it's going to get done by Washington insiders, sending insiders back to Washington just to change different chairs. That's not going to get the job done."
Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee
 "I want to just tell you from the depths of my heart that we thought that if we could finish in the top we kept saying four or five, we'd feel pretty good about that, knowing just how tough it's been to try to break through. But, tonight, you've given us so much more than we could have imagined just a few days or weeks ago, and over the last few days, we've seen that momentum build and the excitement at our rallies and the enthusiasm of our people and the size of the crowds. And we just sensed that we were going to do better than a lot of people thought that this old unknown Southern boy could possibly do up here in New England."
Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani
 "What I can tell you is this race is a wide-open race. It is a wide-open race. There's going to be a lot more ups and downs to it. And one thing we can handle is ups and downs. We are very good at that. That's what it means to handle crisis. That's what it means to handle problems. And maybe we've lulled our opponents into a false sense of confidence now, right? We were prepared for this from the very beginning. It fits into how we looked at this from the very beginning about there being at least 29 primaries and caucuses between January 3rd and February 5th, and now we're off to the next group of them with renewed vigor, renewed spirit, and some great new proposals about how to make America safer, how to make America stronger, how to make America more prosperous."
Texas Rep. Ron Paul
 On why he is running in the Republican Party and not as an independent: "But it is true the Republican Party has changed, the base is smaller. But why should they say that the individuals who support me and there are a few why shouldn't they be welcome? I mean, you'd think the Republican Party needs a little bit of boost. We have tremendous support and we offer them this, but you have to look to the Constitution to defend our positions and there shouldn't be anything un-Republican about that."
Former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson
 "I came to New Hampshire in order to participate in the debates, but it's been about getting to South Carolina the whole time. South Carolina is the gateway to the rest of the country. These elections are not decided in two or three locations. They're decided in the rest of the country. And the South and the West and the rest of the Midwest gets to participate, too. And it's been all about getting here, and this has got to be considered my firewall. I've got to do very well here, if not win here. And, you know, there's no question about that. And I will stake my ground in South Carolina and stand here."
 Load-Date: January 9, 2008

 

End of Document
