

Quotes on over-the-counter sales of the morning-after pill
The Associated Press
August 24, 2006 Thursday 5:19 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 567 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Quotes about the FDA's approval of nonprescription sales of the morning-after pill, Plan B, to women 18 and older:
"He appreciates that the FDA did an exhaustive review, that they recognized the critical distinction between minors and adults and the risks a drug like this could pose." White House spokeswoman Dana Perino on President Bush's reaction.
"While we urge the FDA to revisit placing age restrictions on the sale of Plan B, it is real progress that millions of American women will now have increased access to emergency contraception." Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton, D-N.Y., and Patty Murray, D-Wash., in a statement.
"The bottom line is that the FDA's decision is legally unfounded and hazardous to women's health. It continues the FDA's reckless and irresponsible pattern of applying a lower standard of care, and being hostage to special interest groups, when it comes to women's health." Rep. Mark Souder, R-Ind.
"I am still very disappointed that the FDA allowed an extreme political ideology to hijack our nation's health policy for women by delaying the availability of this drug for over a year." Rep. Edward Markey, D-Mass.
"The product has not changed in 3 years, but the political climate has." Rep. Carolyn Maloney, D-N.Y.
"While I am glad that the drumbeat for a return to a science-based FDA has had some positive impact, this decision still represents a compromise one that could have the unintended consequence of hurting young women's health." Susan Wood, former FDA assistant commissioner for women's health who resigned her position last August over the Plan B controversy.
"If the FDA, the president or anyone who supported this decision truly cared about the health and well-being of women, they would have demanded that the drug be pulled from the market at once." Judie Brown, president of American Life League.
"Planned Parenthood is troubled by the scientifically baseless restriction imposed on teenagers. The U.S. has one of the highest rates of teen pregnancy in the western world." Cecile Richards, president of Planned Parenthood Federation of America.
"If the FDA thinks that enacting an age restriction will work, or that the drug company will enforce it when it has already announced it has no intention of enforcing it, then they are living in a dream world." Wendy Wright, president of Concerned Women for America.
"Denying over-the-counter access to Plan B to women under age 18, when the research shows that it is safe for women of all ages, is arbitrary and baseless." Debra L. Ness, president of the National Partnership for Women and Families.
"Today marks a significant movement in efforts to bring common sense back to the debate over medical advances. This decision will ensure better reproductive care for women across the country and lead to fewer incidence of abortion a goal we all share." Kellie Rose Ferguson, executive director of Republican Majority for Choice.
"Finally, the FDA put sound science before politics and made this safe, effective birth-control option more accessible to women." Nancy Keenan, president of NARAL Pro-Choice America.
"All who share our goal of preventing unwanted pregnancies should join us in welcoming the FDA's long-overdue decision to make this safe and effective way to prevent pregnancy more easily available to women across the country." Mark Pelavin, associate director of the Religious Action Center of Reform Judaism.
 Load-Date: August 25, 2006

 

End of Document
