

Research group says the U.S. service economy grew at the same pace in August as in July
The Associated Press
September 6, 2007 Thursday 4:03 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 601 words
Byline: By CANDICE CHOI, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




The U.S. service economy expanded at the same pace in August as in July, surprising analysts who had been looking for slower growth.
The Institute for Supply Management said Thursday its index measuring change in the non-manufacturing sector registered 55.8 in August, the same as in July. That was higher than the reading of 54 analysts were expecting.
"(The report) indicates there's some resilience there, that some of the other service industries are keeping busy," said Brian Bethune, an economist with Global Insight.
The index hit a 12-month high of 60.7 in June.
A reading above 50 indicates economic expansion while one below 50 indicates contraction.
The services sector accounts for 80 percent of U.S. economic activity and spans diverse industries including restaurants, banking, construction, mining, retailing, agriculture and travel.
Ten industries reported growth in August and five industries reported decreased business activity.
While the overall report was positive, the analyst Bethune said a decline in the employment index to 47.9 in August from 51.7 in July could be a red flag. He said Friday's August employment report the week's most anticipated piece of economic data would provide more context on whether the dip should be of concern.
In other economic news Thursday, the Labor Department said worker productivity grew at the fastest pace in nearly two years. Wage pressures also eased sharply in the spring developments that should reduce inflation worries.
The number of newly laid off workers filing claims for unemployment benefits also fell last week for the first time in seven weeks. The improvement was double what had been expected.
In late morning trading, the Dow Jones industrial average rose 12.27 to 13,317.74 after wobbling in and out of positive territory.
Broader stock indicators also rose. The Standard & Poor's 500 index was up 1.20 at 1,474.06, and the Nasdaq composite index rose 1.72 to 2,607.67.
The ISM report said the industries reporting growth in August were accommodation and food services; real estate; health care; utilities; public administration; professional, scientific and technical services; educational services; retail trade; information; and other services .
The five industries reporting decreased activity from July to August were support services; arts, entertainment and recreation; finance and insurance; wholesale trade and construction.
The upbeat economic news Thursday seemed to reinforce the Federal Reserve's report Wednesday that the credit crunch, while taking its toll on the housing market, has so far had limited impact on the broader economy.
The credit crisis, which began with subprime mortgage loans to people with poor credit, has spread and intensified in August, unnerving investors on Wall Street and around the globe. To stabilize the effects, the Fed has pumped tens of billions of dollars into the financial system and has sliced an interest rate its charges banks for loans.
A growing number of economists believe the Fed will lower a key interest rate now at 5.25 percent by at least one-quarter percentage point at its meeting Sept. 18 to protect the economy from any ill effects. The Fed hasn't lowered this rate in four years.
Still, other financial reports this week have unnerved investors.
The National Association of Realtors said Wednesday that pending sales of existing homes fell in July to the lowest level in nearly six years. Construction spending also dropped 0.4 percent in July compared with June, the weakest showing since a 0.6 percent fall in January.
On the Net:
Institute for Supply Management, http://www.ism.ws
 Load-Date: September 7, 2007

 

End of Document
