

The man on the ten-dollar bill
The Associated Press
May 11, 2007 Friday 5:49 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 999 words
Byline: By NANCY DEWOLF SMITH, The Wall Street Journal
Body




There is only so much you can cram into a two-hour documentary, and "Alexander Hamilton" (PBS, Monday 9-11 p.m. ET, but check local listings) is a necessarily potted account of the man often called America's most controversial Founding Father. In this edition of the "American Experience" series, Hamilton's psychology and peccadilloes get plenty of attention. Yet it's his public life and the policies he pushed that are the most interesting. We're still feeling the fallout today.
It is cruel to say, as one of his enemies did, that Hamilton was "the bastard son of a Scottish peddler." Yet the fact that his parents were not legally married, that he grew up poor, and was orphaned at an early age in the West Indies, indisputably shaped his character and fueled a fierce ambition. A desire to stand out from the crowd surfaced early as Hamilton ran a major trading company while still a teenager and wrote newspaper articles so impressive that the notables of St. Croix gave him a scholarship to study in America.
Arriving at New York City's King's College School (later Columbia) in 1773, the new immigrant Hamilton quickly became a fervent revolutionary orator and pamphleteer, and formed a student militia. In the summer of 1776, as George Washington's army fled Brooklyn, Hamilton and his artillery made a redoubt in Harlem. So began Washington's lifetime admiration for his "adopted son."
It was after the war that Hamilton gained national fame, and began to make bitter enemies. In the "Federalist" series of articles and elsewhere, he stumped for the Constitution and a strong central government.
The program notes that unlike the other Founders, many of whom referred to their home state as "my country," Hamilton was an outsider who had no home-state loyalties. The stage was set for a lasting struggle, most famously pitting Hamilton against populist Thomas Jefferson. The latter's views were reflected in the words of one contemporary commentator who feared that the new federal government Hamilton championed would usurp ordinary Americans' new-found liberty.
"You men of learning, you lawyers, will take control ... and ordinary people with good sense will never get elected," the anti-Federalist refrain went. "And after you grab up all the power and the money, you'll swallow up all us little folk. This will be a government run by and for a tyrannical aristocracy."
And who should make decisions instead, Hamilton scoffed: "Not the wise, not the learned? Would you go to some ditch by the highway and pick up the thieves, the poor and the lame to lead us?"
As America's first Secretary of the Treasury, Hamilton built a fief of influence and patronage far larger than any other in the new government. However radical and odious his reach seemed to many at the time, he grasped that the future of the nation depended on good credit, and laid the foundations for the currency and banking system that made America strong. He also was clever enough to see that if the new country assumed the war debts of the 13 colonies, the influential men in the states who were owed money would have to shift their allegiance to the central government.
As a historian notes here, however, while Hamilton had a great intellect he had terrible judgment. This is made clear in the program not so much by criticism of his policies, but, for example, by an account of his handling of his notorious affair with a married (and blackmailing) woman. His other failings acknowledged here were arrogance and an inability to refrain from insulting people he did not admire. Such was his sense of honor surely magnified by insecurity due to the circumstances of his birth that he was lured to his death in a duel with the insulted creep Aaron Burr.
What's most fascinating in all this is the inevitable comparison between then and now, and how the war of ideas that began soon after the new nation was established is still very much with us. Only the names of the combatants have changed.
'Month of Mayhem" is about a real war, the one in Iraq, and gives CNN correspondent Michael Holmes an opportunity to shift from his role as a veteran reporter in Iraq to being a commentator. (CNN International, Saturday 8-9 p.m.) Mr. Holmes takes us through a 31-day assignment in Baghdad, showing us life inside and outside CNN's bureau. This particular assignment began on Jan. 9, 2007, just as President Bush announced the "surge" intended to quell rising violence in Iraq.
Mr. Holmes tells us that since this was just the beginning, it was probably too early to know if the surge would work. That's the only thing viewers have to cling to as day after day passes with horrific insurgent car bombings and attacks. In addition to the daily death toll, sometimes rising to more than 100 in a crowded market, for instance, there is also a count of bodies found on the streets. These are chiefly the ordinary Iraqis captured and tortured by insurgents, sometimes pierced repeatedly by electric drills, before being dumped on the streets to terrorize everyone else.
In one scene filmed while Mr. Holmes was embedded with a U.S. unit, soldiers find a Baghdad house with all its furniture piled in a courtyard, and three women and a young man inside who say they are moving out because insurgents came the day before and told them to leave by noon or be killed. With a mixture of pity and anger, he explains, two snipers offered to stay and lie in wait for the insurgents to come back. But the family declined the offer of help. They were too afraid.
Presumably, Mr. Holmes is afraid, too, and he shows us a tiny koala bear, from his daughter back home in Australia, and a plastic action figure from his son, that are his good-luck charms. Since he doesn't wear dog tags, he has his name and blood type pasted on his helmet. Many U.S. soldiers, he explains, have two sets of ID, the dog tags around their neck and the one they stick under their boot laces. Mr. Holmes explains this but we already know, hearts tightening, the reason why.
 Load-Date: May 12, 2007

 

End of Document
