

THE EDGE: Turning points on the long road to 270
The Associated Press
November 6, 2008 Thursday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1089 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




There were plenty of turning points on the long, zigzag trail of Campaign '08. Which ones truly mattered? Five AP reporters offer short takes on the debates, the money, the hubris and more.
MELTED WINGS
A crushing early defeat was one of the most important parts of Barack Obama's victory.
Obama learned that getting to the presidency would not come easily when Hillary Rodham Clinton defeated him unexpectedly in the New Hampshire primary. The loss set the stage for a long Democratic race, and the painful surprise made Obama and his staff better campaigners.
Obama has said it was like he was Icarus, flying too high only to come crashing to the Earth. In Greek mythology, Icarus soared on a pair of wax wings that melted when he got too close to the sun.
In response, Obama shifted his approach. Instead of making the rounds like he was on a victory tour, Obama began campaigning closer to the ground. Although demand to see the man who would be the first black president remained high, the campaign began limiting the size of his events so he could relate more personally to his audiences.
Instead of addressing fans from a lofty stage, Obama stood his ground at town hall meetings in gymnasiums and community centers. He dropped by local businesses, ate cheesesteak and went bowling.
New Hampshire did not derail Obama's hopes. But it was an important defeat in a career full of improbable victories.
 By Nedra Pickler
MO' MONEY
This was one case where Republicans had hoped Barack Obama WOULD raid the Treasury. Instead, the man who would be president decided to turn his back on a huge chunk of taxpayer money for his election campaign.
Obama risked a bad image with the handful of people on the planet who care about public financing of elections. Then he went out and bought himself a deluge of advertising that drowned out rival John McCain.
Yes, Obama had said that if McCain accepted public financing for the general election, he would, too. But in retrospect, his decision to go back on that pledge was a no-brainer. While McCain was limited to spending the $84 million he received from the federal government in September and October, Obama had at least $263 million. That money put McCain and the Republican Party on the defensive in red state after red state.
Obama explained his decision by saying he needed his own firepower to compete against McCain and Republican outside groups. And to be sure, McCain got substantial help from the Republican National Committee during the past two months. But spending by outside groups favored the Democrat. Throughout his campaign, outside groups and unions that supported Obama spent millions more than those that helped McCain, according to independent expenditure reports filed with the Federal Election Commission.
 By Jim Kuhnhenn
DEBATING OBAMA
Many political analysts scored the first debate between Barack Obama and John McCain as more or less a draw. But the Sept. 26 forum at the University of Mississippi helped put Obama on a decisive path to the presidency.
The Friday night debate capped a tumultuous week in which the collapse of global credit markets became the paramount issue of the campaign. To be sure, the debate didn't produce a knockout blow or game-changing gaffe. And McCain looked strong, challenging Obama on his thin foreign policy resume and casting the Democratic nominee as naive on world affairs.
But Obama more than surmounted the challenge.
On stage that night, standing next to one of the most experienced and respected men in American politics, Obama appeared the more presidential of the two. He spoke clearly, laid out ideas succinctly and refused to be rattled by McCain's jabs. Most importantly, Obama's preternatural sense of calm stood in marked contrast to McCain's edgy irritation.
It was the night that voters finally decided that they could envision this young African-American man as president. It was fitting that it took place on a campus in the formerly segregated South, where the admission of a black man, James Meredith, sparked race riots decades earlier.
 By Beth Fouhy
TOO MANY TURNS
John McCain's all-over-the-map response to the financial meltdown left a lasting impression.
As the country's economic situation deteriorated, McCain initially seemed to ignore mounting evidence of a crisis, saying the "fundamentals of our economy are strong." He later shifted to say that the country was in an economic crisis but that the fundamental strength of the American worker remained strong.
He began to sound off against Wall Street greed, called for a 9/11-style commission to investigate, and said if he were president he'd fire the Securities and Exchange Commission chairman.
At one point, McCain went so far as to suspend his campaign and return to Washington, he said, to help negotiate a rescue package. He tried unsuccessfully to delay the first presidential debate to deal with the crisis.
McCain proposed that the government buy up bad mortgages to help homeowners. And he closed the campaign saying people are angry, hurting and scared of losing their homes and their jobs, and promising to right the economy.
Voters saw the Republican candidate as thrashing around in search of a solution not what they want to see at crisis time.
 By Darlene Superville
NO TURNS REQUIRED
Barack Obama's turning point came so early, there was no turning necessary.
With the fundamentals stacked against the GOP, the primary challenge for Obama was to win, well, the primary. His team's initial decisions set a strategy and tone that showed amazing resilience.
Strategic decision No. 1: Employ the Internet, especially social networking sites like FaceBook and MySpace, to promote his progressive identity and raise a record-breaking amount of cash from millions of small donors. Traditional methods left Hillary Rodham Clinton outmoded, outgunned and in debt.
Strategic decision No. 2: Game the proportional allocation of convention delegates. That meant blowout victories in small states netted more delegates than Clinton's wins in big states. Those caucus victories added up to the winning margin in pledged delegates.
Strategic decision No. 3: Emulate Obama's personality by staying focused, calm and positive. Resisting calls to go on the attack early, tending to the grass roots and slowly constructing the Obama brand, his team created a persona that would wear well with voters.
Unlike Clinton's or McCain's, the Obama campaign had no staff shake-ups, no insider backbiting and no restarts. Its turning point came when it was turned on.
 By Douglass K. Daniel
 Load-Date: November 7, 2008

 

End of Document
