

The upside to the downturn
The Associated Press
November 23, 2007 Friday 4:40 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1303 words
Byline: By SARA LIN, The Wall Street Journal
Body




It's not the best time to be selling a house in much of the country. But increasingly, it's a good time to build or renovate one.
The housing slump has pushed down prices on everything from lumber and drywall to labor and design fees. Legions of carpenters, tile layers and landscapers are idle. Architects are taking on small renovation projects they once would have sniffed at and contractors are offering their services at a discount. Some people in the building trades are even posting fliers at construction sites to drum up business.
It's a striking contrast from the heady days of the real-estate boom, when builders and contractors could hardly keep pace with demand, prices of materials soared and a six-month wait to start a kitchen renovation was commonplace.
Now, some homeowners are moving forward on renovation or building projects they've put off for years. Others are exacting substantial price cuts from contractors desperate for work.
A few months ago, Mike Bowes remodeled the bathroom and guest bedroom of his $200,000 condo in Las Vegas. The job, which cost $14,000, included a walk-in shower, a new vanity, bamboo flooring in the guest room and retextured plaster on the walls and ceilings. Last year, the same work would have cost nearly twice as much, he estimates, "and I would have had to beg someone to do it." Now, the 47-year-old commercial roofing sales manager is planning to upgrade his kitchen, living room and porch. While prices remain low "I'm going to keep going," he says.
Even small repair jobs, once the province of independent plumbers, electricians and handymen, are getting scooped up by larger firms. When a bathroom pipe burst at the home of Julie Gebhardt, a schoolteacher in Manchester, Mich., she called a local builder for a referral. Instead, the firm, Peters Building Co., said it would take the job itself. The company needs the work, says President Jim Haeussler. Before the slump, the company built 70 to 80 houses a year to sell on the market at $300,000 to $500,000. So far this year it has built just 18 houses, Mr. Haeussler says.
The Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard University estimates that 1.3 million homes will be built this year in the U.S. down from just over two million in 2005. On Tuesday, the Commerce Department said construction of single-family houses fell 25 percent in October from a year earlier.
Meantime, more homeowners will renovate their kitchens this year 7.57 million, up from 7.44 million in 2006 but they will spend a lot less, $96.2 billion compared with $127 billion, according to the National Kitchen & Bath Association. Bathroom renovations this year are expected to rise by 5.3 percent to 10.9 million from 2006, while spending on them will grow 3.8 percent to $70.2 billion from 2006, the trade group projects.
One reason some renovations will cost less this year is the falling price of many key building materials. The price of oriented strand board, a plywood substitute used for walls and roof sheathing, dropped 40 percent from the third quarter of 2005 to the same quarter this year, according to the National Association of Home Builders. During the same period, framing-lumber prices fell 24 percent, says the association. And drywall prices which soared during the real estate run-up to a record dropped 35 percent from last year's third quarter, according to United States Gypsum Co., the largest manufacturer of drywall in North America.
"If you're going to do any kind of construction ... now is the best time you're going to have to do that in the next five years," says Bill Harrison of Harrison Design Associates, an Atlanta-based architecture firm that specializes in high-end homes.
It's also a good time to be shopping for an architect. Bryan Jones, of Jones Pierce Architects, also of Atlanta, says his 12-person company used to concentrate on remodeling jobs valued between $250,000 and $750,000. But now, he says, inquiries about new projects are down by nearly half from a year ago, and the firm is taking on smaller jobs to make up for the lost work. "We're chasing stuff we definitely wouldn't have done a year ago," he says.
The same goes for builders. After Russ Nank Jr.'s three-bedroom ranch house in Rock Creek, Ohio, burned down last year, he snagged Payne & Payne Builders, a Cleveland-based firm, to erect a four-bedroom Cape Cod-style home. The firm took on the $179,000 project even though it was located outside its usual territory and was about one-third the size of its usual jobs. "The timing could not have been better for us," Mr. Nank says, adding that he was able to afford a bigger home with more costly upgrades, including hickory cabinets and granite counters, than he had expected.
Two years ago, says company co-owner Dave Payne, he would have politely declined such a project. "We had a map, we had a line and we didn't go outside of that line," he says of his company, which is about 45 miles from Rock Creek. But as he watched his list of prospective projects shrivel to five from 30 last fall, Mr. Payne says he threw out the rules. In April, his company even built a $25,000 one-room addition for one client. "We're chasing every lead," he says.
Not all parts of the country have been affected equally. Builders in Seattle, New York and Los Angeles, where the job and housing markets have remained firm, report business as usual. And many architects who specialize in high-end homes say they are as busy as ever.
But the picture is much different in states like Nevada, Florida and Arizona, building hotbeds during the housing boom that have since gone bust. The same is true in Midwestern states such as Michigan and Ohio, particularly hard hit by foreclosures and subprime-mortgage defaults. In these areas, builders, contractors and landscapers say they're watching their backlog of work shrink to a few weeks from months, as new projects dry up.
Amid the flurry of competitive pricing from hungry builders comes a warning for homeowners: Prices that seem too good to be true very well might be. "If somebody's low-balling it, they're probably cutting out something that's important and you need to know what it is," says Deborah Pierce, an architect in Newton, Mass.
This spring, Nicki Tragesser, 54, of Atwater, Calif., started building a 635-square-foot, two-story addition for her ranch house. She had called 10 contractors and chosen the one who gave the cheapest estimate after being impressed by a house he'd just finished.
"I felt flabbergasted he was only going to charge me $69,000 for what I wanted," Ms. Tragesser says. Only after she signed a contract did she learn that she would have to purchase an air-conditioning unit herself and pay an electrician separately to do the wiring. And that was just the beginning. Four months after construction should have wrapped up, her cement floors are cracking, the flooring upstairs is uneven and doors hang lopsided on their hinges. The contractor has quit and Ms. Tragesser spent an extra $12,000 trying to correct his work. The contractor didn't return a call seeking comment.
But others have used their newfound bargaining edge to their advantage. Amy and Bob Phillips of Tucson, Ariz., began work on a four-bedroom, Adobe-style house in February. With newly lower pricing on a variety of items, including stucco, wood and labor, the Phillips were able to afford upgrades such as solid wood doors, glass doorknobs and steel garage doors on their $800,000 budget.
While their builder did most of the bargaining on materials for the house, the couple bid out a backyard pool themselves. By pressuring contractors to lower their bids, the Phillipses have knocked $8,000 off the cost. "We're definitely playing people off each other, and they're definitely dropping their prices," says Mrs. Phillips, 44, a convention planner.
 Load-Date: November 24, 2007

 

End of Document
