

The curious breed of the veep: One duel, two shootings and a warm bucket
The Associated Press
February 15, 2006 Wednesday 8:06 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 787 words
Byline: By ERIN McCLAM, AP National Writer
Body




Late in the 1960 campaign, a reporter asked outgoing President Dwight Eisenhower to name an important contribution Vice President Richard Nixon, who was running to succeed him, had made to his administration.
"If you give me a week," Eisenhower replied, "I might think of one."
The 46 men who have served as the nation's second-in-command form a curious lineage made only more bizarre by Vice President Dick Cheney's accidental shooting of a hunting companion on a Texas ranch.
Sure, they cast tie-breaking votes in the Senate. And they stand a moment away from assuming the most powerful job in the free world.
But vice presidents also have wound up often on the business end of Washington one-liners deriding their job as worthless. And some of the best cracks have been hurled by the very men who held the job, or were offered it.
Taken together, they make up a kind of vice-presidential open-mike night:
John Nance Garner, who served two terms as veep under Franklin D. Roosevelt, once characterized the job as "not worth a bucket of warm spit" alternately quoted with another body fluid.
Daniel Webster, an orator and U.S. senator, passed up the nomination for the No. 2 slot on the Whig Party ticket in 1848. The punch line: "I do not propose to be buried until I am really dead."
Dan Quayle, while vice president, faced endless mockery for adding an "e" to "potato."
But pity the veep: Even the most critical task of the No. 2 puts him in an awkward spot, noted Stephen Hess, professor of media and public affairs at George Washington University and a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.
"The president looks across the cabinet table at the vice president and has to realize, `The only reason he's there is in case I die," Hess said.
None of which is to make light of the responsibilities of the post. Vice presidents have been part of some of the most important moments in American history.
Think of the black-and-white photo of a somber Lyndon B. Johnson, taking the oath of office aboard a plane in 1963, a shaken Jacqueline Kennedy to his left. Think of Cheney himself, bunker-bound and working the phones on Sept. 11, 2001.
And think of the most famous duel in American history: The shooting of Alexander Hamilton by a pistol-wielding Aaron Burr, vice president to Thomas Jefferson, on the New Jersey banks of the Hudson River in 1804. Hamilton died the next day.
Burr and Hamilton had a long-standing political rivalry, and Hamilton made no secret of his distrust for Burr when Burr, who had narrowly missed beating Jefferson, ran for governor of New York in early 1804.
When Burr got wind of a newspaper article that reported Hamilton had a "despicable opinion" of him, he challenged Hamilton to a duel near Weehawken, N.J. and won, firing a .54-caliber pistol.
Hamilton, from his deathbed, forgave Burr, who was indicted on murder charges but never brought to trial.
The duel remains in some ways a just subject to some members of the Aaron Burr Association, who believe Burr who himself was unhappy as vice president because he disagreed with Jefferson about slavery hasn't gotten a fair shake from history.
"Hamilton is thought to be the victim and the hero, while Burr is found to be a foe," said Peter Tavino, a civil engineer who has published articles for the group. "And we don't believe it. "Most people are ignorant and just like to paint people as guilty or someone that we should hate."
He said the Cheney shooting has spurred discussion within his group but quickly brought the conversation back to defending its hero.
"Cheney's was clearly an accident," Tavino said. "Burr's was a matter of Hamilton drawing him into the duel and Hamilton bringing hair-trigger pistols for a slight advantage."
Cheney's errant shots, which landed 78-year-old attorney Harry Whittington in intensive care, almost instantly seemed to launch a thousand late-night groaners. (More than one wisecracker dubbed Cheney "No. 2 with a bullet.")
There were some calls by bloggers Tuesday to tone down the jokes while Whittington recovered, but they were seemed drowned out by the Cheney-shooting jokes that continued to swamp inboxes.
Which, for a sitting vice president, may just be par for the course.
Even the Burr-Hamilton duel eventually found its way into the pantheon of veep humor.
It happened in 1993, when the milk industry launched the first of its "Got Milk?" TV spots. Featured was a history buff who stuffs a peanut-butter sandwich into his mouth, then is randomly called by a radio DJ offering $10,000 for knowing who shot Hamilton.
The man realizes, to his terror, that he has run out of milk.
Which is why, if you ask a friend today who shot Alexander Hamilton, you have even odds of hearing "Aaaaawon Buuuhhh" as the answer.
 Load-Date: February 16, 2006

 

End of Document
