

Update: The ABCs of dealing with the AMT
The Associated Press
April 18, 2007 Wednesday 2:42 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1367 words
Byline: By TOM HERMAN, The Wall Street Journal
Body




Ouch.
As of this week's filing deadline, some four million people wound up owing more in taxes sometimes several thousand dollars more for 2006 than they would have otherwise, thanks to the federal alternative minimum tax.
Among them: Alex Hopwood, 38, a vice president of finance at American Express in New York, who had to fork over an extra $5,000 under the AMT, a parallel tax system that forces many people to figure their taxes twice and pay the higher amount. Last year, Mr. Hopwood paid an extra $500; but this year, after exercising some stock options, he says, "it really stung me."
The AMT originally was designed to hit very wealthy people. But if Congress does nothing this year, the number of households hit by the AMT will soar to about 25 million, according to the latest Treasury Department estimates, affecting many families with five-figure incomes.
"I believe I make a good living, but I thought this was something that only affected the higher-higher income people," says Stephen Payne, a certified public accountant who lives in Longmeadow, Mass., and says his family's adjusted gross income last year was about $106,000. "It seems unfair." Mr. Payne says he paid about $500 in additional tax for 2006 thanks to the AMT.
While there isn't much people can do about their 2006 tax bills, some advisers are already helping clients devise strategies to avoid the tax for 2007, or at least reduce the pain. Some suggestions:
For starters, take a fresh look at your holdings of state and local bonds as well as your portfolio of municipal-bond mutual funds. Some types of munis, known as private-activity bonds, typically pay interest that is taxable under the AMT. That can greatly reduce their attractiveness to taxpayers affected by the AMT. A spokeswoman for the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, a trade group, estimates there are about $216.4 billion of private-activity bonds outstanding, or nearly 9 percent of the overall muni-bond market.
Some fund companies try to help investors steer clear of the AMT by offering what are known as AMT-free funds. These funds generally avoid private-activity bonds. Among the fund groups offering AMT-free funds are Fidelity Investments, OppenheimerFunds and T. Rowe Price Group Inc. Since AMT-free funds aren't always clearly labeled, investors need to read the prospectus carefully or contact the fund company to determine a fund's possible AMT exposure. Conversely, if you aren't subject to the AMT, consider buying AMT bonds and pocket the extra yield.
Many popular deductions available under the regular system such as state and local taxes, the standard deduction and personal exemptions aren't allowed under the AMT. The origins of the tax date back to 1969, when Congress learned that a small number of high-income people had managed to avoid paying any federal income tax through the legitimate use of deductions, credits and other items. In response, lawmakers approved an "add-on minimum tax," which was replaced many years later by the AMT. Yet the new tax wasn't indexed for inflation which helps explain why it keeps ensnaring more people.
As recently as 2001, just 1.3 million taxpayers paid the AMT; in 1996, the number was around 700,000, says Len Burman, director of the Tax Policy Center, a joint venture of the Urban Institute and the Brookings Institution in Washington.
Suppose you're pretty sure you'll be caught by the AMT for 2007 but probably not for 2008, because your tax situation will change significantly. You might be planning to move from a high-tax area to a low-tax one, for example. In that case, don't prepay state and local taxes late this year that are due early next year. Instead, wait until 2008 to pay those taxes. Also, if you get hefty bills for tax-preparation fees or investment advice late this year, see if you can defer paying them until early next year.
If you're thinking of timing your income in order to avoid the AMT, though, see a tax pro. This could be a very complicated strategy, especially in view of the uncertainty about what Congress will do.
Among those most likely to be affected by the AMT this tax season were people with income between $200,000 and $500,000 and who live in high-tax areas, such as New York City; Washington, D.C.; California; Connecticut; and New Jersey, says Mr. Burman of the Tax Policy Center. Mr. Hopwood, the American Express executive who works in Manhattan but lives in Fair Lawn, N.J., took a big hit when he realized he could no longer deduct his state and local taxes. "I'm kind of being punished for working in a high-tax state," he says.
People with large families also may be affected because they lose personal exemptions.
For 2007, if Congress does nothing, more than 70 percent of filers with income between $100,000 and $200,000 will be subject to the AMT, says Mr. Burman. In addition, more than one-third of those with income between $75,000 and $100,000 will be caught in the AMT's web.
Investors hit by the AMT can also wind up paying significantly higher tax rates on capital gains and dividends than they expected. For long-term gains on stocks and other securities, the top capital-gains rate officially is 15 percent. So is the top rate on most types of dividends. But for investors in the AMT, the top effective rate on long-term capital gains and dividends can be 21.5 percent or 22 percent, says Greg Leiserson, a research assistant at the Urban Institute and Tax Policy Center.
Nobody knows what, if anything, Congress will do about the AMT this year. One possibility is that Congress will overhaul the law, but that seems unlikely, in view of the political bickering in Washington. A better bet is that Congress will enact another temporary fix, such as a one- or two-year "patch," that leaves the number of people caught by the AMT close to its current level.
Despite the AMT's rapid expansion, it still hasn't completely eliminated the problem that led to its birth. For 2003, of the 2.5 million income-tax returns with adjusted gross income of $200,000 or more, 2,416 reported a world-wide income-tax liability of zero, according to the IRS.
Neither President Bush nor Vice President Dick Cheney, whose tax returns were released recently, had to worry about the AMT for 2006. That's because they owed more under the regular system, where the top federal rate is 35 percent. President and Mrs. Bush filed jointly and reported adjusted gross income of $765,801. Their taxable income totaled $642,905, and they paid $186,378 in federal tax.
MANY PEOPLE get more time to file because of the big Northeast storm.
The IRS said taxpayers affected by the storm will have an additional 48 hours until the end of Thursday to file. This extension applies to federal individual income-tax returns for 2006 filed either electronically or on paper. It also applies to requests for six-month filing extensions and to tax-year 2006 income tax balance-due payments. For more details, including IRS answers to frequently asked questions about the subject, see the IRS Web site (http://www.irs.gov) and click on "Newsroom."
Caution: The IRS said the additional 48-hour filing and payment relief doesn't apply to estimated tax payments for individuals and businesses.
Which states are covered by the additional time? The IRS said yesterday it had decided not to provide a list of states "because of the widespread nature of the storm and transportation issues that could affect people located outside the Northeastern corridor."
Check with your state tax agency on tax filing deadlines.
BEWARE of a new tax scam, the IRS warns.
Scam artists are trying to lure taxpayers into disclosing sensitive information on a site falsely claiming to be a member of the "Free File Alliance." The Alliance is a partnership between the IRS and 19 tax-software companies that offer free online federal tax-preparation services and electronic filing to about 95 million taxpayers.
The IRS says the only way to access the genuine Free File program is through its Web site.
BRIEFS: The IRS gave six-month extensions to people affected by the Virginia Tech shooting. This relief also applies to victims' families, emergency responders and university students and employees.
 Load-Date: April 19, 2007

 

End of Document
