

What's the beef? Making the grade at meat judging
The Associated Press
March 12, 2008 Wednesday 3:14 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1338 words
Byline: By JUSTIN SCHECK, The Wall Street Journal
Body




GREELEY, Colo. It was cold, at 38 degrees, and noisy enough to require earplugs when Jace Hollenbeck approached the bloody competition floor. Tired from a week of 12-hour practices, he awaited the opening whistle with trepidation.
When the whistle blew, Mr. Hollenbeck says, he steadied himself for competition by remembering his coach's words of the night before: "We didn't come here to lose."
Then something happened that could help clinch the victory: He noticed the hardbone.
Mr. Hollenbeck, 20 years old, is a member of the South Dakota State University meat-judging team. Like the school's Jackrabbits football squad, SDSU meat judges hold long practices, wear team jackets and travel great distances to compete. Their playing field is a cavernous meat locker, and their greatest challenge is telling whether a beef carcass is choice or prime.
Intercollegiate meat judging has been a serious business since it started 82 years ago. About 40 colleges will compete in six sanctioned competitions this year, culminating in the international championship in Dakota City, Neb., in November. At contests, students spend most of a day staring at whole and dismembered carcasses. They score meat quality, leanness and butchering technique in detail; then, meat experts grade their work.
There's more at stake than the trophies that go to winners in "lamb judging" and "total beef." As in football, the best competitors earn All-American honors and the notice of pro scouts in this case, meat-industry professionals. Intercollegiate judging is the prime training ground for U.S. meat companies, which produced $71 billion worth of beef alone in 2006, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
The Agriculture Department hires graduates to grade meat in jobs with starting salaries of less than $30,000 but that are rich in benefits, including college-tuition refunds. Industry jobs pay better, starting at $35,000 to $40,000 a year and putting students on a track to make six-figure salaries. "Ultimately, we would like them to be a plant manager or in operations at a corporate level," said Ruben Flores, the community-relations manager for Swift & Co., which sponsors meat-judging contests.
Coaches drive their teams hard, using long practices to teach students to know when a pig has too much back fat or if a T-bone is cut poorly.
Bringing those lessons to bear in a competitive atmosphere is stressful. At this season's first competition, the National Western held at the Swift beef plant here in January, Mr. Hollenbeck was one of about 200 students bundled in parkas, white coats and hard hats decorated in team colors.
Under the fluorescent lights and gale-force cooling system of a meat locker that holds 8,000 beef carcasses, they waited in a line for officials to direct small groups of students from one set of meats to the next.
In front of a quartet of skinned lambs hung by their hocks, contestants compared carcasses in profile. Then they drew near to gauge the udder fat. At tables of hams, briskets and bacon, they knelt on the floor to see whether cuts were sliced at the correct angle. A sloppily cut roast got looks of consternation from successive waves of competitors.
As the contest wore on, students sweated despite the cold, and a member of Texas's Clarendon College team collapsed. She was wearing her hard hat and was not seriously injured by the fall.
It was the beef carcasses where many stumbled. On the periphery of the competition area, where a cleared section of the locker was bounded by a wall of hanging meat, judges graded 15 sides of beef. Officials, mostly former judges themselves, kept watch, making sure contestants didn't get away with measuring ribeyes the round piece of meat between spine and rib with their hands. They are supposed to eyeball it. Out of competitors' earshot, they whispered that the beef group was difficult since it contained older cattle and carcasses from dairy breeds.
Joe Barksdale, a USDA grader from Bovina, Texas, observing the contest, said experience will teach students to tell a skinny dairy breed from a meatier beef carcass in seconds. Mr. Barksdale critiques 2,000 carcasses daily, and he says he can do it at a glance. "You can look at that and just say, 'He's not a beef,'" he said.
Mr. Hollenbeck, from the South Dakota State team, said it didn't take long to see that the rib tips of one carcass had turned from cartilage to bone indicating the animal was at least 4 years old, a "hardbone" in meat-locker parlance. But, Mr. Hollenbeck said, he paced indecisively for several minutes. A hardbone is a rare sight in a meat locker, and a wrong answer could kill his team's beef scores. "I probably doubled back on it three or four times," he said. "But I just stuck with my initial reaction." Meat team coaches say that decisiveness is a key to meat-judging success.
Paden Daniels was recruited by a four-year college after winning junior college tournaments near his hometown of Athol, Kan. His scholarships exceed $8,000 from Texas Tech University's $2 million meat-judging endowment. Mr. Daniels said high expectations and 4 a.m. weekend practices create stress. "This is the big leagues for meat judging," he said.
Loni Woolley, a high-school senior in Cleburne, Texas, got a scholarship, too, that helped her pick Tech over Texas A&M. "I plan on judging on the wool, meats, and livestock judging teams and probably the meat science quiz bowl team as well," she said.
Most teams don't have Texas Tech's riches. At Tarleton State University in Stephenville, Texas, the meats team vies with athletic programs for funds; members cure, smoke and sell hams to raise cash. Other teams sell beef snacks. Much of the money goes to precompetition travel.
College coaches say the key to success is time in meat lockers like the one adjoining the classroom Randy Harp teaches in at Tarleton. A ceiling rail lets Dr. Harp, a Tarleton professor and coach, move carcasses from the locker to his blackboard. Dr. Harp competed as a student at Oklahoma State University and says meat judging develops analytical skills, along with lasting bonds. "I still feel like I can call up any of my team members 30 years later," he says. In his meat science classes, Dr. Harp teaches students the anatomy of farm animals and how aspects of meat such as muscle color and the amount of fat impact taste.
Two days before the National Western, a half-dozen teams crowded Colorado State University to practice.
University of Wyoming Assistant Coach Lander Nicodemus said his team had spent all week in meat lockers, and members were frustrated with his criticism and their own uneven performance. Michael Fernandez struggled with pork loins. "Yesterday," he said, "they all looked similar."
A Kansas team from Fort Scott Community College, was similarly downtrodden. One member, fighting the flu, returned to Kansas the day before the contest. "We've got to push them real hard," Coach Ryan Edgecomb said. "And they just wear out."
No team faced more pressure than the Colorado State Rams. They won the 2007 national championship, and Coach Dale Woerner had high expectations when this season began.
Colorado State team members said they felt prepared, but they encountered unexpected challenges at the National Western. Several missed defects in a beef roast and didn't identify an obese lamb.
"It doesn't feel good when you let your team down," one team member told Mr. Woerner tearfully after the competition.
"Meat judging is going to be the best thing in the world for you," he replied. "It's going to change that. You're not going to be so anal or uptight."
When results were announced the next day, Colorado State finished second. "The most important thing is winning the national championship," Mr. Woerner told the team. "It's just for fun until then."
Mr. Hollenbeck didn't need any consolation. He won the individual title, largely on the risky hardbone call, propelling his team into first place. On the ride home, he said, "it felt really great to represent South Dakota State that way."
 Load-Date: March 13, 2008

 

End of Document
