

'He was white as a ghost' - the frantic minutes following the Florida shark attack
July 12, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 999 words
Byline: By BILL KACZOR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PENSACOLA, Fla.
Body




The girl's screams pierced the tranquil sound of the waves rolling ashore: "My brother! My brother! … Can you please call 911? We need help! My little brother has lost his arm and his leg!"
Down the beach, 8-year-old Jessie Arbogast lay on the sugar-white sand, his body nearly drained of blood. Nearby was a twitching 7-foot shark, hauled ashore barehanded by Jessie's uncle and a beachgoer. In its gullet was Jessie's right arm.
Less than an hour later, the little boy was in surgery, precious blood flowing back into his veins as surgeons began reattaching the arm that had been pulled out of the dead shark.
On Thursday, the Ocean Springs, Miss., boy remained in a coma-like state at Sacred Heart Children's Hospital, where doctors said he was showing slow neurological progress, wiggling his toes when asked and spontaneously opening his eyes. He was breathing on his own, and doctors said his arm is healing well.
The attack at the Gulf Islands National Seashore last Friday and Jessie's struggle for survival have enthralled and horrified many around the nation, stirring a new fascination with sharks perhaps unseen since "Jaws" hit theaters in 1975.
A sequel, "Jaws II," was filmed on another section of the same barrier island where Jessie was attacked at dusk - prime feeding time for sharks.
There was no pay phone nearby when Jessie's older sister, Madelynn, screamed for help. A concession stand at the beach was closed and lifeguards had left for the night. The first 911 call, from a cell phone, came at 7:51 p.m.
"Someone just got bit by a shark and they said they need an ambulance," the dispatcher was told.
Moments later, dispatchers took a call from Jessie's uncle, Vance Flosenzier of Mobile, Ala. He said his nephew had lost his arm and right leg. It turned out the leg was still attached, but a large chunk of thigh muscle was missing.
The uncle calmly reported Jessie's wounds had been tied off to stop the bleeding and that his wife, Diana, and a man were performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
"He's lost a lot of blood," Flosenzier said. "We need a life helicopter out here or something like that."
Dan Dillon was fishing with his grandson several hundred feet away and heard the girl's screams. He recalled his first sight of the shark.
"I said, 'My God, that dorsal fin right in the center of the thing was standing up two feet,"' he said. "What the heck kind of guy is that who could get that big thing out of the water?"
Then he saw Flosenzier, who is maybe 6-foot-3. In his late 30s, he competes in marathons and triathlons. Flosenzier and other family members have declined all interview requests.
"The guy was really strapping," Dillon said. "He was very broad-shouldered and he could wrestle a gorilla, it looked like to me, and give him a good run."
Eight minutes after the first 911 call, Dr. Greg Smith was called from Baptist Hospital's emergency room and told to report to a helicopter on the roof. It took seven minutes fighting a headwind for the helicopter to get across Pensacola Bay to Santa Rosa Island. Smith saw people and the shark on the beach as the helicopter circled to land.
"The shark stood out starkly against the white sand and was an impressive sight," Smith said.
He and paramedic Chris Warnock ran to the boy. The stump of his right arm, bitten off about four inches below the shoulder, was tied with what appeared to be a T-shirt, and his leg was wrapped with a towel. About an inch of bone was sticking out of the stump.
Jessie's aunt, who had recently taken a CPR course, was blowing into the child's mouth while his uncle and another man did chest compressions.
"He was white as a ghost, a paleness that comes only from blood loss," Smith said. "I was not optimistic."
Jessie had no pulse. He was clinically dead.
The doctor and paramedic decided on a "scoop and run," or doing nothing at the scene so he could get to the hospital immediately. With the uncle and bystander helping, they carried Jessie in their arms to the chopper.
"As we were closing the door to the helicopter we asked about the arm," Smith said. "At that point no one knew where it was."
The helicopter had been on the ground six minutes. Smith did chest compressions and delivered cardiac medication into Jessie's lungs through a breathing tube. With the wind now at his tail, pilot Bill Devorak flew back in only two minutes.
At the beach, National Park Service Ranger Jared Klein fired four bullets into the head of the writhing bull shark. Klein then used his metal police baton to pry open its jaws.
Pensacola Beach volunteer firefighter Tony Thomas pulled out the arm with medical tongs. It was wrapped in plastic, placed in a cooler and whisked to the hospital in an ambulance.
In the emergency room, Jessie was given about three pints of blood - half the amount an 80-pound child has. Some 30 minutes after he was scooped from the beach, Jessie's heart was beating again. And by then, the arm had arrived.
Dr. Jack Tyson, a general surgeon, and Dr. Juliet De Campos, an orthopedic surgeon, had just finished five hours of surgery on another child who had been crushed by a cement truck. They were joined by Dr. Ian Rogers, a plastic surgeon.
They had to cut away the mauled tissue and shorten the arm even further to make room for a plate that would hold it in place. The grueling surgery took 11 hours.
It will take months to know how well Jessie will be able to use the arm. It is certain he will walk with a limp.
Brain damage has been the biggest concern.
On Wednesday, De Campos moved Jessie's reattached arm to try to make him more comfortable, and the boy moved it back.
At Langdon Beach, people were fishing and swimming Thursday. Children were playing in the sand and wading in the surf. Two boys ran down the beach flying a shark kite. All appeared tranquil again, though everyone knows what happened last week. And they know about the sharks.
"We know they're out there," said Rena Muir, who had brought her children to the beach. "We've seen them before. We use caution."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos FLMF101-104
 Load-Date: July 13, 2001

 

End of Document
