

'The great exception' from the start, state inspires pride and puzzlement
The Associated Press
August 20, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1447 words
Byline: By PAULINE ARRILLAGA, AP National Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Yes, it IS different here. Always has been.
Author Carey McWilliams knew that. Writing of his beloved home, he said: "California is no ordinary state; it is an anomaly, a freak, the great exception among the American states."
That was back in 1949. Now, a half-century later, the nation is witnessing a spectacle so exceptional even those who live in the "great exception" aren't sure whether to boast or blush.
The gubernatorial recall has people wondering whether California finally has gone off the deep end - and right into the Pacific.
There's the bizarre cast of candidates, the Keno-style lottery drawing to determine who goes where on the ballot-turned-playbill and, yes, even a game show. ("Who Wants to Be Governor of California? The Debating Game," coming to cable in October.)
"I've defended California against people who've said it was weird, but this thing is over the top even for me," said state librarian Kevin Starr, a fourth-generation San Franciscan and appointee of recall target Gov. Gray Davis. "This is some kind of collective nervous breakdown that California's going through. This confirms everybody's worst suspicion about California."
And it shows how different perceptions of the state can be.
A luggage store manager in New York City: "California is a political circus. This is a disgrace."
A San Diego tech company owner: "I think it's great! It's really cool to see politics play itself out."
A medical student in Nashville: "It seems like everyone and their grandmother is in the recall election."
A state employee in Sacramento: "We're rebels without a cause."
A secretary in Chantilly, Va.: "It's just one more reason you couldn't pay me to live in California."
Even some Westerners see the recall as just another "la-la land" oddity. "Nothing surprises me (with California)," Oregon accountant JaRee Spatz said.
"Only in California," many say - and, if you look to history, the maxim often rings true.
Since California's birth, it has been seen as a state that's physically, culturally and politically out-there - an egotistical radical making waves regardless of where they crash.
Today, it's a land of citrus and smog; computer whizzes and drag queens; surfer dudes and scientologists; plastic surgery and oxygen therapy; suburban sprawl and environmental activism.
It is the stuff of stereotypes both real and imagined, fed to the world from Hollywood: the tony Beverly Hills bungalows of "90210;" the buxom babes of "Baywatch;" the convertible-driving attorneys of "L.A. Law;" the fame-crazed starlets of "American Idol."
It is the peculiar parade of individualism on the Venice boardwalk, where Clint Joseph Shelby peddles photographs of reggae singers next to a self-proclaimed Ivy League graduate offering handwriting analysis.
"California's the bomb!" Shelby says of his birthplace.
But it's also the pioneering spirit of Gold Country, where modern-day fortune-seeker Elly deBoer still pans for riches.
"Everybody that comes from back East is gray," she says. "We've got color."
Tim Hodson, executive director of the Center for California Studies at California State University in Sacramento, summarizes a common attitude here: "We're not out of step, we're just one step ahead."
"California is different, and California takes great, perverse pride in this," Hodson said. "We're probably somewhat embarrassed that Larry Flynt has announced for governor, but on the other hand somewhat proud that we're having something no one else has had since 1921.
"The recall represents that inherently unstable if-we-don't-like-the-rules-let's-change-'em streak in California. We worship change, whether it's necessary or not."
Much of this stems from the way California came into being, born in a boom unlike anything the world had seen. The Gold Rush amassed a motley lot from the far reaches of the globe - people unafraid of taking chances, willing to fail and determined to try again until they got it right.
While most states grew slowly, California "sprang at once to full stature," as historian Joseph Ellison put it. There was no prototype like it, and so Californians did things their way. Mining laws, technology and equipment, a monetary system - all were unique to this unique place.
"That spirit of innovation, that drive that teaches us how to take something that doesn't exist and create it through trial and error - it all goes back to the Gold Rush," said Randy Everhart, a Sacramento native who has worked 15 years at California's Marshall Gold Discovery State Historic Park. "That rambunctious, freedom of spirit has always pervaded California."
California politics, as well.
When the union couldn't decide whether to admit California as a state because it would upset the balance of free and slave states, California took matters into its own hands. It adopted a constitution and appealed for direct admission, skipping the territorial phase required elsewhere in the West. Craving a share of the Gold Rush wealth, Congress capitulated.
This self-reliant spirit later provoked a secessionist movement during the Civil War. Rather than choose sides with the North or South, California politicians advocated creating a "Pacific Republic" with other Western territories that Gov. John B. Weller predicted "may in the end prove the greatest of all."
In 1911, it helped give rise to something else: Initiative, referendum and recall. Ushered in during the administration of Gov. Hiram Johnson, the package of laws was part of a Progressive movement sweeping westward to counter special interests and political corruption. In California, voters wanted a way to bypass or oust politicians who'd come under the influence of railroad magnates.
But as the endeavor headed West, it also grew more radical. For example, California required fewer signatures to recall a statewide politician, provided more time to gather signatures for a recall petition and didn't require any allegations of specific wrongdoing.
In modern times, for better or worse, California became a leader in the initiative process. Voters have cut property taxes, raised tobacco taxes, adopted a state lottery, enacted term limits and eliminated affirmative action programs, to name a few of the approximately 100 reforms put in place.
John Ellwood, a public policy professor at the University of California, Berkeley, believes Californians see all of this as "us against entrenched politicians" and said the recall election reflects that attitude.
Still, he and others say there's more at work than just a California anomaly.
"The national context is this growing sense of if you don't win, it's OK to change the rules or work around the rules so you can still win," says Hodson, of Cal State.
He points to the redistricting fiasco this year in Texas, where Republicans, in control of the state House for the first time since Reconstruction, sought to redraw voting lines set by a federal court two years ago. Normally, redistricting is done every 10 years. Democratic legislators revolted, many leaving the state.
Hodson and Ellwood insist the recall of Davis, a Democrat who defeated Republican Bill Simon in November, would have stalled but for the financing of U.S. Rep. Darrell Issa, a fellow Republican.
It took off with voters because of another dilemma hardly restricted to California: The state's burgeoning economic woes, from a $38 billion budget deficit to the energy crisis that brought soaring gas prices and rolling blackouts.
For the first time since the government started keeping track in 1940, the Census Bureau found that more people left California in the latter half of the 1990s than moved here.
The Golden State is tarnished, and its people are itching to polish it up.
Perhaps that's why even Californians who oppose the recall - whose eyes roll at the carnival it has become - can relate to the sentiment behind it.
"I don't agree with the recall, but at least it's not a fraud. The people of California are still in control of their own destiny," said Billy Tsangares, a Hollywood T-shirt maker.
Tsangares should know. He's one of the 135 people who made it on the ballot.
Before this, he was best-known as creator of the "Free Winona" shirt that became popular after actress Winona Ryder was arrested for shoplifting. Tsangares does have political experience: He ran (unsuccessfully) for the Hollywood City Council to push Tinseltown's secession from Los Angeles.
His platform? A Democrat-turned-Republican, Tsangares plopped down the $3,500 filing fee and gathered up the necessary 65 signatures to become a candidate in the recall so he could campaign against the recall.
If that doesn't work he's already heading up an effort to recall Schwarzenegger, just in case.
Only in California.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY461-463 and CALOS464 of Aug. 20
 Load-Date: August 21, 2003

 

End of Document
