

'Trial of the century' involved the Bible and the evolution of mankind
The Associated Press
June 20, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 702 words
Byline: By RICHARD N. OSTLING, AP Religion Writer
Body




Forget Michael Jackson, O.J. and the Lindbergh kidnapping. The "trial of the century" occurred 80 years ago this July in broiling Dayton, Tenn. It was called the "Monkey Trial."
Overflow crowds outside the courthouse followed the proceedings by loudspeaker. More than 100 reporters filed 165,000 words a day through 22 telegraph operators. A Chicago radio station spent $1,000 a day on a live telephone feed. Souvenir stands mushroomed.
At issue was Tennessee's law forbidding schools "to teach any theory that denies the story of the Divine Creation of man as taught in the Bible, and to teach instead that man has descended from a lower order of animals."
The defendant, who was eventually convicted, was football coach John T. Scopes. He only substituted as a biology teacher and possibly never taught evolution, but agreed to be prosecuted as a publicity scheme to boost Dayton's sagging economy.
Many people misunderstand this trial, due to highly fictionalized accounts in the 1955 play "Inherit the Wind" and the 1960 movie version. Those interested in what actually happened should rely on the Pulitzer Prize-winning history "Summer for the Gods" (1997) by Edward J. Larson, available in paperback.
The latest account is "Monkey Business: The True Story of the Scopes Trial" (Broadman & Holman) by biblical conservatives Marvin Olasky and John Perry. They update the issue by depicting recent efforts, not to bar Darwinism but to have schools teach quasi-religious "intelligent design" theories alongside evolution.
An important and related new book is "The Evolution-Creation Struggle" (Harvard University Press) by Florida State University philosophy professor Michael Ruse. The author has debated against creationists many times but sympathizes with their complaint: Scholars have often moved beyond strict science and turned evolution into "evolutionism," a rather intolerant, anti-religious philosophy that competes with religious belief.
The Monkey Trial originated when the young American Civil Liberties Union advertised seeking Tennesseans willing to test the law. It enlisted Clarence Darrow as a defense attorney, though some ACLU insiders considered him a poor choice because he was so corrosively anti-religious (see examples in the forthcoming anthology "Clarence Darrow on Religion, Law and Society" from Ohio University Press).
The prosecution team starred William Jennings Bryan, three-time Democratic nominee for president who had quit as U.S. secretary of state, protesting that President Woodrow Wilson was dragging the nation into World War I.
In terms of current U.S. politics, it's fascinating that in 1925 one of the era's most liberal Democrats championed biblical tradition. Presbyterian Bryan blended three populist beliefs: the truthfulness of biblical history, opposition to "social Darwinian" with its "survival of the fittest" philosophy and insistence on the right of the people and their representatives to determine what schools teach.
"A Civic Biology," the textbook used in Dayton, advocated racism and eugenics. It said humanity's evolutionary ascent produced five races, with "the highest type of all, the Caucasians, represented by the civilized white inhabitants of Europe and America."
Bryan, who died days after the trial, was not a "creationist" as that term has evolved. It now designates strict biblical literalists who say the universe was created only a few thousand years ago and often say this occurred in six 24-hour days.
Darrow famously called Bryan as a witness to discuss biblical history.
Asked if the Earth is only 4,000 years old, Bryan responded, "I think it is much older than that" and said it's unimportant whether people believe in six days or 600 million years.
But did Bryan himself think the Earth was made in six days? "Not six days of 24 hours."
Olasky and Perry emphasize the 1925 press bias against Bible believers. The Baltimore Sun's H.L. Mencken in particular oozed hate and contempt. Many accounts from the time indicate that Bryan held his own. Only in later interpretations did he become a simpleton and the trial a crushing defeat for biblical conservatism.
---
Monkey Trial data: http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/scopes/scopes.htm 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY630
 Load-Date: June 21, 2005

 

End of Document
