

A bank from the suburbs helps transform the industry's look
The Associated Press
October 23, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1044 words
Byline: By GEOFF MULVIHILL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOUNT LAUREL, N.J.
Body




If your bank is open on Sundays or has removed the bulletproof glass teller windows, you might have Commerce Bank to thank.
The Cherry Hill, N.J.-based bank, found only in the Philadelphia area five years ago, is establishing itself up and down the East Coast and has become influential in the banking world.
The bank, led by iconoclastic Burger King franchisee Vernon Hill, has grown fast because of a business strategy that not long ago seemed counterintuitive: opening branches while other banks were paring down locations to concentrate on telephone and online banking. The bank uses convenience and a zealous commitment to customer service to gather as many deposits as possible.
"I think they've done a terrific job in understanding the markets, better than anyone I can think of," said Gary Townsend, a banking analyst with Freidman, Billings, Ramsey & Co. "They understood earlier than most how powerful this retail banking model can be."
The core of Commerce's philosophy - making money mostly by investing deposits rather than by making loans - still bothers some analysts. Industry followers have an uncommonly wide range of opinion how much Commerce's stock is worth; some say it's severely undervalued; some say it's trading for way more than it's worth.
"Vernon would like to be valued as a retail stock when he's really a bank. The debate goes on," said Thomas Monaco, who follows Commerce for Moors and Cabot Capital Markets and believes the bank stock is overpriced.
Hill does not seem worried about that criticism, or the frequent criticism that Commerce uses political donations to get business.
"A lot of people call us the anti-bank bank and the agent of change," Hill said in a telephone interview. "When you're the agent of change, you're always going to get vocal supporters and vocal critics. Today's criticism is: Can they keep it going?"
Hill, whose confidence never wavers in public, says the answer is yes.
It's a popular answer around Commerce, where employee e-mail addresses end in "@yesbank.com."  
While the bank keeps expanding, the last few months have brought a lukewarm financial picture. The company announced in September that it would miss earnings expectations for the third quarter, then announced quarterly profits in October that were even lower than the downgraded expectations. The stock has been trading lately in the $29 range, down from a high of $35.98 in August.
The problem is one that affects other banks, too: Commerce has been paying customers rising interest rates on deposits while still collecting low rates on loans, putting a squeeze on profits. Hill said the problem will resolve itself as the Federal Reserve adjusts rates.
Most of Commerce's stores - the bank doesn't call its branches "banks" - are laid out the same way, full of light and bright red. The hours are long, with either drive-through windows or lobbies open until 8 p.m. during the week.
Commerce has free coin-counting machines and lets its account holders use ATMs - even those at other banks - for free.
If not the originator of those services, Commerce was a pioneer in each of them.
Hill said that in 1973, when his main business was selling Whoppers (he still co-owns 45 Burger Kings in the Philadelphia suburbs), he decided he could start a new bank if it wasn't what he calls a "me too" bank that worked just like the others.
While the earliest branches had a distinct look designed by his wife, Shirley Hill, other parts of the strategy came later.
In 1994, the bank started opening on Sundays. By 1996, it was marketing itself as "America's Most Convenient Bank," a motto that speaks more to Hill's ambitions than to the scope of the company at the time.
Some industry watchers say Commerce's influence is one reason that mega-banks, such as Charlotte, N.C.-based Bank of America Corp., are becoming more customer service-focused.
Hill says he doesn't think of the likes of Bank of America as role models. Instead, he looks to what he calls "power retailers," such as McDonald's Corp., Home Depot Inc. and Starbucks Corp. for inspiration. And none of them expanded through mergers.
"We believe that no great retailer has ever been built by doing deals," he said.
Commerce has been growing the number of branches by about 18 percent per year; a clip Hill has told investors he intends to continue even if it means sacrificing profits in the short-term.
In mid-October, Commerce had 348 locations with plans to have about 375 by year's end. Most are in the New York and Philadelphia areas, though Commerce entered Washington D.C. earlier this year and plans to expand into the Boston area eventually.
Hill said there's enough room for 1,000 Commerce branches is its existing and projected East Coast markets - and he does not intend to stop there.
Commerce is awaiting regulatory approval for a rare acquisition later this year of the seven-branch Bank of Palm Beach County to get a foothold in Florida.
Its main competitor there will be Fort Lauderdale-based BankAtlantic, which calls itself "Florida's Most Convenient Bank." It is determined not to be out-convenienced.
"We're open today in many of our locations til midnight," Chairman and CEO Alan B. Levan said. "If Commerce goes to midnight, we'll be open 24 hours."
Commerce's expansion has not been without some nagging problems. Earlier this year bank executives Glenn Holck and Stephen Umbrell were convicted of approving loans to Philadelphia's city treasurer to get the inside track on city banking business. Both men were sentenced to more than two years in federal prison.
Hill would not comment on the case, other than to say he believes the convictions will be overturned on appeal.
Commerce has tried to distance itself from politics. Last year, it stopped underwriting government bonds. Hill said other businesses make more money than the underwriting did, anyway.
And amid reports that the federal government was looking into the political giving by the bank, Commerce's political action committee stopped making contributions in 2003 - a step its competitors have not taken. The bank has not been charged with wrongdoing regarding its donations.
"Our government deposits are growing at a very rapid rate," Hill said. "It has probably been a plus."
---
On the Net:
http://www.commerceonline.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos of Oct. 21: NY858-59
 Load-Date: October 24, 2005

 

End of Document
