

A look at the second round of the NCAA tournament
The Associated Press
March 20, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 752 words
Byline: By JIM O'CONNELL, AP Basketball Writer
Body




Villanova and West Virginia saved the Big East from an otherwise rough weekend.
The conference that boasted one-fifth of the final Top 25 has just two of its six teams still alive in the NCAA tournament.
The most stunning of the teams eliminated was second-seeded Connecticut, the defending national champion, which lost 65-62 to No. 10 North Carolina State on Sunday.
The Huskies, who shared the regular-season championship with Boston College, didn't look good in the Big East last week and never looked like the team that closed the regular season winning nine of 10 games.
"We ran out of bullets and energy," Connecticut coach Jim Calhoun said, referring to a season in which the Huskies faced a number of off-the-court issues including two players facing life-threatening illnesses. "That's not an excuse, it's a fact of nature."
The other time Connecticut defended a national title it also lost in the second round, to Tennessee in 2000. The last national champion to lose in the first round was UCLA when the Bruins lost to Princeton in 1996.
What made the loss to North Carolina State even more stunning was that the Huskies under Calhoun were 27-0 against teams seeded sixth through 16.
Boston College and Syracuse, both No. 4 seeds, also lost to double-digit seeds. The Eagles lost to No. 12 Wisconsin-Milwaukee in the second round; the Orange, the conference tournament champions, were knocked out in the first round by No. 13 Vermont.
Pittsburgh, a 9 seed, lost to eighth-seeded Pacific in the first round.
Seventh-seeded West Virginia beat No. 2 Wake Forest 111-105 in double overtime on Saturday night in the most exciting game of the tournament thus far, while fifth-seeded Villanova beat No. 4 Florida in the second round Sunday.
That's two Big East teams left in the round of 16, one less than last year and two off 2003. The conference won it all both those years, Syracuse in 2003 and Connecticut last year.
The Big East will change dramatically next season with five schools coming over from Conference USA and Boston College leaving for the Atlantic Coast Conference.
Calhoun was asked about the league's showing in this tournament.
"The Big East has won three of the last six national championships," he said. "We're not going to win this year. Pittsburgh won't. Syracuse won't."
The moderator at the news conference tried to help him as he slowed down listing the teams, saying "Boston College."
"You said Big East teams," Calhoun said, showing the tough loss didn't dull his sarcastic sense of humor.
---
SOWING SEEDS:@ Six teams seeded sixth or worse reached the round of 16 and although that may sound like a lot, it's right about par for the last eight years. 
Since 1997, at least four teams seeded sixth or below have moved on to the second weekend with an average of 5.6 per season.
The most during that stretch was 2000 when half of the round of 16 were seeded sixth to 16th. The lowest in that period was 2003 when four moved on.
This year's group includes three 6 seeds - Texas Tech, Utah and Wisconsin - one 7 (West Virginia), one 10 (North Carolina State) and one 12 (Wisconsin-Milwaukee).
---
ROUGH REGIONAL:@ No. 1 North Carolina was the only one of the top four seeds in the Syracuse Regional to advance to the round of 16. 
Second-seeded Connecticut lost to North Carolina State in the second round, No. 3 Kansas lost to Bucknell in the first round and fourth-seeded Florida was beaten by Villanova in the second round.
That's seems like good news for North Carolina as the Tar Heels head for the Carrier Dome.
It could be great news.
Last year the Phoenix Regional lost Nos. 1 (Stanford), 3 (North Carolina State) and 4 (Maryland) in the second round.
The No. 2 seed that moved on was Connecticut, which went on to win the national championship.
---
SHOOTING GATORS:@ To say Florida juniors Anthony Roberson and Matt Walsh had a rough NCAA tournament as far as shooting goes would be quite an understatement. 
Both entered the tournament shooting 46 percent from the field. They didn't get to half that number in the Gators' two games this week.
In the first-round win over Ohio University, a game in which the Gators blew a 20-point lead in the second half, the two were a combined 6-for-28. In the second-round loss to Villanova on Sunday they were 5-for-21. That's 11-for-49 (22 percent) in the tournament.
"I knocked down my first 3-pointer and after that took three or four more, and they never did fall for me," Roberson said. "That's all I can say. Shots that usually go down for me didn't go down."
 Load-Date: March 21, 2005

 

End of Document
