

A look at the impact of the Roman Catholic sex abuse scandal on the states
April 26, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1429 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




What follows is a state-by-state summary of the major developments since January in the clergy sex abuse scandal that has battered the Roman Catholic Church in America. The information is based on AP reporters' interviews with Catholic officials across the country and daily reporting on the crisis.
---
ALABAMA
Attorney General Bill Pryor wants legislators to review a state law exempting members of the clergy from a requirement to report suspected child abuse or neglect. While information gathered during confession should remain confidential, Pryor said, officials should be required to report any allegations involving church employees. The Legislature is not expected to take up Pryor's request before next year. Neither of Alabama's two Catholic dioceses report receiving any allegations of clergy sex abuse this year. Church officials in Mobile are making sure all employees have signed a sex abuse policy, which includes a statement that they have never been charged with, or accused of, sexual misconduct.
---
ALASKA
Catholic leaders say no priests have been accused of sexual abuse this year, but in light of the scandals elsewhere the Anchorage Archdiocese is reviewing its sex abuse policy. The Fairbanks Diocese plans to review its policy within a year.
---
ARIZONA
The Diocese of Tucson on Jan. 29 settled 11 civil lawsuits alleging that four diocese priests, two still living, sexually molested children. The diocese agreed to pay an undisclosed sum - estimated in the millions - to 16 plaintiffs. Bishop Manuel D. Moreno and Coadjutor Bishop Gerald F. Kicanas apologized to the victims and their families. Most of the incidents were between 1967 and 1976, with one in 1989. The two priests who are still living have been suspended, with canonical defrocking procedures under way.
Moreno named a review committee in February to recommend revisions of the diocese's sex abuse policies. Its mission now includes all diocesan policies and procedures concerning sexual misconduct.
The Diocese of Phoenix announced a review of its sexual abuse policies and procedures after the arrest of two lay volunteers in youth ministry programs.
---
ARKANSAS
The Diocese of Little Rock's anti-abuse policy was adopted in 1992 and includes a provision that it be reviewed every five years - which puts it up for examination this year. Monsignor Francis I. Malone, the diocese's chancellor for canonical affairs since 1990, said he has never had to use the policy, which will come up at a meeting of a priests' council in the next two months. The statewide diocese has about 100 priests, plus another 60 or so assigned to the state through various religious orders.
---
CALIFORNIA
The church has been rocked by myriad allegations of child abuse by priests. Most go back decades but have been made public by dioceses only since Jan. 1. At least 30 priests around the state have been fired, forced to resign or temporarily suspended amid allegations of sexual abuse or misconduct. At least another four retired or former priests have been charged or are under criminal investigation. The dioceses of Orange, San Bernardino, Oakland, San Francisco and Monterey have acknowledged either reviewing or revising their sex abuse policies.
Among those hardest hit has been the Los Angeles Archdiocese, the nation's largest. The Police Department has taken more than 50 reports of abuse, but Cardinal Roger Mahony will not say how many priests have been removed as a result of investigations. The LAPD said it has been told between six and 12 priests were removed, although archdiocese e-mails leaked to the media have put the number at eight. Mahony himself was cleared of molestation charges after the Fresno police determined a woman's abuse allegations were without merit.
---
COLORADO
State law does not require clergy to report abuse, but the Denver Archdiocese, which has 380,000 parishioners, requires any of its employees, including priests, to report to authorities any case of child abuse or neglect. The policy has been in place since 1991.
The Diocese of Colorado Springs changed its misconduct policy this year to clarify how abuse claims should be reported. However, officials said the revisions have been in the works for years and were not a response to recent scandals.
---
CONNECTICUT
The Bridgeport Diocese has removed three priests from their posts in 2002 as a result of sexual misconduct allegations from years ago. A fourth accused priest requested a leave of absence, and as a result has lost his authorization to perform priestly duties. The diocese is also processing accusations that were recently brought against one priest involving incidents that allegedly occurred in the 1960s. Bridgeport Bishop William E. Lori appointed a sexual misconduct review board April 19, and the diocese has examined the records of all clergy for signs of abuse.
Since Jan. 1, the Archdiocese of Hartford has received seven allegations of sexual abuse that occurred decades ago. Most of the accused priests are deceased, said the Rev. John Gatzak. The claims are being reviewed by the archdiocese.
---
DELAWARE
In the Diocese of Wilmington, which covers Delaware and a portion of eastern Maryland, Bishop Michael Saltarelli met with Attorney General Jane Brady this month to discuss abuse allegations against priests. Saltarelli gave Brady the names of five accused priests and the attorney general's office has received complaints against six others.
Rev. William E. Irwin, 63, was relieved of his duties after telling diocesan officials he had received an anonymous phone call in which the caller accused him of abuse.
Diocesan officials this year have identified 15 documented allegations of abuse by priests since 1952, the last being in 1992. A spokesman said none of the priests is active, and that most have died.
---
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
One priest in the Archdiocese of Washington is on administrative leave because of sexual misconduct claims. Monsignor Russell Dillard was removed from his parish last month after allegations were made about inappropriate relationships with two teen-age girls over a five-year period ending in 1984. Dillard admitted he might have "stepped over the line" with at least one girl, but denied anything sexual happened and likened it to a "father-daughter" relationship. Police say there is nothing they can do because the statute of limitations is long past. At the time he was placed on leave, Dillard was pastor of St. Augustine Church, a parish attended by some of Washington's most affluent and influential residents, including Mayor Anthony A. Williams.
---
FLORIDA
Anthony O'Connell became the highest-ranking church leader brought down by this year's scandals when he resigned as bishop of the Palm Beach Diocese after admitting he abused a teen-age boy in the late 1970s at a Hannibal, Mo., seminary.
O'Connell is the second bishop of Palm Beach to resign over a sex scandal in the last four years. Additionally, one priest resigned and two others were relieved of their duties in Palm Beach because of sexual misconduct allegations dating back years.
In the Tampa area, Bishop Robert N. Lynch of the Diocese of St. Petersburg disclosed sexual harassment allegations brought by his former spokesman. Lynch has denied the allegations. There have been misconduct allegations against three other priests in the Tampa area as well.
---
GEORGIA
The Archdiocese of Atlanta said this month that it had responded to six claims in the past 13 years of priests sexually abusing boys. Most of the incidents dated back to the 1960s and '70s.
The archdiocese has paid more than $500,000 to settle claims, including $31,250 from its own coffers and the balance from insurers, according to court records and an attorney for the archdiocese. Some of the claims were not pursued in the courts because the statute of limitations had expired.
Most of the money went to settle cases involving Anton Mowat and Stanley Idziak, priests who served the Corpus Christi parish in Stone Mountain during the 1980s. Both were removed. Mowat, a visiting priest at the parish, served prison time for molesting four boys.
The Atlanta archdiocese said it has no claims against priests currently serving. The Diocese of Savannah, which represents 80 south Georgia parishes, said it has had no claims against any of its priests.
---
HAWAII
Bishop Francis DiLorenzo of the Catholic Diocese of Honolulu called a standing committee on sexual abuse to meet and review old cases. The committee made up of priests, psychologists, social workers and lawyers has met twice since March and plans to meet again in May.
MORE
 
 Load-Date: April 27, 2002

 

End of Document
