

A look at some of the races across the nation
The Associated Press
November 2, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 915 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body



South Carolina voters toast the minibottle farewell
 
COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) - The minibottle will soon no longer be the only way to get a drink in South Carolina restaurants and bars.
Voters approved a constitutional amendment Tuesday allowing lawmakers to decide how drinks are served, meaning that the Legislature will likely pass a law next year to add larger free-pour bottles while keeping minibottles as an option.
The 1.7-ounce bottles of liquor usually seen only on airliners had become a South Carolina peculiarity. For more than a decade, the state was the only one in the nation to prohibit drinks from being poured from bigger bottles.
The amendment had the support of Mothers Against Drunk Driving and the South Carolina Baptist Convention, which said the tiny bottles make for a more potent libation than the standard 1- to 1.25-ounce cocktail. Gov. Mark Sanford and the South Carolina Hospitality Association also backed a change.
But the coalition ended up getting a fierce fight from the people who stood to lose the most: minibottle distributors. In the end, the argument for cheaper drinks and safer roads won.
 
Florida voters derail bullet train measure they approved in 2000
 
ORLANDO, Fla. (AP) - A bullet train network approved by voters in 2000 was knocked off the tracks as opponents convinced voters this time around that the project was an expensive boondoggle.
Voters had approved a ballot measure two years ago ordering the state to build the high-speed train to connect Tampa and Orlando with Fort Lauderdale and Miami. The first leg, from Orlando to Tampa, was estimated to cost $2.3 billion.
Backers of the repeal collected more than $3.1 million, a vast majority coming from a road builders' political action committee, two theme parks upset that the line would bypass their property, and a deep-pocketed booster of Gov. Jeb Bush and the GOP.
The rail's price tag was put at $25 billion over 30 years. Bush said that if voters were serious about ending gridlock, killing the train would free money better spent on regional transportation.
"It shows that Florida citizens know fiscal responsibility is very important," said state Chief Financial Officer Tom Gallagher, who shepherded the repeal through the petition process.
 
California mayor spends day before election in handcuffs
 
ARVIN, Calif. (AP) - Mayor Juan Olivares was arrested on felony child molestation charges less than 24 hours before voters headed to the polls to decide whether to re-elect him.
Olivares, 42, blamed his arrest on a conspiracy to end his political career, saying the charges were orchestrated by the district attorney and the police department "as a political way to make sure that I am not re-elected."
Olivares was charged with one count of a lewd or lascivious act with a child under 14, three counts of sexual penetration of a child under the age of 14 and one count of sexual battery, Cmdr. Steve Del Tour said. He denied that the timing of the arrest was politically motivated.
The investigation began six weeks ago when a child reportedly confided the alleged incident to a counselor, who reported it to authorities. A second child reportedly came forward with allegations of sexual assault.
Olivares, mayor of this city of 13,000 near Bakersfield, was taken into custody Monday afternoon, Tour said. He was released Monday night after posting $40,000 bail.
 
Eugenics candidate in Tennessee loses his congressional race
 
MEMPHIS, Tenn. (AP) - A Republican congressional candidate who vowed to keep "less favored races" from reproducing was easily beaten Tuesday, but tried to put a good spin on the loss.
James Hart said his campaign in Tennessee's 8th Congressional District gave him a wide audience for his beliefs on eugenics and "biological ethics."
"I never expected to win. I was running to try to promote my ideas," Hart said. "I still cannot believe I got as much publicity as I did. I've been sending my book out since 1990 and nobody paid any attention."
Hart was soundly defeated by Democratic incumbent John Tanner.
"I don't think this fellow represents the mainstream thought in this district, either Democratic or Republican," Tanner said from his headquarters in Union City in the northwest corner of the state.
Hart is a champion of eugenics, the phony science that led to a movement in the early 20th century to sterilize the "unfit." With no opposition in the primary, he won the Republican nomination and became an embarrassment for the state GOP.
 
Maine voters reject a property tax cap, fearful of social service layoffs
 
PORTLAND, Maine (AP) - Voters rejected a property tax cap referendum billed as a necessary dose of "tough love" to bring spending under control. Opponents said it could lead to layoffs of teachers, firefighters and police officers.
Larry Benoit, director of the anti-cap group Citizens United to Protect Our Public Safety, Schools and Communities, said opposition to the referendum swelled once people learned of the possible consequences.
The measure asked voters if they wanted to limit taxes to 1 percent of a property's assessed value. The referendum sparked a statewide debate over tax reform and how to lower Maine's tax burden.
The referendum touched a nerve among Maine residents torn between the desire for lower taxes and the wish to maintain quality schools and services.
"We knew it would be an uphill battle but we felt compelled to help Maine families," said Phil Harriman of Tax Cap Yes!, a group that led the referendum effort and conceded defeat.
 Load-Date: November 3, 2004

 

End of Document
