

A look at the federal commission reviewing the Sept. 11 attacks
The Associated Press
April 2, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 871 words
Byline: By HOPE YEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The federal panel reviewing the Sept. 11 attacks conducted its investigation in relative obscurity for months. Now it finds itself in the spotlight as it interviews top government officials and releases preliminary findings as to what went wrong.
Some questions and answers about the commission, including what it has uncovered and the obstacles it faces:
Q: What is the Sept. 11 commission?
A: Congress created the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States in November 2002 to study the nation's preparedness before the attacks and the response afterward. The panel is supposed to recommend improvements to increase preparedness.
Five Republicans and five Democrats sit on the commission, headed by chairman Thomas Kean, a Republican former governor of New Jersey, and Democrat Lee Hamilton, a former representative from Indiana.
Q: How many public hearings will the commission hold?
A: The commission has held eight public hearings so far, the first six of which examined the history of U.S. aviation safety, the development of al-Qaida and issues of intelligence-gathering and personal liberty. The two other hearings, as well as four scheduled in coming months, have incorporated the commission's initial findings of what went wrong with preparedness and why.
Q: What are some preliminary findings?
A: The commission found several government missteps, including failure to stop several of the 19 hijackers. The men had entered the country without proper documentation or were allowed through airport security after being stopped for suspicious behavior.
The panel also highlighted poor communications among agencies. For example, two of the hijackers were on a government terrorist watch list but were allowed on airplanes because the Federal Aviation Administration and the airlines had not been told.
Policy choices also were blamed. The Clinton and Bush administrations generally pursued diplomacy rather than military strikes to deal with the growing al-Qaida threat, the commission found. The United States also passed up several opportunities to kill Osama bin Laden in the late 1990s because the CIA said it never received a clear directive to do so.
Q: Could the attacks have been prevented?
A: The commission's preliminary reports have generally steered away from placing blame on specific U.S. officials in favor of providing a factual account of the events. Kean says midlevel officials clearly could have prevented the attacks by enforcing immigration law or more carefully checking the hijackers or their bags at airports. As for top officials, "Nobody has clean hands in this one," Kean said.
Q: President Bush and Vice President Cheney will meet privately, together, with the commission and provide testimony, which will not be released publicly. Is that unusual?
A: The full commission will meet with Bush and Cheney in the coming weeks in private session. Former President Clinton and former Vice President Al Gore also will meet for private interviews. Talks are under way over whether details will be made public.
Critics say Bush and Cheney agreed to meet with the panel only because mounting public pressure became too uncomfortable, and details of the interview should be released. The top Democrat in the House, Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi of California, called it baffling and embarrassing that the president won't appear by himself. Kean said the commission is satisfied with the arrangement, however, noting that a sitting president never before has submitted to questioning in person from an independent commission.
Q: Why all the attention on Condoleezza Rice right now?
A: In a new book released last week, former White House counterterror chief Richard Clarke charged that the Bush administration, and national security adviser Rice in particular, ignored or minimized or didn't comprehend warnings he made in early 2001 about a growing al-Qaida threat.
Clarke testified publicly before the commission. Rice initially refused to appear despite repeated requests, citing in part a legal need to protect the privacy of her discussions with Bush. The White House later backtracked under public pressure, and she is to testify Thursday.
Q: Congress recently extended the deadline for the commission to issue its final report. Why?
A: The commission says it has met numerous delays from the beginning, when three of the original commissioners, chairman Henry Kissinger, vice chairman and former Sen. George Mitchell of Maine, and former Sen. Max Cleland of Georgia resigned, citing alleged conflicts of interest or time constraints with their other jobs. They were replaced by Kean, Hamilton, and former Sen. Bob Kerrey of Nebraska.
Later, the panel sparred with New York city officials and the Bush administration over access to documents and witnesses. It has gained the most of its requests on the strength of three subpoenas and the threat of a fourth.
Q: When will the final report be released?
At the request of the commission, Congress extended the deadline by two months to July 26. Kean and Hamilton say the report will be ready for release on that date but acknowledge the actual release may come later depending on how quickly the Bush administration declassifies the report's contents.
 Load-Date: April 3, 2004

 

End of Document
