

A policeman at ground zero reflects: 'This is MY city that's been attacked'; EDITOR'S NOTE: On duty at ground zero in the days after the World Trade Center attacks, New York City police officer Paul Mauro kept
April 22, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2820 words
Byline: By PAUL MAURO, Special to The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




A few nights after the Sept. 11 attacks, a woman on North Moore Street took one look at me in my dirty uniform, started crying, and silently handed me an apple. It was a moment so charged with metaphor, I got confused; I couldn't even thank her. I'm sure she thinks now I was an ungrateful jerk.
You want to hear a strange truth? There's a part of the cop psyche that's tremendously uncomfortable with such moments. Clutching that apple, I couldn't help wondering: What happens when I go back to writing tickets? What happens when the apple woman hears I took her brother in on an old turnstile warrant? What happens when it's business-as-usual again?
But that's the thing, this time. This one is so big, business-as-usual may never fully return. Forget the public, that's not who I mean. The real change is probably - had better be - in us. If Osama Bin Laden has reminded America of who we are as a nation, he's reminded New York's cops of who we are as well.
On the morning of the attacks, the lockdown outside ground zero happens quickly, and is reasonably orderly; years of dealing with crowd control in a city that never likes to be told what to do has taught the police department this much.
By nightfall, I will see ID from every local, state and federal agency I've ever heard of, and a few I haven't. All night, I shine my flashlight into the faces of dour men who are "with State" to match them with their State Department ID cards, and I make FBI agents turn on their interior lights so I can inspect the inside of their autos.
In the shadow of all this wreckage, you want to do something, anything, as well as you can. Irrational as it may be, I feel this is MY city that's been attacked, and these guys are interlopers showing up late to further screw things up.
I grew up in this city, in a family of cops - my father, my uncles, even my grandfather back in Italy. But in my 20s, while my relatives told war stories over barbecues and backyard beers, I was a professor teaching English at a university. It wasn't until my 30s that the tug of police work asserted itself, inevitable as weather.
In five years on the force, I've done beat work in uniform and plainclothes narcotics work, but I know I'm still pretty inexperienced. Yet, compared to the average citizen, I feel I know this city the way one knows a difficult sibling.
So I recognize our present dilemma. How do a handful of cops clear half a city block of people who are certain they have to be here? Delicately. Because even with the feeling that we've entered something new, that today all the pettiness of the past is to be swept aside, it can get ugly. A training sergeant once told me: "In Manhattan, everybody thinks they're the most important person on earth."
By dark, I've had so many worthies give me a hard time that I'm numb to the shock of it. Two actually choose to ignore my pleas to keep the area clear for body removal just so they can walk their dogs, hideous little designer creatures I have to restrain myself from punting into New Jersey.
And the volunteers! They come in droves, ragtag groups drifting up to the checkpoint, young men and women in their 20s mostly, yearning to do the right thing.
But when told there's nothing for them to do here, that they should report to the Jacob Javits Center where volunteer details are being organized, most balk. They don't want to walk all the way to 35th Street, what with the subways not running. So they encamp, turning the night of Day One into a crisis Woodstock.
Late into that first night, when we've been standing on the same corner for 14 hours without being sure of what's to come or what day we'll finally get home or of how completely our lives might be changed, two studious-looking young women tentatively approach us. On my lips is yet another demand that they get back behind the police lines, but the words catch in my throat and my alarm rises vaguely when I see one of them gingerly carrying a box.
She's on me before I can protest, right up to me and my partner, and she asks if we're hungry, and says she and her roommate were watching it all on television and have made peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwiches for us, if we want them. Which we do, desperately.
Looking into the box, I see that inside each sandwich bag is a little note: "Thank you for your bravery" and "God bless you." And so I have the first of what will be many moments when I find it difficult to speak.
Late that first night, I had occasion to wander down to the site. The scene was otherworldly. Huge floodlights, most borrowed from New York's television and movie industry, were set up around the tower remains. Beyond their glare, the rest of the area had an underwater hue that was dreamlike.
The dust was still heavy, and I could see only about 10 feet in front of me. Wandering in this gloom, I had the strangest encounter: four people in medical scrubs, surgical masks in place, suddenly appeared and asked if I had seen anybody who needed medical help. One nurse pulled down her mask to ask if I was OK. She smiled at me so beatifically that I wondered, for the briefest moment, if I were still back at the checkpoint, had fallen asleep on my feet and was having a strange, Fellini-esque dream.
They would be gone soon, those apparitions; there was nothing for them to do.
During the early morning of the second day, a grim reality was accepted: forget triage. The destruction is so great, there are very few wounded. You are either one of the lucky ones, or you are not. Seeing the site up close, I didn't wonder. I wondered instead at people's faith, that they could look at this and think anything could survive it.
After four hours of attempted sleep during which I imagine my nerve-endings humming to each other, I'm back for the evening of Day Two, assigned over by the river, where I discover that, when there is no triage, there will be a morgue.
I've been in morgues before, and it's not the sights but the smells; the medicinal rush of disinfectant jumps you first, but then, around the edges, the over-sweet odor of human decay creeps in. This morgue, a tent the size of a classroom, has all that, but here it lurks beneath a chalky construction-site vapor that hangs stubbornly over ground zero.
Perhaps because I've seen before how hostile the world can be to human bodies, or perhaps because in this case the smell inside the tent really isn't all that different from outside it, the morgue is not the shattering experience it might have been. Still, there are scenes.
A group of eight or so professionals - medical examiner, Fire Department paramedic, Police Department chaplains - hunch on folding chairs awaiting the next arrival. The wait can be as long as two hours; other times, body bags come in bunches.
Then the call goes up outside the tent: "Heads up. Body coming!" That a single rescue worker can carry the body bag gives some indication of what's inside.
The worker lugs it onto a table comprised of a sheet stretched over plywood. We crowd around, our heads bending to the bag. Will it be a cop? A fireman? Will it be some horror I will never forget?
The paramedic unzips the black plastic bag. This is human? That is my first thought as her gloved hands sift the contents. But then I see. Within a mat of gray dust and paper fragments, a latticework of ribs. No blood or flesh, nothing that is not simply gray and woolly with ash.
Only occasionally is there more than this. One bag reveals a severed human foot, the toenails painted a heartbreaking violet. And this, eventually, is what shocks you, what sits you down with a nauseated, displaced feel of a world spinning awry. Not the gore or the lack of it, but the small details that point tellingly to fragile lives caught in the maelstrom.
Those details are what I'm here for; I'm one of five cops tagging and bagging anything that might be linked to one of the dead. It's far, far tougher than viewing human remains. Where morgue duty deals only with representations of people - small, broken, nearly irrelevant facsimiles of what they once were - the property somehow manages to capture them, capture their lives and personalities.
A leather shoulder bag holds a management textbook and a notebook. The textbook has a woman's name on the frontispiece in a graceful, feminine hand; the notebook, her weekly classes written into the scheduling grid. They're all evening classes; she was going to night school. Little reminders are written beside the schedule: "Keep up with the reading!"
There are wallets stuffed with photos, company ID's with bashful smiles. A gym bag with boxing gloves and a mouthpiece is set aside; saliva traces on it will be tested for DNA. You wonder: How could these things survive intact and their owners be so completely erased?
Then there are the cell phones. If there is one dilemma facing the property cops, it's what to do with a working cell phone. The argument ensues every time a worker brings one in. Hitting the "send " button will give the owner's last call, and thus help with identification. But at what cost to the call's recipient?
And who will be the one to make that call, to risk raising false hopes among family members or friends, who will be receiving a phone call from a dead person?
By Day Three, a kind of routine has settled in. Various agencies set up in blown-out storefronts. A Burger King has "NYPD Command Center" spray-painted over its sign. And everywhere there are little aid stations set up to make life more tolerable for the workers. We can eat in any of a half-dozen tents, get medicines, even massages from a chiropractor.
A feeling begins that we are our own city down here; reports of political maneuvers in Washington and bomb scares at the Empire State Building filter through from some distant homefront. Yet the place is supercharged with an Americanness that I imagine is normally known only to soldiers in hostile territory.
We're digging now, anybody who can. It's still only Day Three, and the chances of finding somebody alive are, in theory, still real. It's a cyclical process; you pull carefully at the impossibly antagonistic tangle of metal and concrete, until eventually a major beam or girder is exposed. Then the ironworkers hook a crane line to the girder and hoist it free. Anything you discover of any possible interest - property, a possible plane part, or yes, a body part - goes into a bucket you carry with you.
There is something mythic in the sight of the cranes in operation. At one point, I look up from the wreckage to see an ironworker descending from the heavens, poised atop a huge metal hook at the end of a crane cable. He is as matter-of-fact as if he were tinkering with his car, instead of dropping several hundred feet to root among the wreckage. Behind him, the red arm of a derrick scrapes the sky.
Among the cops working here a distinction has emerged; the photo-takers versus the non-photo-takers. Some feel the attacks are something we should vow never to forget, and so the scene should be documented as much as possible, from every angle. Others, myself included, find this distasteful and would as soon forget these sights once (and if ever) this is over. More than once, I hear officers shout, "Put that (expletive) camera away!"
A crane, off to my right, is noisily hoisting a half-melted girder free of the rubble when a chorus of despair goes up. I turn in time to catch a glimpse. It is a young woman, or rather the top-half of one, stuck to the top of the beam. Her arm flaps free once, a disembodied wave; then the torso falls free, disappearing anonymously back into the wreckage.
Go ahead, I can't help but think. Take a picture of THAT.
Hours later, I walk through the mini-city, passing through armies of unfamiliar uniforms, regional American accents, cops with cadaver dogs. And far above me, a strange tinkling sound. Firemen are up in the World Financial Center, methodically knocking out windows so the wind doesn't dislodge shards of glass.
It's raining now, and the ash has turned to a ubiquitous copper mud. I pass a bedraggled group of firemen and find that, in my NYPD uniform, I can't meet their eyes; they've suffered far more than we have - 343 firefighters lost, and 60 NYPD and Port Authority cops.
I'm heading for the marina. I'm told a mini-cruise ship is open to rescue workers. There's food, it's warm and dry, and I'm told they have the one thing most in demand: good, hot coffee.
It's all true, and sitting on the ship's top deck, in the lee of an overhang to avoid the rain, I sip coffee with a buddy from another precinct. Like me, he has gone all jumpy and wired; "the Red Bull shakes" we've been calling it, after the energy drink we've all been downing to keep going. I'm exhausted, but I realize how lucky I've been.
When the first building came down, a sergeant from my precinct was on the street outside; he's long and lanky, and when he dived under a car for shelter, an arriving emergency vehicle ran over his legs.
Another sergeant dived under a fire truck, and later described the debris hitting the truck as sounding like someone dropping Volkswagens from 50 stories. As he lay there, he thought he heard gunshots, but dismissed the idea. But he was right. Other cops were shooting out windows of buildings so they could dive to safety inside.
Those are what passed for success stories down here.
It's strange, sitting on this yacht, mud-spattered, sipping coffee and surveying the still-magnificent vista of lower Manhattan, shrouded now in haze but suddenly ennobled.
"You know, normally, we'd never get near a spot like this," my friend says. He giggles, a sound that falls on my ears strangely; I haven't heard laughter since what seems like a former life.
In the weeks that follow the attacks, I will be handed a bottle of water by Matthew Modine, drink beer with the New York Rangers, and be the recipient of best wishes from Jason Alexander and Kevin Spacey. Later, the Rangers stop by the precinct to make small talk in their Canadian accents.
For one night, Midtown becomes celebrity "ground zero"; a telethon is being held to benefit victims and their families. As a Manhattan cop, I've worked this sort of thing before. Your objective is to make sure the "talent" gets in and out without something happening to make you famous yourself. No one notices you unless there's trouble.
Tonight is different, and even the usually reticent Robert DiNiro throws us a nod as he exits his car and the flashbulbs go off.
After Billy Joel's rendition of "New York State of Mind," I am deputized to drive him down to greet the workers at ground zero. In a week of surreal moments, this is the strangest. I have suddenly gone from a crowd-control detail to chauffeuring a rock star on a USO mission into Manhattan's new moonscape.
All I can think to say, as we negotiate the checkpoints, is "Brace yourself. It's nothing like TV." Even to my ears, it sounds incredibly inane.
It is amusing, to a degree, to watch hollow-eyed rescue workers deal with the apparition of a rock star suddenly in their midst. They start, then give knowing smiles as if privy to some private joke.
I realize, watching little knots of workers drifting over, that I am not showing Billy Joel off to the rescuers, but quite the reverse.
This shows in Joel's reactions; upon rounding a corner and taking in the panorama of the destruction in one beat, he gets the "cannot speaks." The workers all know this feeling, and they happily ignore the fact that the star is openly weeping as he signs their hardhats.
Looking around ground zero, I see it is more organized now. There's less of the pell-mell rushing of little work teams heading nowhere in particular.
Later that night, I take a walk and encounter a couple of cops I don't know leaning on barricades and talking with a young female aid worker. Flirting; this would have been unthinkable even 48 hours ago, and it suddenly strikes me that this horror may indeed end at some point.
Still, it's difficult to believe that even now. And certainly it's impossible to believe that The Job, the NYPD, will ever be the same.
Bosses we once laughed at and mimicked behind their backs I saw unhesitatingly organizing rescue parties, establishing medical stations, dictating rest periods for their men - clamping order onto the sudden anarchy. For the first week, patrolmen getting off their 12-hour shifts would defy orders and head right back down to the site, where they would work until literally delirious.
Like the city, The Job's been blooded - by the instant in which thousands died and by the months in which we sifted the wreckage.
The city will eventually forget us; after all, we are just doing our jobs. We'll be the enemy again soon enough. Which is fine, that's the nature of a contentious and complicated relationship.
But we, the cops - we had better remember. Not what we've seen, but what we've done. The way you remember the things you've done that make you who you are.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY345-351 of April 22
 Load-Date: April 23, 2002

 

End of Document
