

Alaska gets the money and the controversy in highway bill
The Associated Press
June 8, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 780 words
Byline: By JIM ABRAMS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A bridge nearly as long as San Francisco's Golden Gate may one day grace the skyline of Ketchikan, population 8,000, in southern Alaska, thanks to a tenacious lawmaker who is making his state a major beneficiary of federal highway money.
"That's my job, infrastructure," says Republican Don Young, chairman of the House Transportation Committee and Alaska's sole representative, explaining his efforts to secure money for his state, often in the face of criticism that some projects are too big and too expensive.
The six-year highway and transit bill that Young steered through the House in March and that the Senate approved in a different version last month is particularly generous to Alaska. Lawmakers are meeting later this week to merge them into one bill.
The $295 billion Senate bill allocates $427 million a year to Alaska, with the sparsely populated state getting $5.27 back for every dollar Alaskans pay in gas taxes to the highway trust fund. That's a sore point when at least half the states get back less than they pay into the fund.
The $284 billion House bill is different in that it sets aside some $12 billion for about 4,000 projects requested by members for their districts. It's here that Young shines.
According to the watchdog group Taxpayers for Common Sense, which monitors, and criticizes, these "earmarks," Alaska won 39 such projects worth $722 million. Among the more intriguing expenditures is $1 million for pavement rehabilitation in North Pole, Alaska.
Five of the 10 most expensive earmarks in the bill go to Alaska, said the group's Keith Ashdown, and all are likely to be in the final package. "Nobody is standing in the way of Don Young," Ashdown said.
Three of those projects, totaling $223 million, are for the Gravina Bridge linking Ketchikan, a town of 8,000, to Gravina Island, home to the town's airport and about 50 people. Critics say it is an extravagant expense to replace what is now a seven-minute ferry ride to the airport. Young said road access to the island is essential for continued growth.
The House bill also contains $200 million for the Knik Arm Bridge linking Anchorage to the largely undeveloped Port MacKenzie area of Matanuska-Susitna Borough, the fastest growing region in the state. Opponents describe Port MacKenzie as little more than a mosquito-filled wetland, although it is popular with recreational snowmobilers and fishermen. Here, too, Young says the bridge is important because Anchorage is running out of land for expansion.
The environmental groups who say the projects benefit private developers more than the Alaskan populace have things "totally backward, so I don't pay much attention to them," Young said.
Alaska's two Republican senators have also been aggressive in procuring infrastructure funds for their state, particularly Sen. Ted Stevens who, as the former Appropriations Committee chairman, wielded considerable influence over federal spending.
Alaska is the size of America east of the Mississippi and still has issues that other states faced in the 19th century, says Sen. Lisa Murkowski. Other states complain their roads are in disrepair, "but at least those states have roads," she said in a recent speech
Rather than expensive roads and "bridges to nowhere," many areas of the state would be better served with improvements in air services and ferry systems, said Emily Ferry, coordinator for the Alaska Transportation Priorities Project.
That's an issue in another controversial project, $15 million to start a road linking Juneau and the tourist destination of Skagway, through the Tongass National Forest.
Skagway Mayor Timothy Bourcy said in an interview that 62 percent of the people in his town said in an advisory vote last fall that they preferred improved ferry service to a road that would traverse steep and narrow fiords and cross some 60 avalanche chutes.
"I'm not sure what the drive is for having this road, but it is not coming from the people," said Bourcy, whose town of 1,000 hosts some 800,000 visitors, mainly from cruise ships, each year.
The Alaska projects in the House bill do include numerous waterway improvements, including $7.5 million for a ferry terminal in Unalaska.
Groups that criticize the big projects acknowledge that Alaskans are of two minds about the federal largesse.
"There's a realization within the state that our demands are getting to be pretty outrageous," said Tim Bristol of the Alaska Coalition. But "it's hard for Alaskans to say no to a $223 million bridge."
---
On the Net:
Rep. Young: http://donyoung.house.gov/ 
Sen. Murkowski: http://murkowski.senate.gov/ 
Taxpayers for Common Sense: http://www.taxpayer.net/ 
Alaska Coalition: http:alaskacoalition.org/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo WX101
 Load-Date: June 9, 2005

 

End of Document
