

An AP Arts Review; 'The Gathering': fitfully wrestling with the enormity of the Holocaust
April 24, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 430 words
Byline: By MICHAEL KUCHWARA, AP Drama Critic
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Wrestling with the enormity of the Holocaust would be daunting for any drama, but Arje Shaw's "The Gathering," now on Broadway at the Cort Theatre, presses the most obvious buttons in its attempt to deal with a difficult subject.
Its protagonist, Gabe, is a concentration camp survivor, portrayed with considerable zest by Hal Linden, who injects all the energy he can into the creaky if well-meaning script. Yet even Linden can't maneuver around the play's obvious, sentimental manipulations.
Gabe is an irascible guy, who dotes on his grandson, Michael, as much as he dislikes his son, Stuart. These family dynamics are played out rather innocuously in Act 1 as Gabe cutely banters with Michael and spars with Stuart. Their arguments are mediated by Stuart's patient Irish-American wife, Diane, who has converted to Judaism.
The time is 1985, and Stuart is a buttoned-down Republican, commuting to Washington, D.C., from New York City as a member of the Reagan administration. Gabe, a one-time Communist, is aghast that his offspring is now working for Pat Buchanan, no less. The Buchanan reference - and Gabe's reaction to it - draws the biggest laugh of the evening. When the president announces a trip to Germany, specifically to the cemetery at Bitburg where SS officers are buried, Gabe is outraged.
The second act finds the old man and his grandson in Germany at the cemetery and planning to protest when Reagan and German Chancellor Helmut Kohl visit grave sites. These unlikely demonstrators are confronted by a young German soldier who engages Gabe in an angry debate about German responsibility and guilt over the deaths of 6 million Jews.
Their conversation is contrived, almost artificial in the way both men present their arguments. Son and daughter-in-law arrive to spirit away Gabe and Michael before the president gets to the cemetery. Their appearance forces the revelation of a family secret that seems to be tacked onto the plot for dramatic effect.
Young Max Dworin, who plays Michael, matches Linden's bubbly enthusiasm. Sam Guncler and Deirdre Lovejoy exude well-meaning rectitude as the concerned parents. Coleman Zeigen gives credibility to the defiant German military man who proclaims to Gabe, "The sins of my fathers are not my sins. They are only my responsibility. … I will carry them. … I accept them. … Can you accept me?"
There are no easy answers, of course, and the best Gabe can come up with is an uneasy truce with the past. Trying to make sense of the unfathomable is a daunting proposition, but "The Gathering" is only superficially up to the task.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY393
 Load-Date: April 25, 2001

 

End of Document
