

An icon of aviation returns to the skies, at a crucial time for the industry
November 6, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 686 words
Byline: By JOCELYN GECKER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




When the Concorde takes off from Paris on Wednesday on its first passenger flight in more than 15 months, it will mark the rebirth of the world's highest-profile commercial aircraft - and a small triumph for an industry deeply wounded by the events of Sept. 11.
After months of redesigning and test flights, engineers say they have fixed the flaws that led to the fiery crash of July 25, 2000. The flight path has been changed to avoid the town of Gonesse, where the supersonic jet plunged to the earth, killing 113 people.
Air France will be the first to fly its newly remodeled Concorde, on a sold-out Paris-New York flight leaving at 10:30 a.m. An hour later, British Airways will operate an invitation-only flight from London; its fare-paying flights to New York resume Friday.
In a third Concorde flight on Wednesday, British Prime Minister Tony Blair will take a special plane to Washington to meet with President Bush.
The new Concorde has been fitted with fuel-tank liners of bulletproof Kevlar, a flameproof reinforced undercarriage and newly designed, extra-resistant radial tires.
But as important as the engineering changes, aviation analysts say, is the symbolism of the Concorde, the world's only supersonic jetliner, reclaiming the skies.
"One of the icons of the civil aviation industry is returning," said Chris Yates, aviation safety editor at Jane's Transport in London. "It's the shot in the arm that the industry needs."
It's also a boon for the executives and the rich and famous for whom time is more important than money. A roundtrip Paris-New York ticket costs $7,300, while a London-New York roundtrip runs $10,000.
"It's all about time," said Eric Pelletier, vice president for Booz Allen Hamilton in Paris, who has flown the Concorde 40 times and once traveled Paris-New York roundtrip in one day to sign a contract. "It's not something you do because it's enjoyable."
Flying above turbulence at twice the speed of sound, the delta-winged aircraft crosses the Atlantic in about 3 1/2 hours - half the flying time of conventional jets.
Despite a 30 percent drop in trans-Atlantic travel since the Sept. 11 terror attacks, the airlines say they are confident of filling the 100-seat planes. British Airways says it has already sold 7,000 seats.
However, service is being scaled back from what it was before the crash. Air France will run five round-trip flights per week and British Airways will run six, about half the previous schedule.
New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has welcomed the Concorde's comeback, saying its return is "symbolic of how all New Yorkers feel about rebuilding this great city."
The resumption of flights is also a boost for Concorde's creators.
"If the story of the Concorde had finished with the accident of July 25, we would have all been left with a very bitter taste in our mouths," said Henri Perrier, chief engineer on the aircraft's first test flight in 1969.
Perrier, 72, was summoned out of retirement to join a French-British team of investigators and technicians charged with nursing the Concorde back into the skies after the July 2000 crash, the first in the Concorde's 25-year history.
"Nothing we knew would ever have led us to believe that such a catastrophe could happen," Perrier said.
Investigators are expected to make their report on the cause of the crash public by early next year. Officials have theorized that as the plane raced down the runway, it hit a metal strip that ruptured a tire and sent debris hurtling toward a fuel tank, triggering a fire and a fuel leak. The metal strip is believed to have come from another jet.
The Concordes that fly Wednesday will include new gourmet menus and a new look.
British Airways is investing $20 million to redecorate cabin interiors and Concorde lounges. On Air France, fresh lobster and petits fours will be served. But fine silver has been traded in for plastic cutlery - a safety feature following the Sept. 11 attacks.
Perrier, who will be on board, says he looks forward to sipping a glass of Dom Perignon at Mach 2.
"But what will give me the greatest pleasure," he said, "is seeing the plane back in the sky."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos PAR106-108
 Load-Date: November 7, 2001

 

End of Document
