

An outline of the strategies employed in the 2000 Florida presidential recount
November 11, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 717 words
Byline: By DAVID ROYSE, Associated Press Writer
Body




On the morning after the 2000 presidential election, George W. Bush and Al Gore were nearly tied in Florida. The tiny advantage belonged to Bush, who led by little more than 1,000 votes out of 6 million cast.
For the Republican, it was crucial to end the election before his lead could evaporate. For Gore's team, it was just as crucial to keep the process going until his team could find enough votes for a reversal.
Through the tumultuous 36-day battle that followed, each side would use varying strategies to achieve its goal. But an early Democratic tactic may have sealed Gore's fate: While the vice president publicly urged a full accounting of the Florida vote, his legal team pursued recounts in only four counties.
A media review of more than 175,000 disputed ballots in Florida's 67 counties by eight news organizations, including The Associated Press, suggests that if Gore had pursued a full hand recount statewide, he would likely have picked up enough votes to take the lead. By only pushing for selective recounts, he never got that chance.
While some on the Gore team argued for a statewide recount as the fairest way to settle the election, many in the Democratic camp were worried that pleading to canvassing boards throughout the state would be chaotic, time-consuming and politically damaging. There also was concern that recounting results in all counties - many of them Republican-leaning, would end up benefiting Bush.
Gore's camp instead pressed early for recounts only in four counties - Volusia, where computer problems with the machine vote count cropped up; Palm Beach, a heavily Democratic county where voters had complained about a confusing ballot; Broward, the state's biggest Democratic county; and Miami-Dade, the state's largest county. Miami-Dade had large numbers of rejected ballots the Democrats hoped would favor Gore.
On Nov. 11, the Bush campaign went to federal court to stop the hand counts, calling them arbitrary and open to fraud. The court said no, and county officials started the laborious task of inspecting previously rejected ballots.
Republican Secretary of State Katherine Harris, charged with certifying the election, refused to allow extra time to finish the recounts. So Gore's team went back to court.
Volusia finished quickly and Bush's lead dwindled, but the process dragged elsewhere.
Then the Florida Supreme Court weighed in, barring Harris from certifying the election without including the manual recounts from the three remaining south Florida counties. It set Nov. 26 as a new deadline, giving the counties some breathing room.
But Gore still couldn't get what he wanted.
Palm Beach County's weary canvassing board took time off for Thanksgiving. And in Miami, where activists mounted noisy demonstrations, the recount moved at a crawl. Miami-Dade officials abruptly stopped it, with the canvassing chairman saying he'd need a miracle to finish on time.
Bush, meanwhile, headed to the U.S. Supreme Court, seeking to shut down all the recounts. And the state's GOP-led Legislature moved on its own to try to award the state's 25 electors to Bush.
Republicans also chased absentee ballots coming in from overseas military personnel, fighting to have some that had been tossed out reconsidered.
On Nov. 26, after rejecting requests to again extend the deadline, Harris certified the election, declaring Bush the winner by 537 votes. Hours later, Palm Beach finished its count - too late to be included in the totals. The Palm Beach results showed a net gain for Gore of 215 votes, which would have cut Bush's statewide margin to 322 votes.
Pleading to "let the people have their say," Gore went to court the next day to contest the election in Palm Beach and Miami-Dade counties, along with Nassau County, where discrepancies could have netted him about 50 votes.
On Dec. 8, a divided state Supreme Court granted his wish and more, ordering a statewide manual recount of all the undervotes, ballots for which no presidential vote had been recorded.
Across the state the next day, county officials trudged back to start the recounts, but they were quickly interrupted. The U.S. Supreme Court stopped the recount, pending a hearing. Three days later, the nation's top justices overturned their state counterparts by a 5-4 vote.
Gore conceded the next night.
 Load-Date: November 13, 2001

 

End of Document
