

At the Movies: 'The Pianist'
December 24, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 805 words
Byline: By MATT WOLF, Associated Press Writer
Body




Adrien Brody's long, slender fingers make him an apt choice to play the title role in "The Pianist," but what one really takes away from the performance are his ceaselessly haunted eyes.
Brody's Wladyslaw Szpilman, the Polish-Jewish pianist, has much to be haunted about as a Holocaust survivor who went on to live until age 88. (He died in July 2000.)
And yet, it's impossible to watch Roman Polanski's harrowing, unsentimental, if uneven film biography of Szpilman without feeling that the movie's true subject is in some ways Polanski himself - a child of the Holocaust whose way of addressing the unspeakable events he witnessed is to chronicle someone else's experience.
That continual tension animates a film that has already been well received in Europe (winning the top prize at Cannes in May) and should prompt no less acclaim in the United States.
One is always aware of the implicit tug between a director who has long spoken of his disdain for making, as Polanski has put it, "anything autobiographical," and the dramatization for the screen of a fellow creator and countryman in Szpilman, whose wrenching story Polanski would have recognized full well. It was as a 7-year-old, after all, that Polanski escaped the Krakow ghetto through a hole in a barbed-wire fence.
Is "The Pianist" on a par with "Schindler's List," Hollywood's defining treatment of the Holocaust to date?
No, though there are passages - the majority of them wordless - that visualize the period entirely afresh, every shocking image carrying a fierce and renewed sting.
But even when Ronald Harwood's lumbering script lets "The Pianist" down, Polanski's innate empathy for the material picks up the slack. The 69-year-old filmmaker has made his most personal film yet.
As the film opens, it's autumn 1939, in Warsaw, home to 360,000 Jews, a figure marking roughly one-third of the total populace of the Polish capital. (By the time of the German retreat early in 1945, about 20 were left, Szpilman among them.)
Szpilman is performing Chopin in a live broadcast when the state radio station is bombed by the Luftwaffe.
Tensions inevitably are running high at the comfortable apartment Szpilman shares with his parents, brother, and two sisters. While his mother (Maureen Lipman) struggles to put food on the table, his father (Frank Finlay) attempts to hide what zlotys the family still has. And with the Nazis closing in, the Jews are being rehoused, ritually humiliated and ultimately routed altogether.
As was true of Steven Spielberg in "Schindler's List," Polanski can let a single image speak for countless others of equal cruelty - a man in a wheelchair thrown off a balcony by the Nazis simply for sport, or a mother who inadvertently smothers her own baby in an attempt to stifle its cry.
It's because the images are so potent that one becomes increasingly irritated by the script's crudeness. Prosaic stretches ("you haven't heard; you haven't read the papers") give off the feel of a schoolroom lecture, while other lines fall thuddingly from the characters' lips. "Sometimes," says Szpilman, Warsaw's walled ghetto by then well in place, "I'm still not sure which side of the wall I'm on."
If "The Pianist" nonetheless gathers momentum throughout, that's because of a startling visual landscape that paints an almost surreally vivid image of urban desecration. (Already nominated for Golden Globes for best picture and best actor, "The Pianist" should receive Oscar nominations, too, starting with Pawel Edelman's superlative camerawork.)
Clambering through his charred, ravaged city, by then unshaven and wracked by disease, Szpilman for several years lives by his wits, scavenging the occasional potato and sleeping on bedsprings. Only at the 11th hour does a German officer (Thomas Kretschmann) emerge, proffering food and even his coat, before the Allies' liberation of the capital.
These passages comprise a silent movie all their own and one that is rivetingly played by the gaunt Brody, the actor's eyes forever darting about in his desire against the odds to make it through the war.
Although some may wonder what "The Pianist" has to tell us that we haven't heard before, the film, like its star, finds immortally haunting music in mankind's unquenchable desire to survive.
"The Pianist," a Focus Features release, is rated R for violence and brief strong language. Running time: 148 minutes. Three and a half stars out of four.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY684; AP Graphic AISLE SEAT
 Load-Date: December 25, 2002

 

End of Document
