

At the ready: carrying out the Coast Guard's post-Sept. 11 mission
The Associated Press
November 4, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1066 words
Byline: By GREG SUKIENNIK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABOARD THE U.S. COAST GUARD CUTTER ESCANABA
Body




It's about 3 p.m. on a recent Monday, a few miles off the coast of Provincetown, Mass., when the ship's intercom calls for team Bravo to report to the fantail deck for their next mission.
A few months ago for the crew of 100, the mission was off the coast of Florida, looking for undocumented foreigners. About a month ago, it was a 24-hour search-and-rescue operation for two crew members of a fishing boat that was flipped over by a boat twice its size.
At any given time, the mission of the Coast Guard Cutter Escanaba is to be ready to respond to homeland security needs.
This time, the order is to enforce the regulations that govern commercial fishing off the coast of New England.
The next day, the area will close to commercial fishing, and the records show the T.T. Gillie out of New Bedford, Mass., hasn't been boarded in a while. Team Bravo, led by Ensign Jonathan Burby, the 23-year-old boarding officer, files down a narrow hallway through double-latched steel doors to the fantail deck, the back of the ship.
The team, men in their twenties with close crew cuts, wear blue jumpsuits with the Escanaba's name - not their own - on the front. They carry handcuffs, batons, pepper spray and sidearms; underneath their coveralls they wear bulletproof vests.
The team faces over the starboard deck and, upon command, lock and load their .9 mm pistols.
"Usually, it's a warm reception. A lot of (fishermen) realize we're here for them," Burby says later. "It's different when we do boardings down South," where the Coast Guard does more drug and illegal immigrant interdiction. "In this day and age you never know what you're going to see."
This might be a fishing patrol, but there's at least one significant homeland security overlap: Protocol now calls for positively identifying everyone on board, and checking documents - such as permanent resident cards and passports - to make sure they're legitimate.
The Coast Guard may board any American vessel, any time, anywhere, to make sure it is operating safely and not violating the law.
The team puts on orange life jackets and crash helmets, and three of them - a coxswain and two engineers - climb into a 20-foot inflatable boat, and the team skims across the Atlantic Ocean toward the T.T. Gillie.
It's the first day of a five-day trip for the T.T. Gillie, which is looking for groundfish before this area closes.
In the pilot house, Ensign Gary Murphy is interviewing the ship's master, Brian Mello, of Fairhaven, Mass., and filling out a standard form that accompanies every boarding. Another member of the team checks the survival gear.
The mate, Bill Berube, of Fall River, Mass., was about to haul back the gear when the Coast Guard appeared; now he and Mello will have an audience as they bring in their nets.
"It's getting tougher with all the regulations to make a living," Berube says, explaining that the trawler used to have a crew of three, not two.
Three members of the team descend into the fish hold to see if the catch meets regulations.
In the wheelhouse, Mello is at the controls, looking out over the gently rolling swells as he smokes a cigarette. He seems unconcerned by this visit. He has been fishing since he was 16 years old - 25 years on this boat.
"It doesn't bother me," he says. "As long as they don't interrupt the fishing - and I've never had a problem with that yet. They've got a job to do, the same as everyone else."
Several minutes later, Berube is hauling in a catch. A squirming, flapping pile of fish spills onto the deck: some more yellowfin, a few dogfish that get thrown back, a few monkfish, two old lobster pots, a green glass bottle, a cod and an old piece of orange hose.
There's no problem with the nets, the catch or the fish, stacked on beds of ice in the hold.
But there is a problem that earns a citation. The oil in the bilge water - which the T.T. Gillie was warned about the last time the Coast Guard paid a visit - is still there. Later, in his debriefing, Burby notes the smell of diesel fuel hit him in the face as soon as he opened the engine hatch door.
Boarding fishing boats is one of several tasks for the men and women of the Escanaba, the third in a line of cutters to bear the Michigan city's name. (The first Escanaba, most likely the victim of a U-boat attack, exploded and sank in the North Atlantic on June 13, 1943; only two of its crew of 103 survived.)
On this trip, the 270-foot cutter's boarding teams visited about 30 ships in 30 days, including six in one day. They put a stop to the voyage of a fishing vessel that had unsafe levels of carbon monoxide. They towed in a damaged fishing boat loaded with 18,000 pounds of bluefin tuna.
And for 24 consecutive hours, they searched for two crew members of the Lonely Hunter, which sank in Nantucket Sound.
Ensign Sarah Hufford, originally of Richmond, Va., interviewed the Lonely Hunter's only survivor, master and owner John Wezkasser. "It was my first time dealing with someone from a tragedy. It was difficult to hear the story of how it happened."
She and Ensign Elizabeth Tonovitz, of Buffalo, N.Y., are the only two women in a crew of 100 aboard Escanaba. During the last two days of the Escanaba's recent tour, Hufford was a deck command officer, directing the ship's course from the bridge, while Tonovitz, as part of boarding team Alpha, helped inspect the Gloucester-based Atlantic Mistress off the coast of Cape Ann.
A ship the size of the Escanaba means there is plenty of work 24 hours a day. Both the engine room and the bridge draw four-hour watch shifts for command and support staff.
Much attention is paid to the twin 18-cylinder diesel engines, nicknamed "Pebbles" and "Bam-Bam," roaring steadily in the lower decks. The engines also power twin generators, which in turn run a water system that makes 6,000 gallons a day, and the sophisticated electronics that guide Escanaba along the ocean.
For those not on duty, there are classes and training during the day. At night, the crew can catch a movie on satellite television, or a football or baseball game, even play video and board games.
Since Sept. 11, 2001, homeland security has been part of everything the Coast Guard does. Still, from the crew's standpoint, most of the changes have been subtle. Longer missions that were planned out well in advance are now shorter - about a month at sea, followed by about a month at home. By necessity, they are also more flexible.
 Graphic



 
APN SUNDAY ILLUSTRATIONS: Subscribers get 6 photos, NY367-372 of
 Load-Date: November 5, 2003

 

End of Document
