

Ballroom blitz: Now it's the doormen, cooks, bellboys and maids partying at the Plaza
The Associated Press
April 16, 2005, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 631 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The Plaza Hotel's magnificent Grand Ballroom is where society partied, Truman Capote hosted his "Black and White Ball" and Donald Trump toasted wife No. 2 on their wedding day.
The latest gathering in the opulent space was a different sort of celebration as the hotel's doormen, cooks, bellboys and maids cheered their own landmark event: the rescue of their jobs and the storied hotel itself.
The hotel's 900-member rank and file had appeared destined for unemployment by month's end.
Under new ownership, a $350 million renovation of the tony Beaux Arts landmark, beginning April 30, meant luxury condominiums were in, and guest rooms - and hotel workers - were out.
Instead, after four days of intense City Hall negotiations with Mayor Michael Bloomberg, the workers' union and the hotel's owners produced the job-saving deal and Thursday's ballroom celebration.
"It is a beautiful day for the Plaza," said Ramon Richards, a 17-year hotel veteran who usually enters the great gilded room as a banquet server. "We made a good effort … We look forward to working here for many years."
Elad Properties agreed to increase the number of hotel rooms in the revamped Plaza from 150 to 348 and reduce the number of multimillion-dollar condos from 200 to 150. Many of the hotel's public spaces, including the famous ballroom, the Oak Bar and the Palm Court, will remain untouched and open to the public.
The New York Hotel Trades Council was guaranteed 350 positions, a figure that virtually everyone agrees will be higher by the time the Plaza reopens late next year. Workers who prefer to retire or leave will receive two weeks pay for every year worked.
A settlement had seemed impossible after Elad paid $675 million last summer for the fabulous but fraying property that overlooks Central Park. The two sides warred publicly, with the union spending $2 million on rallies and television ads to "Save the Plaza."
But when word of the deal spread, Elad's billionaire mogul Yitzhak Tshuva went from pariah to prince as union workers suddenly offered him a New York greeting worthy of Yankees' player Derek Jeter. The union's "Save the Plaza" hotline was inundated with congratulatory calls.
Given the hotel's 98-year history, the level of excitement was no surprise.
F. Scott Fitzgerald placed Jay Gatsby in a Plaza suite sipping mint juleps, and Kay Thompson created 6-year-old Plaza denizen Eloise, who did a bit of spying from the ceiling of the ballroom. Neil Simon wrote the hit Broadway play "Plaza Suite," which also became a movie. Everybody from the Beatles to the Chicago Bulls stayed at the Plaza.
Plaza doorman Neil Scott Johnson, standing behind Bloomberg at the ballroom announcement, waved an American flag as his co-workers - many of them immigrants and minorities, more than a few with decades on the job - exulted over the news.
"It's amazing," said Johnson, 42, who started work at the Plaza in 1998. "We were all overjoyed. … It's an incredible sign of what we can do to benefit New York City when people come together and really care."
Luis Cavallos, 56, spent the last 34 years working as a Plaza banquet waiter. The father of two was preparing to send his first-born to college this fall - a prospect that dimmed with the threat of a permanent layoff.
"All fathers want to send their children to a better school," Cavallos said. "Now I can do that."
Barbaralee Diamonstein-Spielvogel, former head of the city Landmarks Preservation Commission, explained how everyone from blue-collar workers to blue-blooded landmark preservationists found common ground on saving the Plaza.
"This is an iconic building in an iconic location known the world over," she said. "So much nostalgia, memory and fantasy are wrapped up in that building."
---
On the Net:
Plaza: http://www.fairmont.com/theplaza/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos of April 14: NYKW106, 109, 110
 Load-Date: April 17, 2005

 

End of Document
