

Baseball in Montreal: Is this the end of the Expos?
September 28, 2002, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 718 words
Byline: By MIKE FITZPATRICK, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: MONTREAL
Body




Before they were stars, Larry Walker and Pedro Martinez left Montreal. They'd understand if the Expos did the same thing after Sunday's season finale.
After 34 years in Montreal, the first foreign team in the majors could become the first franchise to move since the Senators left Washington following the 1971 season and became the Texas Rangers.
Washington, Portland, Ore., and Puerto Rico have been mentioned as possible destinations.
Or perhaps the team will stay put in Canada, where the Expos struggle to draw a decent crowd.
"The fans don't deserve a team right now," said Walker, a native Canadian who left the Expos to sign with the Colorado Rockies in 1995. "If they aren't going to come out and support their team, then they shouldn't complain about not having one."
Last winter, the other 29 big league clubs assumed ownership of the franchise after a failed attempt to eliminate Montreal and the Minnesota Twins. Now, the new labor deal between players and owners says no team can be folded through the 2006 season.
So baseball is stuck with the Expos, who average fewer than 10,000 fans per game and appeared on local television only a handful of times this year - in French.
"Montreal is a great baseball city," said Martinez, who won the first of his three Cy Young Awards with the Expos in 1997 before being traded to Boston.
"But once they started getting rid of the good players, they started panicking and not going to the stadium," he said. "I don't blame them for not coming after all the players were gone."
Back in January, commissioner Bud Selig called Washington a "prime candidate" for relocation. But Baltimore Orioles owner Peter Angelos doesn't want another team in his area.
One group hopes to bring the Expos to Oregon, and a team of investors said this week it wants to buy the franchise and move it to Puerto Rico in 2004.
Charlotte, N.C., Las Vegas and northern New Jersey also have been mentioned as possibilities.
Hey fans: Vladimir Guerrero, Bartolo Colon and Jose Vidro - coming to a city near you.
"They need to get out now, and I hate to say that because I love the city of Montreal and I loved playing up there," said Chris Widger, now a backup catcher for the New York Yankees.
"They need to go where people appreciate the team. Players don't like to go up there and play. Everybody wants to play for a winner, and they're not going to win up there," he said.
However, the former minority owners of the Expos, who sued after the sale of the team, have vowed to fight any attempt to move the franchise from Montreal.
That might help keep the Expos, 81-79 heading into the season's final weekend, north of the border for at least one more season.
"I hope it lasts. I think the fans there deserve to see some baseball because they kind of got cheated with the (1994) strike," said former Expos outfielder Rondell White, now with the Yankees. "It would be a shame to see it go."
John McHale Jr., an executive vice president in the commissioner's office, is studying the options for the Expos next year. But he said there is no deadline for a decision yet.
"In 1970, the Seattle Pilots left for spring training and came back as the Milwaukee Brewers," said McHale, whose father was general manager of the Expos from 1978-84. "If you have to, you can turn these things in short order. Obviously, that's not ideal."
The outlook wasn't always so bleak for baseball in this hockey town. The Expos had the best record in the majors before the '94 strike cut the season short, and they thrived for years in the early 1980s with stars such as Gary Carter, Andre Dawson and Tim Raines.
Montreal was one win from the '81 World Series, losing the NLCS to the Los Angeles Dodgers on Rick Monday's ninth-inning home run.
More than 2.3 million fans showed up at Olympic Stadium in 1982 and '83. "You can't tell me all those fans back in the '80s are gone," Raines said. "Their kids from the '80s grew up watching the Expos when they were young, and they're still here."
Yet the glory days seem a distant memory now, replaced by the striking image of an endless sea of empty yellow seats at the Big O the last few years.
"If they move, regardless of how or why, a little bit of me gets left behind," said former star Steve Rogers, who owns most of Montreal's career pitching records. "There's a real sadness."
 Load-Date: September 29, 2002

 

End of Document
