

Behind the scenes at the Latin Grammys
The Associated Press
September 4, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 814 words
Byline: By ADRIAN SAINZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




The Latin Grammys were held Wednesday without the threatened massive protests by Cuban exiles that some thought could have ruined the awards show.
Most Cuban-American demonstrators decided to stay home after it became clear that Cuban artists would not get U.S. visas in time for the show. About 100 people gathered outside of AmericanAirlines Arena in Miami's downtown to protest the nomination of Cuban artists who support Fidel Castro's government. A similar amount of people turned out to defend the Latin Grammys.
Still, security was extremely tight. Authorities closed the main boulevard in front of the arena to traffic at 10 a.m. Wednesday, and officers with orange vests and bomb-sniffing dogs cleared the area before the public was allowed inside.
Members of a conservative Cuban exile group, Vigilia Mambisa, stood across from the arena to criticize the nomination of Cuban artists.
"They shouldn't have been nominated in a land of freedom and especially in a place like Miami that is the seat of Cuban exiles," said Enrique Ferrer, who said he was a political prisoner in Cuba for seven years. "We will support the Grammys when Cuba is free."
But others said the Cuban artists should have been able to see the show in person.
"A Grammys in Spanish with no Cuban artists is not worth it," said Blanca Cuza, a native of Colombia.
Miami was supposed to host the Latin Grammys in 2001, but threatened protests by the city's Cuban exile community over the inclusion of artists from the communist island forced organizers to move the show to Los Angeles.
---
Gloria and Emilio Estefan have been some of the strongest supporters of bringing the Latin Grammys to Miami. The couple helped put together the show's tribute to "Queen of Salsa" Celia Cruz, who died July 16.
"We're thrilled that this is here. It took a little while but everything worthwhile takes time," Gloria Estefan said.
The singer is promoting her first English language album in years, "Wrapped," which will hit shelves on Sept. 23.
---
Cruz's husband of 41 years, trumpeter Pedro Knight, arrived smiling and laughing, but still shed a few tears when asked about his late wife.
But he said Cruz should be a role model for young Latin artists.
"Celia came from a very poor family and look how far she got," he said.
---
Natalia Lafourcade said her life has "totally changed" since she started getting recognition for her music.
"I feel a little strange," said Lafourcade, 19, as she gazed at other stars arriving at the show.
She was nominated for four awards, including best new artist and song of the year for "En El 2000." She is considered Mexico's most promising and original young songwriter. Like many of the top nominated acts this year, her music fuses different styles - in her case pop, rock, and jazz.
She has drawn comparisons to Grammy winner Nelly Furtado and says Bjork is a major influence.
---
Ricky Martin himself was not nominated for a Latin Grammy, but one of his hits, "Tal Vez," earned a song of the year nomination for Franco De Vita, who wrote the love ballad.
Martin took two years off but his new album "Almas Del Silencio," is among the best selling Latin albums.
"It was all about daring … finding ways to challenge my emotions," Martin said of his preparations to record the album.
---
It's not the most glamorous of categories, but Marcos Witt was beaming after winning the Latin Grammy for best Christian album.
Witt claimed the award for his album "Sana Nuestra Tierra" (Cure Our Earth) and praised the show's organizer, the Latin Recording Academy, for recognizing the Christian music category.
"It's a genre that's very festive and hope-filled and brings a lot of faith and love to people's lives," said Witt, dressed in a snappy black tuxedo and grinning from cheek to cheek.
Witt said the award will "allow the Christian artists who are out there to really raise the bar and bring their excellence level to a much higher level."
---
The controversial video for Molotov's anti-racism song "Frijolero" was a surprise winner for best video.
The song criticizes the United States for making war "based on petroleum" and Americans for displaying racist attitudes toward Mexican immigrants. "Frijolero" means "Beaner" in English, a derogatory term for Mexicans.
The animated video also shows President George W. Bush, Mexican President Vicente Fox and the devil shaking hands in an oil field. The Mexican rap-metal group with an unrelenting social conscience goes out of character with the song, setting it to a norteno beat.
---
Sporadic rain showers sometimes put a damper on the artists' arrival. Heavy traffic in downtown Miami also kept many nominees and performers from making it to the pre-ceremony, which began at 6:30 p.m.
"The academy accepts the award on their behalf. I'm sure they're stuck in traffic," singer Jorge Moreno, a Miami native, said after presenting an award to an act that could not make it.
 Load-Date: September 5, 2003

 

End of Document
