

Books revive the memory of the nation's worst theater fire
The Associated Press
February 24, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 906 words
Byline: By DON BABWIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




Even in Chicago where it happened, the deadliest theater fire in American history is largely forgotten.
The few artifacts about the destruction of the Iroquois Theatre at the city's historical society are in storage. However, the fire is mentioned in a small paragraph on a large informational sign in front of the theater that now stands where the Iroquois once was. And at City Hall, several blocks away, there is an oblique reminder, a wordless bronze tablet high on a wall that features an image of an angel.
But everyone who goes to a play or movie owes the simple act of pushing open a door or following a lighted exit sign to that cold day in 1903 when fire tore through the Iroquois on Randolph Street near State Street. More than 600 people died.
The disaster affected building and fire codes around the world.
Now, the fire is the subject of two recent books: Anthony Hatch's "Tinder Box: The Iroquois Theatre Disaster 1903," and "Chicago Death Trap: The Iroquois Theatre Fire of 1903," by Nat Brandt.
The fire, which killed more than twice as many people as the Great Chicago Fire 32 years earlier, happened on Dec. 30, 1903.
Open only a few weeks, the Iroquois was a source of civic pride. "This incredibly beautiful theater was going to position Chicago to compete directly with Broadway," Hatch said.
On stage was Eddie Foy, one of the country's most famous song-and-dance men, appearing in a matinee of "Mr. Bluebeard." The theater was designed to hold just under 1,700 people, but more than 1,900, many of them children, may have squeezed in.
Sparks began popping off a spotlight high above the stage during the second act. "There were nearly 300 curtains up there for the different scene changes," Brandt said.
One caught fire, and the man working the spotlight tried to slap the small blaze out with his hands, but the flames spread.
On stage was 18-year-old dancer Madeline Dupont. Small fires were common in theaters at the time, so when she saw some sparks she didn't think anything of it.
"They just continued to dance as things started cascading down on stage," said John Hughes, Dupont's grandson, who heard the story from her as a child.
Like other theaters, the Iroquois was equipped with an asbestos curtain designed to come down in front of the stage to protect the audience. But the curtain caught on a bank of lights, preventing it from dropping all the way to the floor.
Stage hands looking to escape the growing fire headed for doors in the back of the theater. It was 8 degrees outside, and the rush of cold air was sucked in past the stage and toward the audience.
In his autobiography, Foy said it was like "a blast of cold air almost like a cannon shot," Brandt said.
Meanwhile, the theater had virtually no way to put out the fire. The law required a sprinkler system, but the Iroquois hadn't bothered to install one, Brandt said.
The audience looked frantically for a way out. But the exit signs hadn't been put up yet and the exits were covered with drapery so they were obscured from view. Even if audience members spotted an exit, there was no guarantee they could get to it. To keep people in the balcony from sneaking down into the better seats, gates were locked in the stairwells.
In less than half an hour, more than 600 people died. Some were scorched by the fire. Others never made it out of their seats, the smoke having moved so quickly that they were overcome before they could move.
In their rush to escape, people were trampled to death or crushed against doors that only opened inward. Others died leaping or falling from the burning building.
"My grandmother said when she got to the alley there were bodies raining down on her from six, seven stories," said Hughes. "People were landing on the bodies."
News of the fire spread quickly. "The disaster made headlines all over the world," said Hatch. "The public outrage was unbelievable."
Official reaction was swift. "All the theaters in Chicago and theaters across the country were immediately closed for inspection," said Libby Mahoney, director of historical documentation at the Chicago Historical Society.
"Inspections were ordered in Copenhagen and Stockholm," said Brandt. "In Berlin, the Kaiser took it upon himself to close the opera house."
Reforms were implemented around the United States, including the requirement that doors open outward. Illuminated exit signs were required as was use of fireproof materials for scenery.
As big as it was initially, the story of the Iroquois Theatre fire began to fade.
The public soon had other concerns. Three years later, San Francisco was rocked by an earthquake. In 1911, nearly 150 workers were killed in the Triangle Shirtwaist fire in New York City - a disaster that triggered safety reforms for factories. In 1912, the Titanic sank.
But the authors and others say timing explains only so much.
"It is hard to romanticize this one," said Mahoney. "There is no great survival story, no heroics."
Hatch thinks the city has tried hard to put the fire behind it. "I came away with the distinct impression it's a story that Chicago would like to forget," he said. "There are no police department records of this disaster, no fire department records."
Brandt pointed to an obituary he found of the theater's architect, Benjamin H. Marshall, that ran in The New York Times in 1944. "The obit gives details of different places he designed in Chicago," Brandt said. "But there's no mention of the Iroquois Theatre."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY329-332 of Feb. 24

 

End of Document
