

Brother of Michael Jackson's accuser describes seeing the pop star molest the boy
The Associated Press
March 7, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 704 words
Byline: By LINDA DEUTSCH, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: SANTA MARIA, Calif.
Body




The younger brother of Michael Jackson's accuser described for jurors in graphic detail Monday how he twice saw the pop star fondle the child while the young boy lay sleeping in Jackson's bed at his Neverland Ranch.
The brother also testified that Jackson showed them Internet sex sites, gave them wine, slept in bed with them and appeared before them naked and sexually aroused at the pop star's Neverland ranch.
"Me and my brother were watching a movie and Michael walked up naked," the 14-year-old witness testified. "Me and my brother were grossed out. He sat on the bed and said it was natural," then left the room.
Speaking calmly, directly and unemotionally, he said the molestation occurred shortly after Jackson had shown the boys sexually explicit magazines that he kept in a suitcase in his bedroom.
District Attorney Tom Sneddon projected on a courtroom screen the covers of magazines including one called Barely Legal, which depicted an extremely young woman with her breasts exposed.
The defense has said Jackson had "girlie" magazines in his house but never showed them to children.
The boy said that after seeing Jackson with his hand in his brother's underwear he witnessed another episode of what he described as masturbation two days later. He did not state the dates of the incidents, which the prosecution says followed a February 2003 TV documentary in which Jackson appeared with the boy at Neverland.
Jackson, 46, is accused of molesting a 13-year-old cancer survivor at Neverland, giving him alcohol and conspiring to hold the family captive to get them to rebut the damaging documentary in which Jackson said he allowed children to sleep in his bedroom.
The defense is expected to attack the account as fiction designed by the children's mother in an attempt to get money from the pop star.
The courtroom was still during the boys's testimony Monday. Sometimes the boy spoke softly and had to be told to speak up, but he did not hesitate to answer questions.
Jackson's mother and father were present but showed no reaction. Jackson occasionally leaned over, put his hand on his lawyer's shoulder and whispered in his ear. Jurors listened intently and a few took notes.
The rosy-cheeked boy appeared to grow fatigued by the end of the day, yawning widely and rubbing his eyes with his hands. He faced more questioning by the prosecutor Tuesday.
The brother said that Jackson first brought up the subject of masturbation with him and asked if he ever did it.
The boy said he answered no.
"Then he said to me, 'Everyone does it. You should try it. It's OK,"' the witness said of Jackson.
He also told of Jackson conducting drinking parties with his young boy guests in which he served them wine and called it "Jesus juice."
The witness indicated he was surprised when he walked in on Jackson touching his brother.
He said he pushed open the door to Jackson's room and, "I saw directly onto the bed. I saw my brother was outside the covers. I saw Michael's left hand in my brother's underwears and I saw his right hand in his underwears," he said.
He described his brother as curled up and snoring slightly, and he said he saw Jackson masturbating.
Two days later, he said he encountered a similar scene after entering Jackson's home.
"I went upstairs. The same thing was happening but my brother was on his back. … My brother was asleep. Michael was masturbating while he had his left hand in my brother's underwears."
The witness said he didn't tell his mother or his sister what happened, nor did he tell his brother what he had seen.
"I didn't know what to do," the witness said. "I went back to my guest room."
The witness said the first person he told about the incident was psychologist Stan Katz, who interviewed the boy and then notified the authorities.
The boy also described an incident in which Jackson grabbed a mannequin that he kept in his bedroom and "he pretended like he was having intercourse with it" on bed while fully clothed and laughing.
Jurors were shown a photo of a mannequin depicting a girl with braids.
As Jackson left court and a reporter asked him how he felt hearing the testimony, the singer said, "I'm sorry, I'm under a gag order."
---
Associated Press Writer Tim Molloy contributed to this report.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: March 8, 2005

 

End of Document
