

Bush punches up campaign, sees 'the year of the sharp elbow'
The Associated Press
February 23, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 776 words
Byline: By SCOTT LINDLAW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush, battered by his Democratic challengers and slipping in the polls, answered back on Monday, arguing that his opponents are hesitant in combatting terrorism and that their policies will raise taxes.
Changing his campaign tactics, the president said the November election presents "a choice between keeping the tax relief that is moving this economy forward, or putting the burden of higher taxes back on the American people," according to prepared remarks for his speech to a Republican Governors Association fund-raiser.
"It's a choice between an America that leads the world with strength and confidence, or an America that is uncertain in the face of danger," Bush said.
The president shelved the rhetoric he's been using for months on the fund-raising circuit, in which he tried to cast himself as focused on policy and unconcerned with re-election politics. The new address was billed as a preview of his stump speech and came at a time when he is preparing to launch a multimillion-dollar advertising barrage.
The speech, as drafted, walked to the edge of referring to Democratic front-runner John Kerry by name, but did not explicitly do so, aides said.
Bush pledged to improve the economy and "keep our enemies on the run," and said Democratic presidential hopefuls "have not offered much in the way of strategies to win the war, or policies to expand the economy."
"We hear a lot of old bitterness and partisan anger," Bush said. "Anger is not an agenda for the future or America."
Kerry has yet to secure the Democratic nomination as he and Sen. John Edwards of North Carolina wage a two-man fight. Kerry holds a significant lead in the delegate chase, with contests Tuesday in Hawaii, Idaho and Utah, and a 10-state election, including California and New York, on March 2.
While engaging his Democratic rival, Kerry has succeeded in drawing Bush into early skirmishes, like the one over the weekend in which Kerry challenged the president to a debate about the Vietnam War.
Kerry said Bush's plunge into campaign mode signaled the president is nervous.
"I think George Bush is on the run. And I think he's on the run because he doesn't have a record to run on," Kerry said while campaigning in New York's Harlem neighborhood.
"I don't think losing 3 million jobs, having deficits as far as the eye can go, having 2 million people lose their health insurance, turning your back on kids in schools and not funding No Child Left Behind … represents a vision," Kerry said later in Queens, N.Y. "That's the truth of what is happening in America today."
Edwards also took a swipe at Bush, telling voters in Georgia, "I can't imagine he's got all that much to say tonight. The people want this campaign to be about the future, not the past."
Bush tried to shrug off such criticism Monday as election-year posturing. "It's going to be the year of the sharp elbow and the quick tongue," Bush told governors of both parties at the White House.
Bush has kept his eye firmly fixed on re-election since taking office, tailoring his travels to battleground states, racking up IOUs with fellow Republicans and raising more than $151 million for his campaign.
What has changed is his willingness to publicly engage in the campaign, beyond fund raising.
"He's looking forward to this campaign and to the debate and issues before the American people," said White House communications director Dan Bartlett. "He's excited about the coming months and year."
There had been a split among Bush's advisers over whether to try to keep the president above the fray or have him engage his opponents, with the latter strategy prevailing.
Bush's spokesman, Scott McClellan, said Monday that the president began filming campaign commercials about two weeks ago in the White House residence.
The ads will air on cable TV around the country and on network stations in competitive markets, with the slogan: "Steady Leadership in Times of Change." They begin airing March 4, just two days after the wave of primary elections that is likely to cement the Democrats' pick to challenge Bush.
Bush's approval ratings has dipped around 50 percent in recent polls - some in the high 40s.
Bush, his loyalists and their relatives were maintaining their heavy fund-raising efforts this week. Vice President Dick Cheney raised $200,000 in Minneapolis on Monday and expected to collect another $200,000 Monday evening in Wichita, Kan.
The president was heading to Kentucky and North Carolina to raise cash Thursday, the same day Florida Gov. Jeb Bush was raising money for his brother in Atlanta. And Lynne Cheney, the vice president's wife, was heading to Toledo, Ohio for re-election money on Friday.
 Load-Date: February 24, 2004

 

End of Document
