

Bush goes step by step into the angry complexities of the Middle East
April 5, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 897 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The silence from the ranch on Good Friday could not last. In the week since, President Bush has been pushed into action by events inflaming not only the Palestinian-Israeli conflict but the Middle East itself.
"Enough is enough," Bush finally said, ordering his secretary of state to go and mediate.
His decision to place U.S. diplomacy on the line was taken gradually behind the scenes, with urgent backchannel maneuverings, and conveyed in a tense phone call to Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, later to a besieged Yasser Arafat.
"We have a right to defend ourselves," the prime minister stonily told Colin Powell, who had drawn the unhappy chore of telling Sharon that Bush wanted him to stop the offensive. Yet the wheels were in motion for Powell to go.
Powell leaves Sunday night on his first visit to Israel since the latest uprising began. The secretary goes in an unusual circumstance for a top-level diplomat: not to seal a deal in the making but to try to extract one from rubble piling higher by the day.
Along the way, he will meet Arab and European leaders who have been in a state of high anxiety over Bush's reluctance, until now, to get too involved.
As described privately by some of the participants in days of meetings, Bush had several critical decisions to make before he could commit. Among them: Should Arafat be written off or kept as a negotiating partner?
Keep him in the picture, it was decided with Powell's prompting, after much debate.
For how long?
Perhaps just this one last time. And start looking for "other Palestinian leaders" who might be more trustworthy.
A U.S. president is never a mere bystander in the Israeli-Palestinian feud.
He is in an odd position - he is both Israel's best friend and probably the Palestinians' best hope. Whatever else they think about America, Palestinians turn to it for help with Israel.
Bush looked like a bystander a week ago Friday.
He played with his dogs at his Texas ranch and said nothing in public as Israel laid siege to Arafat's compound. An Israeli rage building for weeks had climaxed with the Passover suicide bombing two days earlier that killed 26 people.
Aides now say Bush first raised the prospect that Friday of sending Powell to the region. But it was just a thought.
When Bush did speak from his ranch, the next day, with apocalyptic storm clouds rolling over the Texas sky and a tornado watch in effect, his language was shorn of the this-but-that equivocations that often characterize America's approach to the complexities of the Middle East.
Israel was right to retaliate against terrorism, he said flatly.
But the usual cycle of attack and reprisal had been ramped up into warfare and it was threatening the stability of the entire region.
"It started to create conditions in other nations … that we thought were becoming too dangerous, to the point that the United States had to step in, play a leadership role and act," one senior official said.
On Sunday, a Palestinian suicide bomber killed himself and 15 diners at a restaurant and wounded dozens. No new U.S. initiatives were offered; it was still up to Bush's midlevel envoy Anthony Zinni to try to get a cease-fire.
Members of Congress were among those clamoring for more.
On Monday, at a national security meeting, Vice President Dick Cheney pushed for tough anti-terrorism rhetoric from Bush and was viewed by others in the room as cool to the idea of asking Israel to pull back its offensive.
Powell, said the aides, told the meeting it might be a good time for him to go.
He has long made a point of sounding out lower level people in the field. "I like to get my truth from the ground level," he says. And his ambassadors were telling him unrest was spreading in the Arab world.
On Tuesday Bush decided to send Powell and give him a broad mandate to urge Israel to pull back, win a cease-fire and - for the first time - link security and political discussions. "He was told to get it done any way he can," an adviser said.
That same day, Powell was doing TV interviews saying he had no plans to travel to the Middle East. Privately, he was in contact with Sharon almost daily, gently bracing him for the statement Bush was preparing to make.
Meanwhile, the White House had secured assurances through private channels that Israel would not let Powell return to the United States without some success in his mission to secure a pullback of Israeli troops.
By all appearances, Powell was still improvising his schedule. On Wednesday, he gave the first indication he might meet Israeli leaders on his planned trip to Europe next week. "My mind is open," he said.
At about 7 a.m. Thursday in Washington, Powell called Sharon to tell him what Bush would be saying later in the day.
"The president asked me to call," Powell told him. Sharon was not pleased.
"We have a right to defend ourselves," he said, in what one official described, in the best of terms, as an uncomfortable conversation.
Powell continued to work the phones that morning. Did he try to reach Arafat right away? "There was no attempt not to call," a senior official said mysteriously. Powell reached Arafat later in the day.
Bush spoke from the Rose Garden at 11 a.m. Again he attacked terrorism. He criticized Arafat in harsh terms. Yet he also said Israel should pull back its offensive and ease up on Palestinian civilians.
The nuances were back and now Powell walks into the complexities.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX114-117
 Load-Date: April 6, 2002

 

End of Document
