

Chrysler keeps the fun in the sizable Sebring - America's favorite convertible
The Associated Press
August 6, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1160 words
Byline: By ANN M. JOB, For The Associated Press
Body




One sure way to get the most out of these waning days of summer: Drive America's most popular convertible.
Chrysler's Sebring retains its top-down fun and honest-to-goodness seating for four. Its class-leading 11.7-cubic-foot trunk is there, ready for two sets of golf clubs, too.
Now, for the 2004 model year, the Sebring two-door soft top also has revised front appearance, new, stylish wheels and a realigned model lineup.
As it has for nearly all of the past six years, Sebring last year bested all other new convertibles in the United States.
Sales in calendar 2002 totaled 43,809, company spokesman Bryan Zvibleman said. He added that Sebring holds a 12 percent share of the U.S. convertible market.
It's a commendable showing for a vehicle which debuted originally in spring 1996 as one of the few convertibles on the market that can carry more than two people and more than just a suitcase or two.
In the ensuing years, new models have entered the convertible segment, but most - such as the Honda S2000 and current generation Ford Thunderbird - have only two seats and less cargo room than the Sebring.
In 2004, the Sebring convertible remains affordable, with starting manufacturer's suggested retail price, including destination charge, of $25,435 for the base 2004 model.
This is up, however, from $24,670 for a base 2003 Sebring convertible and higher than the $24,080 starting price for a 2004 Ford Mustang.
Note the Sebring base price is for a four-cylinder model with automatic transmission, while the base Mustang comes with a standard V6 and manual transmission.
Another four-seat convertible on the market, the 2003 Volkswagen New Beetle, has a starting MSRP, including destination charge, of $21,025. This is for a four-cylinder model with manual transmission that qualifies as the lowest-priced convertible sold in the United States.
The 2004 Sebring is larger in overall dimensions than either the Mustang or New Beetle and is classified by the Environmental Protection Agency as a compact - a larger category than the Mustang and Beetle.
Riders get the benefit of Sebring's 193.7-inch length and 106-inch wheelbase when interior space is factored in with the sizable trunk space.
Front-seat legroom of 42.4 inches is nearly as much as the 42.6 inches in the Mustang and more than the 39.4 inches in the New Beetle.
Headroom, with the fabric top on, is a decent 38.7 inches in the front seat, compared with Mustang's 38.1 inches and the VW convertible's 40.7 inches.
Rear-seat headroom in the Sebring is a commendable 37 inches, comparable to the 37.2 inches in the back seat of the New Beetle and more than the 35.5 inches in the Mustang.
Note that Mustang's maximum trunk space is 7.7 cubic feet, while VW lists 5 cubic feet for the New Beetle trunk.
The test Sebring brought looks from several neighbors, all of whom noticed the more upscale appearance of the front end.
Along with a revised grille and new position for the Chrysler winged badge, the '04 Sebring has scalloped edges on its headlamps.
Chrysler officials said they want the Sebring soft top to more closely reflect the premium image they're striving to build in all Chrysler vehicles.
The tester was the top-of-the-line Limited, so it had new aluminum wheels with a shiny chrome appearance that also added a fancier look.
Doors are long on this convertible to help ease entry into the back seat. But I also had to be careful opening them in parking lots.
Gauges in the Limited are similar to those in other Chrysler sedans and easy to read, with a soft green illumination at night and a white background during the day.
The Sebring's base engine remains a 150-horsepower, 2.4-liter, double overhead cam four-cylinder. But the newly aligned uplevel models - the GTC, Touring and Limited - all come with the more competent, 200-horsepower, 2.7-liter, double overhead cam V6.
Torque is 190 foot-pounds at 4,850 rpm and seems ready to come on, no matter the road situation.
There was no real jerkiness in the engine power delivery during the test drive, just a satisfying, responsive feel, even on long uphill climbs.
In city driving, the Sebring Limited moved with purpose into and around traffic with nary a sense of sluggishness.
But I wish the engine sounds hadn't included that whir I heard each time I accelerated.
I also could control the shifts of the four-speed automatic, if I wanted, with an AutoStick that let me go from gear to gear without depressing a clutch pedal. The gear shifts weren't done quite as smoothly with AutoStick, however.
Ford's Mustang, which ranks as the second best-selling convertible in this country, has three engine offerings, including two V8s that provide more horsepower and torque than the Sebring has.
VW's convertible comes with four-cylinder engines only. One is naturally aspirated, the other is turbocharged and offers 150 horses and 162 foot-pounds of torque between 2,200 and 4,200 rpm.
The Sebring continues to ride on the same platform it has had for years, which meant it didn't take long for me to notice some cowl shake as I went over bumps on city streets.
On rougher bumps, riders felt quite a few vibrations and a busy-ness under the car floor as the suspension sought to damp and hold down any tendency for bounciness.
It wasn't the most sophisticated feel to a suspension, but the Sebring convertible still handled well on curvy roads in the mountains.
I loved how the fabric top went down in a mere 7 seconds. All I had to do was unlatch the roof at the top of the windshield and push a button.
The boot, or cover, over the folded top has to be installed manually, however.
Be careful as you back up, since the fabric top's rear window pillar can block much of the side rear view.
The test Sebring had whistling sounds now and again from the driver window area when the top was on.
The Sebring seats are nicely cushioned, even the two in the back seats. But back-seat riders have no head restraints.
I also noticed that the glovebox didn't have a lock in this open-top car. So I had to squeeze valuables all into the center console storage area, which did have a lock.
Fifty-three percent of buyers are women, and most buyers are between 45 and 50 years old, Zvibleman said.
Average household income is $85,000, and 77 percent of buyers don't have children at home, he said.
The 2003 Sebring convertible received three out of five stars for driver and front-passenger protection in government frontal and side crash tests.
It received four out of five stars for side-crash protection for rear passengers. Rollover resistance was five out of five stars, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said.
NHTSA has no reports of safety recalls of 2002, 2003 or 2004 Sebring convertibles.
Consumer Reports has no reliability report on the 2004 Sebring, but previous models had average reliability.
---
On the Net:
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration:
http://www.+nhtsa+.dot.gov/ 
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety:
http://www.highwaysafety.org/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY356 of Aug. 6
 Load-Date: August 7, 2003

 

End of Document
