

Dolly and Anna the elephants among the victims of budget cuts at the Baltimore Zoo
The Associated Press
November 5, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 293 words
Dateline: BALTIMORE
Body




The budget is so tight at the Baltimore Zoo that 20 jobs are being eliminated and 400 animals, including Dolly and Anna the elephants, are getting their walking papers.
The animals - also including cranes, flamingos, ducks, reptiles and amphibians - will be offered to other zoos, officials said Tuesday.
The loss of Dolly and Anna will be the most visible sign of the zoo's struggle to stay afloat after a $700,000 reduction in state aid, compounded by a sagging economy and a year of terrible weather.
Lending out the elephants is expected to save more than $100,000, including the salaries of four zookeepers who work almost exclusively on their care, officials told The (Baltimore) Sun.
The cuts are expected to save more than $1 million. The 20 job cuts represent a staff reduction of 11.7 percent that will bring employment down to about 150 people.
"If we didn't make the cuts, we would go out of business in the first quarter of 2004," said Billie Grieb, president of the zoo. "We couldn't ignore that and just hope. We wouldn't do this unless we had to."
Zoo officials hope the two female elephants can be bred and then return to Baltimore, with their young, in a few years.
It might take six months or longer to find homes for the elephants, both in their late 20s, zoo officials said. They must be kept in temperatures that are at least 50 degrees.
Grieb recognizes the potential marketing loss in giving up the high-profile elephants.
"Of course we're concerned, and we're going to miss them ourselves," she said. "But they're all the way at the end of our campus, and a lot of people never get there. With our new polar bear exhibit and the other things we're doing, we think it's a better use of our resources."
---
On the Net:
http://www.baltimorezoo.org/ 
 Load-Date: November 6, 2003

 

End of Document
