

Enron lawyer raised questions with superiors about off-the-books deals he thought would harm the company
February 6, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; Washington Dateline
Length: 741 words
Byline: By PETE YOST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Immediately after he was hired, an Enron attorney became so concerned about obscure partnerships the company was using to conceal debt that he raised a string of objections in an attempt to rein them in.
The uneasiness of ex-Enron lawyer Jordan Mintz is detailed in five memos released on the eve of a House committee hearing whose other star witness will be former Enron chief executive Jeff Skilling, who let the partnerships proceed.
In the Senate, Democratic Sen. Ernest Hollings and Republican Ted Stevens urged their leaders to set up a single select committee for the chamber's investigation because so many panels are investigating Enron.
"The issues range from consumer fraud, artificial energy price spikes, the loss of the Enron employees' pension fund" to "SEC regulation and compliance," stated the letter to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle and Minority Leader Trent Lott.
Four Enron executives with knowledge of the partnerships were to be witnesses Thursday at the House hearing, but will invoke their Fifth Amendment right not to testify, said Ken Johnson, spokesman for the House Energy and Commerce Committee.
The four, who will all be present, include Andrew Fastow, who is at the center of off-the-books deals involving the partnerships, said Johnson.
Skilling, who will testify, says he knew little about the details of partnership deals that eventually plunged Enron into bankruptcy. The memos show that Mintz insisted Skilling sign off on the arrangements before they could proceed. In the case of one partnership, six people signed an approval sheet, but the line next to Skilling's typed name is blank. Two of the people who signed the sheet, Rick Buy and Rick Causey, are among the people refusing to testify, said Johnson.
Skilling's lawyers say his approval wasn't required, but "based on the documents it looks to us like Skilling wanted to keep his fingerprints off the partnerships," said Johnson, the committee spokesman.
In a memo to Skilling last May 22, Mintz wrote that "I can send such approval sheets to you as a package and you can then sign at your convenience." Twelve days earlier, Mintz had gone to an outside law firm because of his concerns about whether the partnerships were proper.
Johnson said Mintz was hired in October 2000 as general counsel for Enron Global Finance. He wrote a memo Dec. 7 of the same year raising questions about one of the proposed partnerships, LJM3 Co-Investment.
"We have found substantial evidence of illegal activity by Enron and its management," committee chairman Billy Tauzin, R-La., said at a hearing of his committee.
The company's actions "served to deceive the public about Enron's financial condition. It artificially pumped up Enron's stock price and allowed these same executives to enrich themselves with sales of Enron stock."
The details of Mintz's questioning of the partnerships emerged as Sens. Labor Secretary Elaine Chao said American workers need assurance their retirement savings are secure. Many Enron employees lost their life savings in 401(k) plans loaded with Enron stock.
Lawmakers agreed changes were needed but expressed differing views on how to protect employees.
Chao told Congress that President Bush's proposal would not limit the amount of time employees are barred from making changes in their accounts while plan administrators are being switched. The proposal would encourage employers to keep that period short, Chao said.
Bush wants workers to have more flexibility to diversify their company savings accounts, aiming to prevent a repeat of the Enron case. Thousands of Enron employees lost their retirement savings as the company stock plummeted during a period when they were barred from selling the stock from their investment accounts.
"We must strengthen the confidence of the American work force that their retirement savings are secure," Chao testified at a hearing by the House Committee on Education and the Workforce.
The administration plan also would allow employees to sell company stock contributed by their employer to their 401(k) after a three-year period. Employers would have to give workers quarterly statements with detailed information on their accounts and their rights to diversify holdings.
A dozen congressional committees are investigating the Houston-based energy-trading company, as are the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Justice Department. Enron entered the biggest bankruptcy in U.S. history on Dec. 2.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WCAP103, WCAP112, WCAP117
 Load-Date: February 7, 2002

 

End of Document
