

Entertainment Briefs; Contains items on the Hard Rock Hotel, Gaylord Entertainment, Listen.com, The Hole in the Wall nightclub. Gaylord Entertainment
July 3, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1023 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LAS VEGAS (AP) - A Las Vegas hotel is rebuffing requests from guests who want to book the room where The Who bass guitarist John Entwistle died last week.
"We would prefer that the room number never get publicly identified, out of respect for John Entwistle and the band," Don Marrandino, Hard Rock president and chief operating officer, said in a statement released Tuesday.
Entwistle was found dead Thursday of an apparent heart attack. Clark County Coroner Ron Flud has said it could take weeks before a cause of death is known.
The Hard Rock left the room vacant over the weekend before making it available for occupancy Monday.
"We wanted to treat it with dignity and respect," Marrandino told the Las Vegas Review-Journal. "We're not going to put a plaque up there or anything else. I think a room a guy dies in is not a positive marketing opportunity."
The Hard Rock, known for its collection of rock 'n' roll memorabilia, might create a permanent onsite memorial to Entwistle if bandmates approve.
Executives also are debating whether to distribute, destroy or auction several thousand commemorative gambling chips that were to have been issued before Friday's concert at the Hard Rock. The show was to have begun a three-month national tour.
Instead, the tour opened Monday night at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles.
The $5, $25 and $100 chips, featuring the image of The Who lead guitarist Pete Townshend, are locked in a vault.
The hotel also said it expects The Who will reschedule its concert in the Hard Rock's 1,800 seat venue, The Joint, sometime near the September end of the band's U.S. tour.
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Sony/ATV Music Publishing will buy the oldest and one of the richest song catalogs in country music from Gaylord Entertainment for $157 million.
Acuff-Rose Music Publishing, founded by country singer Roy Acuff and songwriter Fred Rose in 1942, includes classics such as "Oh Pretty Woman," "Bye Bye Love," "Your Cheatin' Heart" and "Tennessee Waltz." Songwriters who once wrote for the company include Hank Williams Sr., Don Gibson and Felice and Boudleaux Bryant.
Sony/ATV Music Publishing already owns a vast catalog including songs by the Beatles, Willie Nelson, Stevie Nicks, Pearl Jam and Babyface. Michael Jackson is a partner in the publishing company, which has administrative headquarters in Nashville.
"We have been entrusted with a real treasure," said Paul Russell, chairman of Sony/ATV Music Publishing. "Our first priority will be to maintain the integrity and quality of the Acuff-Rose catalog while raising its profile with new generations of performers."
The deal, which must be approved by federal antitrust regulators, is expected to close in August. It's part of a drive by Gaylord to narrow its once diverse interests to a core of convention hotels and entertainment franchises, primarily the Grand Ole Opry country music radio show.
"We will use the capital received in this transaction to invest in development projects in our core hospitality business, particularly building our Gaylord Opryland Texas Resort & Convention Center, which is under construction outside of Dallas," Colin Reed, president and chief executive officer of Gaylord, said Tuesday.
On the Net:
Gaylord Entertainment Web site: http://www.gaylordentertainment.com/ 
Sony/ATV Music Publishing Web site: http://www.sonyatv.com 
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - Listen.com announced that its online music service, Rhapsody, has signed a deal to stream music content from a fifth major recording company, Universal Music Group.
Rhapsody now boasts selections from each of the five major labels, something neither of the labels' own online joint ventures - MusicNet and pressplay - has achieved.
"Three years ago, the labels really hoped the Internet would go away because they couldn't see any benefit to it," Listen chief executive Sean Ryan said Monday. "In the last year, they've grown to understand the Internet is not going away and the Internet can grow their businesses."
The Rhapsody service offers access to all of San Francisco-based Listen's licensed music content for $9.95 and allows the user to stream songs from a desktop computer.
Though Rhapsody boasts a robust collection of music on its service, few of the top 10 songs on the Billboard singles chart could be found on the service last week. Rhapsody also does not support CD burning other than its classical selection, and the music cannot be uploaded to portable MP3 players.
That could keep subscribers away, and Ryan admits few people have signed up for any of the competing subscription services thus far. Neither Rhapsody, MusicNet nor pressplay has yet to divulge how many users have subscribed to the respective services.
On the Net:
Listen.com Web site: http://www.listen.com 
MusicNet Web site: http://www.musicnet.com 
pressplay Web site: http://www.pressplay.com 
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) - The Hole in the Wall, a nightclub near the University of Texas campus that was a fixture in Austin's live music scene, has closed after 28 years.
The Hole in the Wall shut down Sunday after a last night of business that turned into a party for regulars, musicians and newcomers.
The club's lease expired at the end of June, and the building is for sale for $972,000. Renting month to month was an option, but the bar's liquor license was up for renewal in August.
"The combination makes it difficult," said co-owner Debbie Rombach.
Over the past month, some prominent musicians revisited the Hole for a fund-raising festival, donating their take to help the bar pay its debts, which mostly includes back payroll taxes. The concert series, called 30 Days in the Hole, aimed to raise more than $15,000.
The profits barely made a dent in the debt, Rombach said.
She said she might reopen the Hole in another location if she can find a place where the rent isn't too high.
The Hole opened in 1974 as a neighborhood bar. Early on it was largely supported by the video arcade in the back room. From the first year, it was a music spot.
Nanci Griffith played there in 1974, earning $15 a night, along with tips and drinks. Steve Earle, John Reed and Charlie Sexton have left their musical footprints there.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY116 Hard Rock; NY117 Hank Williams
 Load-Date: July 4, 2002

 

End of Document
