

Even at age 73, advocate refuses to talk of quitting the fight to keep the Hudson River free of pollution
March 18, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1074 words
Byline: By MICHAEL VIRTANEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: COLD SPRING, N.Y.
Body




Robert Boyle, dethroned champion of the Hudson River, isn't ready to hang up his gloves.
The author of "The Hudson River: A Natural and Unnatural History," published in 1969 and considered the "Silent Spring" for the waterway, has spent decades battling polluters in the press and courts. He gave up his role as president of Riverkeeper, an advocacy group he founded in 1983 to catch Hudson polluters, after a struggle within the group almost two years ago.
But, at 73, Boyle keeps campaigning.
The ex-boxing writer and one-time amateur fighter is among a handful of plaintiffs pursuing a federal appeal to stop construction of a power plant upriver in Athens.
In February he published a book on fishing, and revisions to his seminal environmental book are expected to be completed this year. He lectures and contributes to Audubon magazine, The New York Times and Fly Fisherman.
But his focus over the years has remained the same.
"I'll always be close to the Hudson," he says. "I'll still be a voice for the river."
That will continue despite leaving his aerie in the Highlands with its view of Storm King Mountain, where Boyle led a 16-year fight to beat back a hydroelectric plant. He and his wife, Kathryn Belous-Boyle, recently sold the 6.5-acre property they've had since 1978.
"He's even fighting in bed," shredding the bedclothes, she jokes.
For 17 years, Boyle was president of Riverkeeper, which succeeded the Hudson River Fishermen's Association, which he co-founded. Between the two groups, more than 100 lawsuits were filed against polluters. Riverkeeper's mission: to protect the integrity of the watershed.
Settlements and fines included $12 million from utilities to establish the Hudson River Foundation for Science and Environmental Research and $2 million from Exxon, found rinsing out oil tankers near Hyde Park.
Riverkeeper's original budget was $50 a week, paid to John Cronin, a former commercial fisherman and congressional aide hired to patrol the Hudson as the first riverkeeper.
The 315-mile waterway, which runs from the Adirondacks to Manhattan, takes its name from the English navigator Henry Hudson, who traveled halfway up in 1609.
Along Manhattan, it was considered an open sewer four decades ago. A dead giraffe and a grand piano floated up, along with condoms, excrement, tires and other debris.
The first lawsuit by the fishermen's association, in 1968, was against the old Penn Central railroad for oil discharges.
Consolidated Edison's proposed pumped storage hydroelectric plant on Storm King Mountain would have routinely sucked up and discharged millions of gallons of water, killing millions of fish. It was stopped partly because of a report that many striped bass spawned in the area. As the fight roiled through agencies, Capitol Hill and the federal appeals court in the 1960s and early '70s, Storm King became a buzzword in the nascent modern environmental movement.
"When you add up what we've stopped, it's in the billions," Boyle says, also mentioning the Westway highway project in Manhattan.
Riverkeeper now has a $2.3 million budget, seven in-house lawyers, about 40 active lawsuits, school programs and a citizen hot line. Its patrol boat logged more than 1,000 hours on the river in the past 18 months.
Boyle, nonetheless, has critics. U.S. District Judge Norman Mordue refused last year to issue an injunction to stop the Athens power plant, saying Boyle and the other plaintiffs were essentially just citizens reciting "general public knowledge, personal opinion, speculation." He also questioned the historic significance of the Storm King case.
"Although Mr. Boyle does not claim to have a law degree," Mordue wrote, "his 'active' status in fighting industrialization and pollution in the Hudson River Valley area have apparently led him to conclude that the Second Circuit's decision in Scenic Hudson Pres. Conference v. Fed. Power Comm'n (2d Cir. 1965) 'marked the birth of modern environmental law."'
Former Consolidated Edison Chairman Charles F. Luce butted heads with Boyle.
"He could be a little unreasonable if you're looking at it from the power side, the side trying to keep the lights on," Luce said. "From his side he was simply an absolutist in the protection of the river."
The deck behind the Boyle's French country manor-style house in Cold Spring overlooked the Hudson Valley, the wide estuary, the fortress formations of West Point across the way. On a recent winter day, Boyle pointed out the wetlands of the wildlife sanctuary, next to a former Superfund site where cadmium and nickel were removed in the 1990s.
A hawk circled overhead. A deer stood on the wooded hillside.
Environmentalist is an odd tag for a sportswriter, but it grew out of a 32-year career with Sports Illustrated in which the New York City native covered boxing and wrote about the outdoors.
As senior boxing writer, Boyle covered the young Cassius Clay, who dethroned Sonny Liston as heavyweight champion in 1964 then changed his name to Muhammad Ali. Above Boyle's library work space hung a photograph of Clay and him in the back seat of a car in Chicago.
He recalled an uneasy month covering Liston, who came out of prison to win the heavyweight title and later died in Las Vegas from an apparent drug overdose.
Boyle got off the boxing beat "because I'd want to bathe in acid because (of) all the slimy guys I met.
"Then I got involved in the environment. All the slimy guys in boxing looked like the campfire girls," he said with a laugh.
He caught his first fish at age 4 and got interested in the river, with its fill of shad, bass and sturgeon, after moving to Croton-on-Hudson in 1960. He would find dead fish, sewage and even medical waste in the waters. It seemed a natural progression that the Marine Corps veteran with a master's degree in history and international relations from Yale University would begin to research and write about the waterway.
"It was a visible mess, but it wasn't dead at all," Boyle says. "It's a very strong system."
These days, the raw sewage that was a public health hazard and wreaked havoc on shellfish doesn't flow into the Hudson anymore, and the Environmental Protection Agency's recent decision to dredge PCBs is welcome.
But Boyle doesn't believe in declaring victory, or trusting officials to make more good decisions.
"You can't adopt a party or a politician," he says. "You have to address issue, by issue, by issue."
On the Net:
Riverkeeper, Inc.: http://www.riverkeeper.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY355 of March 18
 Load-Date: March 19, 2002

 

End of Document
