

Expatriate Iraqis, nestled in the good life in America, are feeling the tug of homeland
The Associated Press
April 22, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1016 words
Byline: By SIOBHAN McDONOUGH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WOODBRIDGE, Va.
Body




Ali Shaker, watching TV in his leather chair before a warm meal draws him to the dinner table, says he knows well the comforts of American life.
Shaker drives a Ford minivan, lives in a suburban town house, commutes on the Washington Beltway and worships Michael Jordan. Yet he's going back to his native Iraq.
The 45-year-old father of two, a lawyer who has become an odd-jobber in America, can't forget the soulful stirrings of palm trees in the breeze. He remembers how a cover of palm fronds over a ditch may have saved his life when Saddam Hussein's men had him on the run.
"I will miss America, the luxurious life here, but sometimes you have no choice," he said, warming up to a traditional Iraqi meal of chicken, chickpeas, rice, baked tomato and eggplant, and watching TV news clips of his battered country. "I have to do some things for my people."
His wife, Kamela, teases him about his expanding stomach, saying it's how he's most become "Americanized." His 11-year-old daughter, Ghofran, flashes a grin. Thriving in her Virginia school, she will be staying behind with an uncle when her parents and infant sister leave for a planned two-year stint.
About 300,000 people of Iraqi origin live in the United States, according to the Iraqi-American Council. Many came in the 1970s at the beginning of Saddam's rule. Many are wrestling with questions about whether to go back now that it's over.
The answers are not easy because they have nestled comfortably into the American way of life.
In Baltimore, Haider Thamir says he would like to take his 15-year-old daughter Reem back to Iraq some day to see where she was born. But he could no longer contemplate moving there.
"I would go back to help, but not to live," said Thamir. "People, nations, they change during war and Iraq has had two of them and 12 years of sanctions since I left. I don't know if I'd ever fit in again there. This is home for me now."
In contrast, Jabbar al-Roumi of Paterson, N.J., an Iraqi soldier from the 1991 Gulf War who surrendered to U.S. forces and then moved to America, plans to go home to Basra, where he has 17 relatives, a fiancee and a mechanic's shop.
"The future is better now," al-Roumi said. "I will go back, get married, work again and be in love."
---
The new Iraq will need political figures, business leaders, scholars, lawyers and others schooled in the ways of democracy, independent legal institutions and other foundations of a freer society.
Some exiles have already gone back to a homeland they had not seen for years. Some expatriates trained by the U.S. Army went into Iraq as part of the invasion force.
Ahmad Chalabi, 58, a U.S.-educated, London-based opposition figure in the Saddam years, is in Iraq for the first time since he was a teenager.
Shaker is awaiting a call from the London-based Iraqi Jurists Association telling him when and where to go. The State Department helped prepare him for work in Iraq as a jurist or prosecutor.
"It will be a very different place than the one I left," he says. "I don't know if the people can handle the freedom, or appreciate the freedom."
Shaker, who led anti-Saddam groups in the 1991 Shiite uprising in Nasiriyah, hid in a makeshift bunker covered with grass and palm leaves outside his home for three months, only emerging from the ditch at night to be with his family.
He was sought by the Republican Guard, who arrested his father when they couldn't find him. Shaker believes his father was later poisoned by Saddam's secret police.
His brother, Hassan Shaker, fled with him. Shaker left behind his wife, then six months pregnant. "I remember my mother's face," he says. "She was very upset, she didn't want me to go."
"I had to leave," he adds, "because I was putting troubles on my family."
Saddam's army captured the brothers but when a military official recognized Ali Shaker from law school, he gave them a break.
"He said, 'Go and don't ever stop. Go straight to the Americans,"' Ali said.
After making their way to American troops, they were sent to a refugee camp in Saudi Arabia until they were able to immigrate to the United States in 1993.
Ali Shaker reunited with his wife last year - and met his daughter for the first time.
He has worked a string of jobs since. He currently works for a security company.
Ghofran, a poised and ponytailed fifth-grader, has told her parents she wants to stay in the United States with uncle Hassan. Her American friends, pizza - and her ambition to become a doctor - are why she wants to stay, though she has good memories of Iraq.
"The TV images make me sad," she says. "I miss my nephews, cousins. I want to see my father's village, the date palms."
Kamela Shaker fetches cold cans of Coca-Cola.
"I was miserable in Iraq," she says. "My husband was not with me. Saddam's regime watched me, any movement I made. The pressure was too much. You never knew what was going to happen in the next moment.
"Here, everything is available to you. Any time you want it, you can get it. Life is luxurious here compared to Iraq."
However attached to American niceties, Kamela will be the dutiful wife, by her own choosing, and go back to Iraq.
"If my husband goes I will go," she says, bouncing their 9-month-old baby girl Zainab on her knee. "I can't take another separation."
Ali's brother is unlikely to go any time soon.
Coming to America was like "a new birth" says Hassan, 34, who owns a hair salon. "The only life I remember living in Iraq was those 24 days during the uprising. I don't have the freedom that's gifted to you. When you fight for your freedom, it's different than when you're given it."
Besides, it's taken him years to settle into American ways.
When he worked his first job at a restaurant, the manager asked him to sweep the floor.
"I said, 'Shut up. Women do that.' A year later, I mop and sweep, whatever needs to be done."
He misses swimming in the Euphrates or canoeing on the river with friends at night, under the stars. But that's not enough to drive him back.
"I want Iraqis to live like Americans do," he said. "I want them to have social security. I want them to value human life like they do here."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX102-103 of April 22

 

End of Document
