

Following the money trail through the banking system; a mystery over some hijackers possibly using fake IDs
September 20, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; Washington Dateline
Length: 840 words
Byline: By PETE YOST, Associated Press Writers
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The FBI is enlisting the aid of banks to follow the money trail in last week's terrorist attacks and is trying to untangle a mystery about the hijackers: Did they use aliases of people who still may be alive?
Attorney General John Ashcroft and FBI Director Robert Mueller on Thursday were visiting the southwestern Pennsylvania crash site of United Flight 93, the flight on which several of the passengers made cell phone calls saying they planned to attack their captors.
With the number of people detained on immigration charges for questioning in the probe rising to 115, the FBI sent a list of the alleged hijackers to banks Wednesday asking bank officials to search for any financial transactions involving 21 people wanted in connection with the terrorist attacks.
"The FBI is requesting that all financial institutions check their records for any relationships or transactions with the named suspects," said a "Special Alert" dated Sept. 19 from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.
"Any financial institution that identifies such a relationship, such as a bank account, or a transaction, such as a wire transfer, with any of the named suspects should complete and file a suspicious Activity Report … and immediately contact" the FBI, the alert added.
The list mostly included the names of 19 Middle Eastern men previously identified by the FBI as the suspected hijackers. But the list identified one of those, Khalid al-Midhar, as possibly alive.
Saudi officials have told U.S. officials that as many as four people in their country with similar names or identical names to the hijackers are alive and that some fear their identities may have been stolen. The FBI is investigating, but hasn't reached any conclusions.
In August, al-Midhar was placed on a watch list after U.S. intelligence received information that a man with that name had been seen meeting with associates of accused terrorist Osama bin Laden in Malaysia, officials have said.
By the time al-Midhar's name was added to the list, U.S. officials believed he already had entered the country. His name was listed on the manifest of the American Airlines jet that crashed into the Pentagon.
Officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said they were exploring several possibilities. One was that al-Midhar never entered the country and his name was simply used as an alias by one of the hijackers who died. Another possibility was that he allowed his name to be used on the flight by another hijacker, so that U.S. officials might assume he died, giving him time to escape the country. A third was that he did in fact die in the crash as a hijacker.
The Los Angeles Times quoted an unnamed law enforcement official in Thursday's editions as saying FBI and CIA officials were advised in August that as many as 200 Islamists with terrorist leanings were slipping into this country and planning "a major assault on the United States."
The advisory, passed on by the Mossad, Israel's intelligence agency, cautioned that it had picked up indications of a "large-scale target" in the United States and that Americans would be "very vulnerable," the official said. The paper said it it not known how U.S. authorities reacted to the warning.
The list sent to banks suggested one of the hijackers may have had a connection to Minnesota, where an Arab man was detained three weeks before the attacks after seeking flight training.
Banks were given three possible addresses to check for Abdulaziz Almomari, who was believed to be on an American Airlines flight out of Boston that crashed into the World Trade Center. One address was in Saudi Arabia, another in Vero Beach, Fla., and the third in St. Paul, Minn.
Another possible link between the hijackers and a flight school also emerged. A man with the same name as one of the hijackers aboard the plane that hit the Pentagon used an aircraft simulator at a Phoenix flight school in June, the school said.
Hani Hanjour was a member of the Sawyer School of Aviation's simulator club, which allows unlimited use of the school's basic flight simulator for $200 a month.
Ashcroft left open the possibility that foreign governments could have supported the terrorists.
During a visit to the Pentagon, Ashcroft sidestepped answering whether investigators had determined a foreign state was involved by saying such terrorist networks in general get backing from governments.
"It is pretty clear that the networks that conduct these kind of events are harbored, supported, sustained and protected by a variety of foreign governments," he said. "It is time for those governments to understand with crystal clarity that the United States of America will not tolerate that kind of support."
Law enforcement officials said the investigation had not made a direct link between last week's attacks and a foreign state, although there was uncorroborated evidence that one of the suspected hijackers met with an Iraqi intelligence officer earlier this year in Europe.
Iraq has denied involvement.
---
 
Associated Press Writer John Solomon contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: September 21, 2001

 

End of Document
