

For two of the world's best climbers, another milestone reached on the mountain known as 'El Cap'
September 24, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 801 words
Byline: By BRIAN MELLEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK, Calif.
Body




With headlamps lighting the way out of the abyss, two rock climbers scrambled atop El Capitan and stepped into the record books on the most celebrated hunk of granite on Earth.
Hans Florine and Steve Gerberding, two of the best climbers in the world, each scaled the 3,000-foot wall for the 100th time, setting a mark that once seemed unreachable. In the process, they demonstrated just how much the sport of rock-climbing has evolved in a half-century.
From a vantage point reached by a well-worn trail, the two helmet-mounted lights could be seen as the climbers emerged from large boulders on a ledge just after dark Sept. 14. A weary voice cried out, "Yowww!"
After 14 hours of nonstop climbing, Gerberding sprawled on the rock and said it would take a few days for the personal milestone, 19 years in the making, to sink in.
"When you're wasted, nothing feels that special," he said. "Special would be if there's a helicopter up here."
As the duo contemplated how they were going to get down, an exhausted and dehydrated Gerberding vomited.
"I'm not gonna die, I'm just beat, dude," he said when his buddy expressed concern. They were 7,000 feet above sea level.
On the valley floor below, car headlights looked like lightning bugs darting through the trees and meadows. Any crowds that had stopped to gawk at the various high-wire acts on the face had packed up and left after dark. If any were lucky enough to spot the pair speeding to the top, they were probably unaware they had witnessed climbing history.
"The fact that they've each done it 100 times definitely shows that climbing El Cap has evolved from the unimaginable in the mid-50s - the 4-minute mile of its time, an unbreakable barrier from something nobody's even tried - to something guys build a life around," said Daniel Duane, author of "El Capitan," a history of the peak and many of its memorable ascents.
The sport of climbing sheer rock walls like El Capitan was in its infancy in 1953 when the summit of Mount Everest half a world away was reached by more traditional mountaineering methods. It would be another five years before anyone conquered El Cap.
El Cap casts an imposing shadow over the glacier-sculpted Yosemite Valley, elevation 4,000 feet. It was considered unassailable until new techniques and equipment were developed after World War II.
The first ascent, led by Warren Harding, took 45 days. The second trip took less than a week. Today, the fastest climbers, including Florine, have made it up the most direct route in less than four hours.
"If we climbed it once in a season we figured we could go home," said Tom Frost, who was on the second team to summit. "These guys could climb it every day. Things have changed so much you couldn't have foreseen the differences."
For accomplished climbers the summit is still a three- or four-day proposition, as they cling to barely visible outcroppings on the sheer cliff, pry their way up cracks invisible from below and haul hundreds of pounds of gear behind them.
Those who can reach the top in less than 24 hours are a new breed of climber, taking less equipment, moving faster and taking greater risks.
"These guys are immortals," Duane said.
Like other extreme sports, where fewer firsts remain, the emphasis among a core of elite athletes is on speed or some other measure of accomplishment. With the 100th climb, which shattered the previous 22-hour mark for that route, Florine has 13 records on El Cap.
Florine proposed the climb to Gerberding because they had both topped out 99 times. Reaching the summit for the 100th time was less a goal than an inevitability after years spent going up and down.
The 42-year-old Gerberding, a reserved climbing instructor from Joshua Tree, said he was "bummed out" when he finished climbing El Cap for the first time in 1983 and has returned ever since, exploring new avenues to the top.
Florine, 38, a boastful marketing representative for a San Francisco rock gym company, said his act of repetition is more a matter of convenience on what is considered the Mecca of big wall climbing.
"You can find walls as big, but you might be taking an airplane, riding on horseback or taking a two day ride to get there," Florine said. "I don't think there's any place in the world that has a 3,000 foot wall 12 minutes from asphalt."
Both men said they were resetting their odometers after reaching the summit by way of the lesser-scaled route up Dihedral Wall.
When first ascended in 1962, the route took 42 days to climb over eight months. When the three climbers reached the top they were greeted by a crowd of friends and photographers.
Florine and Gerberding received no such welcoming.
They exchanged a quick handshake at the top, Florine phoned his wife and then the two climbers posed for a couple self-timed photos to record the event themselves.
 Graphic



 
APN SUNDAY ILLUSTRATIONS: Subscribers get 3 photos, NY366-368 of
 Load-Date: September 25, 2002

 

End of Document
