

From the clout of a million to the power of one, Americans shower candidates with endorsements
The Associated Press
January 24, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 857 words
Byline: By SIOBHAN McDONOUGH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The butchers and the bakers lined up behind their favorite Democratic presidential candidate. The candlestick makers are staying out of the fray.
Politics is about megaunions and huge corporations putting money and muscle into campaigns. It is also about candidates making connections with small groups of people, like the 20 San Francisco runners for Wesley Clark and the food lovers who make cheese-topped cauliflower dishes and talk about how much they like Howard Dean.
The organizations anointing presidential candidates make up a crazy quilt of American democracy.
They are new - the Silicon Valley companies backing Connecticut Sen. Joe Lieberman.
They are old - the International Union of Journeymen, Horseshoers and Allied Trades, now fishing for another favorite after its pick in the political horse race, Rep. Dick Gephardt of Missouri, got out.
They are big - the million-member United Food and Commercial Workers, whose varied ranks include butchers and health care workers, and whose 34,000-member Michigan local has swung behind Massachusetts Sen. John Kerry.
And they are tiny - the 25 mothers in Keene, N.H., who are not yet formally endorsing Ohio Rep. Dennis Kucinich but think, as one of them said, "In a very nice way, he is in your face."
If the impact of endorsements from knots of people is just a hiccup on Election Day, the candidate mantra "Every vote counts" is on the minds of American punkers, vegetarians, stagehands, Hollywood stars and more.
Madonna, the material girl, is backing Clark, the soldier guy, in the race.
Food fanatic Meredith Hughes likes what Dean is bringing to the issues table, and formed the Albuquerque, N.M.-based Foodies for Dean.
The group of about 100 people glommed onto Dean, she says, because "we immediately felt he was a straight talker, genuinely passionate and angry."
The group is plugging Dean through food parties. They think Dean is the candidate most likely to tune into their concerns over food safety, school lunches, sustainable agriculture and obesity.
Hughes also has a motherly concern for the candidate's eating habits, and is encouraging foodies to help feed Dean nutritional meals on his campaign stops.
"It's so hard on the road, the way he eats, and he doesn't like it," says Hughes, 58, remembering that he has said that he wants to eat better. Dean has a weakness for chocolate chip cookies.
The not-so-small Bakery, Confectionary, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers International Union, with 120,000 members, is weighing its options again after its chosen candidate, Gephardt, left.
Some interests won't weigh in at all. The National Candle Association says it does not endorse candidates.
President Bush is sure to soak up plenty of endorsements when the time comes. It's still early for him because he is unopposed for the Republican nomination.
As Gephardt's fate showed, endorsements may not count for much on voting day. Gephardt ran a distant fourth despite the union people backing him and helping him out in Iowa. Endorsements from big names such as Al Gore, the former vice president and Democratic nominee in 2000, didn't help Dean a lot in Iowa, either.
But big endorsements can bring lots of cash, credibility and organizing clout into campaigns. Small ones offer bragging rights.
Kucinich, for example, is big with celebrities. Danny Glover, Willie Nelson and actress and fellow vegan Linda Blair are among those supporting him.
The 25 or so moms in the Keene group Mother's Uniting are also tuned into the Ohio congressman's call for peace. "His message is very unique and intense," said Susan Hay, who formed the group.
They're weighing the idea of endorsing him formally but don't want to upset anyone if they find a mom for Dean in their midst.
The weather conditions and time of day may be the only variables that will deter some avid runners, but as far as their support for Clark goes, it's unswaying.
Mark Culpepper, 37, of San Francisco was once a one-man running campaign for Clark, along highly traveled routes in the Bay area. Now about 20 others hit the pavement a few times a week, logging miles in the hopes of recruiting Clark supporters.
"It's loose, to put it lightly," Culpepper says of the group. "Regardless of whatever happens to whichever candidate you support, by the end of this campaign, you'll be in good shape."
Punk rock enthusiast Kimmy Cash, 28, of San Bernardino, Calif., was inspired by Dean when she met him during a campaign stop and rapidly formed the group Punx for Dean. More than 400 bands are going to play concerts nationwide to help Dean.
"Punkers mostly favor the Green Party," Cash says, "but they know they don't have a chance. If you want Bush out, you better go with this guy."
Cash's political apathy turned into activism after she met Dean.
"He talked to me about music, and was excited about the way we looked and represented ourselves," she says. Dean plays the guitar.
Former game show host Monty Hall and The New Republic magazine, meanwhile, are for Lieberman.
Filmmaker Jerry Zucker is endorsing North Carolina Sen. John Edwards. Black Enterprise magazine wants to see Al Sharpton win the Democratic presidential nomination.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX101-102
 Load-Date: January 25, 2004

 

End of Document
