

From the death house, the eyes reveal the emotion
June 8, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1302 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - Houston correspondent Mike Graczyk, who has been covering executions for The Associated Press since 1983, has now witnessed more than 200 by lethal injection. Here he describes what Timothy McVeigh will be facing Monday.
---
By MICHAEL GRACZYK
Associated Press Writer
HUNTSVILLE, Texas (AP) - The killer strapped to the gurney looked through the glass at the strangers standing shoulder to shoulder, staring and tight-lipped.
"I am so sorry for what y'all had to go through," he sobbed, choking on the words. "You had some lovely girls and I am sorry."
For the first time since her young daughters were killed more than a decade earlier, Linda Purnhagen heard a man she vilified admit his role in their deaths.
"I looked straight back at him," she would say later. "He looked really sad, scared. I could see it was a scary thing for him."
The killer, Dennis Dowthitt, turned away. His body quivered and he fell limp, succumbing to the deadly drugs pumping through needles inserted into his arms.
"My daughters went through horrible deaths," Purnhagen said. "He just went to sleep. It doesn't make me feel any better."
On Monday, Timothy McVeigh will face other Linda Purnhagens - people living with the sorrow of having lost husbands, wives, children, loved ones in the Oklahoma City bombing.
Whether McVeigh goes with remorse like Dowthitt, or defiance like other prisoners, his execution will be carried out by federal officials who haven't put a killer to death in nearly 40 years.
In February, they visited Huntsville to attend the punishment of Adolph Hernandez and carefully note how the nation's busiest execution chamber carries out the business of death.
It is not always silent. It is not always merely going "to sleep" like Dowthitt.
Ultimately, however, the Texas experience has shown the condemned person's eyes can reveal his final thoughts.
For McVeigh, that means his eyes may disclose whether he views himself as a frightened victim, a heartless killer or a martyr in a personal war against the government, which is using the Texas blueprint to kill him.
"It's time to go to the next room," the Texas warden gently but firmly tells the condemned prisoner as the clock reaches the hour the death warrant prescribes for the lethal injection.
The prisoner moves the final 12 feet from a tiny holding cell through a door to the death chamber, where aqua-painted brick walls and a gray tile floor are illuminated by a single fluorescent light fixture. Inside, a mattress-like pad tops the steel pedestal gurney bordered by leather straps and clear plastic tubes ending with two needles - one for each arm.
Assuming the courts have resolved any 11th-hour appeals, the warden's instruction culminates a routine that began about six hours earlier when the inmate arrived from death row.
He was fingerprinted, searched and asked several questions: Are any appeals working through the courts? Do you want the last meal you requested? Are you expecting your lawyer or spiritual adviser? How do you want your body disposed of?
Prison officials already know the answers, but the exchange offers a hint of the condemned inmate's demeanor.
Most are cooperative.
Gary Graham was not.
Graham's claims of innocence and an unfair trial became an issue in the presidential campaign of then-Gov. George W. Bush. Corrections officers, working as an "extraction team," hit him with pepper spray, burning his eyes and lowering his defenses.
Less than a minute later, a tie-down team secured him to the gurney. Immobilized, Graham seethed and waited to unleash a diatribe as witnesses filed into the two closet-sized viewing rooms.
Arms extended, the scene is not unlike a crucifixion, with the criminal prone rather than erect.
Belts secure the inmate's wrists, ankles and legs. A diagonal belt runs across the chest, another at the waist. A belligerent prisoner is further restrained with wide strips of Velcro-like fasteners, including one that holds his head to the gurney.
Then only the eyes can move.
Within three minutes, a needle is inserted in each arm at the elbow, the IV carrying a saline solution. A suitable vein is not a certainty; technicians sometimes switch to another vein at the top of the hand, inside the leg or in the neck.
The procedure complete, the officers depart, leaving the inmate with the warden standing near his head, a chaplain near his feet.
Up to five relatives of the murder victim and a similar number of witnesses selected by the inmate are escorted into separate viewing areas. When the steel doors clang shut behind them, a door at the front of the chamber opens and a prison administrator appears.
"Warden, you may proceed," the official says.
The warden bends slightly toward the inmate.
"Do you have a final statement?"
As a microphone dangles overhead, sometimes the prisoner - like Dowthitt - looks at the victim's witnesses, seeking forgiveness. Sometimes he proclaims his innocence. Sometimes he turns his attention to the people he knows.
He may pray or sing.
Jonathan Nobles reached the words "mother and child" in the Christmas hymn "Silent Night" before gasping as the drugs cut him off.
The inmate may say something memorized or spontaneous, funny or vulgar, express love and sorrow and apologies. He may search for words that are difficult to find or fire them out in staccato fashion.
"This is what happens to a black man - genocide in America!" Graham shouted.
Joseph Cannon said he was sorry and closed his eyes, waiting for the kick of the $86 dosage of sodium thiopental, pancuronium bromide and potassium chloride.
Nothing happened.
A quizzical look on his face, he nodded toward the needle in his right arm. "It's come undone," he said.
Drapes hurriedly closed. The needle was reinserted, the curtains opened, the drugs resumed and Cannon died.
Last year, death row inmate Ponchai Wilkerson, combative throughout his final day, saved his coup de grace for his last act on earth. Ignoring the warden and spurning a final statement, he defiantly spit out a handcuff key he had hidden in his mouth.
With tears occasionally dribbling from their eyes, prisoners have remarked briefly about tingling, experiencing a cool sensation or tasting rubber just before the normal reaction to the drugs: a gasp, a wheeze or a sputter within seconds of the end of the final statement. Once, an inmate vomited.
"You watch his eyes set and they have that blank stare," says Jim Brazzil, the Texas prison chaplain who has seen scores of executions, his right hand resting on the inmate's right leg, just above the ankle. His touch is the last contact the prisoner experiences from another human.
"I feel his heart. I feel him tremble," Brazzil says.
It's only a matter of seconds before obvious breathing has stopped.
"When that last moment is gone, he enters in the presence of God," the chaplain says. "And to me, that is an intense moment."
The room is silent unless an inmate's relative or friend is sobbing, praying, wailing or pounding on the wall.
Sometimes the inmate's eyes are open, sometimes shut. A fair-skinned inmate tends to turn red or purple. Others become gray, their lips blue.
A doctor enters the chamber about five minutes after the start of the lethal dose. The Hippocratic oath prevents him from being present when the drugs are administered.
He uses a stethoscope to listen for a pulse and heartbeat. He shines a light in the inmate's eyes. Then he looks at his watch to announce the time of death. Routinely, it's about 10 minutes since spectators entered the chamber.
As witnesses depart, Brazzil reaches over and covers the inmate's face with a white cloth. Sometimes he has to close the eyes first.
"Then I go back and do a lot of writing - just for me," Brazzil says. "The main reason I do that is because I don't ever want this to become routine. If it ever becomes routine, I'll quit."
 Graphic



 
With AP Photos
 Load-Date: June 9, 2001

 

End of Document
