

How two fires in the Arizona mountains became one of the worst in the West
June 29, 2002, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 939 words
Byline: By PAULINE ARRILLAGA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HEBER-OVERGAARD, Ariz.
Body




Homes went up like popcorn. Trees burst into flames. On either side of Highway 260, fire loomed 80 feet high in ponderosa pines turned torches.
From the middle of the road, Heber-Overgaard Fire Chief Mel Epps watched stunned as his town disintegrated to ash.
Just four days earlier, Epps had been called back from a seminar in Phoenix where he was learning how to prepare his community for a disaster.
A fire was threatening the nearby town of Pinedale, and they needed his help.
When Epps flew over the blaze that morning, it had covered just 200 acres and seemed under control. "This doesn't look like a problem to me," he thought.
But the day after he returned, more bad news arrived: A second fire burning just west of the first could take aim at Heber-Overgaard itself.
Then, on the evening of June 22, he watched his neighbors' dreams burn to the ground.
"It looked like you were walking down the aisles of hell," he recalled later.
It has been christened "The Monster," and for good reason. The two fires that merged in the mountains of eastern Arizona have charred almost a half-million acres of trees on the way to becoming one of the biggest and most destructive blazes the West has seen.
As many as 30,000 people were evacuated, more than 400 homes were destroyed, and the forest so many depend on for their livelihoods was reduced to smoldering ruin.
Fire had been expected, thanks to a sustained drought and overgrown forests. In Heber-Overgaard, a quiet community of 3,500 people, fire officials frequented church services to warn residents of the extreme danger. In Show Low, 40 miles east, the city mailed out brochures telling homeowners how to make their properties more fire-safe. Public service announcements flooded the radio.
So, when the first wisps of smoke appeared on June 18, no one was particularly surprised. It was just another fire in an already bad fire season, a 300-acre blaze no less.
But by midday on June 19, the blaze had grown to 1,200 acres. Hours later had it exploded to 36,000 acres, forcing the evacuation of 4,000 people in Pinedale, Linden and Clay Springs.
The next morning, a second fire began only eight miles west of the first.
Suddenly there was reason to worry. Weather was ideal for a quick spread: High temperatures, low humidity and windy.
And with much of the nation's firefighting resources tied up in Colorado, help would be hard to come by.
Fire they had expected. But no one was prepared for this.
The morning of June 20, Martha Roeller dropped her husband at work and headed to the beauty shop for her weekly shampoo and set. Back home at the Pinecrest Lake RV Resort in Overgaard, tomatoes were ready for picking and pansies were blooming. It was another beautiful day in the White Mountains.
In Overgaard that morning, all the gossip was about the wildfire threatening their neighbors to the east and possibly even Show Low, a town of 7,700 people that is the commercial hub of the popular tourist region.
Roeller, 65, never even noticed the smoke rising in the east as she headed home from the salon. But around noon, her husband called: "We're leaving! We're leaving! Get ready," ordered Jerry Roeller, 68.
The Roellers packed their medicine and insurance papers, but took only one change of clothes.
"We figured they'd throw water on it and it'd be over with," Martha Roeller recalls.
The following morning, they sat glued to the news at a motel in Payson, waiting for word that the fire was out.
"I still thought I was coming home," Martha says. "Then it got worse."
The turning point came Saturday, June 22. The two fires had consumed more than 150,000 acres and were threatening to merge. Show Low Police Chief John Corder pulled together a videotape instructing residents on how to evacuate.
By 2 p.m., Overgaard was as dark as night. Down the road to the west, the tiny community of Forest Lakes also was evacuated.
At 6:30 p.m., flames began to consume homes on the east edge of Overgaard. And in Show Low, Corder got the call: The blaze had jumped a fire line eight miles west of town and it was time to go.
In Overgaard, Epps and his crew could do little as house after house ignited. They lost more than 200 that night alone - 168 in Pinecrest Lake RV Resort.
On Sunday, June 23, the fires had finally merged into a 300,000-acre inferno. By that night, with the sky over Show Low painted a deep magenta, the fire crept to within two miles of town.
"It's definitely still going to get into Show Low," fire incident commander Larry Humphrey warned. "There's no doubt."
Corder thought his community was done.
"It just seemed almost incomprehensible that we weren't going to be swallowed up by this thing," he recalls.
But the incomprehensible happened. Firefighters were able to hold their line, and the blaze never did cross into Show Low.
On Saturday, more than 25,000 evacuees were told they could return to their homes in Show Low, neighboring Pinetop-Lakeside and Hon-Dah, and to several small towns just west of Show Low.
The news wasn't so good on the west side of the fire, where on Saturday the blaze still threatened Forest Lakes, an evacuated community of 350 people.
"The war's not over. We might have won a little battle here, but the fight's still on," Epps said, adding: "And I'm not sure we're going to win."
Martha and Jerry Roeller learned that their home was among those destroyed.
They remain with friends and neighbors in Payson. Even if there's little left to see, they still want to go back home.
"I want to stand on the ashes if I have to," said Jerry Roeller, "but I want to see my place."
EDITOR'S NOTE - Pauline Arrillaga is the AP's Southwest regional writer, based in Phoenix.
 Load-Date: June 30, 2002

 

End of Document
