

In city that embraces history, few willing to take up the cause of the Confederate museum
September 19, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 926 words
Byline: By CAIN BURDEAU, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW ORLEANS
Body




Just around the corner from a towering statue of Robert E. Lee, an aging museum that houses one of the nation's most valuable troves of Confederate flags, uniforms and artifacts is threatened with eviction.
But even in a city that's known for fighting to preserve its history, few people seem willing to take up this cause.
"The silence is deafening," said Dr. Glen Cangelosi, president of the Confederate Memorial Hall Foundation. "I'm flabbergasted when I go around trying to get support for the museum, what a hot potato it is."
That has left museum officials largely to go it alone in their legal battle to retain ownership of the red-brick building that is home to some 5,000 artifacts.
Among the gems: Gen. P.G.T. Beauregard's uniforms; a crown of thorns given to imprisoned Confederate President Jefferson Davis by Pope Pius IX; letters and photos of black Confederates; one of four original, hand-woven Confederate banners.
The building itself is a piece of Confederate history. For 111 years, Confederate veterans, their widows and descendants have been bringing odds and ends to the museum. It is so Romanesque and church-like that it got the name "The Battle Abbey of the South."
In 1893, 60,000 mourners descended on the "abbey" for a second wake of Jefferson Davis. A decade later, 30,000 Confederate veterans and their families flocked there and to New Orleans for the largest reunion ever of Confederates.
And until the last of them died off, Confederate veterans stood guard at the museum's entrance.
But calls to Gov. Mike Foster - who recently expressed support for the museum on his weekly talk show - and other lawmakers have led nowhere. Businesses hem and haw, and back away. State museum officials are noncommittal - sorry but not sad.
"I think our cultural heritage is important, but museums come and go, historically, and they have their own life cycles," said Gordon Mueller, president of the National D-Day Museum across the street.
The museum's struggle comes at a time when New Orleans' blacks have been chipping away at reminders of slavery. George Washington's name was removed from a school because he owned slaves. A pylon celebrating the end of Reconstruction government was moved from a prominent position near the Mississippi River ferry to the back of a parking lot.
But this time around, the Confederate museum - seemingly as nettlesome an issue as the Reconstruction monument - is not inspiring anger on either side of the racial lines.
"I wasn't even aware the place existed until I read the newspaper article," said Terry Holden, a New Orleans representative of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
If anything, the outrage seems to come from outside the state.
"To try to get rid of a museum with one of the finest collections of Southern memorabilia is just incredible, unheard of, unthinkable," said Gordon Cotton, director of the Old Court House Museum in Vicksburg, Miss.
The threat of homelessness is real.
In July, a New Orleans judge said that the University of New Orleans Foundation owns the building. The foundation claims it bought the church-like structure for $425,000 from Tulane University.
The Confederate museum claims Frank T. Howard, a philanthropist who put the money up for the building in the late 1880s, explicitly said it was to remain an enshrined repository to Confederate veterans forever. The case is on appeal at the 4th Circuit Court of Appeal.
Part of the issue is location of the collection in a growing area of museums.
In 1976, the Contemporary Arts Center opened in a renovated warehouse. And art galleries and chic restaurants such as Emeril's popped up.
Then in 2000, the University of New Orleans and the state built the multimillion dollar, state-of-the-art D-Day Museum - across the street from the Confederate hall.
It was a hit.
Next came plans for the Ogden Museum of Southern Art.
This time, instead of across the street, developers bought historic buildings on either side of Memorial Hall - and, arguably, the hall itself, with a corridor connecting it all in mind.
Elizabeth Williams, president of the University of New Orleans Foundation, dismissed allegations that she and the foundation board are anti-Confederates.
"The question is what is the right thing to do. And the right thing to do is that that very special collection of Confederate artifacts is protected," Williams said.
Museum vice president James Carriere said that's just spin. He said the truth is their enemies equate the Confederate museum to a repository of Nazi symbols - best kept under wraps.
"Elizabeth Williams has got herself on a hot seat," Carriere said. "It's bad publicity: She's seen as wanting to close the oldest museum in the state and not wanting to have a Confederate museum."
"When Camp Street was overrun with vagrants, no one cared about the Confederate museum. Now that it's a prime real estate area, they want it to be an entrance to their museums."
In the lull between court motions, the Confederates are trying to rally the troops. But they're realistic: If all else fails, they'll retreat, move on out.
Carriere said they are looking at moving to Houston, Richmond, Va., the Mississippi Gulf Coast or Slidell.
"If y'all don't want it, send it on up," said Cotton at the Old Court House Museum in Vicksburg. "Soon there won't be anything left in New Orleans to see except drunks on Bourbon Street. Is there absolutely nothing sacred?"
On the Net:
Confederate Memorial Hall: http://www.confederatemuseum.com/ 
The University of New Orleans Foundation: http://www.unofoundation.org/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY417-419 of Sept. 19
 Load-Date: September 20, 2002

 

End of Document
