

In Vermont town, folks ask: What did the treasurer do with all the money?
March 8, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 593 words
Byline: By DAVID GRAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WHITINGHAM, Vt.
Body




So much for that legendary Yankee thrift.
John Robohm, the treasurer in this New England town of 1,300, has made a mess of the books, leaving townspeople to wonder where the money went.
"He was always telling us he knew where all the money was, right to the penny. Turns out, not even close," said Selectman Steve Morse.
Somehow, a $1 million budget developed a deficit of $267,829.86. And the $160,000 the town had in a reserve fund? Gone.
The news came in January when Robohm tallied up the figures for 2001 in this community where many people work for the utility companies or the logging and lumber industry.
"He calls me up and says, 'I am having trouble putting these figures together,"' recalled Norm Stevens, chairman of the five-member Select Board. "Then he gave me the balance sheet for the end of the year. I couldn't believe it.
"So I copied it and went to see every board member in person because I didn't want them to pass out over the phone."
People in town have taken the financial woes in stride. Most of them, awaiting an audit in the spring, appear to accept for now Robohm's claim that there was nothing sinister about the disappearance of the money.
Told that the town was facing a severe cash flow problem, a few residents even volunteered to pay their property taxes now even though they are not due until November.
At Tuesday's annual town meeting, residents approved a series of cuts in the budget to help close the deficit. They decided to eliminate all road paving this year, a savings of $135,000, and not to fill a vacancy in the six-man highway department, for a savings of $45,000.
"I think we'll be OK," Stevens said.
Robohm stepped down on Tuesday from the part-time elected post he has held for five years. In the town report he apologized for "not being experienced enough."
"I have proudly performed my duties and have served the town to the best of my ability," he wrote. "Simply stated, my abilities in this context are not enough."
Town Clerk Earle "Bud" Holland described his neighbors as "surprisingly mellow" about the mess. "There's no accusations flying around. There's no 'Lynch him' or 'Get him,"' Holland said.
Libby Hillman, a retired cooking teacher, felt that the town finances were too complex for a part-time treasurer to handle. "They should have had a professional accounting in the past years," she said.
Robohm, who retired from IBM in Connecticut after a career in sales and product development and moved to town several years ago, said there had been much confusion in the town's finances in recent years related to its battle with the state over Vermont's education funding law.
Whitingham, situated along the Massachusetts state line midway between Brattleboro and Bennington, saw its property taxes increase under the new law. The town fought the new system in court and withheld its payments to the state for a while.
Some also blame the shortfall on changes in the valuation of a hydroelectric dam on the Deerfield River. A newly competitive electric industry has been much more aggressive about asking towns to lower taxes. And Whitingham agreed to reduce the dam's tax value by one-third, to $52 million.
The cuts in the budget did not come easily. Selectmen had suggested a $2,000 cut in the Fire Department, but the voters sided with Fire Chief Stanley Janovsky.
Janovsky said the department's equipment and clothing are getting "pretty ratty" and much of the clothing does not fit his volunteer firefighters.
"I'm getting bigger. A lot of people are getting bigger," the chief said, drawing a laugh from the crowd.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: March 9, 2002

 

End of Document
