

It's not always the military keeping the skies over the nation's capital safe
The Associated Press
May 14, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: State and Regional; Washington Dateline
Length: 581 words
Byline: By BRIAN WESTLEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




On a moment's notice, Steve Swingle must be prepared to throw on his bulky flight gear, jump into his white and blue Cessna Citation II jet and take to the skies to help protect America's most sensitive air space.
Swingle's agency, the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE, is a little-known contributor to the defense against airplanes that might violate a 15-mile no-fly zone around Washington.
Since January 2003, ICE has launched the jets and Black Hawk helicopters from Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport. They patrol and intercept small, general aviation aircraft that enter the protected space above the home of the federal government and some of the nation's most famous monuments.
At an open house of sorts Friday at the airport across the Potomac River in Arlington, Va., pilots and other officials from ICE gave reporters a glimpse of their round-the-clock efforts. They work together with the Defense Department and the Federal Aviation Administration to monitor the more than 400 aircraft over the Washington area at any time.
After the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, authorities found a need to provide increased protection to the region's airspace. "Unfortunately, the decision was made to give the mission solely to the Department of Defense," said Charles Stallworth, director of air and marine operations for ICE.
Because of the cost of patrolling the no-fly zones, and the strain it placed on the military, defense officials soon began phasing out their nonstop air patrols over Washington and New York. That, Stallworth said, proved the task was more than the military could meet alone.
In the 16 months since, rotating teams of customs officials have begun participating in the patrols, which officials said have been a deterrent to about 30 illegal but inadvertent intrusions. Six months before their mission, more than 180 aircraft had violated the restricted zone.
Military jets remain on continuous alert at nearby Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland.
"Those 30 intrusions were tracked down and investigated and found to be harmless - not a threat to homeland security, but accidents," said Michael J. Garcia, assistant secretary of U.S Immigration and Customs Enforcement with the Department of Homeland Security. "It's been a tremendous success."
One example of that effectiveness occurred during President Bush's State of the Union address last year at the Capitol, when a helicopter entered restricted airspace. Customs officers tracking the aircraft quickly called in Black Hawk helicopters which, along with military jets, escorted the pilot out of the area.
"We are the cop on the beat in the skies," Stallworth said.
Its a role that's familiar to Swingle, who said he spends about six or seven weeks throughout the year on standby for 12 hours at a time.
"Once we get a call that there's an intrusion, then (we) have eight minutes to actually get airborne," he said. "We stay at a heightened level of alert."
In the sky and cruising at more than 100 mph, Swingle and other crew members pull alongside an airplane close enough to read its tail number. That is relayed to radar specialists on the ground, who investigate and ultimately identify whether the plane is operating without proper authorization or in a suspicious manner.
Although the aircraft operated by customs crews are unarmed, the bold U.S. government insignia and other markings can be startling to an unsuspecting pilot.
On the Net:
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement: http://www.ice.gov/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX115-116
 Load-Date: May 15, 2004

 

End of Document
