

London show highlights Hungarian painter of the regal, the rich and the famous
The Associated Press
January 13, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 644 words
Byline: By GRAHAM HEATHCOTE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




The glittering half-century of European society that vanished with World War II is alive again in a show of Philip Alexius de Laszlo, who painted the royal, the rich and the famous.
Born in Budapest in 1869, de Laszlo became the leading portrait painter in Europe.
Starting with the Bulgarian royal family in 1894, he painted Austrian Emperor Franz Joseph, German Kaiser Wilhelm II, the kings and queens of Spain, Portugal, England, Denmark, Greece, Romania and their families, three Russian princesses and Italian leader Benito Mussolini.
Popes, cardinals, archbishops and aristocrats sat for him, as did generals, bankers, politicians, actors, musicians and writers.
He painted four presidents during visits to the United States from 1908 to 1934: Theodore Roosevelt, Warren Harding, Calvin Coolidge and Herbert Hoover. He also drew William H. Taft before his presidency.
Business magnates Andrew Mellon and George Eastman were among his American sitters. Eastman presented him with a hand-cranked Kodak camera which the de Laszlos used to film his famous clients and themselves.
The home movies are running during a loan exhibition of 160 paintings and drawings by de Laszlo at Christie's auction house in London through Jan. 22. Besides portraits, there are landscapes, a nude from Morocco, street scenes and studies of his family and their Pekingese dog, Chinky.
De Laszlo thought himself very well rewarded by earning $9,700 from his 1908 American visit, a sum worth over $180,000 today.
He would study a sitter intensely, making drawings before painting directly on canvas with a rapid, bravura technique. He made lovely women more beautiful and men handsome and allowed their personalities to emerge as well.
"Their families loved the portraits and kept them. So the pictures have mostly been out of sight for a long time, resulting in de Laszlo being underrated today," said Christopher Wood, a London art dealer who curated this first retrospective since the painter's death at age 68 in 1937.
"His work is the portrait of an age, a society which has gone. Painters like de Laszlo don't exist any more."
The show's highlight is a 1926 portrait of England's late Queen Mother Elizabeth when she was Duchess of York, loaned by her daughter Queen Elizabeth II, who herself sat for de Laszlo in 1933, when she was 7.
Memorabilia includes a cigarette case from Queen Marie of Romania to placate de Laszlo in 1936 when he was irritated by her constant smoking.
De Laszlo painted more than 3,000 portraits.
He was helped by European society remaining largely intact during his lifetime, according to Christopher Lloyd, who looks after the British royal collection. De Laszlo also was helped by his cosmopolitan mentality, which allowed him to move through Europe with ease, gaining the confidence of his distinguished clientele by artistic skill and personal charm.
"De Laszlo was driven to be a painter and determined on his career when he was only 9 years old. He left school at that age to learn how to do it," Sandra de Laszlo, a granddaughter-in-law who is researching the artist's life and work, said.
In his youth, de Laszlo painted theater scenery, retouched and copied photographs, painted porcelain and signs and studied art on scholarships to Budapest, Paris and Munich. At a Munich fancy-dress ball, he fell in love with Lucy Guinness, an Irish banker's daughter.
Her father warned him off and for seven years they did not meet. In 1900, when her father was dead and de Laszlo had painted many important people, they met again and married, settling in England in 1907.
The exhibition was opened Jan. 5 by Princess Anne, the queen's daughter. The former king and queen of Romania, now residents of England, were among society guests.
The Hungarian government supported the exhibition as part of a yearlong program in Britain to mark Hungary's entry to the European Union.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo XAB101 and XAB105
 Load-Date: January 14, 2004

 

End of Document
