

Lose your job? Go to the end of the telephone line
August 10, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 777 words
Byline: By ADAM GELLER, AP Business Writer
Dateline: SCRANTON, Pa.
Body




When Fred Leibold lost his job as a forklift operator a few weeks ago, he figured it was time to drive downtown to the state unemployment office and get in line.
His expression soured, though, during a meeting in that very building when a jobs counselor told him the unemployment office is gone and the only waiting lines for the newly out-of-work are attached to telephones and computers.
"Where is the unemployment office?" an annoyed Leibold asked, looking across the room that for years processed claims for government unemployment checks. "I don't know, and I live here."
The confusion isn't only in this corner of Pennsylvania - most states are overhauling the way they handle unemployment compensation. They're closing offices, moving those services out of remaining job-placement centers, and asking workers to file initial claims by telephone or over the Internet.
The change means the end of the unemployment line, at least the way many remember it.
During past downturns in Scranton, people seeking unemployment checks gathered outside the squat, brick state office building on Franklin Avenue before opening time. Sometimes the lines trailed away from service counters, through the doors and down the sidewalk.
But the concrete was empty on a recent Tuesday morning, despite mass layoffs at four area plants since March, including the Thomson Multimedia television factory where Leibold worked.
Layoffs have driven the local jobless rate to 5.5 percent, topping the national figure of 4.5 percent. But people who walk in to the office to sign up for benefits are given the number for a new call center in Taylor, seven miles away, which processes claims from 19 counties.
Many claimants say the system saves time, but as more companies cut jobs, the newly unemployed are discovering the change and it is fueling frustration. Scores of angry Pennsylvanians complained last fall when the phone system played a steady soundtrack of busy signals and unanswered rings.
The problems have eased since then. But a surge in first-time jobless claims - up 40 percent nationwide compared to this time last year - marks the first big test for the new systems.
As claimants spend more time on hold, some are lamenting the end of the unemployment lines.
At least in the old days, they say, face-to-face contact provided reassurance and helped claimants figure out arcane rules. Some activists say the lack of personal contact is particularly difficult for workers who don't speak English well or whose eligibility is not clear-cut.
"There are going to be people who are going to lose out on unemployment benefits just because the technology is not going to be able to handle the volume," said Maurice Emsellem of the National Employment Law Project, an advocacy group for low-income workers.
When New York officials announced plans to close an unemployment office serving Manhattan's Chinatown district, a group representing immigrant workers sued. The 1999 lawsuit charges that switching to a phone claims system denies applicants vital assistance in their native Chinese, long provided by employees at the now shuttered office. The two sides are trying to negotiate a settlement.
Colorado pioneered the change to telephone-based initial claims in 1991 and 23 states have followed in the past five years. Most others are working to install phone systems and 10 states recently added Internet claims.
Most states turned to phone systems after Congress' pared funds for administration of unemployment insurance by 10 percent in the mid-90s.
"It really has not been a cost savings per se, but a shifting of costs from having the old way of taking claims in person to moving to new telephone call centers," said Grace Kilbane, administrator of the U.S. Department of Labor's Office of Workforce Security.
Despite the limited savings, most states are moving ahead, although some still allow people to visit labor offices to file claims in person.
Florida began taking initial unemployment claims over the Internet in limited areas last year before opening the system statewide early last month. Within weeks, it was taking 48 percent of all initial claims online.
"People are using the Internet for shopping and banking," said Warren May, a spokesman for Florida's labor agency. "This is a natural for them."
Some claimants say the new systems make being out of work a little easier.
Michael Mastracco recently lost his job as a construction worker, and filed a claim using the courtesy phones inside the Scranton office. But despite being put on hold for 10 minutes, he was impressed.
"It may be a little bit complicated, but you're treated with a little more respect and dignity," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY811 of Aug. 7, AP Graphic UNEMPLOYMENT LINES
 Load-Date: August 11, 2001

 

End of Document
