

Names In The Game Esiason, the Milwaukee Bucks and Kelly Shoppach.
June 20, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 643 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




U.S. Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., sent U.S. Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., 100 soft pretzels from Philadelphia as payment for an NBA Finals bet.
The pretzels and mustard left Philadelphia by train on Tuesday and got to Washington, D.C., an hour later, Feinstein spokesman Scott Gerber said.
"Senator Feinstein thanked Senator Specter for his graciousness in defeat," Gerber said, adding that Feinstein's staff and the press corps gobbled the pretzels quickly, leaving only two to spare.
As for Feinstein's prediction for the Los Angeles Lakers, who defeated the Philadelphia 76ers on Friday for the NBA championship: "She hopes it's the beginning of a dynasty," Gerber said.
---
CINCINNATI (AP) - Former Cincinnati Bengals quarterback Boomer Esiason has pledged $1 million to a Cincinnati hospital to help hire a top scientist in pulmonary research.
The money, raised through the athlete's promotional campaign with Cincinnati Bell Inc., would be channeled through Children's Hospital Medical Center. The hospital has provided care to Esiason's son, Gunnar, who was diagnosed in 1993 with cystic fibrosis, a genetic lung disease.
The money will pay for the Gunnar Esiason-Cincinnati Bell Research Chair in the Life Sciences. Providing funds for a scientist to conduct basic research into cystic fibrosis will help accelerate work already going on at Children's Hospital, said Dr. Robert Wilmott, director of pulmonary medicine.
In 1995, Children's Hospital named its cystic fibrosis outpatient treatment center after Gunnar Esiason.
For several years, the Boomer Esiason Foundation has raised money to fight cystic fibrosis through sales of Boomer's Barbecue Sauce and through golf tournaments with which he is affiliated.
---
MILWAUKEE (AP) - The mayor declared June as Milwaukee Bucks month, and the Common Council gave the team a plaque for finishing its best season in 27 years.
"This was simply an effort to honor the Bucks for all the excitement they brought to the city during their great run in the playoffs," said Bill Arnold, public relations supervisor for the Common Council.
The Bucks were the NBA's Central Division champions for the first time since 1986, and they finished with a 52-30 record for the regular season.
In the playoffs, the Bucks defeated the Orlando Magic and the Charlotte Hornets before losing to the Philadelphia 76ers in the seventh game of the Eastern Conference finals.
The ceremony featured coach George Karl, forwards Scott Williams and Darvin Ham and vice president of business operations John Steinmiller.
---
WICHITA, Kan. (AP) - Kelly Shoppach, who led Baylor in hitting all season and had a .998 fielding percentage behind the plate, was honored with the Johnny Bench Award as the nation's top collegiate catcher.
Shoppach was chosen by a panel of sportswriters, sportscasters and Division I coaches. Jeremy Brown of Alabama and Casey Myers of Arizona State were the other finalists for the award, presented by the Greater Wichita Area Sports Commission.
Bench, Hall of Fame catcher from the Cincinnati Reds, presented the award to Shoppach at a banquet Tuesday night.
Shoppach was the Boston Red Sox's top selection in the 2001 major league baseball draft last month. Boston selected him with the 48th pick in the second round.
For Baylor, Shoppach committed only one error in 406 chances this year and finished with a .397 batting average.
In a speech to about 450 people at the banquet, Bench praised the commission for establishing an honor for catchers - a group whose talents and contributions, he joked, are underappreciated.
"When an outfielder runs into the wall or a pitcher is hit in the shin, the coach will come off the bench to see if he's all right. When a catcher goes down, they say, 'Ah, he's fine.' No one cares about the catcher," Bench said.
"Well, now the sports commission cares, and this award is a testament to that."
 Load-Date: June 21, 2001

 

End of Document
