

New Hampshire saddened by collapse of its rocky icon, the Old Man of the Mountain
The Associated Press
May 16, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 751 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - The "Read All About It" column is a reading comprehension exercise for children. It is written by Susan Fineman, a reading specialist in the New Haven, Conn., school district. This column is based on an AP story sent May 4.
 
---
FRANCONIA, N.H. (AP) - New Hampshire awoke Saturday to find its stern granite symbol of independence and stubbornness, the Old Man of the Mountain, had collapsed into indistinguishable rubble.
The fall ended nearly a century of efforts to protect the giant mountainside landmark from the same natural forces that created it. Only stabilizing cables and epoxy remained Saturday where the famous ledges had clung.
"There's only so much you can do," said Mike Pelchat, a state parks official who hiked up the mountain Saturday to make sure there were no signs of foul play.
"With heavy rains and high winds and freezing temperatures, the combination was just right to loosen him up," he said. "We always thought it was the hand of God holding him up, and he let go."
It was unclear when the outcropping actually fell from Cannon Mountain because clouds had obscured the area Thursday and Friday. A state park trails crew reported Saturday morning that the Old Man of the Mountain was gone.
The Old Man is a natural rock formation that was created by a series of geologic events beginning an estimated 200 million years ago.
Over time, nature carved out a 40-foot-tall profile resembling an old man's face, and it soon became New Hampshire's most recognizable symbol. The face appears on the state quarter, state road signs and countless souvenirs and tourist brochures.
Millions of tourists have traveled through Franconia Notch to view the profile, 1,200 feet above Interstate 93 about 65 miles north of Concord. In the 19th century, the profile inspired New Hampshire statesman Daniel Webster to write: "In the mountains of New Hampshire, God Almighty has hung out a sign to show that there He makes men."
Dick Hamilton, president of White Mountain Attractions, a tourism group, has commuted through the notch every day for more than 30 years, and said goodnight to the Old Man every night when he drove by.
On Friday, with his view blocked by the clouds, he said, "Good night, boss, wherever you are."
"I've just lost my number one attraction," he said Saturday.
---
Old Man Of The Mountain Is Gone
Use information from the story to answer the following questions:
1. How was New Hampshire's Old Man of the Mountain created?
2. Why do you think the rock formation became New Hampshire's most recognizable symbol?
3. How do you know that the craggy cliff face was in danger of falling for years?
4. Referring to the Old Man, what does parks official Mike Pelchat mean when he says, "There's only so much you can do?"
5. Which natural forces do Pelchat believe caused the collapse of the great mountainside landmark?
6. Why are park officials not sure when the granite face actually fell?
7. As New Hampshire's state symbol, where does the image of the Great Stone Face appear?
8. Who is Daniel Webster? In his poetry, to what does Webster compare the 40-foot profile of the old man's face?
9. Now that the Old Man is no more, do you think tourists will still want to visit Cannon Mountain? Explain.
10. Do you think the jagged rock face should be rebuilt? Explain?
------------------------------------------------------------
MIRROR IMAGE
Discovered in 1805, the Old Man of the Mountain is a natural rock formation that resembled the profile of an old man's face. A series of five red granite ledges formed a heavy brow, large nose, pointy chin and an unsmiling mouth. How would you describe your profile? You'll need two mirrors to view your face from the side. Which member of your family has a profile most like yours?
Old Man Of The Mountain Is Gone
Answer Key: (Wording may vary)
1. The Great Stone Face was formed by a series of geologic events that began 200 million years ago.
2. Answers will vary.
3. For the past century, stabilizing cables and epoxy were used to prevent the granite symbol from weakening.
4. Answers will vary.
5. Pelchat thinks the combination of heavy rains, high winds and freezing temperatures caused the rock to fall.
6. It is unclear when the actual collapse occurred because clouds covered Cannon Mountain at the time of the fall.
7. The face appears on the state quarter, road signs, many souvenirs and tourist booklets.
8. Daniel Webster was a 19th-century New Hampshire statesman. He wrote that the Old Man was like a sign.
9. Answers will vary.
10. Answers will vary.

 

End of Document
