

ON THE BUS: Hot on the trail of Lincoln's assassins
April 29, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Travel News
Length: 729 words
Byline: By STEPHEN MANNING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CLINTON, Md.
Body




Laurie Verge flicks a switch and a giant map of Washington and southern Maryland lights up on the wall of the Mary Surratt House gift shop.
With a tape-recorded narration playing, lighted dots follow the path of John Wilkes Booth from his shooting April 14, 1865, of President Abraham Lincoln to his death 12 days later in northern Virginia.
For Booth, it must have been a tough trip. The Union cavalry was hot on his heels as he hid in swamps and the homes of Confederate sympathizers. A $100,000 bounty must have weighed heavily on his shoulders.
He imagined his act would make him a hero and allow the South to rise again, but instead federal troops hunted him down and shot him as he hid in a barn. The Union held together, and Booth's conspirators, including Mary Surratt, were hanged.
For $50 apiece, Lincoln assassination buffs can retrace Booth's steps from Ford's Theater in Washington to Garrett Farm in Virginia. And the bus trips, which are run by the Surratt House, are a much more comfortable way to make the trip.
"We do in 12 hours what Booth did in 12 days," said Verge, director of the museum. "Of course, we have a coach liner to ride in."
Mid-April is a busy time at the Surratt House, the preserved home that sits just south of Washington. It's where Booth stashed guns and other supplies for his flight, and tour guides are quick point out the narrow slot in the attic as a hiding place for the weapons.
Run by the Surratt Society since 1977, the bus tours start each year around the anniversary of the April 14 assassination. Always popular, Verge said this year's trips are booked through the summer.
The society also held its third conference on Lincoln's death. Academics and Lincoln buffs discussed the president's funeral, the manhunt for Booth and the use of military tribunals to try the civilians accused of helping Booth.
The history may not be as clean-cut as many textbooks maintain. Conspiracy theorists believe Booth did not act alone when he killed the president, saying the orders may have come from Confederate leaders.
"It's a hot subject," said James O. Hall, a noted assassination scholar who helped start the bus tours. "It's like the Kennedy assassination. There's a whole library of books on it and all sorts of theories."
The role of Booth's conspirators is also debated. The family of Dr. Samuel Mudd, a Charles County physician who set Booth's leg and gave him shelter, still say he wasn't a part of the plot. Mudd was sentenced to life in prison, but President Andrew Johnson pardoned him in 1869.
The Surratt Society says it doesn't take any editorial positions on the role of its namesake, but they make it clear questions surround her role in the conspiracy.
Surratt and her husband once ran a tavern and tobacco farm on 300 acres of land outside Washington, but the Civil War and the death of her husband ruined the business. The house was rented to a tenant farmer and Surratt moved to the city.
Surratt was a Southern sympathizer who likely ran a safe house for a Confederate underground. Her son, John Surratt Jr., was party to Booth's original plot to kidnap Lincoln, but said he had no part in the assassination.
Surratt was doomed by the testimony of her tenant farmer, John Lloyd, who told a military court she stored field glasses and guns at her house in Clinton for Booth. Surratt reportedly delivered the binoculars to Lloyd the day Lincoln was killed.
But there is little evidence tying Surratt to the plot - the military court that heard the case relied heavily on Lloyd's testimony for her conviction.
On July 7, 1865, Surratt was hanged along with three other Booth conspirators. She was the first woman the U.S. government executed.
Verge said "only God and Mary Surratt" know what her role was, but after 25 years of studying Surratt, some members of the Surratt Society have their pet theories.
"Each one of us has our own feelings about her," said Joan Chaconas, a museum staffer as she walked through the Surratt home. "She had to be aware of what was going on, but I don't think she should have been hanged."
Surratt's guilt or innocence may be the subject of a future conference, Verge said.
But for now, the Surratt Society is gearing up for another season of bus tours and the upcoming conference. Construction is also under way on a new Lincoln assassination research center.
Mary Surratt House: http://www.surratt.org/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY406-410 of April 29
 Load-Date: April 30, 2002

 

End of Document
