

On the phone, in the mail, at the door: An intense effort to get voters to get out and vote
The Associated Press
October 17, 2004, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 1082 words
Byline: By MIKE GLOVER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DES MOINES, Iowa
Body




Here, playing out on 57th Street, there's an intense miniature version of the nationwide effort by President Bush and Sen. John Kerry to find friendly voters and get them to the polls on Nov. 2.
Located on the city's west side, just a sand wedge away from a popular city golf course, this working class neighborhood has a mix of Republicans, Democrats and independents that roughly reflects the party split in this battleground state. That makes Precinct 52 a target for special attention.
The 67 registered Democrats, 62 Republicans and 33 independent voters who live along a four-block stretch of 57th Street are deluged with mailed pleas, telephone calls and door-knockers looking to lure them to the polls. Like it or not, these Iowans on a street of brick and wood-frame homes dating from World War II are part of the most sophisticated get-out-the-vote effort ever undertaken.
"It's just enough to be irritating," says Kathy Hunt.
After investing millions of dollars in state-of-the art technology, both campaigns use Census and other data to track voters down to the household level in dozens of ways - from their voting habits to their magazine subscriptions, their church affiliations, race, age, marital status, number of children, hobbies and political issues of interest.
Democrats and affiliated groups are using hundreds of paid canvassers and volunteers to reach out, and Republicans are relying on a network of volunteers to make more than 38,000 "voter contacts" each week just in Iowa.
"We've ratcheted it up," said Ed Failor, who runs the GOP field effort. "I've never seen anything so enormous, so organized."
That's not lost on the folks along 57th Street. Precinct 52 had an 82 percent turnout in 2000, so they're an attentive political audience. Democrat Al Gore got 52 percent of the precinct's votes four years ago.
Bridget Briel, 42, is a Republican. She's buried in direct mail but says, "All of the junk mail goes in a pile and at the end of the week, I throw it out."
Her pile on a recent day included a message from Bush warning that Kerry was "playing politics with national security" and another from the state Democratic Party warning the nation couldn't afford four more years of Bush's health care policy.
She hasn't decided how she'll vote but is leaning toward Kerry. "I just don't like Bush, never have," she said.
Down the street, 74-year-old Aurora Lumandue handles phone calls simply - when she figures out it's a political call she hangs up. "I don't even listen to them any more," she said. She hasn't decided how she'll vote.
Here's how the campaign's personal contacts work: Canvassers hit the streets armed with voter registration information that provides the name, age and party affiliation of each registered voter on the block. They knock on doors, questioning folks about candidates and issues. They store the information on hand-held computers.
At the end of the day, those canvassers merge their day's work with a central database, where the handhelds and the central computers update each other. The next time the campaign reaches out to the same voters, it is armed with a wealth of information that drives decisions on things like which direct mail piece to use, or what to pitch in a phone call.
"We look at demographic information we've developed," said Republican Failor. "We could use terror, education, health care, whatever fits."
Back on 57th Street, Vanessa Minick is a 33-year-old teacher with small children. She has made clear her view that schools are getting the short end of the stick. Not long ago, she opened a mail piece from Kerry warning "when it comes to public education, George Bush is shortchanging Iowa."
"Amen to that," said Minick, a Kerry supporter.
Virginia Nolan, 35, has been flooded with mail, too.
"I was more toward Kerry, but with all the flip-flopping I'm not really sure," said Nolan, a Democrat.
Hunt, 51, isn't sure either. She said she reads everything she gets "but I haven't decided yet."
Lynn Walding, 49, director of the state's Alcoholic Beverages Division and a neighborhood resident, said, "I'm getting e-mails, they definitely have my e-mail address." But he's an active Democrat and said, "I've already voted."
Besides trying to persuade potential voters, the campaigns are making a big effort to get the votes voted, in advance if possible.
In the front yard of Janet Waggoner's home is a sign for Republican Sen. Chuck Grassley, and she's a certain Bush voter.
"I had planned to vote on November 2, but then I got a card in the mail telling me where the satellite voting station will be and I think I'll do that," she said.
Everyone carefully tracks the early votes. In Polk County, Auditor Michael Mauro said there have been 48,918 requests for absentee ballots, with Democratic requests ahead roughly 2-to-1. More than 25,000 of those absentee ballots have already been returned, and campaign workers are in hot pursuit of the rest.
Early voters at satellite stations are also noted, with more than 1,100 already having voted at the city's central election office. Starting Monday, Polk County voters can cast ballots at 11 more early-voting places including libraries and a community center.
Larry James serves as Precinct 52 captain for the Democrats, and he concedes there's a balancing act between getting the message out and suffocating voters with constant contact.
"We're all getting telephone calls from everybody," he said. "I'm very careful about that because these are my neighbors." The 57-year-old James prefers personal chats about issues like Social Security.
Still, the next two weeks will see an increase in organized get-out-the-vote activities.
The anti-Bush group America Coming Together is moving into the street with its 70 canvassers in what spokesman Jeff Link indelicately describes as "carpet bombing."
"We haven't been there before because those folks are pretty good voters," he said. "We've been focusing on sporadic voters."
Failor said GOP officials began their get-out-the-vote effort working from lists of church memberships. "Churchgoing people in certain groups are going to be favorable to the president," he said.
The Republicans are casting a wider net, too. A reporter walking the street one night bumped into a young woman distributing absentee ballot requests to voters likely to favor Bush. Told of his assignment, she asked if he needed an absentee ballot to vote for Bush in his spare time.
EDITOR'S NOTE - Mike Glover has covered presidential politics for the AP since 1984.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos IACN201-202; AP Graphic ELN 57TH STREET VOTERS
 Load-Date: October 18, 2004

 

End of Document
