

One by one, the names of the dead resound across a mourning city
March 11, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 491 words
Byline: By RICHARD PYLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




From police stations around the city to a chapel near ground zero, a roll call of America's heroes resounded Monday to mark six months to the minute from the attack on the World Trade Center.
At police precincts, officers assembled in streets outside and stood at attention, saluting, as commanders read the names of the 23 New York officers killed in the attack. The event began at 8:30 a.m., with the reading of the names timed to end for a moment of silence at 8:46 a.m., when the first hijacked jetliner hit the north tower on Sept. 11.
"They didn't know they would be called to act, but they did so with the highest valor," said Capt. David Barrere, commander of the 76th Precinct in Brooklyn.
At St. Paul's Chapel near ground zero, participants began reading the names of the more than 3,000 victims of the attacks at the trade center, the Pentagon and the fourth hijacked jetliner, which crashed in western Pennsylvania.
The death toll in New York included 343 firefighters and 37 Port Authority police officers.
Former Mayor Rudolph Giuliani took a turn reading 254 names. Others reading from the list were clergy, police, firefighters and relatives of the victims.
The church, though one block from the trade center, survived major damage and was used as a relief center during the weeks after the attacks. It still serves breakfast and coffee to construction workers and police at ground zero, and provides cots for those needing rest.
The memorials were accompanied by impromptu gestures.
When two firefighters in full gear boarded a subway train at the Chambers Street station at the trade center, apparently to check something, the 40 or more passengers in the car rose and applauded them. Some riders dabbed their eyes. Church bells rang across the city.
The scene outside the 76th precinct house was repeated around the city as the police department marked a day unlike any other.
Standing in cold, bright sunshine, Barrere called his officers to attention and read the names:
"Police Officer James Leahy, 6th precinct … police Officer Robert Fazio, 13th precinct," he began. The list ended with bomb squad Detective Claude Richards.
Fourteen of the police officers killed were members of emergency service units who went into the towers to rescue people. They perished, along with most of the firefighters, when the 110-story skyscrapers collapsed.
The 76th precinct in Brooklyn's Carroll Gardens neighborhood sent a van load of nine officers to the scene that day. Racing through a tunnel under the East River, the officers were among the first to arrive.
They were directing the evacuation of a day care center when the south tower crumbled in a blizzard of debris. All survived.
"You couldn't see in front of your face," said Officer Bruce Gise, 42, recalling how the team was suddenly enveloped in a black cloud of dust and flying debris. "I've been a police officer 17 years and I never before had the feeling that I wasn't going home that day."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: March 12, 2002

 

End of Document
