

Pengaton's flying radio station goes off the air - and leaves the skies in the process
March 20, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 461 words
Byline: By MARC LEVY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIDDLETOWN, Pa.
Body




One of Afghanistan's most popular radio stations for the past few months has gone off the air.
The 193rd Special Operations Wing of the Pennsylvania Air National Guard arrived home Tuesday after six months of flying day and night around Afghanistan, broadcasting messages and music to Afghans as part of the Pentagon's psychological warfare against the Taliban.
"They've pretty much been on the air in the Middle East for the last several months, nonstop," said Col. Jim Lillis, the squad's vice commander, one of a couple hundred people on the guard's home tarmac at Harrisburg International Airport as the crews disembarked.
Some of the crew members flew home in the same planes they flew in Operation Enduring Freedom: 40-year-old C-130s equipped with thousands of pounds of broadcasting equipment.
The unit flew over 300 missions, each lasting nine hours. Its motto: "Never seen, always heard."
The 10,000-watt broadcasts tried to get a wide range of messages across to Afghans who had hidden radios from the repressive Taliban. Listeners were told how to approach food drops, warned to stay indoors or away from U.S. soldiers during fighting, and assured that it was terrorists, not them, who were under attack.
"We know they had radios stashed away," said Senior Master Sgt. Michael Kovach, a 46-year-old flight supervisor who has been with the unit since 1986.
Some of the broadcasts were aimed squarely at the Taliban. "Attention Taliban! You are condemned. Did you know that?" one said. And another: "Our forces are armed with state-of-the-art military equipment. What are you using, obsolete and ineffective weaponry?"
Afghan music was included because past missions had shown that music was a big draw to listeners. One of the songs broadcast was an old Afghan anthem that had been banned by the Taliban, Kovach said.
The U.S. military's only unit of its kind, the 193rd has flown over most of the planet, from Panama to Kuwait. It has six of the specially equipped C-130s, which are capable of transmitting television broadcasts. Eventually, all will be able to relay live satellite feeds.
While the radio messages, delivered in local languages, are usually broadcast from recordings, crews occasionally bring aboard a native speaker to do a live broadcast.
Unit members say they were told by a number of sources in the military that the broadcasts were widely heard on the ground.
Inside the planes, two huge banks of broadcast equipment mounted to steel supports loom over six swiveling seats at the controls.
It seems a dreary place to spend nine hours at a time, but the unit members see their mission as a humanitarian one.
"It's doing a good cause without going in and throwing things down people's throats," said Lt. Dawn Junk, a pilot. "You can do more with less."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo HX103
 Load-Date: March 21, 2002

 

End of Document
