

Police on the front line: Stretched thin and rankled about lack of information from the FBI
October 16, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 824 words
Byline: By ROBERT TANNER, AP National Writer
Body




The thin blue line has become the front line in a nation transformed by terrorism, but police are beset by long hours and frustrated with what many see as a lack of information from the FBI.
From department chiefs to detectives, officers say poor intelligence-sharing by federal investigators leaves the chance for too many leads to go cold.
A case in point was last week's discovery of anthrax at NBC News - the FBI was called first after the arrival of a threatening letter to anchorman Tom Brokaw that contained a white, powdery substance. The agency did not immediately submit the letter for testing or interview the woman who opened it, and failed to immediately notify the New York Police Department.
The city learned from a private doctor days later that the woman, an assistant to Brokaw, was infected with anthrax.
"The overall sense of the man on the beat is that he's not getting every bit of information that he should," said Lt. Lou Cannon, a veteran of Washington's city force who is now with the U.S. Mint police.
Daniel J. Oates, who worked 21 years with the NYPD and is now police chief of Ann Arbor, Mich., is more blunt.
"The FBI has a culture of not sharing information with local law enforcement," said Oates, who headed intelligence for the New York police before moving two months ago.
"In this arena of counterterrorism, it is doing a disservice to the country. Frankly, I'd like the FBI to finally trust some cops, a whole lot of cops."
FBI spokesman Joe Valiquette in New York said Monday that "with regard to the NBC incident the other day, we certainly would acknowledge that the way that was handled was not the ideal."
But as far as communication between the FBI and the New York police, he said, "there is a close working relationship." He said he could only comment for the local office, and FBI officials in Washington did not return phones calls Friday and Monday.
Yet Baltimore Police Commissioner Edward Norris testified before a Congressional hearing last week that changes are needed nationwide.
"What's making me angry is that I have yet to talk to a police chief who's happy about this, but very few are coming out publicly," he said. "It's a little disappointing."
The frustrations come at a time when local police are already pushing themselves harder than ever.
Sept. 11 brought a steady string of long days for departments far beyond New York and Washington. The latest anthrax worries spur the need for officers to track down every call about white powder.
"The job's probably changed more in the past month than it has in my entire 22 years in the department," said Baltimore Detective Gary McLhinney. "We're clearly the front line."
His department went on 12-hour days and canceled days off for the first week and a half after the terrorist attacks. Ann Arbor, Denver and many other cities stepped up their hours, too.
The burden, though few are willing to call it that, takes its toll on budgets, equipment and the officers themselves.
"Right now, we're mentally strong and we're ready to take the task on," said Larry Sowards, a crime prevention officer in San Marcos County, Texas. "Talk to me two months from now, we'll see how we're doing."
In Portland, Maine, police Chief Michael Chitwood said his detectives were the first to interview one suspect's girlfriend. But when they tried to interview her again, the FBI told police they were "flirting with obstruction of justice charges."
Chitwood ordered detectives to continue their investigation. The FBI may have more money and resources but his officers know their city, he said.
"We can conduct an investigation as good as them, especially on the local level - probably better," he said.
Oates said the hundreds of names of potential suspects released by the FBI are only that: names. No photographs, no drivers license numbers, no history. "It has the appearance of them working with local law enforcement, when in fact it's of virtually no value," he said.
Still, some chiefs said the FBI's actions were logical.
"They can't supply us with all the information we need because of national security, and we understand that," said Jim Gabbard, chief of Vero Beach, Fla., police.
But several officers said the federal government's warnings of potential terrorist attacks, when given without specific information, don't help.
"You have the Justice Department that issues an alert. You then tell the man on the beat to be alert. He's already alert; he'll try to hone his awareness even more. But then you don't tell him what to focus on," said Cannon, in Washington.
Keeping America safe comes down to numbers and a wiser use of resources, Oates said.
"There are some 12,000 FBI agents, and about 600,000 cops. We should be involved in the fight against terrorism, and the FBI should be using us," he said. "And their failure to use us is to the country's detriment."
AP reporters Amy Westfeldt in Newark, N.J., and David Sharp in Portland, Maine, contributed to this report.
 Graphic



 
AP Graphic ATTACKS POLICE
 Load-Date: October 17, 2001

 

End of Document
