

Profiles of some of the leaders who will attend the Summit of the Americas
The Associated Press
January 10, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 480 words
Body




Profiles of some of the key leaders who will attend the Summit of the Americas:
President George Bush
He comes to the summit with a new immigration plan that he will use to help smooth strained relations with the region and capture Latino votes in November elections. He will also face growing resentment about U.S. anti-terrorism measures, including the fingerprinting and photographing of arriving foreigners.
Mexican President Vicente Fox
He will push Bush for details of his immigration plan, something Fox desperately needs to boost wavering voter confidence in his leadership. Many Mexican officials have also expressed anger over U.S. concerns with flights from Mexico City to Los Angeles. After one flight was canceled, members of Fox's administration said the United States must provide harder evidence of possible terrorist threats.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez
Chavez has pledged to wage an intense fight at the summit against the Free Trade Area of the Americas, saying that joining the FTAA would be "like committing suicide." Chavez argues that the free-trade zone would further impoverish Latin American and Caribbean countries by forcing their industries to compete with U.S. and Canadian products. Venezuela is a major oil supplier to the United States, but relations have been strained under Chavez, an ally of Cuba's Fidel Castro. Castro will not be attending the summit because his country's membership in the Organization of American States is suspended.
Canadian Prime Minister Paul Martin
Martin, who took office a few weeks ago, will take advantage of the summit to meet his new counterparts, including Fox, and to improve U.S.-Canadian relations that were often strained under predecessor Jean Chretien. Martin has said he will push other countries at the summit to make AIDS drugs available to poor nations.
Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva
Silva's administration has led a coalition of nations that oppose the U.S. vision of the FTAA. The United States has refused to back down on agricultural subsidies for its farmers, and Brazil has said it doesn't want to talk about intellectual property rights. Brazil also retaliated against the U.S. decision to fingerprint and photograph foreign visitors by doing the same to U.S. tourists in that country.
Bolivian President Carlos Mesa
Mesa, struggling to stabilize his country after the violent ouster of his predecessor in October, will ask for financial help from his counterparts to aid social and political reforms needed to strengthen the country's tenuous democracy.
Argentine President Nestor Kirchner
Kirchner's administration was angered by recent U.S. criticism over Argentina's warming relations with Cuba and its methods for rebuilding the economy. Kirchner said he would not yield to any pressure for policy changes, and predicted he would "win by a knockout" at a face-to-face meeting with Bush.
 Load-Date: January 11, 2004

 

End of Document
