

Raising the turret the last major job in recovery of the Civil War ironclad Monitor
July 3, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 761 words
Byline: By ESTES THOMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HATTERAS, N.C.
Body




Half buried in silt and encrusted with sponges and coral, the gun turret of the Civil War ironclad USS Monitor sits on the bare Atlantic floor waiting for the modern Navy to retrieve it.
The wreckage emerges from the shadows as a four-man submarine used by marine researchers approaches. The curved wall of the turret looks like a straight-sided bowl filled with sand.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has been working since 1975 to retrieve the remains of the Monitor, discovered in 1971 by Duke University marine archaeologists.
The 987-ton gunboat was unique because of its steel hull and rotating turret, with its two 11-inch cannons. The turret landed under the hull when the Monitor foundered and sank upside-down in a storm Dec. 31, 1862, just 10 months after it was commissioned.
Sixteen people died, and researchers know three perished in the water. What happened to the rest isn't certain.
Navy divers now are preparing to lift the 120-ton turret and assembly - its weight swelled to about 200 tons because of the sand and debris inside as well as an attached lifting frame.
They expect to find human bones in the turret, and an expert from the Army's identification lab will be on hand to advise how to handle any remains.
"The turret was the only way out and all the other hatches were sealed tight. If there were any remains to be found on the Monitor, the turret would be the logical place," said John Broadwater, manager of the Monitor National Marine Sanctuary.
Still, scientists know the currents that sweep through the site are powerful enough to carry away any remains not secured inside the wreckage.
The Monitor's engine was lifted last summer. Previous dives have raised the anchor, propeller and a number of small artifacts like glass bottles and cannon balls. But the turret is considered significant to the preservation effort.
"This was the first revolving gun turret, not just in the United States, but the world," said Jeff Johnston, the principal researcher with the sanctuary.
"The one thing everyone has wanted to see since day one was the gun turret. It's worth saving. It's the great-grandmother of modern warships."
Johnston inspected the wreckage from the small submersible. As the sub drops below 200 feet, a grouper chases an eel and other fish flit around the wreckage, the most prominent feature on the ocean floor 16 miles off Hatteras Inlet.
Although one section of the old armor belt that ran around the ship's water line is intact, much of the vessel has collapsed on itself and it looks like a pile of fish bones.
Work around the wreckage is going on 24 hours a day as Navy divers clear silt and debris and cut away wood and steel. It's expected to last six weeks.
The divers will use special techniques that allow them to work at the 240-foot depth for hours instead of minutes. Divers in four-hour shifts will tear away debris that fell from the steamship's coal bunker when it slid to the bottom. They will remove rotten wood and steel plates, cutting a 25-by-45-foot section of the hull away to expose the turret.
Once in the clear, the 20-foot diameter turret will be attached to a claw-like grappling device and hoisted carefully to the surface by a crane on a gigantic work barge.
The Union ship's most famous battle came in Hampton Roads, Va., against the Confederate ironclad CSS Virginia, also known as the Merrimac, just 12 days after the Monitor was commissioned. It was the first battle between ironclad warships.
The Virginia had armor plate and banks of guns, but the entire ship had to be moved to get the best firing angles. Between ammunition supply problems and a hit on the Monitor's pilothouse, where a shell blinded the commanding officer, the Monitor was forced to withdraw into shallower water, where the deep-drafted Virginia could not follow.
Saving the turret won't be cheap. The Navy is spending $6.5 million this year to send its divers, who use the project for training for other salvage dives. NOAA, which owns the wreck, is paying $600,000. Last year, the Navy and NOAA spent about $4.3 million to raise the Monitor's engine.
Money is expected to run out at the end of July, when expedition organizers hope to have the turret raised and on its way to The Mariners' Museum in Newport News, Va., for conservation. The museum is trying to raise $30 million to create a center for Monitor artifacts.
On the Net:
NOAA's Monitor site: http://monitor.nos.noaa.gov/ 
Mariners' Museum site: http://www.mariner.org/monitor/ 
Navy Monitor site: http://www.history.navy.mil/photos/sh-usn/usnsh-m/monitor.htm 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY431-433 of July 3
 Load-Date: July 4, 2002

 

End of Document
