

Readying for 'the big one,' world health authorities solve the mystery of a new disease
The Associated Press
March 26, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1765 words
Byline: By EMMA ROSS, AP Medical Writer
Dateline: GENEVA
Body




It was 2:30 a.m. when Dr. Mike Ryan was awakened by the phone call that catapulted the world's health officials into crisis mode over a deadly flu-like illness striking in Asia.
It was health authorities in Singapore. They had heard that a doctor from their country might be sick with the mysterious Asian bug - and he could be carrying the new disease around the world on a flight home from New York.
"We had the name, but not the flight number, or even the airline," said Ryan, whose name was at the top of a 24-hour contact list given to governments dealing with the illness.
It took a few more calls to determine that the man was headed for Frankfurt. By the time the plane landed there on the morning of Saturday, March 15, German quarantine services were waiting for him.
For the first time, the World Health Organization was about to launch a crisis plan to attack a global contagious disease, severe acute respiratory syndrome, SARS. They would corral the talents of the best laboratories in the world and hunt down the cause, come up with a cure and contain its spread.
"We've had killer outbreaks of new diseases before, like Ebola, but they have never spread internationally," said the WHO's infectious diseases chief, Dr. David Heymann.
A 57-year-old veteran of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Heymann was part of the scientific team dispatched to what was Zaire in 1976 to investigate the first Ebola outbreak.
"We've never faced anything on this scale with such a global reach," he said. "It's a big challenge. If this system had been in place when AIDS occurred, we might not have had the AIDS expansion that we had."
There was already heightened concern over the SARS outbreak, not only because it was ferocious and its cause unknown but also because it was possible that a new form of influenza could be the culprit. New varieties of flu have often come out of Asia and many experts have predicted another major killer flu epidemic is inevitable.
It was a fearsome scenario. The last major worldwide flu epidemic, which began in 1918 in Spain, killed at least 20 million people.
"Things began to develop very rapidly over the weekend," said Ryan, who heads WHO's Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network, based at the organization's headquarters in Geneva.
The case of the Singapore doctor, together with a report the night before from Canada of a suspicious outbreak there, prompted the agency to ratchet up the response.
Key people were called in to headquarters Saturday morning and by that afternoon a 14-person team was ensconced at the command room for the outbreak network.
Creating a structure and dividing into focused teams was important. "One of the most difficult things in a crisis is that everybody does everything," said Ryan. "They all work extremely hard, but the direction tends to get lost."
The immediate task was to hash out a definition of the new illness, decide what advice to give government health authorities and announce it to the world.
WHO, an agency of the United Nations, does not have any legal power to enforce global health precautions over the SARS outbreak. It is primarily governments' responsibility to respond to outbreaks; WHO can only intervene when invited.
"The member states wanted an advisory from WHO. We knew that if we didn't fill that void, countries would, and if one country went one way and another country went another way, it just gets confusing, so we had to make a decision," said Pat Drury, a coordinator of the outbreak network.
Later that afternoon, WHO issued an unprecedented worldwide emergency travel advisory, declaring SARS a global health threat and alerting the world to the symptoms: fever, cough, breathlessness and breathing problems. People with a suspicious case were urged to see a doctor and refrain from further travel until they recovered.
"I didn't sleep very well that night. I was thinking, had we done the right thing and I convinced myself that we had," said Heymann, who had interrupted a father-son Boy Scout camping trip to deal with the crisis.
For about two years, WHO has been building a new system to tackle the emergence of new global diseases. Here was a chance to try it out sooner than expected.
"This has been a real forging process," said Ryan. "Three or four weeks ago I would have said, 'Yes, we have a good set-up, it's been tested in Ebola, it's been tested in a number of outbreaks, but it really hasn't had its major road test.'
"Well, I'll tell you what, it's got it in the last 10 days. It has creaked and it has groaned and it has leaned to a bit, but it has worked," he said.
With outposts established in other time zones, the operation was run on a 24-hour basis almost within normal office hours.
But about a week into the crisis, the strain was evident in the bloodshot eyes and weary faces of many at the command center - the scene of skipped lunches, long hours and late-night pizzas. The whole thing was pushing the World Health Organization to the limit.
"They are tired. A lot of them haven't seen their families in quite a while. Some of their kids are threatening revolt. One kid has asked her mommy to get a new job. It's been hard," said Ryan, a rugged Irishman with a day or two of stubble framing his ruddy face.
As that first weekend came to a close, reports of suspected cases from health authorities flooded in from around the world. Thousands of ordinary people, worried about their travel plans, also contacted the U.N. agency seeking advice.
On Monday, March 17, the WHO established a "virtual lab," pooling the expertise of 11 top labs in nine countries to figure out the cause of the disease. During a daily conference call, the labs shared findings.
"This is the first time that a global network of laboratories are sharing information, samples, blood, pictures," said Dr. Klaus Stohr, a WHO virologist coordinating the labs. "Basically overnight, there are no secrets, there is no jealousy, there is no competition in the face of a global health emergency. This is a phenomenal network.
"These are the world's top-notch labs. These people are very competitive. They want to raise funds for their research. They want to publish. They want tenure and whatever, but here they are working all together and that makes a really big difference."
In one week, the lab network had isolated the SARS virus, produced a preliminary diagnostic test and narrowed the virus' identity down to two candidates - neither one a new strain of influenza. In the following week, various antiviral drugs were being tested as possible treatments.
One of the labs at the forefront was the CDC lab in Atlanta. Dr. James Hughes, director of the National Center for Infectious Diseases, said the search for the virus was reminiscent of the 1993 investigation that uncovered hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in the Southwest United States. That virus is carried by mice.
"It was very severe and killed previously healthy young people," Hughes said. He agreed with Stohr that the sharing of research among the world's best labs was unprecedented.
"We would not be sitting here talking about these findings," Stohr said, "if all of them had done what they have been doing behind closed doors, as they usually do."
Meanwhile, doctors were also sharing information. Stohr and others at WHO coordinated exchanges of symptoms, case histories and possible treatments. In a morning conference call, Asian doctors talked about various therapies they were trying; later in the day, the Europeans and North Americans conferred.
In eastern Asia - at government invitation - expert field teams of WHO staffers and scientists from international institutes were sent to Vietnam, Hong Kong and China to figure out how the disease was spread, to help treat patients and advise how to control it.
Aileen Plant, an infectious disease epidemiologist from Curtin University in Australia, led a dozen experts in Hanoi, one of the hard-hit areas. To her, SARS seemed eerily similar to hendra virus in the mid-90s.
"There was a man who caught the virus from horses, and we believe the horses caught it from bats," she said. "He had a very similar picture where he got sick quickly and died."
Her international team focused on the Hanoi French Hospital, which closed its doors to new patients and quarantined those inside. Many of the sick were doctors and nurses. The WHO team focused on controlling the outbreak and created a kind of spider web diagram of who had contact with which patient, when and where, and how long it took those people to get sick. The health investigators stayed well primarily by wearing surgical masks.
The circles under Jesper Aagesen's eyes told the story of the hours he spent inside hospitals. He spoke of the conditions and patients as if they were his own.
"In the French Hospital, I think more than 60 percent of the staff has fallen ill by now," said the clinician. "They are working very hard caring for their colleagues, and not knowing who is next puts an enormous stress on those people."
The Hanoi teams worked 18-hour days. Many of them gathered around a table in a modest office, a half-dozen laptops open with graphs and figures analyzing data on the outbreak.
Each had a specific job fitting into a larger puzzle they all worked to solve. Some gathered data, some worked to control the spread, others monitored patients and hospital equipment.
As for the deadly disease, the epidemiologists tracking it were unafraid. "We don't have anyone walking around with big helmets all around their heads and that sort of thing - no moon suits," Plant said, smiling. "At the moment, I send my staff into the hospitals and the only thing I'm really meticulous about is the (surgical) masks. That means I still believe it's droplet spread. If it was airborne, we'd be seeing lots of cases."
With newly released figures from China, there have been fewer than 1,400 cases and a little over 50 deaths worldwide. The WHO believes the disease is well under control everywhere but Hong Kong. In mainland China, the picture is somewhat murky.
By the time the crisis plan had been rolling for 10 days, the frenzy at WHO headquarters seemed to have settled into a groove.
Many inside the World Health Organization see the SARS operation as a kind of dress rehearsal - "good practice," one doctor said - for the Big One, the inevitable killer flu pandemic that experts say could come at any time.
"This isn't the Big One, because I think it's being contained."
EDITORS NOTE: Margie Mason in Hanoi contributed to this story.
On the Net:
World Health Organization SARS site: http://www.who.int/csr/sars/en/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY354-357 and HK104 of March 26

 

End of Document
