

Recalling 'The Kid': Williams was as unpredictable as the wind
July 5, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 776 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE: Dave O'Hara was the AP's New England sports editor in Boston from 1965-1992. O'Hara retired in August 1992 after a career spanning six decades in Boston and Milwaukee.
---
By DAVE O'HARA
For The Associated Press
Hearty laughter. Roaring rage. A winning grin. An icy scowl. Outgoing and friendly. Moody and belligerent.
Ted Williams was his own man and did his own thing during a bombastic baseball career that spanned four decades and two tours of military duty as a Marine Corps fighter pilot.
From the time he broke in as a rookie with the Boston Red Sox in 1939 until he hit a home run in his final at bat in 1960, Ted was as unpredictable as the east wind he cursed so often after being denied a homer at Fenway Park.
Idolized by countless fans for a booming bat and movie-type flair on the field, he had a love-hate relationship with Boston baseball writers throughout his career. He called the writers, "Knights of the Keyboard," and not in a friendly fashion.
Actually, only a couple of the writers went out of their way to take potshots at him.
Even his severest critics had to agree that there was only one Williams, whether he was called "The Kid," "Tempestuous Ted," "The Brat" or whatever. All had to admire his ability to hit a baseball, his dedication to the game, and, especially, his generosity as he tried to shun publicity in private life.
The "Jimmy Fund," begun with the support of the Red Sox and Williams in the 1940s to assist children's cancer research, stands as a lifetime memorial to the last of the .400 hitters. Even as he entered his 80s and fought health problems, he found ways to help the Jimmy Fund, the major fund-raising arm of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, a few blocks from Fenway Park.
Williams had only a handful of Boston writers he liked throughout his career. Basically, though, he treated all alike, occasionally with respect, often with scorn and harsh words unsuitable for a family newspaper. And, for a young reporter, covering him from the press box or the Red Sox clubhouse could be considered the equivalent of another degree of higher learning.
During a long career with The Associated Press, I covered virtually every major sports event - the World Series, football, hockey and basketball championships, world title boxing bouts and the Rose Bowl. Nothing, though, was more memorable and, in a way, more rewarding than covering Ted.
With television in its infancy, the print media was the principal outlet for reporting news during Williams' career. There were very few tape recorders, and microphones were rare in the clubhouse.
So Williams concentrated on the sports writers in postgame interviews. A writer soon learned that he loathed seeing a pencil and a notebook. The best personal interviews were seemingly casual talks before the writer went around the corner and jotted down valuable quotes.
I continued using that method in my last formal interview with Williams in 1991, conducted while he was watching and shouting encouragement to young prospects in the Red Sox training camp in Winter Haven, Fla.
Having mellowed somewhat, he didn't even complain when he spotted a tape recorder under some papers in my hand, although he made it known that he had noticed the device.
During the 1950s, Williams was voted The Associated Press athlete of the year. Judge Bob Cannon had trouble getting together with Williams for presentation of a huge trophy, symbolic of the honor, given annually at the time by a Milwaukee fraternal organization. After repeated efforts, this writer got Williams to agree to accept the award before a game in Boston - as long as there were no speeches.
Cannon was cautioned that Williams could be uncooperative and moody. When the presentation was made on the top step of the dugout, however, Williams was at his gracious best. And, for the next half hour, he and Cannon sat in the dugout talking about fishing and making plans to meet again. So much for uncooperative and moody.
A few years ago, Williams was honored at Fenway Park and doffed his cap to New England fans, something he refused to do even in his final game, and acknowledged the "Knights of the Keyboard" in the press box. He got in a mischievous shot at his old prey, even though there was only one writer on hand who had covered him as a player.
Later, at a news conference, a young writer asked Williams if he was referring to Dave O'Hara. He looked at me and said "Nah," then unable to resist the temptation, he guffawed and shouted, "Oh, yeah, you were one of them."
With that, Williams broke up with laughter.
Reporting on Williams was not always a writers' dream, but there never was a dull moment.
 Load-Date: July 6, 2002

 

End of Document
