

Reflections after a century: Has the Bureau of Reclamation met the needs of the changing West?
June 14, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1004 words
Byline: By JEFF BARNARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GRANTS PASS, Ore.
Body




When President Theodore Roosevelt signed the Reclamation Act of 1902, he gave a new government agency the unambiguous charge to go forth and make the desert bloom by bringing water to family farms.
The idea, says University of Oklahoma historian Donald Pisani, was to boost the West out of the depression of the 1890s by helping populate the vast empty lands with yeomen farmers, considered the foundation of democracy.
A century later, the family farms are mostly history, and the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation is looking at a much more complicated world, balancing endangered species against large-scale agriculture, industry, growing cities and Indian tribes.
As the bureau prepares for its centennial celebration Monday in Las Vegas near its proudest achievement, towering Hoover Dam, not everyone touched by federal water projects is ready to eat cake.
"The bureau has done everything it could to do one thing and one thing well, and that is deliver water to farmers," said Glen Spain of the Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen's Associations. "But it completely wrecked some of the region's most important rivers" and the fishing economies that went with them.
Barry Nelson, senior policy analyst for the Natural Resources Defense Council, said, "That's what happens when 19th century policies collide with 21st century needs."
"The bureau has failed to change its policies to meet the real needs of the West," he said. "And I don't mean just environmental needs. The environmental, economic and community needs of the 21st century."
Back when nature was for conquering and the effects of turning whole watersheds upside down was not understood, the bureau produced some of the nation's greatest engineering achievements.
Its 180 water projects in 17 Western states include the Hoover and Glen Canyon dams on the Colorado River in Arizona, Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia River in Washington, and the sprawling Central Valley Project in California.
The bureau is the nation's biggest wholesale water supplier, supplying 10 trillion gallons of water to 31 million people annually.
That water, much of it subsidized, supplies one of every five Western farms, producing 60 percent of the nation's vegetables and 25 percent of its fruits and nuts. The bureau's 58 hydroelectric plants generate 42 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity a year.
Its goal in the early days was expressed by Franklin Lane, interior secretary from 1912 to 1921, who said it was a crime to let one drop of water flow unused to the sea.
"In the end you look at the West as a kind of laboratory experiment that is still going on where you have a lot of disquieting signs something is terribly wrong," said Pisani, a keynote speaker at bureau festivities in Las Vegas.
In 1984, waterfowl deaths and deformities at Kesterson Reservoir in California were traced to the toxic metal selenium, concentrated in the water by bureau projects.
Forty years after construction of Glen Canyon Dam, scientists are trying to figure out how to reverse the damage to the Colorado River: shrinking beaches, declining native species, invasion of alien fish and plants, and erosion of archaeological sites.
Wild salmon runs in the Northwest and California have plummeted, in part from habitat lost to bureau projects.
Last summer, the bureau's century-old dedication to irrigating 220,000 acres of the Klamath Basin straddling the Oregon-California border crashed into the Endangered Species Act. With drought making water scarce, the bureau had to cut off water to most of the 1,400 farms to protect endangered suckers and threatened salmon.
Bureau Commissioner John W. Keys III characterized the water shutoff - the first in the bureau's history - as the agency's biggest challenge since the 1976 collapse of Teton Dam in Idaho killed 11 people and destroyed 4,000 homes.
It is not a new problem. The Truckee-Carson Project in Nevada ran into similar issues in 1909.
San Francisco swells fought the bureau's plan to build a dam on Lake Tahoe so more water could flow down the Truckee River. The Paiute Tribe on Nevada's Pyramid Lake opposed diverting more water from their kokanee salmon fishery. Urban boosters in Reno and farmers around Fallon, Nev., clamored for more water.
Ultimately, many of the farms failed, and the city of Reno became the primary beneficiary, Pisani said. It was an outcome repeated throughout the West.
"Ironically, the Bureau of Reclamation, when it provided Hoover Dam, contributed far more to the growth of Los Angeles and the industrial development of the West than agricultural development," Pisani said.
The bureau's last big project authorization came in 1968 for the Central Arizona Project, and Pisani said the agency is now searching for a new mission.
Keys counters the bureau has no doubt about its mission, which is to maintain its old projects, build new ones and develop new sources of water, such as desalinated seawater and treated wastewater.
"Wastewater is the last great river we have to tap," Keys said.
Klamath Basin farmer Rod Blackman said the public has gotten less supportive of farming and the bureau's water projects as people have gotten farther from the family farm.
"Maybe they feel guilty that they live in a large city that pollutes and is made of concrete that once maybe a farm used to sit on," he said.
Bennett Raley, assistant interior secretary for water and science, foresees the bureau taking an increasing role as water broker. In the Klamath Basin, for example, the agency began a water bank to allow farmers, the government and others to buy the water they need for crops and fish, while compensating those who go without.
"We believe the best solution long-term for these complex situations where you've got competing demands is to let the market work," said Raley. "As we look to the next century, that is the way that we foresee that water will be shifted from existing uses to emerging uses in a way that is consistent with the way the system exists."
On the Net:
Bureau of Reclamation: http://www.usbr.gov/main/index.html 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY437 of June 14
 Load-Date: June 15, 2002

 

End of Document
