

Religion News in Brief; Episcopal bishop takes to the streets to learn about the homeless
The Associated Press
February 19, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1338 words
Dateline: PROVIDENCE, R.I.
Body




Calling herself "Aly," Episcopal Church Bishop Geralyn Wolf spent the month of January on the streets, befriending the homeless and sleeping and eating in shelters.
Her goals: To learn firsthand what it's like to scrape by, temporarily trade administration for hands-on ministry and put her pulpit words into action.
The experiment won praise from Rhode Island clergy and Episcopal bishops elsewhere.
Now off the streets, she's still trying to understand - and find solutions to - the plight of the poor.
"I have this power as the bishop of the diocese, but so often I'm bound up in pettiness," she told The Providence Journal.
"People are fascinated by someone in that position doing something like this … but they are also really trying to figure out how they feel about it," said Noreen Shawcross, director of Rhode Island's Coalition for the Homeless.
Shawcross said Wolf's experience changed some perceptions about the homeless. "People aren't so much talking about the hardships and injustices, but that she was able to be friends with these people," she said.
In 1996, Wolf, who was raised Jewish, became the second woman to head a U.S. Episcopal diocese.
--- Judge dismisses alienation suit blaming polygamous church for loss of wife
 
SALT LAKE CITY (AP) - A man has lost his courtroom attack on leaders of the polygamous Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints for his wife's decision to divorce him and become the plural wife of another man.
A federal court dismissed Jason Miles Williams' claim against the estate of the late Rulon Jeffs, leader of the church. Jeffs' denomination is separate from the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which is anti-polygamy.
Williams, a former member of the Fundamentalist Church, sued for $20 million, claiming his former wife was counseled by Jeffs and other church elders to leave their Colorado City, Ariz., home and divorce him. He also wanted church leaders to stop "unlawfully influencing" his children's beliefs.
But U.S. District Court Judge Dale Kimball said Williams' arguments were identical to those rejected by another federal judge. A state appeals court also rejected his claim.
--- Philadelphia church declared historic, despite Catholic archdiocese's objections
 
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - A Roman Catholic church in unusual Art Moderne design has been declared a historic site, to the cheers of parishioners and objections from the Archdiocese of Philadelphia.
The city historical commission voted unanimously to add Our Lady of Loreto Church to the Philadelphia Register of Historic Places. Loreto's school closed in 2000 and the church will close July 1 and merge with a nearby parish.
The landmark designation won't change that plan, but could affect the sale of the building. The archdiocese contended freedom of religion should prevent a public body from controlling the operation or disposal of church property.
The designation will protect a mural, stained glass windows and other features of the building; that could limit its desirability to buyers, a church attorney said.
Annamarie Horan, who spearheaded the designation, said campaigners wanted to save a community landmark but discovered the building is also an architectural rarity.
The Art Moderne style, which succeeded Art Deco in the 1930s, featured curving and sweeping lines. It is seen in airports and bus terminals, but rarely in churches.
--- Tennessee pagans claim religion lies behind daughter's mistreatment at school
 
MAYNARDVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - A couple that practices paganism has sued Union County, claiming school officials tried to have their daughter participate in Christian services and failed to stop others from harassing her.
Greg and Sarajane Tracy say daughter India, now 14 and attending a private school, was expected to join religious activities but denied the right to exercise her own faith. They also claim the school district failed to protect her from physical and verbal abuse.
The $300,000 lawsuit says India was sent to the principal's office after she declined to portray the virgin Mary in a Christmas play and was harassed after she didn't join other students being bused to an after-school evangelistic rally, The Knoxville News-Sentinel reported.
The lawsuit also alleges that India was required to attend Bible classes during the school day, was urged to lead her class in prayer and was told by a teacher to "keep quiet because you'll get in trouble" after she wrote a paper about religious freedom.
School Director James Pratt declined comment.
The Pagan Federation says its faith embraces kinship with nature and acknowledges both the female and male sides of divinity.
--- Complaint against Methodist bishop dismissed by church panel
 
CHICAGO (AP) - A special United Methodist Church investigating panel has dismissed a complaint against Chicago's Bishop Joseph Sprague from a group of clergy and lay people who said the prelate's teachings contradicted church doctrine.
The panel asked the bishop to issue a clarifying statement, reaffirming his beliefs about Jesus Christ. It said the 28 clergy and lay members who filed the charge should "offer a public apology" because such complaints are supposed to be private.
The Dec. 30 complaint said Sprague's writings and a speech at Iliff Theological Seminary in Denver violated Methodist doctrinal standards on the Trinity, salvation only through Jesus and the virgin birth.
A regional panel led by Bishop Bruce Ough of Worthington, Ohio, concluded that Sprague has a satisfactory faith in Christ and intended to reflect "his personal journey of faith."
The Rev. Thomas Lambrecht of Greenville, Wis., spokesman for the complainants, told United Methodist News Service the panel "did not objectively consider our perspective, but was heavily weighted against our point of view."
---
http://www.umc.org/index.asp 
--- Rhode Island remains the most Catholic state, almanac reports
 
HUNTINGTON, Ind. (AP) - Rhode Island remains the nation's most Roman Catholic state, with 61 percent of the population listed as members of the church, the 2003 "Catholic Almanac" reports.
Other heavily Catholic states: Massachusetts (49.8 percent), New Jersey (42.6 percent), New York (40.4 percent), Connecticut (38.4 percent) and New Hampshire (31.8 percent). The least Catholic states are South Carolina and Tennessee (3.2 percent each).
Nationwide, the annual puts Catholics at 65,270,444 or 22.9 percent of the populace.
Among nations, the United States ranks third in total Catholics behind Brazil (144 million) and Mexico (124 million) and exceeds, in order, the Philippines, Italy, France, Colombia, Spain, Poland and Argentina.
The authoritative reference work is published by Our Sunday Visitor.
---
http://www.osvpublishing.com/catholicalmanac 
--- Former lawyer of Zimbabwean Anglican Bishop accuses him of abusing power
 
HARARE, Zimbabwe (AP) - A former Anglican church lawyer has accused staunchly pro-government Bishop Nolbert Kunonga of trying to use political influence against opponents.
In a letter distributed in churches Sunday, Bob Stumbles suggests Kunonga fabricated an assassination plot against him by parishioners to discredit opponents of his politics.
Church officials had no immediate comment.
According to Stumbles, Kunonga leveled the murder plot charge with police last year and launched an internal church investigation, with no results.
Kunonga has divided churchgoers through outspoken support of President Robert Mugabe's push to seize white-owned farmland and distribute it to landless blacks. His critics want politics kept out of the church.
Last October, a court approved a petition by Kunonga to ban a group of Christians from church after they protested his pro-Mugabe sermons.
Kunonga was elected bishop in 2001 amid accusations he used influence with the ruling party to secure the post. He was also accused of firing priests who opposed his nomination.
Zimbabwe has been gripped by more than two years of economic turmoil and political violence, widely blamed on the increasingly authoritarian ruling party.

 

End of Document
