

Roberts argued the government position on divisive issues - the files for which are still secret
The Associated Press
July 27, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 837 words
Byline: By DONNA CASSATA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The solicitor general's office during John Roberts' 39 months as top deputy argued for the first President Bush on such divisive issues as abortion and prisoners' rights - and compiled a legal file that the current Bush White House wants to keep secret.
Roberts, President Bush's choice for the Supreme Court, served as the principal deputy solicitor general from October 1989 to January 1993, one of two political appointees in a Justice Department division heavily populated with civil servants.
The other political appointee was Roberts' boss, Solicitor General Kenneth Starr.
The solicitor general's office supervises and conducts government litigation in the Supreme Court. Starr and Roberts would have dealt with top officials in President George H.W. Bush's White House. The office's lawyers - four or five deputies and 15-20 assistants - would have written memos and other material for a spate of high-profile cases.
It is those documents that Senate Democrats are seeking for Roberts' confirmation process - and that the current White House likely will claim fall under attorney-client privilege.
Attorney General Alberto Gonzales said Tuesday he opposes releasing the documents, arguing in an interview with The Associated Press that their release "would be detrimental to the United States of America."
The position of principal deputy solicitor general was created in the early 1980s and frequently is referred to as the political deputy, although Republicans and Democrats who have worked there say the solicitor general's office is apolitical. The other deputies are career employees.
"The title implies that the politically sensitive cases are assigned to that deputy," said Richard Seamon, an associate professor of law at the University of Idaho who worked as an assistant in the solicitor general's office for six years, overlapping the Bush administration and the Clinton years.
He said the politically sensitive cases "tend to be the same ones: church-state, abortion, voting rights."
During Roberts' tenure as principal deputy, the solicitor general's office:
-Urged the Supreme Court to use the case of Planned Parenthood v. Casey to overturn the landmark 1973 ruling of Roe v. Wade that legalized abortion. A bitterly divided court reaffirmed Roe in a 5-4 decision but upheld restrictions in the Pennsylvania law such as a 24-hour waiting period and parental consent for unmarried girls under age 18.
-Argued in favor of a Reagan administration ban that prohibited federally subsidized family planning clinics from discussing abortion with pregnant women or informing them about where they could go to get one. The court ruled 5-4 in Rust v. Sullivan that the ban did not violate free-speech rights or a woman's right to end her pregnancy.
-Urged the court, with Roberts making the argument, to impose new restrictions on federal judges' power to reverse state court criminal convictions. The court ruled 5-4 in Withrow v. Williams that federal judges may hear state inmates' claims of Miranda violations even if state courts thoroughly considered and rejected those claims.
But lawyers who have worked in the solicitor general's office said a Roberts' paper trail could be limited.
Assistants in the office frequently wrote the memos recommending whether the office should consider appealing a case or submit a friend-of-the-court brief, with deputies marking up those documents.
"The heavy lifting was almost always done by assistants," said Richard Lazarus, a Georgetown University professor who worked in the solicitor general's office for four years but preceded Roberts.
Amy Wax, who was an assistant for seven years and three administrations, said scribbling in the margins by deputies "was the main practice in the great majority of cases I was involved in."
"In most cases, the line attorney wrote a memo and the assistant wrote a memo," said Wax, a law professor at the University of Pennsylvania. Of the call for documents to be released, he said, "You're not going to get a whole lot out of that dredging operation."
Roberts did frequently serve as acting solicitor general on cases involving the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit as Starr, a former judge on the court, often recused himself.
At a forum held at Brigham Young University in September 2002, Roberts suggested that his work was a bit more mundane.
On a panel with Starr, Roberts recalled a case that pitted two government agencies - the SEC and the Commodities Futures Trading Commission - both pressing him to act against the other.
"That was resolved," he said, "by holding, and this was typical, a series of interminable meetings with all interested parties that looked like nothing so much as Thanksgiving dinner at a dysfunctional family because - as you rapidly find out - these agencies have a long history of sort of squabbling with each other and now they are - it is wrong to view it this way, but - before their parents and the parents are going to decide which one gets punished and which one gets rewarded."
 Load-Date: July 28, 2005

 

End of Document
