

Sandwich and a beer: Grouper fishing off the Florida coast is banned for the rest of the year
The Associated Press
October 17, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 701 words
Byline: By MITCH STACY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MADEIRA BEACH, Fla.
Body




A specialty of the house at restaurants up and down Florida's west coast - a deep-fried slab of locally caught grouper, served on a bun with lettuce, tomato and a dab of tartar sauce, along with a cold beer - is off the menu until next year.
The government has put a stop to fishing for red grouper in the Gulf of Mexico for the remainder of 2005 because the year's quota of 10.1 million pounds has already been caught. That means restaurants will have to start importing their grouper, probably from Mexico.
The shutdown Oct. 10 is the latest turn in a years-long dispute that has pitted small-time fishermen against their big competitors.
"I ran for mayor once, and I thought the mayor's race in a small town was nasty," said Bob Spaeth, executive director of the Southern Offshore Fishing Association and part owner of Madeira Beach Seafood, one of the Gulf Coast's largest grouper operations. "This is vicious, beyond nasty."
Fishermen in big boats and small make their living catching grouper for seafood restaurants that feed the cravings of tourists and locals for the mild-tasting fish.
The demand for red grouper - the most popular commercial and recreational Gulf of Mexico catch - is so great that the federal government put annual quotas on the harvest several years ago.
This is the second year in a row that the season has been shut down because the quota was reached.
Also at issue this fall is a more far-reaching proposal - advocated by Spaeth's group, made up mostly of large commercial operators - to reduce the number of commercial fishermen by buying out smaller operators.
The government has already earmarked up to $35 million for the plan, and holders of fishing permits voted on it by mail earlier this month. The results have not been announced, but if it passes, the big commercial fishing operations will repay the government with a percentage of their revenue every year.
Smaller commercial fishermen say they are being sacrificed for the sake of the big guys - especially the "longliners," who run miles of line along the sea bottom affixed with hundreds and even thousands of baited hooks. Longliners typically come home from each trip with thousands of pounds of fish.
Longliners hold only about 150 of the 1,140 permits to catch grouper and other species, but they catch about half of the gulf grouper sold commercially, Spaeth said. Many fishermen who use "vertical gear" - rod and reel - say there would be enough grouper for everyone if the government got rid of longline equipment.
"A lot of people don't want a million-dollar house," said Bill Tucker, a 43-year-old Dunedin rod-and-reel fisherman who formed a group to fight the buyout proposal. "They just want to live a simple life and catch fish and make a living."
But Spaeth said the buyout would benefit lots of people. His side argues that big operators employ large numbers of people who are thrown out of work when grouper fishing is suspended.
Last year, grouper fishing was suspended in November; it was the first year fishing was shut down because the quota had been reached. (Fishing is also suspended every year from Feb. 15 to March 15 during spawning season.)
Both sides agree on one thing - something has to be done soon.
"You're looking at a dying industry, if it's not already dead," said the 58-year-old Spaeth, who has been fishing the gulf for four decades.
Tom Shook, seafood manager for a Clearwater restaurant chain called Frenchy's, famous for its grouper sandwiches, agreed something's got to give. He buys about 250,000 pounds every year from eight to 10 boats for the company's four restaurants. The fish accounts for about 60 percent of sales.
When the last of the local grouper is gone this month, he will have to start importing fish, probably from Mexico, to get through the year. Because it does not get to market as quickly, it is not as fresh and usually isn't as good as locally caught fish, he said. And prices for the Mexican fish have gone up because of the shutdown in Florida.
"That's the option, either import it or have none," Shook said.
On the Net:
Southern Offshore Fishing Association Inc. http://www.southeasternfish.org 
Fishermen's Advocacy Organization: http://www.fishermensadvocacy.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos FLCO601-603
 Load-Date: October 18, 2005

 

End of Document
