

Site of one of the most fiercely contested battles of the Civil War faces new struggle against encroachment
The Associated Press
November 2, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 963 words
Byline: By CONNIE FARROW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: REPUBLIC, Mo.
Body




The August sun burned in the morning sky as Henry Martyn Cheavens, an infantryman with the Missouri State Guard, lay wounded on the battlefield, shrouded by clouds of gunpowder and bleeding heavily.
A canister ball fired by Federal forces had broken Cheavens' right leg and nearly ripped apart the thigh muscles and nerves.
The roar of artillery shells could be heard miles away as Union and Confederate forces fought ferociously, muzzle to muzzle for six hours, in the first large-scale battle west of the Mississippi River.
The Battle of Wilson's Creek, on Aug. 10, 1861, marked the beginning of the Civil War in Missouri.
When it was over, the devastated countryside was strewn with hundreds of bodies. Cheavens was one of the lucky ones. Recalling his painful recuperation some time afterward, he wrote that "maggots crawled over me and in my wound and up my back till the bedclothes were just filled," according to an account posted by Kenneth Elkins on the National Park Service's Web site.
More than a century later, the landscape betrays nothing of the brutal struggle that left it awash in the blood of 535 men who perished and about 2,000 others who were wounded, captured or declared missing.
Lush grass and wildflowers sway in the wind, canopied by thick stands of cedar and oak trees. Runners and bicyclists get their exercise on the two-lane blacktop road that winds through what is now designated as Wilson's Creek National Battlefield.
It is one of the jewels of the National Park Service.
But park superintendent Ted Hillmer, fearing restaurants, stores and rows of houses could soon mar the view, is leading the fight to protect the sacred ground from encroachment.
"I think it's a crime that we don't preserve these areas for the soldiers," Hillmer said. "Whatever side you were on, these people gave the ultimate sacrifice so we can learn from our past."
Concern for the battlefield in southwest Missouri are well-founded.
A developer wants to take 2,200 acres of pristine pastures on the western edge of Wilson's Creek for 2,500 homes. The pending proposal prompted Republic School District to buy 148 acres along a road leading into the park for future school construction.
Hillmer also recently lost an effort to block a water tower that will be within sight of the ridge where Union and Confederate troops clashed.
"We have these resources that people read about and discuss in the classroom, and then they can come out and physically walk on the areas that they have read about," Hillmer said. "To me, that puts you in better contact with history."
Wilson's Creek encompasses 1,750 acres, but only 75 percent of the actual combat areas are within its boundaries.
Missouri's Rep. Roy Blunt and Sen. Jim Talent have convinced Congress and President Bush to authorize the acquisition of 615 acres. The six parcels would return the battlefield to its original acreage.
"This bill will add priceless new assets to Wilson's Creek National Battlefield, preserve the battle site and allow future generations to experience the park just as Americans would have more than 140 years ago," Blunt said.
Civil War Preservation Trust views the threat of urban sprawl so great that it placed Wilson's Creek on its list of top 10 endangered battlefields.
The Trust, a nonprofit organization with 63,000 members, has offered its muscle and resources to save Wilson's Creek.
It cites a 1993 congressional survey that declared 384 of the battles fought across the country "significant influences on the course of our nation's history." Fewer than 15 percent of those sites have been protected from developers and other commercial interests.
The Trust and its backers have had some success in thwarting development. It won two victories at Chancellorsville, Va., recognized as Confederate General Robert E. Lee's greatest battle success and the scene of one of the most high-profile preservation fights to date. The preservationists were able to defeat a 2,000-house development planned for the battlefield. They also convinced the regional transportation authority to reject a proposed bypass through the battlefield.
Subdivisions and shopping developments can be built practically anywhere, Trust spokesman Jim Campi said.
Battlefields are nonrenewable resources. "Wilson's Creek is one of the few battlefields that really does look as it did at the time of the Civil War," Campi said.
The battle between 5,400 Union troops and 12,000 Confederates raged on the crest of a ridge that has come to be known as Bloody Hill. Among the casualties was Brig. Gen. Nathaniel Lyon, who became the first Union general to die in battle during the war.
Lyon was devoted to driving out those sympathetic to the South and keeping Missouri pro-Union. The state also was important because its farmfields produced food, vast supplies of lead and manpower that were essential for Lyon's rout.
The Confederates won, but they failed to pursue the Federal forces before they retreated to Rolla and then St. Louis. In the end, Lyon's goal of keeping Missouri under Union control was achieved.
Missouri had become the third most fought-over state in the nation by the time the war ended.
Hillmer recognizes the lure of being able to sell land with an agricultural value of about $1,000 an acre to a developer for about $11,000 an acre.
Some owners, however, have expressed interest in following in the footsteps of beef farmer Bill Kary, who became the first farmer in Missouri to participate in a federal farmland protection program. Kary received $816,000, considered fair market value, in exchange for agreeing to forever preserve 102 acres of farmland adjoining Wilson's Creek.
"I may have made more building houses out here on this property," he said, "but building houses and making more money is not always the answer."
 Graphic



 
APN SUNDAY ILLUSTRATIONS: Subscribers get 2 photos, NY364-365 of
 Load-Date: November 8, 2004

 

End of Document
