

String of arsons leaves Phoenix debating the message and the messenger
February 15, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 598 words
Byline: By JOEL ESKOVITZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PHOENIX
Body




Eleven Phoenix-area luxury homes under construction at the edge of the wilderness have been burned down - perhaps by eco-terrorists - since 1998, and locals are questioning whether the media are fanning the flames.
When a local alternative newspaper interviewed a man who claimed to be the arsonist - and protected his identity - some accused the paper of crossing the line between reporting on the arsons and encouraging them.
The man told the Phoenix New Times that he set a fire the night before the interview "to establish our credibility." And he used the interview to promote his desire to curb urban sprawl and preserve the desert.
The result has been a furor about both the fires and the newspaper's coverage of them.
The Phoenix Fire Department has connected four of the blazes to the same arsonist or group of arsonists. The fires, set on once-virgin desert land that has become prime real estate, caused more than $5 million in damage.
"I guess in a way they're being successful," Gwen Burdick, whose home is within view of several fire scenes, said of the arsonists. On the other hand, she said, "Is that the way you want to make your point, by creating tragedies?"
Graffiti messages left at two fire scenes were signed "C.S.P.," the same initials used in letters to several media outlets. One of those letters, sent to The Arizona Republic, said "an acre an hour is obscene" - a reference to growth estimates in the city.
Phoenix has jumped three spots in the past decade to become the nation's seventh-largest city. In 1998, voters approved 124 state and local ballot measures aimed at acquiring open space.
The most recent arson was on Jan. 18. Since then, city authorities working with the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force have stopped talking about the case, in part because they don't want to give the arsonist the publicity. A $66,000 reward has been posted for the capture of the arsonist.
"I'm tired of it all," said Fran Glasper, who lives two doors down from one of the burned homes and has watched some neighbors put up fences and install outdoor lighting as a precaution. "I just want them to catch somebody."
The fervor peaked in recent weeks in reaction to the interview in the Phoenix New Times. Some people were outraged the paper didn't turn the man in.
"At some point, your sense of moral duty to your fellow citizens should outweigh your desire to have people pick up a free newspaper," Tempe Mayor Neil Giuliano said.
The newspaper has defended its decision.
"We feel strongly that our role as journalists is to provide the public as much information as possible about an issue, particularly an issue like the arsons," Associate Editor Patti Epler said. "We are not the police. We feel we should not be agents of the police. We feel we're just doing our job."
The reporter, James Hibberd, has resisted efforts to subpoena his notes and phone records, concerned about alienating future sources. Hibberd declined to comment to The Associated Press.
G. Cleveland Wilhoit, a professor of ethics at Indiana University, said the dilemma is similar to one the media grappled with during the early days of the Ku Klux Klan. Many worried that covering the group's violent acts gave them a megaphone to espouse their political views, he said.
In the end, Wilhoit said, not covering the problem did not solve anything, and eventually, through reporting, the public learned the true nature of the KKK.
So far, no prominent environmental groups have claimed any connection to the fires, though Earth First! last month said it supports the arsons, so long as only property is destroyed.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo
 Load-Date: February 16, 2001

 

End of Document
