

The God Gap: The role of faith, values, morality in the election and the impact on voters
The Associated Press
October 18, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 1641 words
Byline: By PAULINE ARRILLAGA, AP National Writer
Dateline: PHOENIX
Body




Joe Guinnip and Ronda Kelso have a lot in common, and God's at the top of the list.
They recite Scripture, attend church every Sunday, preach fervently of faith and the ideals they hold dear. And both want a president who embodies those values.
But dig deeper to explore what those values are, and that's where the lines of consensus get fuzzy.
Guinnip talks of morals and sin and the societal decay he sees in every abortion, homosexual union or attempt to keep prayer out of schools. Kelso speaks of equality and protecting individual freedoms by ensuring government doesn't legislate conduct.
Guinnip is an evangelical Christian who backs George W. Bush. Kelso is a Christian and a lesbian, and a supporter of John Kerry.
In this election year, they also are something else: Symbols of how issues of faith and values energize American politics and color voters' thinking as they prepare to make their choices.
The two epitomize the schism of values in America today.
"You hear all these arguments about separation of church and state. There's really no separation," says Guinnip, the prayer coordinator at Phoenix's Covenant of Grace Christian Fellowship. "It's more of a combination of church and state."
Kelso sees it differently. Speaking while manning a booth for her church at a gay and lesbian festival in downtown Phoenix recently, she extolls diversity, including "different belief systems."
"We can have our belief and we can enter it into politics and our values, and you shouldn't be beaten down for it. I may not be right," says the 40-year-old nurse-turned-lawyer, "but you may not be right either."
Faith and values matter to Americans - but whose faith and what values? And what part does it all play in politics in a nation where "The Passion of the Christ" and "Queer Eye for the Straight Guy" are both blockbuster hits?
This election year, voters are confronted with the so-called "God Gap," prompted by incessant debates over gay marriage and the stir created when some Roman Catholic bishops vowed to deny communion to lawmakers who support abortion rights (the pro-choice Catholic Kerry was cited by name).
These days, most voters consider religion important in their lives and evaluate issues of "moral values" when choosing leaders.
Whereas voters in 1960 wanted assurances that John Kennedy's Catholicism would remain purely private, voters in 2004 - 7-in-10, according to the Pew Research Center - desire a president with strong religious beliefs and most don't mind hearing about those views. Two-thirds of Americans say the issue of values will be important when they go to the polls on Nov. 2.
"Religious beliefs are proxy measures for that strong moral compass that Americans want," explains Luis Lugo, director of the Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life. "For somebody it may be the abortion question. For others it's presidential character. For somebody else it's how we're treating the environment or the poor.
"My sense is all of them consider moral values important," he concludes, "but they will all define that differently."
Geri Epcar, who owns a Jewish book store in Phoenix, is weighing which candidate is "best for Israel," but adds: "I just want somebody who is honest. Everyone now equates values to abortion and gay marriage, and I don't think that's right."
"The wrong spin is being put on values," she says.
Bishops stepping into the fray and campaigns requesting church rosters to identify and mobilize voters - these trends, some say, further divide the faithful by turning that which is sacred into a matter of strategy.
"Religion makes its best contribution to the life of the nation when it acts like religion - not when it's treated like a political action group," says the Rev. Welton Gaddy, a Baptist minister and president of the Interfaith Alliance.
Religious voters have nonetheless become a much sought-after voting bloc - and "values" a popular political buzzword.
There are "pro-life" voting guides and church bulletin inserts from such groups as the Traditional Values Coalition - addressing not health care or the economy but abortion, homosexuals and faith. Ad campaigns in swing states organized by The Gay & Lesbian Victory Fund endorse candidates "most likely to fight for your equal rights."
The Democratic National Committee hired a religious outreach coordinator and launched a Web site called "John Kerry Shares Our Values" to talk about the poor, the hungry and the environment. The Republicans' "Catholic Team" touts Bush's faith-based programs and his view that "human life is defended." The GOP's "Muslim Team" promises to empower those "from all walks of life."
In states like Kansas, interfaith monitors are sitting in on conservative Christian services to ensure pastors don't endorse candidates, while a group called "Rat Out A Church" is doing the same of left-leaning parishes.
Then there are the candidates themselves.
Kerry has dropped his reticence to talk about his religious views. "I don't wear my own faith on my sleeve, but faith has given me values and hope to live by ..., " he said in accepting the Democratic nomination.
Bush, who freely espouses his beliefs as a Methodist and a born-again Christian, has performed a delicate juggling act. While shoring up support from the religious right, he has wooed moderates, as when prime speaking slots at this summer's GOP convention went to Arnold Schwarzenegger and Rudy Giuliani, Republicans who support legalized abortion and gay rights.
Not all Americans operate at the poles of the values debate, of course.
For sisters Leslie Todd and Shelley Davis, Sunday morning rituals include sipping Starbucks under a crystal blue Arizona sky, feet propped up, The New York Times in hand.
"Our family is, what, Presbyterian or something?" the 43-year-old Todd asked her sibling on a recent Sunday.
They went to church growing up - on Christmas and Easter - and though both consider themselves spiritual, they don't attend services regularly. To them, "values" means integrity, not some of the hot-button issues cited by others.
For Todd, a business consultant whose company provides no medical insurance, health care trumps traditional "values" issues.
For Davis, a 45-year-old lawyer, it's the war in Iraq and the United States' relationship with the world.
"The majority of people … whether they practice a religion or not, their concern is really what's right in front of them: their family and their job," Todd said. "All that other stuff, they're not focused on that."
Some research says she's right.
In this year's National Survey of Religion and Politics, a poll of 4,000 voting-age Americans sponsored by Lugo's group, economic issues ranked first among individuals from all major religious backgrounds - Protestants, Catholics, Jews and those of other faiths, as well as those who are unaffiliated or nonbelievers. Foreign policy was second, and "cultural issues," those associated with the values debate, were a distant third.
Only one religious subgroup - traditional evangelicals - picked cultural issues as their No. 1 priority.
Political analysts note that group, 12.6 percent of the population, could decide a close presidential race - particularly in the 11 states whose November ballots include a proposed state constitutional amendment prohibiting same-sex marriage. Those include the battlegrounds of Ohio and Michigan.
"The moral issues are my main concern … abortion, same-sex marriage, prayer back in the schools, the pledge of allegiance," the 61-year-old Guinnip said after a morning of song and prayer at Covenant of Grace.
"As far as war issues and things of that nature - yes, I'm very concerned about that as well," Guinnip said. "But right now the main thing is to get our country back on track. Once we get the moral issues back into alignment, the political issues will solve themselves."
Most Americans have more trouble reconciling their religious beliefs with their social and political ideology.
In the National Survey of Religion and Politics, a slim majority favored a woman's right to an abortion in most circumstances, but a wider majority supported embryonic stem cell research - a practice some religious faiths equate to abortion.
On marriage, a majority supported traditional marriage between a man and a woman over civil unions or same-sex marriage, yet even more agreed that homosexuals should have the same rights as other Americans.
John Green, a political scientist at the University of Akron who conducted the survey, uses a real-life example to illustrate the complexities.
After he addressed a Catholic church in Ohio recently, a group of congregants expressed uncertainty about the criteria they should consider in choosing between Bush and Kerry. They'd carefully examined bishops' policy statements on the issues, and "protecting human life" came first.
Half believed they should therefore place the greatest weight on the issue of abortion, while the other half wanted to rate the candidates on all of the issues, and vote for the man with the highest overall score.
"Within the Christian community, there are sharp divisions. Even within individual churches, there are sharp divisions. And there are a lot of religious people in the middle," says Green.
Take Helen Capistran and Michael Laguna, both members of Saint Agnes Catholic church in Phoenix.
Capistran, 81, opposes abortion - and asserts issues related to values are paramount in the election.
"Being Catholic," she says, "it means a lot."
Laguna, 36, believes abortion should be legal and gays allowed to marry if they want - but he's tired of hearing about both topics.
"Those aren't the issues," he insists. "That shouldn't make or break someone to vote for."
A conservative Catholic, and self-described liberal Catholic. Both support Bush in the race.
The moral of the story, says Green: "It is much more complicated than it might at first appear."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY310-312
 Load-Date: October 25, 2004

 

End of Document
