

The next venture for the owner of Burt's Bees: creating a national park
September 24, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 979 words
Byline: By JERRY HARKAVY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WINTER HARBOR, Maine
Body




Roxanne Quimby has already turned a roadside business that sold honey into a multimillion-dollar cosmetics company. If her latest endeavor goes as planned, she'll build a new visitors center for a national park - a park that has no guarantee of ever existing.
The visitors center reflects Quimby's belief that a 3.2 million-acre park should be created in the state's vast North Woods.
Quimby, owner of the all-natural cosmetics business called Burt's Bees, already has plowed $8 million of her profits into land acquisitions for the park, purchasing more than 15,000 acres over the past two years. That total is soon expected to reach 20,000 acres, and Quimby intends to set aside an additional $2 million a year to expand her holdings.
Quimby, 52, plans to open her visitors center next summer in the town of Monson, a popular stop for Appalachian Trail hikers. It would provide a tangible link to the Maine Woods national park concept proposed eight years ago by a Massachusetts-based group called Restore: The North Woods.
No stranger to the Maine woods, Quimby is a former back-to-the-lander who turned beekeeper Burt Shavitz's roadside venture selling jars of honey into a cosmetics company expected to have $45 million in revenue this year.
All of her land is in Piscataquis County, where she settled in the mid-1970s after graduating from college with a degree in art. She built a log cabin in the woods in Guilford and lived there with no electricity or indoor plumbing.
After her two children were born, Quimby knew she needed to earn more than the $3,000 a year she took in as a part-time waitress at a local diner. So, she went into business with Shavitz, packaging honey in smaller jars with designer labels. They also made beeswax candles and polishes before producing lip balm, their first personal care product that's still the company's No. 1 seller.
Quimby later bought Shavitz's share of the company, which now makes about 150 personal care products.
She now divides her time between this village on the Maine coast and North Carolina, where Burt's Bees moved in 1994 when it outgrew its home in Guilford. But Quimby's spiritual connection to the forests, mountains, wildlife and waters of the North Woods remains as strong as ever.
Her concern is that a major chunk of undeveloped wilderness in the Northeast is poised to be subdivided into vacation getaways for urban dwellers who live within a day's driving distance and are itching to own a piece of the Maine woods.
The first signs of such a change are already present, she said, citing the recent approval of house lot sales on pristine First Roach Pond. "I can see the time when there's gated communities on Chamberlain Lake," she said.
Prices for raw land remain low. Quimby said she pays roughly $200 to $300 an acre, somewhat more if there are special features like a pond or a spectacular view. But the window of opportunity, she fears, won't remain open for long.
"People here take it for granted, this big North Woods in their backyard; it's always been here and it always will be," she said. "Once it goes to development, I feel it's going to be going retail. It's still wholesale now."
A national park, she believes, is the proper vehicle for preserving the land, but it will take a while to get everything in place. In the meantime, she is buying land she eventually hopes to donate to the National Park Service.
Although Quimby sits on Restore's 14-member board, the wealth she achieved through Burt's Bees has enabled her to act independently and swiftly negotiate land deals that might take a nonprofit group years to carry out.
Critics of Restore's vision fear that a national park would destroy the region's already depressed economy by denying access to logging operations. Longtime activist Mary Adams of Garland said a park would change the character of the land and strip it of its productivity and economic potential.
"What you're really doing is changing freedom for captivity and coming under the government's thumb. Why would anyone want this?" said Adams, who admires Quimby's accomplishments but regards her as misguided.
"I've got the greatest respect for what she's been able to do. She's tough, she's bright and she's made some money. I just wish she'd use her brains for good," Adams said.
Supporters of the park maintain it would enhance the local economy by opening new job opportunities that serve the hordes of visitors.
Quimby's total acreage is nearly one-tenth the size of Baxter State Park, the gift of the late Gov. Percival Baxter, to whom she has been compared. Her biggest acquisition so far has been a pair of lots, one 2,350 and the other 4,850 acres, for a total of $2.2 million. Her smallest are a pair of 41-acre tracts for $30,000 each.
Sellers range from multinationals like International Paper Co. to individual woodlot owners, and the word is out that Quimby wants to buy more. One woman trying to sell some land suggested that her agent "see if that bee lady is interested," Quimby recalled.
Quimby tries to clump her holdings together and create a contiguous wildlife habitat. One of her land parcels abuts Borestone Mountain, the Audubon Society preserve that Quimby often climbed with her children from the time they were toddlers.
Some of her land borders the Appalachian Trail, and she is hoping to acquire more real estate along the trail corridor, which is owned by the National Park Service.
For the visitor center in Monson, Quimby is buying three inexpensive homes that she plans to tear down to accommodate the new building, a parking lot and a picnic area.
"It will give credibility to the effort. It will be a focus for research, for the dissemination of information and to clarify for people where the properties are and how to get to them."
---
 
On the Net:
Burt's Bees: www.burtsbees.com 
National Park Service: www.nps.gov 
Restore: The North Woods: www.restore.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY878, AP Graphic ME PROPOSED PARK
 Load-Date: September 25, 2002

 

End of Document
