

The bomber pilot is a spiritual man, but in the cockpit, he puts his faith in his ground crew
The Associated Press
April 1, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 859 words
Byline: By GEORGE JAHN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABOARD THE USS THEODORE ROOSEVELT
Body




Lt. Cmdr. Mike Ruhsenberger is a spiritual man, but he does not pray.
As he runs through the final checks in his F/A-18 Hornet, he places his faith in his training and in the ground crew, the mechanics and others who must do their jobs to perfection if he is to complete his mission and return safely to this aircraft carrier in the eastern Mediterranean.
"If I pray, it's almost like putting myself in someone else's hands," he says. "I can't do that."
Ruhsenberger, a straight-talking 34-year-old from Fort Worth, Texas, is known as Heed, and one of the things he has heeded on this day is the announcement during his pre-mission briefing: "Survival time in the water, 1 1/2 hours."
As he suited up, he ticked off the items in his emergency pack: survival charts, flares, water, power bars, a hand-held satellite positioning system.
Navy flying is in Heed's blood. His grandfather was a World War II pilot and later commanded an aircraft carrier. His father, Roger, also a Navy officer, died in June and asked to be buried at sea. Heed has his father's ashes with him on the Roosevelt.
"When all this is over," he said, "I'll gather some friends, smoke some cigars, give a toast to my father and spread his ashes."
---
 
Hours before Heed's takeoff, in the hangar bay three levels below the flight deck, men and women with greasy hands and smudged uniforms were preparing his Hornet for flight.
Down here, the enemy is "the sea and the salt," said 34-year-old Petty Officer 1st Class Michael Scott Brown of Denver. "If you don't attend to those small gripes, they turn into corrosion. A panel could rip off, come down on an engine and cause big problems."
Brown took a moment to express deep admiration for Heed and the other pilots.
"I know the physical demand it puts on their bodies," he said. "We always say a prayer for the pilots when they take off."
Heed returned the compliment. Without people like Brown, he said, he'd never get off the carrier.
Long before Heed climbed into the cockpit last Wednesday, his Hornet was lifted to the flight deck, where Petty Officer 2nd Class Michael Gobea and his crew combed it again for any sign of trouble - a loose rivet, low tire pressure, a funky gauge reading.
If they find problems, "we'll fix it or abort the flight, but normally it doesn't come to that," said Gobea, 42, of Fort Worth, Texas.
Once in the cockpit, Heed, too, would do a final check - but sometimes, he said, there is little time for that.
"I don't think these guys are aware of the extreme trust we place in them," he said. If Gobea "tells me that jet is good to go, it's good to go."
The bombs and missiles on Heed's Hornet were loaded by Troy Quigley and his team. Arming a Hornet takes about two hours, from the time the crew unloads the first bomb to when the last lever is snapped in place.
"There are people on the ground depending on us," Quigley added. "If a plane comes back with a bomb, the first thing we ask a pilot is: 'Is it maintenance-related?' If he says, 'yes,' we take it personal, because that bomb could have saved some of our guys' lives."
Hours later, Heed will fire one of the missiles Quigley's crew loaded. It will destroy a surface-to-air missile site that had been menacing transport aircraft dropping paratroopers of the 173rd Airborne to secure an airfield in northern Iraq.
On this five-hour mission, Heed will need to refuel three times. His Hornet holds nearly 2,000 gallons of jet fuel, but it gets lousy mileage.
The S-3B Vikings, the refueling planes piloted by Lt. Kyle Horlacher and other "gas jockeys," are always the first to take off. The Hornets that follow approach the Vikings and extend probes to capture the Vikings' training fuel hoses.
"Before they go out, we top them off," explained Horlacher, 30, of Jacksonville, Fla. "Then, we're up there to meet them when they come back."
"Without these guys," Heed said, "we can't do our missions."
Just as critical is Heed's wingman, the bomber pilot who will fly beside him into Iraq. They are one another's eyes and ears, watching each other's blind spots for anti-aircraft fire.
---
 
Minutes before takeoff, Heed's eyes sweep the navigation, weapons and sensor systems. Ground crew members swarm the Hornet for a final check. Are all fuselage panels shut? Is that stain a fuel leak?
Heed flicks on his external lights, signaling he's ready.
He is a reflective man who appreciates silence - especially "the silence of the church before the service begins," he says. But it is far from silent now.
Heed's Hornet rockets into the air with a banshee shriek, 22 tons of metal and munitions going from 0 to 150 miles in two seconds.
One day, this will all be over. Then Heed will take a long trip with his girlfriend, spend some time with his mother, take care of a roof that needs fixing. He has 3 1/2 years remaining in his commission. "After that, who knows?" he says. Maybe commercial piloting. Maybe diplomacy, or international business.
Or something maybe with travel - lots of it, but not this fast.
Streaking over the slate gray water, the yellow-white jet exhausts of his Hornet shrink to white specks and disappear, lost among the stars of an eastern Mediterranean sky.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XRJV101,103-104

 

End of Document
