

The Lakers, the Stars, now the Twins? Minnesota's long, bumpy history with pro sports
November 9, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 651 words
Byline: By ASHLEY H. GRANT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST. PAUL, Minn.
Body




If major league baseball gets rid of the Minnesota Twins, it wouldn't be the first blow suffered by the state's sports fans.
Basketball's Los Angeles Lakers sure didn't get that name from California's 10,000 lakes. And the Dallas Stars used to be Minnesota's North Stars, beloved in a state that prizes hockey the way Texas loves football.
But losing baseball might be the most painful blow yet in the state's long history of winning, losing and getting back pro sports franchises.
It was 40 years ago that the state was crowing over the Senators from Washington to become the Twins. Now the team that won the World Series in 1987 and 1991 and boasted of players like Harmon Killebrew, Kirby Puckett and Paul Molitor may be on the chopping block as baseball owners look for two teams to eliminate by next season.
David Carter, a sports business instructor at the University of Southern California, said how many teams a market can handle depends on a committed fan base, a corporate fan base and public subsidies.
Minnesota has trouble with all three, he said. Existing teams have had trouble getting public money for new or improved stadiums and "the fan base has had the rug pulled out from under it so many times."
"That creates this recipe for being unstable," said Carter, also a principal in a sports business consulting firm. "You've got a real mess on your hands."
That isn't anything new in a state whose pro sports history dates to 1947, when Ben Berger and Morris Chalfen bought a struggling National Basketball League franchise, the Detroit Gems, and moved it to Minneapolis. For $15,000, they got some equipment and a piece of paper saying they owned a team - but no players.
In time, they built the Minneapolis Lakers, which became part of the new National Basketball Association. Led by George Mikan, the team piled up five championships in six years.
But the Lakers never had a real home, splitting games among three arenas. Owner Bob Short took the team west before the 1960-61 season.
The market wasn't empty for long. The year after the Lakers left, Minnesota landed the Senators and football's Vikings to play in newly built Metropolitan Stadium.
The Twins were second in the league by their second season. The Vikings caught on, too, winning 11 division titles in 13 years and going to four Super Bowls. The National Hockey League added the North Stars during a 1967 expansion.
But there were money problems.
George and Gordon Gund, who bought the North Stars in 1978, threatened to move the team in the late 1980s unless the Minnesota Sports Facilities Commission gave them $15 million to improve the Met Center. They never got the money and sold the team to a Canadian who moved the team to Dallas in 1993.
Like the Gunds, Twins owner Carl Pohlad and the Vikings' owners have pushed for public money for new stadiums, saying they can't make enough at the Metrodome to keep up with other teams. With an open market in Los Angeles, moving the Vikings remains an option.
The Timberwolves, which replaced the Lakers three decades after the California defection, seem relatively stable now, but only after headaches over construction of the Target Center. When the Minnesota Wild brought pro hockey back to the state last year, it was in the shiny new, publicly subsidized Xcel Center in St. Paul.
If the Twins fold, Minnesota won't be the first area to lose three pro teams. St. Louis lost the Cardinals football team, the Browns baseball team and Hawks basketball team. New York lost the Giants and Dodgers baseball teams and the Nets basketball club.
But it would hurt.
"When the North Stars left, there were dire predictions of people bleeding in the streets," said Bill Lester, executive director of the sports facilities commission. "The sun came up the next morning just like it always has. I think this would be different. I think it would be much more difficult to rebound from the loss of baseball."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: November 10, 2001

 

End of Document
