

The Cabinet at work: The meetings, the greetings, the paper!
February 10, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 911 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




You're not in Drumthwacket anymore, Christie Whitman.
Life has taken an unfamiliar turn for people newly installed to run the government. For Whitman, it means a one-bedroom apartment instead of the fancifully named New Jersey governor's mansion. It means so many strange faces at work.
"I've been spending all day with people I've never seen before," mused the Environmental Protection Agency administrator.
For John Ashcroft, it's nailing down a lunch routine - brown bag, takeout or the office kitchen? - and deciding what to put in his attorney general's office other than the flak jacket and flowers he got as gifts.
Don Evans had to talk his way past a guard who did not recognize him when he brought his family to work his first Sunday as commerce secretary.
Across Washington, officials in the executive suites are just getting their feet wet in the sea of government.
Cabinet members shared with 14 AP reporters their experiences in this singular moment when so many of them haven't quite figured out what to do.
They describe intense meet-and-greets, furniture shuffling and budget crunching, with every hour a game of name and face recognition between boss and bossed.
In their spare time, the Washington newcomers among them think about where to settle down.
"I learned that I will have to spend everything I earn to keep a roof over my head," said Education Secretary Rod Paige, in from Houston and looking for a permanent place to rest his ever-present cowboy boots.
Interior Secretary Gale Norton has been waiting for her husband to drive in from Colorado - with a load of their belongings - so they can house-hunt in Virginia.
But who has spare time?
"Each day," said Whitman, "I go to a different building and meet upwards of 1,000 or so people."
On Monday, the beginning of her first full week, Whitman left a voice mail greeting on the phones of her agency's nearly 18,000 employees.
Not everyone is new to Washington. Yet even old hands struggle to get those around them on the same wavelength.
When Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld mentioned it would be good for him to know when someone is making a presentation to Congress, an official sent a memo ricocheting around the Pentagon.
It told staff to report daily on all their contacts with Capitol Hill, the White House and press.
It was not what Rumsfeld intended.
"Amusing," he said of his return engagement as defense secretary.
"Been here four days now. Seems like four months."
--
The Tour:
A prime ritual, roaming hallways is a journey both of discovery and public relations. It behooves Cabinet members to show a common touch.
Labor Secretary Elaine Chao had lunch with a mailroom clerk and fussed over pictures of employees' kids. "There's a lot I need to know," she said at mine safety offices.
Paul O'Neill at Treasury even poked around the dingy basement where, two weeks later, noxious fumes from sewer pipes bubbled up and forced the evacuation of the building.
In contrast, predecessor Lawrence Summers was rarely seen without a Secret Service detail even in the secured building and often stayed in his office munching cheese curls.
At the Agriculture Department, new Secretary Ann Veneman gave the tour. A former No. 2 in the department, she showed a transition official which walls in the executive suite are fake.
---
Digs and Perks:
As Alcoa chairman, O'Neill helped design a headquarters that gave everyone, including him, the same size work space. At Treasury, his office is bigger than others but the same institutional beige.
Whitman brought her own desk, which belonged to her father.
"It's very much smaller than the desk that was here, but at least it has drawers," she said. The other one was so big, "I couldn't get from one end of it to the other anyway."
She learned that unlike New Jersey governors and full Cabinet members, the EPA chief doesn't get an assigned car all the time. "I have one during the day, but not portal to portal."
No matter. It made for a joke when she gave a speech her first day.
She said you know you're not governor anymore when you get in the back seat of a car and it doesn't move.
---
The Routine:
Oh, the paper!
"I come in and there's a box on the left side of my desk all full with stuff, paper, lots of paper," Secretary of State Colin Powell told visiting students.
"All these adults you see around the room, against the walls, stay up all night writing paper I have to read the next morning."
Tommy Thompson walked into a pile of it.
Fresh from Wisconsin, where he was governor, the new health and human services secretary had only a weekend to draft the government's largest budget, so he huddled with career employees, making snap decisions.
When he met staff in an auditorium, Thompson lingered. And lingered. Until aides slipped him a piece of paper saying time was up.
"I guess I'm out of time," he said. "When I was governor, I made the decisions. But now that I'm secretary, people make those decisions for me."
Ashcroft was the last Cabinet member to get started. On Day Four, he brought food from home. Other days, he's sent out for lunch or tried the office kitchen.
On Thursday, he met predecessor Janet Reno. The left's bogeyman and the right's bogeywoman ate together in the private dining room.
His office is sparse, but fragrant with eight bouquets he got his first day. He displays the flak jacket given by a friend.
It says on the back: "Attorney General" and "Hang in there."
On the Net:
Cabinet list: http://www.whitehouse.gov/government/cabinet-secretaries.html 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX106-108 of Feb. 9, AP Graphic CABINET DIARY
 Load-Date: February 11, 2001

 

End of Document
