

The lights go out in the city that never sleeps
The Associated Press
August 14, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 971 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




In Times Square, the crossroads of the world, all the neon and bright lights were impossibly dark Thursday night. The stars - and the power - were both out on Broadway. Candles flickered in restaurants, a nod to reality rather than romance.
Night descended on New York at 4:11 p.m. Thursday, when power went out throughout the five boroughs and most of its suburbs. While chaos reigned while the sun was up, stranded commuters and harried locals lightened up once the night arrived.
In Manhattan's Soho neighborhood, it seemed more like the 19th century than the 21st as candles illuminated the few windows with any light. In bars, people sipped drinks purchased by candlelight. Some flouted the smoking ban, their lit cigarettes glowing in the darkness that enveloped the city.
"They're New Yorkers. They're making the best of it," said owner Mark Whelan of Maggie's Place in midtown. "Have a few cocktails and wait it out."
The nighttime atmosphere stood in contrast with the afternoon, when panicked New Yorkers suffered Sept. 11 flashbacks. Giovanna Leonardo stood in an enormous line Thursday afternoon, waiting for the bus above a subway station where no trains were running.
"It feels like Sept. 11 all over again," said Leonardo, 26, of Staten Island. "It's that 'What's going on?' feeling."
What was going on was plenty of nothing: no power, no air conditioning, no traffic lights, no subways after the power went pffft on a steamy August day. People were stranded outside Grand Central Terminal and the Port Authority Bus Terminal, or inside elevators and trains.
"Wherever the trains were when the electricity went out," said a transit spokesman, "that's where they are right now."
In Manhattan, where finding a $1,500-a-month studio apartment is considered a coup, people were instead desperately seeking ice, water, batteries and candles. People gobbled ice cream from street vendors before it melted, and gathered around battery-operated radios for updates.
Gouging started quickly, with stores inflating their prices on everything from deodorant to tooth brushes. People scrambled to find sneakers and socks for the long trudge home as Canadian officials blamed a lightning strike on the American side of Niagara Falls for the outage. American officials didn't immediately confirm that.
Traffic at bridges and tunnels entering the city was turned away, while the outbound evening rush hour turned into a horn-blowing gridlock. Broadway went dark - literally - with all shows canceled, and the New York Mets called off their baseball game against the San Francisco Giants.
Mayor Michael Bloomberg, as the sun set, promised things would look brighter by sunrise. "Tomorrow, we'll be back up to business as usual," the mayor said. Shortly after 9 p.m., power was already returning in part of the Bronx.
Within two hours, police and firefighters had searched the city's major high-rise buildings and believed no one was trapped. Firefighters were opening subway car doors and steering people through the underground to safety.
Other escapes were more difficult. Allan Feldman walked down 21 flights of stairs at the 102-story Empire State Building, the city's tallest. On the subway line running across the Manhattan Bridge, riders pried open the doors of some cars, climbed out and made their way down to the adjoining lanes of traffic.
Bloomberg quickly assured New Yorkers that terrorism was not involved - the first thought that occurred to Manhattan hair stylist Renato Vasconcelos.
"This is just too weird," he said after giving six panicked customers a quick rinse.
Manhattan streets were flooded with pedestrians, most with no idea of how they might get home to the boroughs of Brooklyn and Queens, New Jersey or Connecticut. "Westchester for $," read a sign held by one woman standing near Gov. George Pataki's East Side office, headed for the suburbs.
In lower Manhattan, people wandered the streets in a scene far too reminiscent of the World Trade Center attacks. At some intersections, pedestrians stood directing traffic. And in midtown, ex-mayor Rudolph Giuliani shook hands and urged people to remain calm.
"Take it in stride," he advised.
Many businesses were forced to shut down early, their cash registers and lights rendered impotent by the massive outage.
On the Brooklyn Bridge, many folks were already walking across the East River on their way home, the same route they'd taken on Sept. 11 or during a transit strike.
Pay phones saw lines a dozen deep as people struggled to call home when their cell phones went out. At Patrick Conway's, a bar near Grand Central, commuters hurriedly downed beers before the bottles turned warm as temperatures hit a high of 93 degrees.
The bar's owner, to the delight of his patrons, promised to stay open as long as the power from his generator held out. Nearby, Mark Johnson - stranded outside the shuttered train station - sat drinking a can of beer with a friend.
"We're taking in the sights," he said. "You can't let it get to you."
Power went out in all five boroughs as well as the suburbs in the worst outage to strike the nation's largest city since 1977, when electricity disappeared for 25 hours.
The city's subway stations were plunged into darkness, with passengers waiting on platforms before heading upstairs for a bus. Buses were packed past capacity, and with good reason: they were among the only places in the city where the air conditioning was still blowing.
City hospitals, for the most part, were operating normally on generators. The Port Authority said all passengers had been safely evacuated from 10 trains that were stuck under the Hudson River or underground when the power went out.
There were limited flights coming in and out at Kennedy International and LaGuardia Airports, the Port Authority said. Both airports were working on backup power sources.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: August 15, 2003

 

End of Document
