

The lives of those beating the bankruptcy bill hint at the future - Correction Appended

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; Washington Dateline
Length: 1158 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER NEWTON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When a judge in colonial Pennsylvania banged his gavel and declared a man bankrupt, the debtor was dragged out of court, hustled into the town square and nailed by the ear to a pillar.
No appeals. No refinancing. No credit discharges. In fact, the most painful repayment was often the first - creditors had the legal right to lop off the ear at nightfall.
Since then, bankruptcy has been defined and redefined by the federal government. It's no longer a crime; for millions, it's a new beginning.
And the rules are changing again.
As an overhaul bill aimed at toughening bankruptcy rules heads toward President Bush's desk, thousands are racing to sidestep its effects.
The lives of those who are beating the bill - and the hassles they believe they are avoiding - give some insight into what life might be like for debtors hoping to file in the near future. Here are two of their stories.
---
 
Jerusalem Contreras sat on the cold examination table in her doctor's office. After an afternoon of pinpricks and backpats, she was listening for his footsteps, waiting for the diagnosis.
She guessed the news was bad the moment she saw his face. She had endometriosis, a disease that causes increased menstrual bleeding and leaves the victim weakened and sometimes, depressed.
It made sense. Contreras, 29, a part-time graduate student and waitress in New York, had been struggling to get out of bed for months, often skipping work.
As she worked less, she relied on her credit cards more, sometimes using them to buy every meal of the week. In six months she was pinned beneath $ 7,000 of debt.
"It was scary," Contreras said. "You start to get this sinking feeling that you're not going to catch up with your bills - they're going to drown you. You start to realize that your whole life is going to be under this cloud."
Contreras says her creditors were relentless. Some began calling at dawn.
At a friend's suggestion, she sought out a bankruptcy attorney late last year. Contreras found attorney Charles Juntikka of New York.
They met twice a day over the course of a week. She filled out some paperwork - nothing too intensive. She paid the attorney's $ 500 fee. Two weeks later, she walked into court with $ 7,000 of credit debt, and walked out with a judge's order that said she didn't have to repay any of it.
"I was sick and I desperately needed a new chance," Contreras said. "There always needs to be a way out for people. I didn't have a lot of energy to devote to some drawn-out process. This was my way out."
Under the new rules proposed in a Senate bill, Contreras would have had a tougher time, and perhaps, would not have been allowed to file.
Before going into court, she would have been required to attend credit counseling classes, at her own expense. Those classes can run from $ 60 to $ 120 for a monthlong course.
"We think it is fair that people understand what bankruptcy can do to your credit," said Hal Cassidy, a Washington-based lobbyist for the credit companies. Cassidy points out that most bankruptcy filers can no longer get low-interest loans.
"There are too many lawyers that are too eager to take the filing fee and don't look to find the person who really doesn't need to file," he said.
Contreras also would have had to inform her creditors of her intent to file at least two weeks prior to her court papers being submitted, giving creditors a heads-up to oppose her petition.
On the day Contreras went to court, only one creditor showed up to challenge her filing. A representative of Sears offered her a special deal: She could keep her Sears credit card if she would pay $ 1,000 of her $ 2,000 bill.
"I could have paid it," said Contreras. "But I just didn't want to. They had been making my life a living hell so I told them that they weren't going to get any money."
That is exactly the attitude credit card companies feel shouldn't be rewarded. So the pending overhaul bill would ban from bankruptcy any person believed to have enough income to repay at least 25 percent of his or her debt. Courts are charged with assessing a person's finances and Contreras would have had to prove she couldn't pay the bills.
That might have kept Contreras out of court altogether.
---
 
When credit companies complain that the youngest debtors handle finances like a video game, they could be talking about people like Andrew Fernandez.
For him, bankruptcy was the "ultimate reset button."
Fernandez, 23, attended New York State University until 1997. Like most college students, his mailbox was constantly stuffed with glossy envelopes offering credit cards with low interest rates.
With no credit history, Contreras was regularly offered cards with a $ 2,000 limit.
He bought CDs. He bought clothes. He bought video games. He charged most of it on three credit cards.
By last November, he had a total credit card debt of about $ 12,500.
That, on top of student loans, an auto loan and rent, made bankruptcy sound like a great idea.
"I wanted a way to correct the mistakes I made when I was a kid and the credit cards were like candy," said Fernandez, who filed in January. "I don't feel sorry for the credit companies. They hunted me down, hoping that I would run up a big bill and then spend my life paying it."
Fernandez, too, had his debts discharged.
Bankruptcy attorneys say Fernandez probably would no longer be eligible under the proposed new rules - primarily because he now makes about $ 32,000 as a Web site designer. They say it is likely a court would rule that he was capable of paying a significant portion of the debt.
Under the proposed rules, Fernandez might have attended the counseling course at his own expense, paid an attorney to represent him in court - only to be denied the chance to file by a judge.
Rightly so, says Jim McLarnen, a spokesman for Fair Credit, a group that lobbies for credit companies.
"There are people who are just irresponsible, and it is time we started making them pay for that," McLarnen said. "When someone files bankruptcy, the truth is that all of us pay for it, through higher rates. The companies pass along the bills to the consumer."
Lawyers who oppose the new bankruptcy legislation say applicants like Fernandez may be too intimidated to attempt to file bankruptcy under the new system. The proposed rules would have required Fernandez to submit extensive documentation of his tax history, along with receipts for expenditures that are hard to document.
Credit groups argue that people like Fernandez have too much incentive to file. On that count, Fernandez agrees.
Since filing, Fernandez says he gets offers every day for high-interest credit cards, car and house loans.
"It isn't exactly like wearing a scarlet letter," Fernandez said, with a laugh. "I still get to buy just about anything I want. I just can't get those special deals on furniture, where you pay for a couch for 12 months. I have to pay for the couch up front."
---
 
On the Net:
Library of Congress Legislative Record: http://thomas.loc.gov/ 
Correction



In an April 17, 2001 story, The Associated Press quoted comments by "Hal Cassidy" and "Jim McLarnen, a spokesman for Fair Credit." In subsequent reporting,the AP was unable to locate Cassidy, McLarnen or Fair Credit. Correction-Date: October 22, 2002, Tuesday
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NYR122
 Load-Date: April 18, 2001

 

End of Document
