

The big question: Kerry looks presidential but should he replace the president?
The Associated Press
October 14, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 823 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, AP Political Writer
Dateline: PHOENIX
Body




Democratic Sen. John Kerry passed a major test in the three debates with President Bush, standing toe-to-toe with the incumbent and looking at least as presidential. Now the hard part: persuading voters to let him take Bush's place in the Oval Office.
Some Republicans openly fretted about the campaign Thursday while the Democrats rushed to polish Kerry's presidential credentials. He planned a series of speeches designed to cast himself as the champion of the middle class and Bush as the toady of the elite.
"We're calling this next week an opportunity to deliver the closing argument," said Kerry strategist Mike McCurry. Polls show the race tight nationally and in the 10 or so states that will determine the election.
"It's always a tough sale for the challenger," McCurry said.
Betting on that, White House officials said Bush would step up his criticism of Kerry as a flip-flopping liberal with few accomplishments in the Senate. "The senator's record is 20 years of out-of-the-mainstream votes without any significant reforms or results," Bush said in Las Vegas hours after the final debate.
He plans a major address on terrorism next week in New Jersey, with hopes off putting a Democratic state in play while underscoring his experience as a wartime commander in chief. Memories of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks are fresh in the minds of New Jersey voters.
Joe Gaylord, a GOP consultant in Washington, said Bush's troubles extend beyond the debates to developments outside his control. Violence in Iraq. Job losses at home. Gas prices. Millions of Americans without health insurance.
"I think Kerry's line about - Just turn on the television, Mr. President, and you'll see what's wrong - is pretty strong" and could turn uncommitted voters to Kerry, Gaylord said. "However, once people get to the edge of that cliff hopefully they'll think, Hey, do I want to do this?"
In other words, Kerry may be plausibly presidential, but Bush is still the president - the commander in chief in a time of war. Will voters balk at change, even though they feel better about Kerry than two weeks ago?
In a way, some Republicans believe, the race has become a cynical contest of fear vs. hate, Bush trying to scare people away from the idea of change and Kerry riding a tide of anti-Bush anger that many Democrats harbor.
In the hours of post-debate meetings inside both campaigns Thursday, the mood was decidedly less edgy and nervous in Kerry's camp than at the White House.
"My spirits are high," Bush told reporters aboard Air Force One. But the appearance itself, a rarity for Bush, amplified the White House's concern about the mixed reviews for his debate performances.
As for Kerry, he cranked up his populist pitch in Las Vegas, saying, "Do we want four more years of a president who gives more to those who already have the most and tells the struggling middle class that everything's just fine?"
Bush's re-election campaign has detailed plans, based on complicated mathematical formulas, to send the president and his allies to key markets with specific attacks against Kerry. For example, if polling shows that Philadelphia's suburbs respond to Bush calling the Democrat's health care plan a government takeover, he will be sent there with that point inserted into his stump speech.
Bush's team has the markets and messages planned to the final hours of Election Day. In contrast to 2000, when Bush essentially coasted with a series of get-out-the-vote rallies, he will criticize Kerry relentlessly until the end, advisers said.
And, unlike four years ago, they are saving some attack material until the closing few days.
The president turned off voters with his smirky, peevish response to Kerry's criticism in their initial, Sept. 30 faceoff. Bush was aggressive in the Oct. 8 debate. He was all smiles Wednesday night in Tempe, Ariz.
Al Gore, in describing his own debate performances in 2000, said at the time: "It was kind of like the story of Goldilocks: The first one was too hot, the second one was too cold, and the third one was just right."
He could have been describing Bush's performances this year.
"Obviously, for the first time ever, the presidential debates mattered in terms of polling. I wish the president's last debate had been his first," said Dave Carney, a GOP consultant in New Hampshire.
"The president did better in the last two debates, but the question is whether enough people saw them to mitigate the damage done by the first," he said.
"There's no question that Kerry got himself into the game with the debates," said Rep. Tom Cole, R-Okla. "But people draw a big distinction between who wins the debates and who wins the elections."
Jim Jordan, Kerry's former chief of staff, said, "A debate is not a presidency, but it's the closest metaphor we have. And Kerry is now seen by a big slice of the electorate as better at it than Bush."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Ron Fournier has covered politics for The Associated Press since 1993.
 Graphic



 
AP Graphics ELN DEBATE STATISTICS, ELN DEBATES ROUNDUP
 Load-Date: October 15, 2004

 

End of Document
