

The mayor vs. the minister: Washington's battle of write-ins
September 4, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 753 words
Byline: By DERRILL HOLLY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




There is plenty to distinguish the top candidates from each other in Washington's primary election for mayor. The incumbent is a career bureaucrat seeking a second term. His rival is a minister trying to show he has appeal beyond his flock - with help from the popular but controversial former mayor.
One thing the candidates have in common: Neither is on the ballot.
"We're asking people to write Anthony Williams," says the troubled incumbent. Until a month ago, Williams, 51, seemed sure of re-election. With $1.4 million in campaign donations, he faced four little known candidates in the Democratic primary to qualify for the November election in a city where Democrats routinely win by huge margins.
But irregularities and thousands of forgeries among his petition signatures - the names included actor Kelsey Grammer and British Prime Minister Tony Blair - led the D.C. Board of Elections and Ethics to bar him from the primary ballot. Board members, all Williams appointees, also socked him with the largest fine ever against a candidate in the city's 27 year history of home rule. The $250,000 must be paid by Sept. 16.
"We're going to pay it when it's due," said Williams, adding he must now raise more money to fight off what he calls a "serious write-in challenge" from the Rev. Willie F. Wilson.
Wilson, 58, a former Williams supporter, jumped into the race on Aug. 12, saying the mayor was unresponsive to residents outside the powerful circles of official Washington.
"I'm a person that's involved in community affairs all over the city," said Wilson, pastor of the 8,500-member Union Temple Baptist Church. Trailing Williams in a recent Washington Post poll, he is campaigning citywide in an effort to broaden his constituency beyond the working class neighborhoods east of the Anacostia River.
Voting for either man will be a bit complicated.
At campaign appearances Williams has led chants of "write in and connect," referring to a process that includes writing the candidate's name and drawing a connecting line between parts of a broken arrow to show the voter intended a write-in. The Williams campaign is also considering passing out self-inking rubber stamps or pencils with his name on the side.
Ballots that contain variations of the candidates' names will be counted. That means Williams would get credit for ballots listing Tony or Williams the mayor. Wilson would receive credit for ballots marked Rev., Willie or some other variation.
The fact that both last names begin with the letters "W-i-l" could make counting even more difficult.
"Write legibly," asks Bill O'Field, spokesman for the election board. The final count could take a week or more.
Williams and Wilson debated Wednesday night at George Washington University. Williams told students he made "a sacred commitment to serve all the citizens of the city and we've done that."
Wilson said he joined the race because the city needs a mayor who is "compassionate" and "inclusive."
"For the last four years we have had a manager, but we need a leader," Wilson said.
Four candidates did manage to get their names on the ballot. The best-known is a bugle-blowing arts activist who often runs for office under the single name of Faith. As Faith Dane, she appeared in the original Broadway musical "Gypsy" as Mazeppa.
Both Williams and Wilson are campaigning with former members of longtime Mayor Marion Barry's inner circle. Barry left office the last time in 1999 and remains especially popular among lower-income elderly Washingtonians.
Although he supported Williams in 1998, Barry has endorsed his pastor's candidacy and has campaigned alongside him. Wilson helped direct Barry's 1994 political comeback after the former mayor served six months in prison after being videotaped smoking crack cocaine.
The federal government took over some local functions during Washington's fiscal crisis in the mid-1990s, and Williams was brought in to help from his job as chief financial officer at the U.S. Agriculture Department.
He was elected mayor in 1998, succeeding Barry, and has been credited with helping put the city onto better financial footing.
Still, Wilson points to continuing problems. He backs reopening of the city's only public hospital, which Williams turned into a community health facility offering limited services last year.
On the Net:
D.C. Board of Elections and Ethics: http://www.dcboee.org 
Committee to Re-elect Tony Williams: http://www.williamsformayor.org 
Committee to Elect Rev. Willie F. Wilson: http://www.williewilsonformayor.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX101-106
 Load-Date: September 5, 2002

 

End of Document
