

The worldwide label of the future: Made in China?
The Associated Press
December 25, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1116 words
Byline: By NAOMI KOPPEL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GENEVA
Body




On everything from sheets to shirts, napkins to neckties, one label is set to become increasingly widespread: Made in China.
Already, the world's most populous nation exports more than $60 billion in textiles and clothing annually, and some analysts predict that changes to global trade rules at the end of this year will hand China the biggest share of the $350 billion global trade market.
That's a prospect that terrifies textile producers in rich and poor countries around the world, from Bangladesh and Morocco to the United States and the European Union.
"A Chinese takeover would shake the economic and political stability of dozens of struggling nations," said the Global Alliance for a Fair Textile Trade, a U.S.-led grouping of trade organizations from 49 countries.
For decades, industrialized countries have maintained quotas on textile imports to protect their own producers from foreign competition. The World Trade Organization started phasing out the quotas in 1995, and members have agreed to remove them altogether by Jan. 1.
"It's clear it's going to change the game," said Jean-Paul Sajhau, who heads the textiles division of the U.N. International Labor Organization.
"Countries which developed because of the existence of quotas will be in difficulty now because the market will be more open," he said.
A WTO study this year estimated that eliminating the quotas would raise China's share of U.S. clothing imports to about 50 percent from 16 percent in 1995, and China's share of EU imports to 29 percent from 18 percent.
WTO Director-General Supachai Panitchpakdi describes the end of quotas as an important milestone that will benefit the global economy as a whole. China, India and other textile exporters say it will finally create a level playing field and allow the market to decide who exports what and where, as already happens in most other areas of goods trade.
Producers elsewhere are complaining.
The Global Alliance has claimed China is competing unfairly by keeping its currency undervalued while paying subsidies and giving loans to its manufacturers in an attempt to control the global market.
"Cheating should not be rewarded," it said.
Euratex, a group of European textile producers, claims China's 2001 entry into the WTO has led to a flood of imports and price declines of up to 75 percent.
"These plummeting prices are inexplicable and bear no relation to reality," Euratex said. "But then China is no market economy, and cannot demonstrate its respect of many internationally agreed rules."
The French Fashion Institute estimates some 325,000 of Europe's 2.5 million textile and clothing workers could lose their jobs because of the change.
In the United States, the chief executive of textile manufacturer Carolina Mills is already seeing the damage.
"In the last two days, we've had three customers announce they are going out of business," CEO Steve Dobbins said in mid-December. "It's in anticipation of those quotas being eliminated. We see our customers going away."
Predictions of job losses in the developing world vary widely. Bangladesh's labor unions said almost half the country's 1.8 million textile jobs could go, while the government puts the figure at 200,000 and some experts say it could be just 80,000.
Under the current system, when India reaches its export quotas, textile buyers often turn to neighboring Bangladesh. After the quotas are scrapped on Jan. 1, Bangladesh won't get any more of that spillover business.
"My family will starve to death if I don't work," said 20-year-old Fatema Begum, who supports her daughter and parents on the $33 she brings home each month from a Dhaka sewing factory.
Retailers around the world, however, stand to benefit from lower wholesale prices and higher margins.
Dozens of U.S. merchants including J.C. Penney Co. and Liz Claiborne Inc. have filed suit to prevent the Bush administration from imposing any new restrictions to imports from China after the quotas expire.
"Textile and apparel quotas have imposed a high cost on American families for decades while failing to protect American jobs," said Erik Autor, vice president of the U.S. National Retail Federation.
U.S. financier Wilbur Ross and his International Textile Group - formed from two bankrupt North Carolina companies - recently announced plans for several major initiatives in China.
Munir Ahmad, executive director of the International Textiles and Clothing Bureau, a group of developing nation exporters, believes the WTO market share figures are exaggerated.
He accepts that China will increase its share but said the pessimists have overlooked the rapid growth of the global sector - 12 percent last year - which should soften the blow for other producers. In the longer term, he adds, China's labor costs will rise and its own burgeoning market will consume more clothing and textiles.
Governments also have measures to use against China if the situation gets out of control. Under the terms of Beijing's WTO membership deal, new restrictions can be slapped on its exports if they rise too steeply.
Washington has recently moved to impose new limits on imports of Chinese socks and trousers, and EU Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson warned, "we will use all the instruments at our disposal if action is needed."
Heeding the threat, China's trade ministry said Dec. 13 it plans to impose a new tax on its textile exports from Jan. 1. By taxing the number of goods companies export rather than the value of the items, the new rules will encourage Chinese firms to produce fewer but higher-priced garments and textiles, the ministry said.
European producers said they would like to see more details on the tax levels and the exports to which they would apply.
"What we don't want to see is an announcement with no action behind it," said Euratex director Francesco Marchi. "If they put a tax on a product we no longer produce, the effect is nil."
For EU and U.S. industries - many of which have been scrambling to get out of China's path by moving upscale - the gesture could prove to be a mixed blessing.
If China boosts higher-value production, said Sajhau, "there's the possibility that China might penetrate markets where developed countries still have a comparative advantage at the moment - whether it's high fashion or high-tech clothes."
---
 
Associated Press Writers Jonathan Fowler in Geneva, Laurence Frost in Paris, Farid Hossain in Dhaka, Bangladesh, and Paul Nowell in Charlotte, North Carolina, contributed to this report.
---
 
On the Net:
World Trade Organization: www.wto.org 
International Textiles and Clothing Bureau: www.icbl.org 
Global Alliance for a Fair Textile Trade: www.fairtextiletrade.org 
National Retail Federation: www.nrf.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Graphic WTO TEXTILES
 Load-Date: December 26, 2004

 

End of Document
