

The bizarre, the serious mark government's case against accused spy
February 21, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 772 words
Byline: By LARRY MARGASAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The government's case against FBI agent Robert Philip Hanssen, accused of spying for the Soviet KGB intelligence agency and its successor, the Russian SVR, includes allegations both serious and bizarre.
In one of many letters quoted in an FBI affidavit released Tuesday, Hanssen was said to have written to his Russian handlers on Nov. 17, 2000, of his possible fate if caught: "Recent changes in U.S. law now attach the death penalty to my help to you as you know, so I do take some risk."
In another letter, the writer, allegedly Hanssen, says he was encouraged by the memoirs of the notorious British-Soviet double agent Kim Philby.
"I decided on this course when I was 14 years old," the letter stated. "I had read Philby's book. Now that is insane, eh!"
The affidavit said Hanssen also contacted the Russians through use of a newspaper ad purporting to sell a 1971 Dodge that "needs engine work." When the KGB asked how Hanssen would explain the diamonds he received, the agent was ready to tell everyone they came from his grandmother, it said.
In a Dec. 25 message from the Russians, the American was offered "Christmas greetings from the KGB," according to the documents. And to show appreciation in another instance, the Russians were said to have quoted poetry: "What's our life, if full of care. You have no time to stop and stare?"
"You've managed to slow down the speed of your running life to send us a message. And we appreciate it," the Russians were quoted as saying in the affidavit. They also commended Hanssen for "your superb sense of humor and your sharp-as-a-razor mind," it said.
Hanssen, 56, was accused Tuesday of espionage and conspiracy to commit espionage.
According to the FBI, his spying began with an Oct. 1, 1985, letter to a KGB official in the United States.
"Soon I will send a box of documents. … They are from certain of the most sensitive and highly compartmented projects of the U.S. intelligence community," wrote the man the Russians knew as "B."
"I believe they are sufficient to justify a $100,000 payment to me," Hanssen allegedly said in the letter included in the affidavit.
The letter said the KGB had "recently suffered some setbacks" and warned that three Russian agents "have been recruited by our 'special services,"' the affidavit said, adding that Hanssen identified the three, and two eventually were executed.
Mostly using footbridges at parks in Washington's Virginia suburbs, the FBI alleged, Hanssen would signal the Russians of a package drop with a vertical white adhesive tape, and the Russians would respond with a piece of horizontal adhesive tape.
On March 3, 1986, it said, Hanssen wrote the Russians that money wasn't always the best form of payment.
"As far as the funds are concerned, I have little need for more than the $100,000. It merely provides a difficulty since I cannot spend it, store it or invest it easily without triping (sic) 'drug money' warning bells," the letter said. "Perhaps some diamonds as security to my children and some good will" would be better, it said.
On June 30, 1986, authorities said, Hanssen wrote: "If you wish to continue our discussions, please have someone run an advertisement in the Washington Times" saying: "Dodge Diplomat, 1971, needs engine work, $1,000."
According to the affidavit, Hanssen said he would respond: "I will say, 'Hello, my name is Ramon. I am calling about the car you offered for sale in the Times.' You will respond, 'I'm sorry, but the man with the car is not here, can I get your number?"'
Several weeks later, an angry Hanssen allegedly wrote his contacts after a missed package exchange: "I found the site empty. Empty bothers me."
The FBI said it was Hanssen who ruined an investigation of a U.S. foreign service officer, Felix Bloch, by disclosing the probe to the Russians.
Bloch then received a call saying his Soviet contact "cannot see you in the near future" because "he is sick" and "a contagious disease is suspected," the affidavit said. "The FBI was unable further to develop its investigation of Bloch," it said.
All this was playing well in Moscow, where in 1989 the KGB officers involved in the operation allegedly involving Hanssen won the highly coveted Order of the Red Banner, Order of the Red Star and the Medal for Excellent Service.
But the FBI said that by last March, a Hanssen letter to the Russians showed a man in despair.
"I have come about as close as I ever want to come to sacrificing myself to help you and I get silence," Hanssen allegedly wrote. "I hate silence. … Conclusion: One might propose that I am either insanely brave or quite insane. I'd answer neither. I'd say, insanely loyal."
 Load-Date: February 22, 2001

 

End of Document
