

The first test - Olympic security in the spotlight at opening ceremony
February 8, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 791 words
Byline: By TIM DAHLBERG, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: SALT LAKE CITY
Body




With snipers on the roof of Olympic stadium and Black Hawk helicopters hovering nearby, the $310 million effort to protect the Winter Games moved into full gear Friday after nearly three years of planning.
"We don't get a second chance," Secret Service agent Mark Camillo said a few hours before the opening ceremony began under the watchful eyes of thousands of agents, police and military.
Top administration officials have warned that the Olympics could be a prime target of terrorists, a particular fear following Sept. 11. Security officials took no chances: Five protesters were arrested after confronting police near where President Bush was supposed to enter the stadium, and another protest group was dispersed after attempting to block a media bus.
The complex security plan includes 59 agencies and employs nearly 16,000 security workers on everything from snowshoes to fighter jets.
It began for real Friday with a ban on all air travel at the city's airport during the opening ceremony that included Bush and U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan.
The security force was busy around the stadium hours before the ceremony, and a maze of fences and checkpoints stretched up to a half mile from its perimeter.
Police patrolled the fences on all-terrain vehicles and the helicopters buzzed overhead. The adjacent University of Utah campus, usually bustling with activity, was nearly deserted.
"All that can humanly be done to make this a safe place will be done," Utah Gov. Mike Leavitt said. "This will be a safe place."
Most of the 2,500 athletes didn't need to be convinced. Although polls showed Americans worried that terrorists might attack the games, all the security checks, police and National Guardsmen patrolling the area made them feel more secure.
"It's like when I crawl in bed at night and I have my down comforter," said Nina Kemppel, a U.S. cross-country skier and four-time Olympian. "It's that same kind of comfortable, fuzzy feeling."
Fans felt the same way.
"It's very intense security but it makes you feel safe," said Gail Stern of Baltimore as she made her way to the metal detectors outside the stadium.
The suffocating security meant spectators had to leave for events hours in advance. During a rehearsal Wednesday, fans stood in line for up to two hours to get in.
But the expected long waits to get through security checkpoints didn't materialize, and the stadium was filled long before the opening ceremony began.
About 150 police officers in riot gear near the stadium had a brief showdown with about 200 sign-waving protesters who decried poverty.
A spokesman for the Olympic joint information command said about 30 of the protesters moved toward a police line that was blocking the path to where Bush would enter the stadium, and five were arrested. Four were released after being cited, while the other was jailed.
"It looks like they wanted to be arrested to make a point," spokesman Marty Slack said.
Earlier Friday, there were long lines to get into the downtown medals plaza, where the only thing to see was an Olympic souvenir store and a few exhibits.
At the nearby Salt Lake Ice Center, where figure skating events will be held, strong overnight wind delayed the arrival of additional metal detectors, and there were long waits to get into practice sessions.
At the airport, flights were rerouted as authorities moved to enforce a shutdown of flights during the opening ceremony. A total of 332 flights were rescheduled or canceled from 6-10 p.m.
Flight restrictions also went into effect at midnight Thursday for a 90-mile wide area over Salt Lake City for the remainder of the Olympics. Until the games are over, only commercial airliners and planes that go through security checks at four gateway airports in other states will be allowed through the airspace.
Making sure the airspace is clear will be about a dozen U.S. Customs Black Hawk helicopters and several F-16 jets stationed at nearby Hill Air Force Base.
"If you violate the restrictions you will be able to tell your children and grandchildren you flew formation with the Department of Defense or Treasury Department," FAA spokesman Mike Fergus said.
The Secret Service is in charge of security over some 900 square miles, thanks to a special designation of the games as a National Special Security Event. The security staff is so big that each athlete could have six bodyguards, and some $40 million worth of upgrades were made following the Sept. 11 attacks.
Even the most mundane matters got some attention. Australia's security director warned his country's athletes against buying Valentine's Day flowers outside the Olympic Village because they could be sprayed with anthrax.
"We're just being cautious," Bob Myers said. "I guess you could say overcautious."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: February 9, 2002

 

End of Document
