

Vignettes from survivors describing the blasts at the World Trade Center and Pentagon
September 12, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1055 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Some vignettes from a day of agony:
David Lucerne, 32, of Newtown, Pa., was working in the Nomura Securities building across the street from the World Trade Center when the first plane hit.
"It just sounded like thunder, like a bunch of rolling thunder," he said. "Then it looked like a shower of flaming confetti out of our window, like it was raining fireworks."
While he was talking with colleagues about what happened, someone noticed a plane coming directly at them.
"At some point, everyone else made a run for the exits … but where are you going to go? So I just stood there and watched it. I said some prayers," he said.
"At the last moment it just banged really hard to the right and went right between the two buildings, ours and Georgia Bank. In a flash, all I saw was the United Airlines symbol."
Lucerne said he heard "the sound of some enormous deafening thunder, the building shook, the plate glass shook, debris was falling down, pieces of the building the size of automobiles."
He made it down to the street and watched as "people began jumping one at a time out of the building. Some were holding hands. They were jumping out from all different sides. I saw at least 25 people jump in about five minutes.
"A bunch of people jumped in pairs and when I saw the people jump, I was so unbelievably taken over by a sense of sorrow and grief. My God, I felt so sad it was unbelievable."
Elias Lopez was beginning his second day of stockbroker training at Morgan Stanley at the World Trade Center when he noticed papers fluttering outside his window.
Lopez, of Loma Linda, Calif., began climbing down the fire escape of the south tower when a voice over a loudspeaker urged people to remain calm and return to their desks.
He had reached the 58th floor when a jetliner slammed into the tower 10 floors above. The building swayed and people tumbled down the stairs.
Lopez made his way out of the tower and immediately called his mother, Vivian Lopez, who was praying her son was OK.
As he walked away from the building, he saw people jumping from the tower.
"I counted three people. Other people counted 11," he said.
California native Jerry Cothran was inside the Pentagon on Tuesday and described the explosion of a plane as a "very loud thunder."
"And of course it was perfectly clear outside, so we knew it wasn't thunder," he said. "Then an instant later, we felt the building shudder."
Cothran is a civilian employee of the Air Force. His boss ordered everybody to evacuate and he ran to the subway, which wasn't working. He and a couple of co-workers walked about three miles and rented a van. It took more than three hours to get to his home in Alexandria, Va.
"The World Trade Center just blew up. I'm OK; I'm leaving the building," was the hurried electronic message Ross Hinkle typed out on a hand-held Blackberry pager to his parents in Tallahassee, Fla.
Hinkle, 22, now works as an analyst for Lehman Brothers in at The World Trade Center, next to the fallen towers.
After hurrying north to his Midtown apartment, Hinkle finally was able to get a phone connection to his parents. His mother said her son described nightmare scenes of burning bodies plummeting from the collapsing towers and panic in the streets.
"I was just very, very, very, very relieved to hear from him," said Lee Hinkle.
Air Force Maj. Jim Cusic of Fairview Heights, Ill., on temporary duty at the Pentagon, was watching scenes of carnage in New York City on television when he felt a shock.
A hijacked airliner had smashed into the Department of Defense nerve center, collapsing much of one wall and starting a massive fire. But Cusic and his co-workers in another wing of the massive office building didn't know that.
"We learned about what happened in our own building from television," Cusic said.
Lisa Whitehead's husband, Kevin, called her in Belleville, Ill., on Tuesday from the World Trade Center's Tower Two to tell her a plane had crashed into Tower One, right across from where he was standing.
Minutes later, Lisa Whitehead watched on live television as a plane crashed into Tower Two.
"I had just hung up the phone with him and thought he was going to be evacuated, and I watched the second plane hit the building," she said. "Truly, I had a very strong feeling that my husband did not make it through that."
He did. The Morgan Stanley employee, who was in the office tower on a business trip, made it down 56 flights of stairs and out into the street before the tower collapsed in a towering column of smoke and dust.
But his wife had to wait 90 minutes in terror before she learned he would be returning to her and his two daughters in Illinois.
"I can't tell you how it felt to hear his voice," Lisa Whitehead said.
Paul Anton was at ground-zero: the first floor of the World Trade Center in New York.
The Minneapolis economist was in the south tower of the two-building structure for a conference Tuesday when a hijacked airliner slammed into the north tower.
"It was so loud we expected the ceiling to come down," Anton said.
Minutes later, it did.
By then, Anton and his colleagues were already in the streets. But the race for survival wasn't over.
"Paper and debris were raining out of the top floors," he said. Suspecting that he might get struck by falling rubble, Anton didn't stick around. He headed toward a park a few blocks away. As he searched for a pay phone to call his wife of seven weeks, the second plane tore into the building he had just exited.
Anton, 53, chief economist at the Minneapolis consulting firm Anton, Lubov & Associates, said he walked in stunned silence like the rest of the onlookers.
Anton finally got hold of his son, who offered to call his wife and family to say he was all right.
Andy Felschow's day ended when he stepped onto the platform at the Hackettstown, N.J., train station and into the arms of his parents.
The 46-year-old from Springfield, Va., had been across the street from the World Trade Center's twin towers on Tuesday when he saw a plane crash into one of the buildings.
Felschow was evacuated from the building at the same time a second plane hit the other tower. Minutes later, the buildings collapsed.
"It was just a huge rumble," Felschow told The Express-Times of Easton, Pa. "Just a loud boom and rumble and a huge cloud of smoke."
"There were a lot of people in a daze," he said. "We were all shocked."
 Load-Date: September 13, 2001

 

End of Document
