

WASHINGTON TODAY: How the hunt for bin Laden turned into war against the Taliban
November 16, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 747 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The targets keep changing in President Bush's war against terrorism. One day, the Taliban and the al-Qaida network are the chief villains. The next day it's Osama bin Laden himself, the man Bush calls "the evildoer." Sometimes, it's all of them together.
The Taliban regime, on the run in Afghanistan, and the terrorists who plotted the Sept. 11 attacks against the United States "are now virtually indistinguishable," Bush says.
Never mind that the militant Islamic regime has not been implicated in the suicide hijackings that destroyed the World Trade Center and scarred the Pentagon, or tied directly to other acts of international terrorism.
The Taliban held territory, and territory is something you can make war on. Conspiracies and networks are harder to bomb.
After first declaring he wanted bin Laden "dead or alive," Bush toned down his direct references to bin Laden. He started making more mention of the Taliban as the U.S. air campaign in Afghanistan picked up pace.
Bin Laden often became "the evildoer."
But with the fall of the Afghan capital of Kabul last week and the retreat of the Taliban to caves, ravines and mountain hideouts of southern Afghanistan, the administration has been bolder in specifying its targets.
"Our mission is al-Qaida and terrorist training camps," Bush said. Added Vice President Dick Cheney: "Clearly, we're obviously interested also in the command and control of that network and Osama bin Laden who runs it."
"The task," said Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, "is to go get the senior leadership of both the Taliban and al-Qaida."
Word of a success came Friday: Mohammed Atef, an Egyptian-born Islamic militant who worked at bin Laden's side, was believed killed by an airstrike near Kabul, U.S. officials said.
While no one minimizes the difficulty of tracking down bin Laden - Rumsfeld compares it to finding a needle in a haystack - the area in Afghanistan in which he and his lieutenants can hide has gotten much smaller in the past week.
Demonizing the Taliban as an enemy of civilized society and linking it with bin Laden was a calculated move by Bush, helping to justify the U.S. bombing of Taliban sites and forces.
"An indispensable part of getting to bin Laden and al Qaida is to take away the welcome mat," said Lee Feinstein of the Carnegie Endowment for Peace.
The Taliban let bin Laden and his followers use Afghanistan as a base for years. "The aim of the U.S. operation has been to prevent it from continuing to be a conducive place for terrorism," said Feinstein, a State Department official in the Clinton administration.
Sen. Sam Brownback of Kansas, the senior Republican on a Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee on the region, says turning the Taliban into the most immediate target was justified.
"I'm of the school of thought that success begets success. And if we can have military successes, which we are now experiencing, we can ratchet up political successes, which we need," Brownback said in an interview.
He said Bush made clear from the beginning that he would not only go after terrorists, but states that harbor them. "And that's the route the Taliban chose," Brownback said.
Just as the U.S. military continued to fire on Taliban troops as they retreated, U.S. officials kept up the barrage of rhetoric against the fleeing regime.
"There's no question the Taliban is the most repressive, backward group of people we have seen on the face of the Earth in a long period of time, including and particularly how they treat women," Bush said late last week.
He was not the only one using harsh rhetoric.
As U.S.-backed opposition fighters captured one former Taliban stronghold after another, Taliban supreme leader Mullah Mohammed Omar cited a larger campaign whose goal was "the extinction of America." That hardly bought him sympathy in the West.
Despite dramatic military successes of the past week, the aim remains tracking down the Sept. 11 terrorists and shutting down their operations, U.S. officials say.
"I think we have to be very realistic about it," Rumsfeld said. Going after far-flung terrorist networks will require "long-term pressure across the full spectrum of economic and diplomatic as well as military activity," the defense secretary said.
"It is a heck of a lot harder than just going out and sinking a navy or shooting down an air force," he said.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Tom Raum has covered Washington for The Associated Press since 1973, including five presidencies.
End Advance for Sunday, Nov. 18
 
 Load-Date: November 19, 2001

 

End of Document
