

WASHINGTON YESTERDAY: When the state of the union is a state of war
January 28, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Commentary; Washington Dateline
Length: 809 words
Byline: By LAWRENCE L. KNUTSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush delivers his State of the Union speech Tuesday night armed with a degree of national unity conferred on no wartime chief executive since Pearl Harbor 60 years ago.
The Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, targeting Americans on American soil, lend Bush's prosecution of the war a degree of popular support denied to Harry Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhower in Korea and Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard M. Nixon in Vietnam.
Even Bush's father, President George H. W. Bush, faced division and dissent at the beginning of his effort to stop Iraqi aggression in the Persian Gulf.
Unlike Johnson in the 1960s, Bush will walk down the center aisle of the House chamber free of the emotional pressure that LBJ faced as casualties mounted in Southeast Asia and the protest chant echoed in the streets: "Hey, Hey, LBJ, How many kids did you kill today?"
Johnson had to appeal for public understanding and support throughout the war. By the end of his term he was using the State of the Union speech to underscore efforts to achieve a negotiated peace.
In 1966, Johnson offered one of the most eloquent passages by any president on the nature of war itself.
"War is always the same," he said. "It is young men dying in the fullness of their promise. It is trying to kill a man that you do not even know well enough to hate. Therefore, to know war is to know that there is still madness in the world."
But Johnson also used that speech to try to convince Congress that the nation could pay for both his war and his ambitious domestic programs.
America is strong enough "to pursue our goals in the rest of the world while building the Great Society here at home," he declared.
By the next year Johnson was facing up to a dilemma.
"… The question is whether we have the staying power to fight a very costly war, when the objective is limited and the danger to us is seemingly remote," he said on Jan. 10, 1967.
Contrast that with Franklin D. Roosevelt's State of the Union address on Jan. 6, 1942, a month after the Pearl Harbor attack, when he described the nation's Japanese and Nazi enemies as hurtling along a "bloodstained course of conquest."
Pearl Harbor, described earlier by FDR as a "day of infamy," was a blunt instrument, intended to stun and terrify America,
Roosevelt said it had failed in that purpose.
"We have not been stunned; we have not been terrified or confused," he said. "… The mood of quiet, grim resolution which here prevails bodes ill for those who conspired and collaborated to murder world peace."
Truman faced a more daunting challenge on Jan. 8, 1951, as he sought backing for a "police action" to repel the communist invasion of South Korea and thwart "the threat of world conquest by Soviet Russia."
Korea, he said, was a symbol that "stands for right and justice in the world against oppression and slavery."
"The free world must always stand for these principles and we will stand with the free world," Truman said.
Growing opposition to the Korean War was one reason Truman passed up the opportunity to seek re-election in 1952. Fierce opposition to the war in Vietnam was one reason Johnson ruled himself out in 1968.
The consequences of Johnson's unhappy experience in Vietnam were still fresh in many minds on Jan. 29, 1991 - a decade ago -when George H. W. Bush walked into the House chamber and said the nation had reached "a defining moment."
Congress had only narrowly approved U.S. involvement in a coalition to defeat Saddam Hussein's Iraq and reverse the invasion of Kuwait. The air war had just begun. There was still much skepticism about the wisdom of the president's course.
Bush accused Iraq of the "ruthless, systematic rape of a peaceful neighbor." Then he moved the regional conflict onto a larger world stage altered by signs of cracks in the Soviet Union's iron facade.
"What is at stake is more than one small country: It is a big idea - a new world order where diverse nations are drawn together in a common cause to achieve the universal aspirations of mankind: peace and security, freedom and the rule of law," he said.
Like his father, the current president can report that the nation is "on course," having rolled up the Taliban in Afghanistan and put terrorism on the defensive around the world.
But the 43rd president also must lay the foundation for a lengthy contest with an elusive foe.
In answering the question of just how long such a war might take, Bush might start by remembering Roosevelt's words six decades ago:
"Many people ask, 'When will this war end?' There is only one answer to that. It will end just as soon as we make it end, by our combined efforts, our combined strength, our combined determination to fight through and work through until the end ...."
EDITOR'S NOTE - Lawrence L. Knutson has covered the White House, Congress and Washington's history for 34 years.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX1-3, 106
 Load-Date: January 29, 2002

 

End of Document
