

Whining doesn't get the ball in the hole
June 11, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 782 words
Byline: By DOUG FERGUSON, AP Golf Writer
Dateline: FARMINGDALE, N.Y.
Body




No one ever said golf was supposed to be fair.
Especially the U.S. Open.
Lee Janzen won at The Olympic Club in 1998 when his tee shot on the fifth hole in the final round disappeared into a thick tree - then dropped down only after he was walking back to the tee box to hit his third shot.
Payne Stewart felt he lost it that year when his drive landed in a sand-filled divot.
David Duval's drive on No. 9 at Southern Hills last year stopped in a trampled down crossing area. He wanted relief, didn't get it, chunked his wedge and then took a chunk out of the turf when he slammed down his club.
Hale Irwin once complained that the fairways at Atlanta Athletic Club were not cut low enough and that he was getting flier lies.
The list goes on, so long that Tom Meeks no longer keeps track.
"All players have whined about something," said Meeks, director of rules and competition for the U.S. Golf Association. "They always talk about the bad breaks. No one ever remembers the good ones."
Meeks said he was stunned when he joined the USGA in 1975 to hear so many petty complaints by so many world-class players.
The rough is too thick. The greens are too hard. The most popular gripe is when the USGA converts a par 5 into a par 4, forcing players to hit long irons into greens that were designed to hold not much more than a wedge.
"If a guy comes to the U.S. Open with a (bad attitude), he'll be gone," Meeks said.
No one knew better than Jack Nicklaus.
The Masters has the smallest field among major championships, but Nicklaus could make the case for a U.S. Open. During the practice rounds, Nicklaus heard players gripe about one thing or another, and simply checked them off the list.
There goes one less player to beat.
"That's usually what happens," Tiger Woods concurred Tuesday as he was leaving Bethpage State Park. "What people forget is that everybody has got to play the same course. And you're going to get bad breaks. That's just the way it is - for everybody."
Whether anyone figures that out remains to be seen.
Just last week, the howls could be heard from the LPGA Championship in Wilmington, Del., all the way to the Buick Classic at Westchester.
DuPont Country Club gave the women fits. Only Se Ri Pak (5-under 279) and Beth Daniel (2-under 282) finished under par. It was Daniel who said earlier in the week there was a fine line between great shots and bad results, and she became a victim in the final round.
Pak never complained, either.
"No matter what, we have to take it," she said. "You don't have any choice. Whether you make it easy or difficult or bad conditions, we have to play. So, there's no point to complain. It's not going to change anything."
No one whined louder than Pat Perez.
He was in a short-lived tie for the lead after chipping in for birdie on No. 16 at Westchester Country Club, and had an 8-foot birdie putt on the 17th hole. Three putts later, Perez was in full meltdown mode.
And after a drive into the bunker on the par-5 18th removed an easy birdie from the equation, he blamed his play on the golf course.
"I had horrible breaks all day," Perez moaned. "The front nine was a joke, the breaks I got. I didn't like the back nine at all. I can't believe they put the pins in some places."
Later, Perez was asked about blocking it all out.
"How are you going to block it out?" he said. "Every time you get in the same position, something is going to come up and you're going to be thinking about it."
The 156-man field at the U.S. Open should consider the mantra of Janzen, a two-time champion.
"I come to the U.S. Open expecting nothing to be fair," he once said. "If you hit it in the rough, you can't hit out. If you put it above the hole, you can't two-putt. Hit in the bunker, you don't have a shot. If you don't hit good shots, you don't make the cut."
John Daly has never finished better than a tie for 27th in the U.S. Open.
That's no coincidence.
Daly couldn't cope with domed greens at Pinehurst No. 2 in the '99 U.S. Open, and when his putt rolled back toward him on the eighth hole, he swatted the ball while it was still moving. He took an 11 on the hole and signed for an 81.
"This is my last U.S. Open - ever," Daly said.
Two days later he apologized to the USGA. Daly made it to Pebble Beach the next year, took a 14 on the final hole of the first round for an 83 and withdrew by saying, "Get me to the airport, fast."
Count on a high number of complaints this week. The players love the Black Course at Bethpage State Park now. Just wait until the score counts.
"I expect to hear from a lot of people who are not playing the course well," Stewart Cink said. "It eats away at your mind. But the course is fair."
Golf is supposed to be a quiet game.
Shut up and play.
 Load-Date: June 12, 2002

 

End of Document
