

232 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Monday
The Associated Press
March 17, 2008 Monday 10:49 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1348 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Florida Democrats abandon plan for mail-in primary re-do ... Obama, Clinton say turmoil in financial markets show how weak is US economy ... Clintons counter Pelosi's take on Democratic presidential nomination, delegate math outcome ... Number of delegates needed to win Democratic nomination drops by 1 ... McCain visits Baghdad as Iraq war enters sixth year
Fla. Dems abandon primary re-vote plan
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. (AP) Facing strong opposition, Florida Democrats on Monday abandoned plans to hold a do-over presidential primary with a mail-in vote and threw the delegate dispute into the lap of the national party.
While the decision by Florida Democrats left the state's 210 delegates in limbo, Democrats in Michigan moved closer to holding another contest on June 3. Legislative leaders reviewed a measure Monday that would set up a privately funded, state-administered do-over primary, The Associated Press learned.
Florida Democratic Party chairwoman Karen L. Thurman sent a letter announcing the decision.
"A party-run primary or caucus has been ruled out, and it's simply not possible for the state to hold another election, even if the party were to pay for it," Thurman said. "This doesn't mean that Democrats are giving up on Florida voters. It means that a solution will have to come from the DNC Rules & Bylaws Committee, which is scheduled to meet again in April."
Members of Florida's congressional delegation unanimously opposed the plan, and Barack Obama expressed concern about the security of a mail-in vote organized so quickly.
The national party punished Michigan and Florida for moving up their primaries before Feb. 5, stripping them of all their delegates to the party's national convention this summer in Denver. All the Democratic candidates agreed not to campaign in the two states, and Obama was not even on the Michigan ballot.
Obama, Clinton cite economic distress
MONACA, Pa. (AP) Democratic Sen. Barack Obama said Monday the economy is in distress while rival Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton criticized President Bush for failing to exercise leadership to address the nation's economic problems.
"Our economy is in a shambles," Obama said at a town hall meeting at a community college near Pittsburgh. "This economy is contracting, it is heading toward recession. We probably already are in one."
Clinton told reporters in Washington: "At these times of stress and uncertainty we need to be vigilant to do everything in our power to maintain confidence in our financial system. I feel very strongly that we've got to have more urgency to continue the action that was started yesterday."
The comments from the presidential candidates came after the Federal Reserve approved a $30 billion loan for a $2-a-share takeover by JPMorgan Chase & Co. of Bear Stearns & Co. to help keep the stricken investment bank one of the nation's largest from collapse. The Fed also lowered the rates it charges to loan directly to banks by a quarter-point, following moves last week to lend $100 billion in cash to banks and $200 billion in government bonds to cash-strapped Wall Street investment banks.
As senator from New York, Clinton has received the most money from employees of large Wall Street firms, but Obama is not far behind. Bear Stearns employees contributed the most to Clinton with total donations of $152,000. Likely Republican nominee John McCain received $47,000 from Bear Stearns employees and Obama got $36,000.
Obama is the biggest recipient of donations from JPMorgan employees Obama received $270,000, Clinton's contributions were nearly $200,000 and McCain's were more than $60,000. According to McCain's latest personal financial disclosure report, his wife and dependent children had between $3 million and $7 million invested in JPMorgan financial instruments.
Clintons prod Dems on delegate strength
WASHINGTON (AP) After a weekend of campaign adversity, Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton and her husband separately prodded Democratic Party leaders on Monday to look beyond mere delegate strength in picking a presidential nominee at this summer's national convention.
"I don't know that it will be an easy decision, but that's what leaders sign up for," said the former president, declaring that a candidate's ability to win a general election should be considered.
The former first lady, who trails rival Sen. Barack Obama in the delegate chase, concurred. "I think it's a question about everything and I think people are going to have to take everything into account," she told reporters.
Made in different settings, the remarks underscore the debate roiling the Democratic Party as the primary season nears an apparently inconclusive end while Republicans have begun to close ranks around Sen. John McCain for the fall campaign.
They also ran contrary to sentiments expressed by House Speaker Nancy Pelosi over the weekend. "If the votes of the superdelegates overturn what's happened in the elections, it would be harmful to the Democratic Party," she said in an interview.
Compounding Clinton's delegate woes, Obama padded his advantage over the weekend at county conventions in Iowa, the state whose precinct caucuses kicked off the presidential race.
Road to nomination gets easier
WASHINGTON (AP) The road to the Democratic nomination for president got easier Monday by one delegate.
The number of delegates needed to secure the Democratic nomination fell to 2,024 because of several changes among superdelegates. The highest profile change was the resignation of New York Gov. Eliot Spitzer, who left office Monday over his involvement in a prostitution ring.
Spitzer was a superdelegate who had endorsed Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton. His successor, David Paterson, already is a Clinton superdelegate through his position as an at-large member of the Democratic National Committee.
In the overall race for the nomination, Sen. Barack Obama had 1,617 delegates Monday, including 213 superdelegates. Clinton had 1,498 delegates, including 249 superdelegates, according to the latest Associated Press count.
McCain visits Baghdad
BAGHDAD (AP) Sen. John McCain stressed the importance of maintaining U.S. commitment in Iraq after meeting with Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki on Monday.
The Iraq war, to which the probable Republican presidential nominee has linked his political future, will turn five years old Thursday. A U.S.-Iraq military operation is under way to clear al-Qaida in Iraq from its last urban stronghold of Mosul, 225 miles northwest of Baghdad.
"We recognize that al-Qaida is on the run, but they are not defeated," McCain said after meeting al-Maliki. "Al-Qaida continues to pose a great threat to the security and very existence of Iraq as a democracy. So we know there's still a lot more of work to be done."
McCain, who arrived in Iraq on Sunday, told reporters that he also discussed with the Shiite leader the need for progress on political reforms, including laws on holding provincial elections and the equitable distribution of Iraq's oil riches.
McCain, the senior Republican on the Senate Armed Services Committee, was accompanied by Sens. Joe Lieberman, an independent, and Republican Lindsey Graham, two top supporters of his presidential ambitions. The weeklong trip will take McCain to Israel, Britain and France.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton delivered a speech in Washington on the Iraq war. Barack Obama campaigned in Pennsylvania.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain was overseas on a congressional trip.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Will there be more animosity as the thing goes on? Yes, it can't be helped. It's nowhere near the worst campaign I've ever seen in America in terms of the personal stuff." Former President Clinton, speaking about the Democratic presidential race in an interview with ABC's "Good Morning America" broadcast Monday.
STAT OF THE DAY:
An exit poll of Mississippi voters showed that 57 percent of Hillary Rodham Clinton's voters said they had a favorable opinion of John McCain, the likely Republican presidential nominee. Only 23 percent of Barack Obama's voters viewed McCain favorably.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 18, 2008

 

End of Document
