

242 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Friday
The Associated Press
March 7, 2008 Friday 11:55 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1292 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama adviser resigns after calling Clinton a 'monster' ... McCain repeatedly cuts off reporter in testy exchange ... Clinton lowers expectations in Wyo. ... McCain calls for tax cuts, job training to lift the faltering economy ... RNC names team to help elect McCain, other Republicans in fall
Obama camp rejects adviser's comments
WASHINGTON (AP) An adviser to Barack Obama resigned Friday after calling rival Hillary Rodham Clinton "a monster" and saying that Obama may not be able to withdraw all U.S. combat troops from Iraq within a year as he has promised.
Samantha Power, a Pulitzer Prize-winning author, made the comments in two separate interviews with foreign media while promoting her latest book. The "monster" comment, which led to her resignation, came in an interview with The Scotsman. She immediately tried to keep it from appearing in print.
"She is a monster, too that is off the record she is stooping to anything," The Scotsman quoted Power as saying. A few hours after the comments were published, Power, an unpaid adviser and Harvard professor, resigned.
"I made inexcusable remarks that are at marked variance from my oft-stated admiration for Senator Clinton and from the spirit, tenor and purpose of the Obama campaign," she said in a statement distributed by the Obama campaign.
Power told RTE, Ireland's public broadcast service, that she spoke with Obama by phone Friday. "He made it absolutely clear that we just couldn't make comments like this in his campaign. I really hope I haven't done him any harm because I know he's been trying to run such a clean campaign," she said.
Power's comments about Iraq came in an interview with the BBC. She said Obama's position is that withdrawing all U.S. troops within 16 months is a "best-case scenario" that he will revisit if he becomes president.
Obama has actually shortened his original 16-month commitment to say he'll end the war in 2009. Obama advisers say President Bush's plan to draw troops down to 15 brigades this year means Obama could complete the removal in a year.
McCain flashes temper at reporter
NEW ORLEANS (AP) Republican Sen. John McCain, showing a flash of the temper he is known for, repeatedly cut off a reporter Friday when asked whether he had spoken to Democratic Sen. John Kerry about being his vice president in 2004.
"Everybody knows that I had a private conversation. Everybody knows that, that I had a conversation," McCain told the reporter. "And you know it, too. No. You know it, too. No. You do know. You do know."
The reporter, Elisabeth Bumiller of The New York Times, was following up on a question McCain had answered at a campaign event Friday morning in Atlanta. Asked if he might consider Kerry as a running mate, since Kerry asked him in 2004, McCain said no.
Afterward, on a campaign flight, Bumiller said she looked in the Times' archives and that McCain had denied talking with Kerry in a May 2004 story.
McCain interrupted, saying that everyone knew he had a private conversation, and he kept interrupting as she tried to follow up. McCain clearly was irate.
"I don't know what you read or heard of, and I don't know the circumstances," McCain said. "Maybe in May of '04 I hadn't had a conversation."
Clinton lowers expectations in Wyo.
CHEYENNE, Wyo. (AP) A day before Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton and Sen. Barack Obama were to compete for a small scattering of delegates in Wyoming, Clinton cast herself as the underdog and said the odds are not in her favor.
Clinton's campaign has sought to set low expectations for the Saturday caucuses in Wyoming as well as next week's primary in Mississippi, states where her campaign believes Obama has a better shot at winning.
"I said, 'Well you know what, I'm going to go to Wyoming anyway I know it's an uphill climb, I'm aware of that," Clinton told an audience of more than 1,500 at a community college in Cheyenne. "But, you see, I am a fighter, and I believe it's worth fighting for your votes."
She set a similar tone while campaigning in Mississippi Thursday night and Friday morning. She said a win for her in that state would be a heavy lift because of Obama's appeal there. Twelve delegates will be awarded in Wyoming's caucuses, followed by 33 on Tuesday in Mississippi.
Earlier Friday at a town hall meeting in Mississippi, where some in the audience were undecided or leaning toward Obama, Clinton raised the possibility that she might run with the Illinois senator on the Democratic presidential ticket.
Clinton said: "I've had people say, 'Well, I wish I could vote for both of you.' Well, that might be possible some day. But first I need your vote on Tuesday."
McCain calls for tax cuts, job training
ATLANTA (AP) Republican John McCain, who has said economics isn't his strong suit, said Friday that tax cuts and job training are needed to lift an economy that is either in recession or headed toward one.
McCain was responding to a report showing widespread job losses amid the housing and credit crisis. The Labor Department said employers cut jobs by 63,000 in February, the most in five years.
"I think the fact of the matter is, many American families are hurting very badly, particularly those in states like Ohio, Michigan, parts of Illinois, those states that really relied on manufacturing jobs and saw those jobs leave," McCain told employees of Chick-fil-A Inc. at a town hall-style meeting in Atlanta.
"And we as a nation have not done enough to help those workers find new employment, new training, new education," he said.
The Arizona senator said President Bush's tax cuts, passed by Congress over McCain's objections, should be made permanent so that families and companies do not see tax increases when the cuts expire in 2010. And he called for slashing corporate taxes and repealing the alternative minimum tax, which was originally aimed at the wealthy but threatens to hit millions in the middle class unless Congress continues to provide annual adjustments to it.
RNC joins forces with McCain campaign
WASHINGTON (AP) The Republican National Committee on Friday named four people who will help build support for the party's presidential nominee-in-waiting, John McCain, and other Republicans in the general election.
Frank Donatelli will serve as the RNC's deputy chairman and work as the liaison between the McCain campaign and the committee. Lew Eisenberg will lead the fundraising efforts, and Mike DuHaime will act as senior adviser for political operations. DuHaime served as Rudy Giuliani's campaign manager before the former New York mayor ended his bid for the White House.
As "victory chairman," Carly Fiorina said she will promote McCain's business and economic policies on the campaign trail and remind voters why the Arizona senator is the best candidate for president.
"This is a principled pragmatist," Fiorina said at a news conference where RNC Chairman Mike Duncan announced the positions. "He knows that to solve problems you have to reach across the aisle."
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton held a town-hall style meeting in Hattiesburg, Miss., before holding town-hall style meetings in Cheyenne and Casper, Wyo. Barack Obama also holds a town-hall style meeting in Casper, then a rally in Laramie, Wyo.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain holds a town-hall style meeting in Atlanta and gives a speech in New Orleans.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"She is a monster, too that is off the record she is stooping to anything." Samantha Power, adviser to Democrat Barack Obama. She resigned Friday after the comment about rival Hillary Rodham Clinton was published in The Scotsman.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Only two Democratic presidential candidates have won Wyoming in a general election in the last 60 years Harry Truman in 1948 and Lyndon Johnson in 1964.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 8, 2008

 

End of Document
