

258 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Monday
The Associated Press
February 20, 2008 Wednesday 1:59 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 456 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama gains upper hand with victories over Clinton in Wisconsin and Hawaii ... McCain inches closer to delegate goal ... Candidate wives' spar over remarks ... Candidates comment on Castro announcement ...
Obama scores 10th straight victory
WASHINGTON (AP) Barack Obama added Wisconsin and Hawaii to a primary season winning streak that now totals 10 and has put Hillary Rodham Clinton into a virtual must-win scenario in Democratic contests coming early next month in Texas and Ohio.
The former first lady now looks to a debate Thursday in Austin, Texas, to stall Obama's momentum and reinvigorate her campaign.
"The change we seek is still months and miles away," Obama told a boisterous crowd in Houston in a speech Tuesday night in which he also pledged to end the war in Iraq in his first year in office.
"I opposed this war in 2002. I will bring this war to an end in 2009. It is time to bring our troops home," he declared.
Sen. John McCain, the Republican front-runner, won a pair of primaries, in Wisconsin and Washington, to continue his march toward certain nomination.
McCain inches closer to delegate goal
WASHINGTON (AP) John McCain moved closer to clinching the Republican presidential nomination Tuesday, winning delegates in Wisconsin and in the state of Washington.
Barack Obama extended his delegate lead by winning the Democratic primary in Wisconsin over Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Overall, McCain had 942 delegates and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee had 245. It will take 1,191 delegates to claim the Republican nomination at this summer's national nominating convention.
Huckabee faces a nearly impossible task. He is close to needing help from Mitt Romney's former delegates just to remain a viable candidate. Romney has withdrawn from the race and endorsed McCain. But the former Massachusetts governor has little authority over his 253 delegates, most of whom will be free agents at the convention.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Clinton attends a reception in New York before heading to Texas for rallies in Hidalgo and Brownsville. Barack Obama holds a rally in Dallas.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain campaigns in Ohio and Illinois. Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee holds a rally in Plano, Texas.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"If you want to wave the white flag, as Senator Obama and Senator Clinton do, and have al-Qaida win and have more casualties in the Middle East and throughout the world, I will steadfastly reject that." GOP Sen. John McCain on ABC's "Good Morning America."
STAT OF THE DAY:
The first year both parties held a presidential primary with a direct for vote a candidate was 1980. Jimmy Carter defeated Edward M. Kennedy in the Democratic race, while Ronald Reagan edged past George H.W. Bush, a former Texas oilman.
 Load-Date: February 21, 2008

 

End of Document
