

277 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Friday
The Associated Press
February 1, 2008 Friday 9:15 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1280 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
People focus on candidates' personalities and their views keep changing, AP-Yahoo poll shows ... Obama faults Clinton's explanation of Iraq war vote as he gets anti-war group's endorsement ... NY Post endorses McCain; Rangel's wife backs Obama ... Huckabee criticizes Romney's change of heart on issues dear to conservatives ... Clinton advisers call Obama campaign mailer a betrayal of universal health care ... Chelsea Clinton asks students to vote, preferably for her mother ... CNN announces plans for two Feb. presidential debates in Ohio
Poll: Focus now on candidates' traits
WASHINGTON (AP) For all the millions the presidential campaigns have spent, it still comes down to this: Ask people what they think of Hillary Rodham Clinton and they say female and feminist. For Barack Obama, it's inexperience. Mitt Romney is known as a Mormon, John McCain for his military service.
And oh, yes, he's old.
Candidates have been merchandising themselves to voters for the better part of a year, using polls and focus groups to test everything from their stances on issues to their gestures while speaking. Yet an Associated Press-Yahoo News survey released Friday shows people are forging their own views of the candidates' qualities, blending the contenders' messages with information and impressions picked up elsewhere, and sometimes with complete fantasy.
Obama endorsed by anti-war group
LOS ANGELES (AP) Barack Obama picked up the endorsement of a leading anti-war group Friday and said Democratic presidential rival Hillary Rodham Clinton still has not adequately explained her vote to go into Iraq.
Obama told reporters in a news conference that, even though Clinton explains how she would like to end the war, her explanation for her vote leading into the war is disingenuous. He said his opposition to the war from the start will make him the stronger rival to Republican front-runner and war backer John McCain in the general election.
Obama's long-standing opposition to the war helped him pick up the backing of MoveOn.org, a liberal network that counts 3.2 million members and decided to back him by a vote of 70 percent to 30 percent for Clinton. The group said Friday that it has 1.7 million members in the 22 states scheduled to vote Tuesday, and it would immediately begin a campaign to get them behind Obama.
In Sacramento, one of California's largest unions, the Service Employees International Union, decided to throw its support to Obama, spokeswoman Jeanine Meyer Rodriguez told The Associated Press.
The 650,000-member union's backing could help Obama cut into Clinton's lead in California polls of Democratic base voters, many of whom are union members.
NY Post endorses McCain
NEW YORK (AP) The New York Post endorsed Sen. John McCain for the Republican presidential nomination Friday, saying his experience contrasted sharply with that of Barack Obama, whom it supported for the Democratic nomination.
The Post, which also backed McCain's candidacy in his 2000 bid against George W. Bush, called the Arizona senator "a proven leader, a man of integrity."
"McCain's experience would stand in sharp contrast to Barack Obama's sparse resume," the paper said in its editorial. "And his candor, character and honor would be the antithesis of a Clinton II candidacy."
In other endorsements Friday, Obama got the nod from Alma Rangel, wife of Rep. Charles Rangel, dean of New York's congressional delegation and a loyal backer of Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Romney's political maturity questioned
OKLAHOMA CITY (AP) Republican Mike Huckabee on Friday defended his previous remark that Mitt Romney didn't reach "political puberty" until recently, saying he was referring to his presidential rival's change of heart on key issues.
Speaking to 600 supporters jammed into a restaurant-bar in Oklahoma City, Huckabee said he has been consistent on issues dear to conservatives such as abortion, gun control and gay rights, while Romney has shifted his positions.
Romney, a former Massachusetts governor, was once "very pro-choice" and had held "strong positions for same-sex-relations," Huckabee said.
Earlier Friday, Huckabee appealed to his Oklahoma supporters to spread the word that he is the most conservative candidate in the race and more attuned to their values.
After winning Iowa on Jan. 3, Huckabee has lost six straight nomination contests and his campaign is rapidly fading.
Clinton advisers criticize Obama mailer
NEW YORK (AP) Advisers to Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton complained vehemently Friday about an Obama campaign mailer that criticizes Clinton's health plan, with one adviser likening the mailer to "Nazis marching through Skokie, Illinois."
Clinton communications director Howard Wolfson disavowed the analogy leveled by Len Nichols, a health policy expert at the New America Foundation who has consulted with Clinton and other candidates on their proposals.
The Obama mailer, which the Clinton campaign traced to mailboxes in North Dakota and Alaska, shows a young couple sitting at a table, appearing to puzzle over a stack of bills.
"Hillary's plan forces everyone to buy insurance, even if you can't afford it," the headline reads.
Nichols said he was "outraged" by the mailing's picture. "It is as outrageous as having Nazis march through Skokie, Illinois."
In late 1970s, the American Nazi party won a court battle over the right to march through the predominantly Jewish Chicago suburb of Skokie, home to many Holocaust survivors. Despite their victory in court, the white supremacists decided to move their demonstration to a Chicago park.
Chelsea Clinton campaigns for her mom
CARSON, Calif. (AP) Chelsea Clinton urged college students to vote in California's upcoming primary preferably for her mother, Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton.
"Everyone says young people are going to vote this election, so get out and prove it true," she told more than 200 students and faculty Friday at California State University, Dominguez Hills.
California is among the 22 states holding Democratic contests on Tuesday.
Clinton took questions from students that ranged from the economy to human rights.
The daughter of former President Clinton and the New York senator was joined by "Ugly Betty" star America Ferrera and "The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants" actress Amber Tamblyn, as well as congresswomen Loretta Sanchez and Laura Richardson.
CNN to air 2 debates from Ohio
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) CNN is partnering with the Democratic and Republican parties in Ohio to bring a pair of presidential debates to the state at the end of February, the network announced on its Web site.
Democratic candidates would debate Feb. 27, and the Republican debate would take place following day, according to a story posted on CNN.com Thursday night.
The debates are planned for the week before Ohio's March 4 primary. The political parties also are looking ahead to the importance of Ohio and its 20 electoral votes in the fall campaign.
The locations of the debates and other details were not available, but will be released soon, CNN said.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton meets with voters in California. Barack Obama campaigns in New Mexico.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain stops in Missouri and Illinois. Mitt Romney holds events in Colorado. Mike Huckabee campaigns in Oklahoma, Arkansas and Missouri.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Nice looking, slick." Republican Carol McDowell, 65, of Gresham, Ore., when asked to describe Republican Mitt Romney.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Forty percent of those surveyed in a recent AP-Yahoo News poll found Hillary Rodham Clinton likable, compared with 54 percent for Barack Obama, 45 percent for John McCain and 31 percent for Mitt Romney.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: February 2, 2008

 

End of Document
