

323 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 18, 2007 Tuesday 2:43 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1873 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Former Democratic VP nominee Lieberman backs Republican McCain ... Obama touts farm plans in Iowa ... Friends offer testimonials to help Clinton show softer side ... Iowa's first lady Mari Culver endorses Edwards ... Bill Clinton campaigns for wife in SC, plans meeting with Sharpton ... Tears come to Romney's eyes as he envisions a son dying in Iraq ... Biden warns Musharraf of consequences for poor elections ... Iowa's Rep. King endorses Fred Thompson
Lieberman endorses McCain
HILLSBOROUGH, N.H. (AP) Sen. John McCain, trying to keep momentum in this state's critical Republican primary race, brought in something unusual on Monday an endorsement from the other party's former vice presidential nominee.
Sen. Joseph Lieberman, Democrat Al Gore's running mate in 2000, said he had intended to wait until after the primaries to make a choice for the 2008 presidential race. But McCain asked for his support and no Democrat did.
Lieberman, an independent who caucuses with the Democrats, said he chose his longtime Senate colleague because he has the best shot of breaking partisan gridlock in Washington. Both men also support the war in Iraq.
Independents can vote in New Hampshire's first-in-the-nation primary on Jan. 8, and they are the people McCain is targeting, much as he did in winning the state's Republican primary in 2000 over George W. Bush.
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada said, "I have the greatest respect for Joe, but I simply have to disagree with his decision to endorse Senator McCain."
Romney emotionally recalls soldier story
LONDONDERRY, N.H. (AP) Tears filled Mitt Romney's eyes Monday as the Republican presidential contender recalled watching a dead soldier return from Iraq and imagined one of his five sons in the casket.
Adding a poignant twist to a story he often tells on the campaign trail, Romney recalled the scene at Boston's Logan International Airport while he was Massachusetts governor to make the point that the country remains united despite its differences over the Iraqi war or other national challenges.
It was a counterbalance to a moment earlier this year, when Romney told a woman in Iowa that his grown sons none of whom has served in the military were serving the country by helping with his campaign. Romney later apologized for the remark, saying it was wrong to equate military service with campaign involvement.
"The soldiers that I was with stood at attention and saluted," Romney told employees at Insight Technology Inc., a company that makes infrared optical equipment for U.S. troops. "And I put my hand on my heart, and tears begin to well in your eyes, as you can imagine in a circumstance like that. I have five boys of my own. I imagined what it would be like to lose a son in a situation like that."
Obama touts rural plans in Iowa
SPENCER, Iowa (AP) Powerful interests in Washington have swayed a new farm bill toward big business, Democrat Barack Obama said Monday, campaigning in the most rural region of this crucial early voting state and promising to do better as president.
"Once again the lobbyists stepped in to make sure that big agribusinesses got the multimillion-dollar giveaways that they've come to count on," said Obama.
The issue is crucial in rural sections of the country because the new farm bill will set food and farm policy for the next five years, including subsidy levels farmers will receive. There's a home-state tie as well because Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin heads the Senate Agriculture Committee which crafted a farm bill.
Last summer, Obama held more than 30 hearings around the state getting grass-roots input before issuing a package of farm and rural development policies last fall. He was touting that package of proposals as he swept through northwest Iowa.
Friends reveal Clinton's softer side
JOHNSTON, Iowa (AP) Childhood friends and New York constituents offered emotional tributes to Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton Monday as her campaign tried to show her softer side.
With just over two weeks until Iowa's leadoff caucuses Jan. 3, the former first lady has continued to battle the perception that she is cold, brittle and overly ambitious. To help warm up her image, her campaign launched a new Web site, thehillaryiknow.com, featuring interviews with 30 people from different aspects of her life attesting to her compassion, ready laugh and sense of humor.
Four friends stood at the New York senator's side Monday at a campaign event in a chilly barn outside Des Moines. One, childhood friend Betsy Ebeling, wiped away tears.
Clinton was expected to pack in a busy schedule of campaign appearances Monday and made the rounds on network and cable morning television shows. The effort comes as she continues to be locked in a tight three-way contest with Barack Obama and John Edwards in Iowa.
Iowa's first lady endorses Edwards
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Iowa's first lady Mari Culver called Democrat John Edwards the most electable, battle-tested candidate on Monday as she officially announced her endorsement of the White House hopeful.
Culver said Edwards stands out as a dedicated public servant.
"John Edwards is right on the issues that matter the most," she told a crowd in downtown Des Moines. "He has the vision to put America back on the right track and a detailed plan to make it happen."
Most importantly, Culver said, "I believe John Edwards can win."
This is the second time Culver has endorsed Edwards, who was the 2004 Democratic vice presidential nominee. Her nod comes with just over two weeks left until Iowa's leadoff precinct caucuses on Jan. 3. Her husband, first-term Democratic Gov. Chet Culver, maintains that he'll stay neutral to ensure a fair contest.
Edwards told reporters that Mari Culver's endorsement means a lot to his campaign.
"It feels very familiar to me from four years ago, and I'm very excited and energized by it," he said. "Having Mari's endorsement is a big momentum continuum for our campaign."
Bill Clinton and Sharpton speak
SUMTER, S.C. (AP) A meeting between former President Clinton and Al Sharpton in this state was downgraded to a telephone conversation Monday night after Sharpton's flight to South Carolina was canceled.
Clinton's wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, once had a comfortable lead in the state but now finds herself in a close race with Barack Obama for the Democratic presidential nomination.
Several recent polls show Clinton with a solid lead over Obama, although a Mason-Dixon Polling and Research survey out earlier this month had the two essentially tied.
Sharpton's spokeswoman, Rachel Noerdlinger, said Sharpton and Clinton were able to talk about hate crimes by phone. The former president also was to meet with ministers and business leaders and work on efforts to turn out black voters in the Jan. 19 primary.
Sharpton has not endorsed a candidate in the primary, and none was expected Monday. During the 2004 primary in South Carolina, Sharpton turned in one of his best primary showings, and this week he was scheduled to hold two days of meetings that include get-out-the vote efforts with black residents.
The black vote is critical to a Democratic primary win in South Carolina and in 2004 comprised nearly half the ballots cast. An Associated Press-Pew Research poll last month showed Clinton, a New York senator, breaking even on the black vote with Obama, an Illinois senator who earlier this month toured early voting states with talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
Biden warns Musharraf of consequences
CONCORD, N.H. (AP) Presidential hopeful Joe Biden on Monday told Pakistan's President Pervez Musharraf there will be consequences if his nation's elections are in any way shoddy.
Biden, chairman of the Senate's Foreign Relations Committee, said he spoke with the embattled president by phone. Biden said U.S. aid may be in doubt if the upcoming elections don't meet expectations.
"I want to make it clear, for the United States of America to be willing to support Pakistan the way we have in the past, it rests on this transition to democracy being real. If this election is not fair and open, there will be consequences for it, in terms of our participating in aid," Biden said he told Musharraf.
Musharraf lifted a six-week-old state of emergency Saturday and said the crackdown had been to save Pakistan from a conspiracy rather than ensure his own political survival. The U.S.-backed leader imposed strict curbs on press freedom and replaced independent-minded judges with jurists friendlier to him. Musharraf, however, will allow parliamentary elections next month. His rivals are talking about a boycott.
Biden, a Delaware Democrat running for president, said on New Hampshire Public Radio that the situation is the result of President Bush taking a shortsighted view of the region.
Iowa congressman backs Thompson
DUBUQUE, Iowa (AP) Iowa Rep. Steve King, a vocal critic of illegal immigration, endorsed Republican Fred Thompson for president on Monday.
The much-anticipated endorsement resulted in confusion; King kept his decision under wraps, and aides to both Thompson and GOP rival Mitt Romney were on hand for King's announcement.
"I understand some folks from another campaign, they were kind of shocked I got the endorsement and they didn't," Thompson told about 70 supporters in Dubuque on Monday night. "I'll just say this ain't the last surprise you're going to get, folks."
Thompson, the former Tennessee senator, and his wife, Jeri, arrived in Iowa just before the 20-minute event, at which Thompson spoke but took no questions. They planned a 15-day bus tour through the state beginning Tuesday in Manchester.
King is known for his tough stance on illegal immigration; his proposal to punish companies that hire illegal immigrants won Thompson's support.
"There is only one candidate who epitomizes the full spectrum of our conservative values," King said in a statement Monday, referring to Thompson. "There is one who is a comfortable conservative whom I have full confidence in his decisions."
Thompson is battling for a third-place finish in Iowa, where former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee has overtaken former Massachusetts Gov. Romney in state polls.
THE DEMOCRATS
Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York and Barack Obama of Illinois campaign in Iowa. Former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards and New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson also have events in the state.
Delaware Sen. Joe Biden and Ohio Rep. Dennis Kucinich meet with voters in New Hampshire.
THE REPUBLICANS
Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee raises campaign cash in Beverly Hills, Calif.
Sen. John McCain of Arizona, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney and former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani talk to voters in New Hampshire.
Former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson campaigns in Iowa.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"On all the issues, you're never going to do anything about them unless you have a leader who can break through the partisan gridlock. The status quo in Washington is not working." Sen. Joseph Lieberman, I-Conn., in endorsing Arizona Sen. John McCain for the Republican presidential race.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Seven percent of Democratic presidential hopeful Hillary Rodham Clinton's supporters say they have some reservations about voting for a woman, according to an AP-Yahoo News survey.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 18, 2007

 

End of Document
