

335 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 5, 2007 Wednesday 11:53 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1730 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama urges expanded Peace Corps, other volunteer programs ... Dodd warns on celebrity ... Clinton's endorsement list debatable ... Thompson wants Arctic refuge drilling ... Another Tancredo ad attacks lax border ... Huckabee unaware of intelligence report on Iran ... Campaign finance bill gets Democratic support ... Iowa union runs ad for Clinton
Obama wants to expand national service programs
MT. VERNON, Iowa (AP) Democrat Barack Obama on Wednesday advocated a major expansion of the Peace Corps, AmeriCorps and other national service programs, saying, "This will be a cause of my presidency."
The Illinois senator said the government is not keeping pace with those who want to serve. "We will create new opportunities for all of us to serve," he said at a rally at Cornell College.
Obama evoked the memory of President Kennedy and his Peace Corps volunteers. "JFK made their service a bridge to the developing world," he said.
The candidate said he also would expand the all-volunteer military but "we will never send them to fight in a misguided war."
Dodd warns Iowa threatened by 'celebrity' candidates
BOONE, Iowa (AP) Democrat presidential hopeful Chris Dodd, trailing in the polls and in campaign money, warned activists that if they succumb to "celebrity" candidates the state will risk losing its treasured spot at the beginning of the presidential nominating season.
Instead, Dodd argued, activists in the state have a tradition of rewarding candidates who doggedly seek the backing of individual Iowans and that's the unique key to the state's leadoff caucuses.
"If this process becomes one where this state only chooses candidates based on celebrity and wealth, you'll have a short run as a caucus state," said Dodd. "This is no different than California and Michigan and Florida. People look to Iowans because you've always done this more deliberately."
The Connecticut senator made his case to about 40 people at a public library as he opened another day of campaigning in which he meets with small groups of people, seeking to convince them one at a time that he has the heft and experience the party needs to win back the White House.
Clinton list of endorsements from black ministers not quite so long, AP review shows
COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton's support from South Carolina's black religious leaders may not be quite as extensive as her campaign suggests.
Clinton got a boost last week when she shared a South Carolina stage with dozens of supporters, accepting what organizers said were endorsements from nearly 90 ministers in the state. But an Associated Press review of an endorsement list supplied by the New York senator's campaign found that some of the backers were affiliated with religious ministries and outreach groups rather than churches, some were wives of ministers, two were church elders and at least two were not members of the churches listed beside their names.
All told, about 50 different groups were represented, rather than more than 80 congregations as initially implied, the review found.
Clinton spokesman Zac Wright said the campaign never claimed the endorsements represented separate congregations and knew all along that some came from the same organization.
Thompson: Tapping Arctic refuge oil will help reduce gas prices
PICKENS, S.C. (AP) Republican presidential candidate Fred Thompson said Wednesday that tapping oil reserves in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge would help lower gas prices.
"We've got the reserves up there that can be tapped," Thompson told about 50 people packed into a small cafe in this early voting state. "They're not going to solve our problem, but it's one step we can take."
As a Tennessee senator, he voted in favor of drilling the refuge.
Thompson's remarks came a day after environmental and Native Alaskan groups asked a federal appeals court to block Royal Dutch Shell PLC's plans for exploratory oil drilling near the refuge. The U.S. Mineral Management Service decided this year to allow the energy giant to drill up to 12 exploratory oil wells in the Beaufort Sea off the northern coast of Alaska.
Tancredo's new campaign ad blames lax border for gang violence
DENVER (AP) Republican presidential candidate Tom Tancredo is airing another television ad with ominous warnings about immigration, this one saying that "vicious Central American gangs" in the U.S. are killing mothers, raping children and selling drugs.
The ad, which began running Tuesday in Iowa, weaves images of tattooed Hispanic men and bloody bodies and blames "gutless politicians who refuse to defend our borders."
Tancredo, a Colorado congressman, has centered his long-shot campaign on immigration. His earlier ad said Islamic terrorists who "froth with hate" have entered the United States. It showed a hooded man appearing to blow up a shopping mall, leaving bloodied bodies behind.
That ad drew charges of fear-mongering. Tancredo spokesman Alan Moore said the campaign expects the new one to be controversial as well.
Huckabee says he didn't know about new intelligence report on Iran's nuclear capabilities
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Two days after a new government intelligence report said Iran had halted its nuclear weapons program in 2003, Republican presidential hopeful Mike Huckabee said he knew nothing of it.
Asked about it during a dinner with reporters, Huckabee said, "I'm sorry?" He was told about the report and asked if he'd been briefed or heard the findings.
"No," Huckabee replied, before offering the following: "I have a serious concern if they were able to weaponize nuclear material, and I think we all should, mainly because the statements of (President Mahmoud) Ahmadinejad are certainly not conducive to a peaceful purpose for his having it, and the fear that he would, in fact, weaponize it and use it."
He added: "I don't know where the intelligence is coming from that says they have suspended the program and how credible that is, versus the view that they actually are expanding it. And then I've heard the last two weeks supposed reports that they are accelerating it and could be having a reactor in a much shorter period of time than had originally been thought."
Huckabee told CNN on Wednesday that he had missed the news about the report because he'd been busy campaigning.
Democrats for president sign on to bill increase public funds for elections
WASHINGTON (AP) Call it the "Stop me before I have to do it again" bill.
The four Democratic senators who are running for president have signed on as original sponsors of legislation that would increase the amount of money in the presidential public financing system and increase the spending limits for candidates who participate in it.
It would not change the rules for the 2008 presidential election.
The idea behind the bipartisan bill unveiled Wednesday is to reduce the incentive for politicians to engage in the vast fundraising that has characterized this presidential campaign.
The legislation would increase the amount individuals can voluntarily check off on income tax returns from $3 to $10. It would give candidates $4 in public money for every $1 they raise from individuals, up to $200 per donor. Current law gives a one-to-one match on contributions up to $250.
It also would eliminate state-by-state primary spending limits and increase the overall primary spending limit from about $50 million to $100 million, and $150 million for candidates who stay in the race beyond April 1. It would increase the general election spending limit from about $80 million next year to $100 million.
As of Sept. 30, the presidential candidates in both parties had raised more than $370 million, with Sens. Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton leading the way with about $80 million each. Both have signed on to the new bill though they are passing up public funds now. Joe Biden and Christopher Dodd, two other senators running for president, also sponsored the bill. Republican presidential candidate John McCain, whose name is synonymous with past efforts at toughening campaign laws, did not sign on. Conservatives have criticized him for his past efforts, claiming campaign finance laws have diluted their free speech rights.
Union puts up pro-Clinton television ad in Iowa
WASHINGTON (AP) One of Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton's major union supporters hit the Iowa airways Wednesday with a television commercial touting her presidential candidacy.
AFSCME PEOPLE, the political arm of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees union, spent $250,000 to air its "Hide and Seek" advertisement in Des Moines and Cedar Rapids for at least two weeks.
The commercial features a little girl running through a Christmas tree lot and a picture of Clinton. "Will she know the promise of peace?" an announcer asks. "Only if we elect a president with the strength and experience to create real change. Caucus for Hillary. The future's too important to stay at home."
This ad is one of the first union ads supporting a specific candidate to hit the Iowa airways. The caucuses are Jan. 3.
Clinton is spending at least $350,000 a week on television ads in Iowa, while Democratic challenger Sen. Barack Obama is spending around $400,000.
AFSCME endorsed Clinton in October.
The union is the largest for workers in the public service sector with 1.4 million members nationwide. AFSCME represents government and private workers including nurses, bus drivers, child care providers, custodians and librarians.
THE DEMOCRATS
Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York delivers an economic policy speech in New York.
Sens. Barack Obama of Illinois and Chris Dodd of Connecticut campaign in Iowa.
THE REPUBLICANS
Sen. John McCain of Arizona holds a town hall meeting in New Hampshire.
Former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson makes stops in South Carolina.
Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani holds private fundraisers in Kentucky.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"The best way you deal with dictators, the best way you deal with tyrants and terrorists, you stand up to them. You don't back down." Republican presidential hopeful Rudy Giuliani, in a new television ad airing in New Hampshire and Boston.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Eighty-five percent of Democrats and 76 percent of Republicans say next year's election matters more than usual. Only 52 percent of independents agree, according to an AP-Yahoo News survey.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 6, 2007

 

End of Document
