

337 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 4, 2007 Tuesday 3:24 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 2290 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Poll: Clinton strong, but Iowa raises doubt ... McCain on MTV-MySpace ... Edwards already has veep-Cabinet list ... Oprah tickets snapped up ...Tougher road ahead for Huckabee ... Romney's 'Mormon speech' risk ... Clinton cranks up rhetoric against Obama ... Obama asks crackdown on 'predatory' credit cards ... McCain: Don't require health coverage ... Giuliani assails 'fair tax' plan ... Huckabee says waterboarding is torture.
AP-Pew poll: Clinton, strong on key issues, has edge in early contests but Iowa is a worry
WASHINGTON (AP) Health care and Iraq dominate Democrats' concerns in the three pivotal early voting states of the 2008 presidential race. Advantage: Hillary Rodham Clinton, a poll shows.
Clinton has clear leads in New Hampshire and South Carolina, building on her ownership of the health-care issue and her broad but more fragile trust among Democrats on Iraq, the survey showed Monday. Yet she could stumble in Iowa, whose Jan. 3 caucuses will be the first voting and where she is in a scramble with Barack Obama, trailed closely by John Edwards.
An extensive poll in the three states by The Associated Press and the nonpartisan Pew Research Center finds Democrats enthusiastic about their overall presidential field. Most rate it strongly, and they spiritedly back the contenders they prefer.
The poll shows Clinton's advantages in the early contests stretch beyond the top issues. The New York senator has amassed strong support among crucial groups including female, older, less-educated and lower-income Democrats significant because women and older voters in particular have dominated these primaries and caucuses in the past. In Iowa though, she has only a modest lead over Obama among women.
AP-Pew poll shows Clinton leading in South Carolina and New Hampshire, close with Obama in Iowa
WASHINGTON (AP) Here's a look at how the Democratic presidential race is shaping up in the three early states, according to an AP-Pew poll Monday:
 Hillary Rodham Clinton is essentially tied with Barack Obama in Iowa, 31 percent to 26 percent, with John Edwards at 19 percent and Bill Richardson at 10 percent.
 In New Hampshire Clinton has 38 percent, Obama 19 percent, Edwards 15 percent, Richardson 10 percent.
 In South Carolina Clinton has 45 percent, Obama 31 percent, Edwards 10 percent.
Tight race in Iowa leads Romney to risky decision: addressing religion head-on
MANCHESTER, N.H. (AP) In mid-November, Mitt Romney dismissed the prospect of a speech discussing his Mormon faith. Three weeks later, with rival Mike Huckabee, the one-time Southern Baptist minister, surging in Iowa, Romney's calculus has changed.
On Thursday, he will draw national attention to his religion, a subject of curiosity for many people, with a speech at the George Bush Presidential Library and Museum in College Station, Texas.
There are risks, which helps explain why the strategy hasn't been employed during the previous 11 months of his campaign.
In a poll last month by The Associated Press and Yahoo, half of those surveyed expressed discomfort voting for a presidential candidate who is a Mormon, including 20 percent who said that would make them very uncomfortable. Slightly more Democrats than Republicans said it gave them pause.
Huckabee's optimism belies thicket of challenges in Iowa, beyond
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Mike Huckabee, who has surged from the back of the Republican presidential pack to challenge longtime leader Mitt Romney in Iowa, is campaigning with a spring in his step and an ear-to-ear grin.
His optimistic air, however, belies a thicket of challenges in Iowa and beyond. He has a lean campaign organization in the early states compared to Romney and trails him in money.
Huckabee found himself on the defensive Monday because of the disclosure that an independent group with a Web site called "Trust Huckabee" was making automated phone calls in Iowa praising him while criticizing his opponents.
The former Arkansas governor urged an end to the calls.
Clinton cranks up rhetoric against Obama and other rivals in Iowa; polls show close race
CLEAR LAKE, Iowa (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton suggested Monday that Barack Obama has too little experience and perhaps too much ambition, pressing an increasingly aggressive campaign against her chief rival for the Democratic presidential nomination.
Both candidates were in Iowa, one month before the nation's leadoff caucuses with new polls showing Obama had whittled away her early lead and they were virtually tied among Democrats in the state.
"So you decide which makes more sense: Entrust our country to someone who is ready on day one ... or to put America in the hands of someone with little national or international experience, who started running for president the day he arrived in the U.S. Senate," Clinton said.
Her rhetoric and countercharges from Obama underscored the tightness of a race in which polls show a dead heat between them, with former Sen. John Edwards of North Carolina also in strong contention. Many Iowa caucus goers say they still haven't made up their minds or could yet change them.
McCain and the MTV generation
HOOKSETT, N.H. (AP) Republican Sen. John McCain, his spirits better than his comic timing, told students Monday he's the best presidential candidate for youth despite his age.
Participating in an MTV-MySpace forum shown live, McCain appealed to students at Southern New Hampshire University. The 71-year-old Arizona senator offered lighter versions of his common campaign answers and engaged with the students in person and online. He also flubbed several scripted jokes and mistakenly called Osama bin Laden "Saddam Hussein."
"You might've seen three weeks ago, Saddam Hussein got a video out around the world that reached excuse me not Saddam Hussein. He's no longer with us, thank God," McCain said to applause.
Realizing he had confused the al-Qaida leader with the dead Iraqi president, McCain turned to the audience and laughed.
"I want to mention again, Saddam Hussein is dead," he said. "Duh."
McCain talked about the war in Iraq, public education and his belief that climate change must be vigorously addressed, a position that stands him apart from most of the GOP presidential field. He told students that unless something changes, the Social Security system will not be there when they need it.
"I'm not the youngest guy in this race," he said. "We know that. But I am the most experienced."
Obama urges restrictions on 'predatory' credit cards
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Democrat Barack Obama, sharpening his populist middle-class rhetoric, called for new restrictions on "predatory" credit card companies he says deceive consumers into piling up debt they have little hope of repaying.
"The truth is, our middle-class families are not going to be secure so long as they can't get out of debt," Obama said Monday. "If we're serious about stopping Americans from stopping Americans from falling deeper in debt, we've got to crack down on predatory credit card companies that are pushing them over the edge."
Obama pointed to studies showing that consumers have an average personal debt of more than $8,000, a debt load driven higher by credit card debt. He said that soaring credit card debt could turn into a crisis as big as the one in the subprime mortgage industry.
"The larger risk is that what's happening in the housing market could lead to a slowdown in the entire economy," said Obama.
Suspect in Clinton campaign office standoff held on $500,000 bond, will get mental evaluation
ROCHESTER, N.H. (AP) The man accused of taking hostages at a Hillary Rodham Clinton campaign office last week watched impassively during his video arraignment Monday as he was portrayed alternatively as a sick man desperately seeking psychiatric help and a manipulative longtime criminal.
The judge ordered Leeland Eisenberg held on $500,000 cash bail on six felony charges and ordered a psychiatric evaluation for him.
Eisenberg is alleged to have taken six hostages at Clinton's storefront office in Rochester on Friday, showing them what he said was a bomb strapped to his chest. Authorities said it turned out to be road flares.
Edwards would consider Republicans in administration
WATERLOO, Iowa (AP) Democrat John Edwards says he's already made a list of potential running mates and Cabinet members, and would consider Republicans for some top positions. He wouldn't say whether he might put one of his rivals on his ticket should he win the nomination.
Edwards became John Kerry's running mate after failing to win the nomination in 2004. Hillary Rodham Clinton is leading the 2008 Democratic contest nationally and in the early contest states of New Hampshire and South Carolina, polls suggest, but Clinton and Barack Obama are essentially tied in Iowa with Edwards close behind.
"I can tell you that both for Cabinet positions and potential running mates, I already have a list of people being considered, and I have no intention of telling you who they are," he said to reporters.
Edwards picked up the endorsement Monday of the first member of Iowa's congressional delegation to back a presidential candidate. Rep. Bruce Braley, a freshman, also supported Edwards four years ago.
The three leading Democrats in Iowa have held fundraisers for Braley. "He's been pushed and pulled and courted by all the Democratic presidential candidates, who would love to have his support," Edwards said. He told Braley during a stop in Waterloo that he was proud to have him on board.
McCain says he'll make health insurance affordable, not required
DURHAM, N.H. (AP) Republican presidential hopeful John McCain said Monday that mandating health insurance coverage makes about as much sense as requiring everyone to buy a house.
Told that health care costs at Goss International, a printing press manufacturer where he was speaking, have risen $4 million in the past year, the Arizona senator said he would focus on making insurance more affordable rather than requiring universal coverage as some Democrats have proposed.
"Senator Clinton and the Democrats want to raise your taxes, and they want a government mandate system. I'm not going to mandate that every American have health insurance. I'm not going to mandate that every American have a home. I'm not going mandate that every American have a college education," he said. "But I'm going to make them all affordable and available."
Giuliani assails 'fair tax' plan embraced by Huckabee, says it would hurt home buyers
GREENSBORO, N.C. (AP) Republican presidential hopeful Rudy Giuliani criticized the "fair tax" plan that has been touted by rival candidate Mike Huckabee on Monday, saying it could hurt home buyers.
The former New York City mayor cited the struggling U.S. housing market as a reason to avoid the plan, which would eliminate all taxes on income and investments in favor of a hefty federal sales tax.
A questioner asked about the plan but did not mention Huckabee. Nor did Giuliani mention his rival in his response.
"I think there are several tax deductions that are vital to our economy," Giuliani said. "This would not be a good time I don't know if there would ever be a good time to do this to advocate ending the home mortgage deduction. The home mortgage deduction is considered by many critical to the ability of people to buy a home and keep their home."
Huckabee says he sides with McCain on U.S. torture policy after meeting with retired military personnel
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Republican presidential candidate Mike Huckabee met Monday with retired generals and admirals about the United States' interrogation of terrorism suspects.
The former Arkansas governor sided with GOP rival, Sen. John McCain, the former prisoner of war in Vietnam who argues that torture doesn't work and the United States should not engage in waterboarding, a technique that simulates drowning.
"Senator McCain on this issue is right that torture should not be the policy of the United States of America," Huckabee told reporters.
He said the country should aggressively interrogate terrorism suspects and go after those who seek to do the country harm, but he objects to "violating our moral code" with torture. He said he believes waterboarding is torture.
No more Oprah tickets in S.C.
COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) Tickets are no longer available for talk show host Oprah Winfrey's campaign rally in Columbia with Democratic presidential hopeful Barack Obama on Sunday.
The Illinois senator's campaign stopped giving out the free tickets Monday, just two days after distribution began. Obama's campaign is taking names on a waiting list. Winfrey is to appear with Obama at the Colonial Center and is campaigning for him in New Hampshire and Iowa. The campaign would not say how many tickets were given away for the rally at the arena, which seats 18,000 people for basketball games.
THE DEMOCRATS
Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, Barack Obama of Illinois, Chris Dodd of Connecticut and Joe Biden of Delaware campaign in Iowa. John Edwards and Bill Richardson also meet with voters in the state.
THE REPUBLICANS
Rudy Giuliani speaks to his campaign's female supporters at an event in North Carolina.
Mitt Romney and John McCain talk to voters in New Hampshire.
Mike Huckabee campaigns in Iowa.
Fred Thompson holds a town hall meeting on small businesses.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Times have changed and particularly in a state like Iowa, there's been interest in religion generally and I think religion does have a very important role in our society and therefore it's important to talk about our religious heritage." Republican Mitt Romney.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Eleven percent of Republicans say the election bores them, compared with 7 percent of Democrats, according to a recent AP-Yahoo News survey.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 4, 2007

 

End of Document
