

A comparison of the Bush plan and the Iraqi Study Group's proposals
The Associated Press
January 11, 2007 Thursday 5:45 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 385 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A comparison of President Bush's new plan for Iraq with the recommendations of the bipartisan Iraq Study Group:
TROOPS
Bush: Send another 21,500 troops to help squelch the violence in Baghdad and the Anbar province. Embed more troops with Iraqi forces as advisers. No timetable for withdrawal of troops.
Iraq Study Group: Temporarily increase by about 16,000 the number of troops devoted to training and equipping the Iraqi forces. Plan a gradual withdrawal of U.S. combat troops, with a goal of bringing the bulk home by early 2008.
DIPLOMACY
Bush: Do not engage in talks with Iran and Syria; intensify U.S. efforts to counter Iranian and Syrian influence in Iraq. Urge Arab states to support the Iraqi government. Increase U.S. military presence in the region and keep the United Nations active in Iraq.
Iraq Study Group: Launch a diplomatic offensive to quickly engage Syria, Iran and the leaders of insurgents in negotiations on Iraq's future. Work toward resolving the long-standing Arab-Israeli conflict to ease hostility throughout the Middle East.
IRAQIS' ROLE
Bush: Iraqis should dedicate $10 billion for reconstruction efforts, deliver three brigades for Baghdad effort, and crack down on all insurgents and extremists, regardless of sect or religion. Sets benchmarks for Iraqis: complete oil profit-sharing law, reintegrate Baathists into the government, hold provincial elections, transfer security to Iraqi forces. But doesn't tie U.S. support to specific goals.
Iraq Study Group: The report called for similar benchmarks for security, government and reconciliation progress, and said the U.S. should make it clear that American support will be reduced if these milestones are not met.
IRAQ ECONOMY
Bush: Spend $814 million to double the number of U.S. civilian workers helping coordinate reconstruction and to provide quick-response funds for local rebuilding projects; spend another $350 million on a program that gives field commanders money to solve local problems and quickly improve Iraqis' lives.
Iraq Study Group: The U.S. should provide $5 billion a year in economic aid and work faster to implement assistance programs, giving U.S. officials more flexibility to quickly fund or eliminate programs. It encouraged greater international investment in Iraq's oil industry, its management and its security.
 Load-Date: January 12, 2007

 

End of Document
