

A glance at the operations of airports around the world
The Associated Press
June 6, 2006 Tuesday 3:17 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 477 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Airport operations across the globe are split between private companies and governments. A glance at who operates some of the world's major airports:
 BAA PLC, the world's largest airports operator, owns and operates seven airports across Britain including London's Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted. In the United States, BAA manages the Indianapolis airport and retail operations at Baltimore, Pittsburgh and Boston-Logan airports. It also has a stake in and runs airports in Budapest, Hungary, and Naples, Italy.
 Grupo Ferrovial SA of Spain has a 60 percent stake in England's Bristol airport and 31 percent of Belfast City airport, and it also manages the Sydney airport in Australia and Antofagasta airport in Chile. Ferrovial last year acquired Zurich-based airport handling company Swissport, which operates at more than 170 airports in 40 countries.
 Fraport AG operates Frankfurt International Airport Europe's second-busiest airport after Heathrow as well as the smaller Frankfurt-Hahn airport, Hanover, Saarbruecken Airport, Peru's Lima Airport and Antalya Airport in Turkey.
 New York's major airports Newark, LaGuardia and JFK are owned and operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, a bistate agency that also owns the Holland and Lincoln tunnels between the states, the George Washington Bridge and the World Trade Center site.
 Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, the world's busiest airport by both number of passengers and takeoffs and landings, is owned by the City of Atlanta. The Department of Aviation, a city agency, operates and manages it.
 Chicago's O'Hare International Airport, one of the world's busiest airports, is owned by the city of Chicago. The city also owns nearby Midway International Airport. Illinois Gov. Rod Blagojevich signed legislation last month letting Chicago lease Midway to a private company if officials decide the move would make financial sense.
 Aeroports de Paris operates the two main Paris airports, Charles de Gaulle and Orly, and 12 other aerodromes and heliports within 30 miles of the French capital. It also has stakes or management contracts at airports in Belgium, Cambodia, Cameroon, China, Egypt, Guinea, Madagascar and Mexico. It is fully state-owned, but the French government launched an initial public offering last week in which it plans to sell almost one-third of the company's capital.
 Hochtief AG has stakes in the Athens, Duesseldorf, Hamburg and Sydney airports. The company, based in Essen, Germany, also operates the Tirana, Albania, airport.
 Schiphol Group, majority-owned by the Dutch government, owns Schipol Airport in Amsterdam. It also fully owns Rotterdam and Lelystad and has stakes in Eindhoven and Brisbane airports.
 Los Angeles International Airport is owned and operated by the city of Los Angeles through an agency called Los Angeles World Airports.
 Load-Date: June 7, 2006

 

End of Document
