

A glance at the winners of the 2006 Nobel Prizes
The Associated Press
December 10, 2006 Sunday 6:28 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 363 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A brief look at winners of 2006 Nobel Prizes:
PEACE:
 Muhammad Yunus, 66, citizen of Bangladesh. Shared prize with Grameen Bank, which he founded to help the poor with tiny loans, called microcredit. His personal loans to help poor people start businesses in the mid-1970s grew into Grameen Bank, incorporated in 1983 and now with 6.6 million borrowers 97 percent of them women. Holds doctorate in economics in 1972 from Vanderbilt University in Tennessee.
PHYSICS:
 John C. Mather, 60, U.S. citizen. Coordinated NASA satellite project launched in 1989 that uncovered convincing evidence of "big bang" theory of the universe. Is a senior astrophysicist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md.
 George F. Smoot, 61, U.S. citizen. Was responsible for measuring small variations of microwave background radiation in the NASA project. Is professor of physics at University of California at Berkeley.
CHEMISTRY:
 Roger D. Kornberg, 59, U.S. citizen. Honored for studies of how cells take information from genes to produce proteins. Medicine professor at Stanford University in California, he also teaches for four months a year at Hebrew University in Jerusalem. His father, Arthur, won 1959 Nobel Prize in medicine.
MEDICINE:
 Andrew Z. Fire, 47, U.S. citizen. Co-discovered process called RNA interference that can silence specific genes. Is professor at Stanford University.
 Craig C. Mello, 46, U.S. citizen. He worked with Fire in groundbreaking experiment using tiny worm. Professor of molecular medicine at University of Massachusetts in Worcester.
LITERATURE:
 Orhan Pamuk, 54, Turkish citizen. Controversial novelist in Turkey, where he was to stand trial earlier this year on charges of insulting his country but charges were dropped at last minute on technicality. His works, including "Snow" and "My Name is Red," illustrate Turkey's struggle to find balance between East and West. A fellow at Columbia University in New York.
ECONOMICS:
 Edmund S. Phelps, 73, U.S. citizen. Put together new model describing relationship between inflation and unemployment. His work has had a profound impact on macroeconomic policy. Professor of political economy at Columbia University.
 Load-Date: December 11, 2006

 

End of Document
