

A look at the wearing of veils, and disputes on the issue, across the Muslim world
The Associated Press
October 31, 2006 Tuesday 6:31 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 333 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The wearing of veils and debates over the issue, across the Muslim world:
EGYPT: An estimated 70-80 percent of Egyptian Muslim women wear a head scarf, and an increasing number also wear the face veil, or niqab, although the overall number wearing the niqab remains small. The government does not encourage the wearing of scarves or veils worried they are a sign of Islamic extremist political opposition.
SAUDI ARABIA: Women are required to wear a full black cloak, called an abaya, and a head scarf. Saudi women are also expected to wear a face veil. They can be harassed by religious police, supported by the government, if they do not. Despite that, more women have stopped wearing the face veil in parts of the country.
IRAN: Women in this overwhelmingly Shiite Muslim nation wear a head scarf in public and many also wear a cloak called a chador. Laws since the 1979 Islamic revolution require women to cover their hair and wear clothes that hide their shapes. Most women do not cover their faces.
IRAQ: Many women wear a head scarf and others wear a full face veil although secular women are often unveiled. Since the overthrow of Saddam Hussein and the rise of a Shiite-dominated government, armed men have sometimes forced women to cover their heads or face punishment.
KUWAIT, LEBANON, SYRIA: The use of head scarves has grown in recent years.
JORDAN: Many women wear the head scarf, and conservative women are often required by their families to wear it, or encourage others to wear it.
TUNISIA: This North African country has banned head scarves in many public places since the 1980s worried about Islamic opposition to its secular government. Despite the ban, the use of head scarves has risen in recent years.
MALAYSIA, INDONESIA: Head scarves have come into vogue as part of an Islamic revival
TURKEY: Head scarves are banned in all government offices and institutions, but there has been some unofficial relaxation of the ban under governments led by Islamic-oriented parties in recent years.
 Load-Date: November 1, 2006

 

End of Document
