

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
March 19, 2009 Thursday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1475 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Thursday:
SHANGHAI (AP) Shanghai's food and drug safety agency says it is testing Johnson & Johnson baby products following allegations they contain potential carcinogens.
An official at the Shanghai Food & Drug Safety Administration confirmed the agency was conducting tests. Johnson & Johnson baby shampoo and other products were among dozens listed in a report issued March 12 by the U.S-based health and environmental activist group Campaign for Safe Cosmetics as containing formaldehyde and/or 1,4-dioxane.
New Jersey-based Johnson & Johnson issued a statement reassuring customers and accusing the report of unnecessarily alarming parents. It said the U.S. Food and Drug Administration "and other government agencies around the world consider the trace levels safe, and said its products meet or exceed the regulatory requirements in every country where they are sold.
Meanwhile, China defended its rejection of Coca-Cola Co.'s attempt to acquire a major Chinese fruit juice maker, denying the decision was protectionist. The Commerce Ministry denied Coca-Cola's $2.5 billion bid Wednesday to buy Huiyuan Juice Group. Regulators cited concern the merger would hurt competition and raise prices.
Mainland China's Shanghai index rose almost 2 percent, while Hong Kong's Hang Seng gained 0.1 percent. Elsewhere in Asia, benchmarks in Australia, India, Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand all advanced, but South Korea's Kospi closed down 0.7 percent.
LONDON Prudential PLC announced that its chief executive was stepping down as the company posted a loss of 396 million pounds ($566 million) for 2008, mainly due to writedowns on the value of assets in the United States. Mark Tucker, who has led the company for 4 1/2 years, will be replaced by the chief financial officer, Tidjane Thiam. Britain's Prudential is unrelated to The Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
Meanwhile, British mortgage lending fell to the lowest level in eight years in February, typically the slowest month of the year for home loans, the Council of Mortgage Lenders said, as the budget deficit in February swelled to the highest level in at least 16 years as the recession cut the government's tax income. The 9 billion pound ($12.8 billion) shortfall reported by the Office for National Statistics compares with 1.1 billion pounds in the same month last year. The deficit for the first 11 months of the year has soared to a record 75.2 billion pounds, compared with 23 billion pounds a year earlier.
Also, next year's British International Motor Show has been canceled because car companies feel unable to commit under the strains of the economic crisis, the organizers said.
Britain's FTSE 100 closed up 0.3 percent at 3,816.93.
BERLIN Chancellor Angela Merkel stood firm against calls for further pledges to stimulate Germany's economy, saying nearly €80 billion ($105 billion) pledged by her government so far must first be allowed to take effect.
Meanwhile, German dealers of Opel cars said they were in favor of splitting off the Adam Opel GmbH unit from parent General Motors Corp. and grounding an independent Opel of Germany with headquarters in Ruesselsheim.
Germany's DAX advanced 1.2 percent to 4,043.46.
TOKYO Goldman Sachs Group and partner investors are offering 111.2 billion yen ($1.1 billion) for the Universal Studios Japan theme park. The bid for ownership of USJ Co., the park's operator, is 28 percent above its closing price Tuesday in Tokyo, USJ and Goldman said.
Meanwhile, a panel of Asian researchers said the global financial crisis has underlined the critical need for the region to grow less export-dependent and instead foster domestic demand. The representatives from the Asian Development Bank Institute, which brings together economic experts on the region, acknowledged such change will require time, perhaps as much as a decade.
The Nikkei 225 stock average lost 0.3 percent as the Federal Reserve's "quantitative easing" weighed on the dollar and pulled back exporters like Toyota and Honda.
Toyota also said it expects to hire the fewest number of new employees since 1995 for Japan's recruiting season this year, while Sony Corp. said it will impose a salary freeze on its full-time workers in Japan for one year to cut costs as the electronics giant braces for a massive loss.
PARIS The French economy is shrinking at the fastest pace in over 30 years and the recession will deepen this year before it gets better, the national statistics agency warned. The INSEE statistics bureau slashed its forecasts for gross domestic product in both the first and second quarters of this year, after the fourth quarter turned out significantly worse than expected.
Meanwhile, a new wave of nationwide strikes hit France as angry workers demanded that President Nicolas Sarkozy open new talks on the government's policies to fight the deepening economic crisis. Tens of thousands of protesters from the public and the private sectors, including employees of Air France and oil giant Total, were marching in the streets of France's biggest cities: Paris, Marseille and Lyon. More than 200 protest marches were under way around the country as economic news worsened.
Meanwhile, Hermes International reported a small rise in its 2008 profit and said it plans to open or renovate over 20 stores in 2009 as sales of high-end scarfs and luxury handbags defy the crisis.
France's CAC 40 grew 0.6 percent to 2,776.99.
BRUSSELS European Union leaders insisted they were spending enough to dig out of the recession, with the EU presidency saying an additional stimulus package "is a deadly idea." The comment from Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek, who is hosting a two-day EU summit, came in the wake of the announcement Wednesday that the U.S. Federal Reserve will launch a bold $1.2 trillion effort to lower rates on mortgages and other consumer debt. While that is aimed at increasing the amount of money in the economy, not the amount of government spending, it underlines the contrast between the European stance and a more aggressive U.S. approach.
BERN, Switzerland Swiss exports dropped by almost a fifth at the start of the year. The Federal Customs Administration said exports were down 17.3 percent to 14.4 billion Swiss francs ($12.6 billion) during the first two months of 2009 as the global economic downturn reduced demand from oversees markets. Swiss companies are highly dependent on exports.
SAO PAULO Brazil's stocks rose a day after the U.S. Federal Reserve announced its $1.2 trillion spending plan. The Ibovespa stock index climbed 1.5 percent to 40,731 in afternoon trading. The biggest gains are in large exporting companies, which stand to benefit the most from U.S. recovery efforts. Comments from the director of monetary policy at the central bank also cheered investors. Mario Toros says Brazil's $200 billion in foreign reserves means the nation has instruments to combat the crisis if it worsens.
NEW DELHI India's wholesale price index, the country's most-watched inflation measure, eased to 0.44 percent, the Ministry of Commerce said, raising the prospect that India may slide into deflation.
Saudi Arabia's central bank head says the rate of growth in the country's non-oil exports plunged by 50 percent in 2008 as a result of the global financial crisis. The drop undercuts efforts by the Arab world's largest economy to diversify its revenue base away from petroleum.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia Japanese carmaker Honda said it was confident of increasing sales in Malaysia this year, one of the rare regional markets to buck the downtrend amid the global economic gloom.
Meanwhile, the International Air Transport Association warned that the world's airlines are collectively expected to lose more than $2.5 billion this year and could remain in the red for years amid the deepening global economic slump.Next week, the key industry body will raise its forecast for 2009 industry losses as the deteriorating global economic conditions further hit demand for air travel and cargo.
REYKJAVIK, Iceland Iceland's central bank lowered its base interest rate by a full percentage point to 17 percent, saying that "cautious easing" of monetary policy to help its recession-struck economy was now appropriate. The cut was the first change in rates since Iceland's banking system collapsed in October and the government sought a $10 billion bailout led by the International Monetary Fund.
MANILA, Philippines Two Japanese computer parts makers will lay off 3,750 of their factory workers in the Philippines because of weakening demand, media reports and officials said.
KUWAIT CITY Moody's Investors Service placed Kuwait's sovereign rating under review for a possible downgrade, citing concerns about a political crisis that led to the dissolution of the oil-rich nation's parliament.
 Load-Date: March 20, 2009

 

End of Document
