

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
December 3, 2008 Wednesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1648 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock-market activity around the world Wednesday:
BERLIN The German auto industry's leading trade group, the German Association of the Automotive Industry, said it expects next year's car sales to be the worst since the reunification of the country in 1990. It expects 2.9 million new car registrations in 2009, down from the 3.1 million registrations it anticipates in the current year. Meanwhile, the euro-zone service sector purchasing managers index, or PMI, fell to 42.5 in November, below the preliminary estimate of 43.3 and October's 45.8. November's reading was the lowest in the survey's 10-year history. The DAX share index closed up less than 1 percent at 4,567.24, while the CAC-40 benchmark in France ended less than 1 percent higher at 3,166.65.
LONDON Britain's services sector contracted at its fastest rate in at least 12 years, a closely watched survey showed, ratcheting up expectations that the Bank of England will cut interest rates by a full percentage point on Thursday. The monthly services purchasing managers' index from the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply dropped to 40.1 in November from 42.4 the previous month, the lowest since the survey began in 1996. Also, consumer confidence in Britain hit a new low in November, a survey by the Nationwide Building Society showed, with almost half of respondents expecting the economy to worsen over the next six months. Nationwide said its consumer confidence index dropped to 50, down from 56 in October. Meanwhile, the draft of a speech by Queen Elizabeth II that lays out next year's legislative agenda says the British government will attempt to shield people from the economic slowdown with measures that include the creation of a new state-backed savings account for low-income families. The FTSE index closed up 1.1 percent at 4,169.96.
TOKYO Japan's benchmark Nikkei 225 stock average rose 140.41 points, or 1.8 percent, to 8,004.10. The broader Topix index added 1.5 percent to 799.19. Benchmark indexes in Australia, Singapore and India also inched higher as investors nibbled on shares after broad declines the day before.
DUBLIN, Ireland Ireland's unemployment rate surged to a decade high of 7.8 percent in November, surprising economists and deepening the government's struggle to contain its budget deficit. The Central Statistics Office reported an unexpectedly sharp jump from October's rate of 7.4 percent, hours after the government conceded that its budget planning for 2009 was in disarray because of grossly overestimated tax forecasts. Unemployment has not been this bad in Ireland since April 1998. And the swelling numbers of people signing on for jobless benefits is even worse, reaching a 12-year high above 268,000.
HONG KONG China's sovereign wealth fund, which last year poured $5 billion into Morgan Stanley, is reluctant to plow more money into foreign banks until governments hash out coherent policies to cope with the global economic and financial turmoil, the fund's head said. The remarks by Lou Jiwei, chairman of the $200 billion China Investment Corp., represent a new blow for ailing banks that were hoping the Chinese government investment fund would use its deep pool of cash to bail them out. The Hang Seng index rose 1.4 percent to 13,588.66.
BEIJING The United States and China are headed for a possible clash over currency as they open wide-ranging talks on the future of their economic relations. U.S. officials say Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson will press Beijing to let its yuan rise against the dollar to ease trade tensions at the two-day Strategic Economic Dialogue starting Thursday. American companies contend that China keeps the yuan undervalued, giving its exporters an unfair advantage and adding to its swollen trade surplus. Meanwhile, Chinese stocks rose as a government fund announced a large purchase of shares in a major state-owned commercial bank. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index jumped 4 percent, or 75.78 points, to close at 1965.41. The Shenzhen Composite Index for the country's smaller second exchange climbed 3.9 percent to 584.43.
MILAN, Italy Telecom Italia SpA will cut an additional 4,000 jobs by 2011 as it concentrates on core growth markets in Italy and Brazil to confront the deteriorating economic situation, CEO Franco Bernabe said. The 4,000 job cuts are in addition to 5,000 announced in June, and will reduce Telecom Italia's work force by 14 percent, to 55,000 from 64,000. Bernabe said the number of managers will be cut in half as the company seeks to simplify its organization. Italy's benchmark index was nearly flat, ending up 6 points at 19,913.
BANGKOK, Thailand Thailand's central bank slashed interest rates by the largest amount in eight years, attempting to stave off recession as the economy reels from the global downturn and a weeklong shutdown of Bangkok's airports by anti-government protesters. The Bank of Thailand cut the key lending rate by 1 percentage point to 2.75 percent, its lowest level since mid-2005. Protesters were ending their occupation of the Thai capital's international and domestic airports, but the damage to the nation's vital tourism industry was expected to be long-lasting, with more than 300,000 travelers stranded by the airport chaos. A court on Tuesday dissolved the ruling party for vote buying, forcing Prime Minister Somchai Wongsawat and other top government ministers out of office meeting a key demand of the protesters. The central bank said the global financial crisis has led to a significant and worse-than-expected slowdown in the industrialized economies, which will hurt Thailand's exports, a mainstay of economic growth. The SET index rose 1.5 percent to 392.92.
SEOUL, South Korea South Korea's foreign currency reserves shrank further in November amid the global credit crunch, the central bank said, though by a smaller margin than the previous month's record decline. The reserves totaled $200.51 billion at the end of November, down $11.74 billion from $212.25 billion at the end of October, the Bank of Korea said. South Korea's reserves are on track for their first annual drop since 1997, when the country was brought to the brink of insolvency by the Asian economic crisis and sought a $58 billion bailout from the International Monetary Fund. The benchmark Kospi was almost flat, finishing down less than a point at 1,022.67.
TEHRAN, Iran Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad is acknowledging publicly for the first time that tumbling oil prices are gouging the country's fragile economy. The official IRNA news agency is quoting the increasingly unpopular president as saying Iran will be forced to trim spending and generous subsidies and raise taxes. It's a sensitive admission for the Iranian president, who is seeking re-election in June. The report quoted Ahmadinejad as saying the government budget would have to be readjusted to base it on an oil price of around $30 a barrel.
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates The new Dubai developer that unveiled a $95 billion real estate project just two months ago said it is reviewing its plans the latest sign that the souring economy is dampening this brash boomtown's ambitions. The retreat comes as a widely watched report showed property price growth in the fast-growing Gulf city-state slowed considerably in the three months through September, ahead of an expected decline later this year.
BELGRADE, Serbia Serbia's currency dropped to its all-time low against the euro despite repeated central bank interventions to support it on foreign exchange markets. The dinar traded down at 90.59 per euro from highs of 75.75 a euro on Aug. 7 even though the National Bank of Serbia (NBS) on Tuesday sold 10 million euros ($12.61 million) on financial markets to offset the strong demand for foreign currencies. The NBS has sold more than 600 million euros ($757.02 million) on the foreign exchange market since late September to stop the fall of the dinar, triggered by the global economic crisis and worries over Serbia's economy.
SAO PAULO, Brazil Latin American stocks opened lower, then rebounded after Wall Street investors calmly absorbed the latest evidence of a still-weakening economy. Mexico's IPC index closed 1.7 percent higher at 20,147 after initially dropping 1.1 percent to 19,576. Colombia also was on the rise, its IGBC index up 2.1 percent to 7,381 after opening 0.5 percent lower to 7,193. Argentina's Merval index rose 1.9 percent to 970 after opening down 1 percent at 942. Brazilian stocks also began in negative territory down 2.1 percent to 34,256 but recovered to close up 0.8 percent at 35,293.
BRUSSELS, Belgium A European Union flotilla will begin anti-piracy operations off the coast of Somalia next week, the EU's foreign policy chief said, replacing a NATO naval force that has been patrolling the region and escorting cargo ships carrying relief aid to Somalia since the end of October. Although the NATO ships have successfully delivered nearly 30,000 tons of humanitarian supplies to the impoverished nation, they have not been able to stem the upsurge in pirate attacks on foreign shipping in one of the most important shipping lanes in the world.
CAMBRIDGE, Mass. Harvard officials say the university's largest-in-the-nation endowment lost about 22 percent of its value, or $8 billion, in the four months since the end of the last fiscal year. The endowment was worth $36.9 billion as of June 30. Harvard will have to take a "hard look at hiring, staffing levels, and compensation," university President Drew Faust and Executive Vice President Edward Forst wrote in a letter informing deans of the losses.
HARARE, Zimbabwe Riot police charged into a group of doctors and nurses protesting Zimbabwe's deepening economic and health crisis, eyewitnesses said, as deaths rose sharply from a cholera epidemic blamed on collapsing infrastructure.
 Load-Date: December 4, 2008

 

End of Document
