

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
June 24, 2009 Wednesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1201 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Wednesday:
PARIS The deepest global recession in over 60 years is close to bottoming out, but recovery will be weak unless governments do more to remove uncertainty over banks' balance sheets, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said. In its semiannual economic outlook, the OECD said it expects its member countries' economies to shrink by 4.1 percent this year, with only government rescue measures heading off an even worse decline. That is a slight improvement from the OECD's last forecast in March of a 4.3 percent decline this year and is the group's first upward revision to its forecasts in two years.
The OECD now expects the U.S. economy to shrink by 2.8 percent this year after 1.1 percent growth in 2008. Japanese output is likely to contract by 6.8 percent this year and the 16-nation euro zone will likely shrink 4.8 percent. The OECD forecast a return to growth in all three regions next year, with overall growth across its membership expected to average 0.7 percent in 2010.
TOKYO The slump in Japan's exports showed little sign of relenting in May. Exports from the world's second-largest economy plunged 40.9 percent from a year earlier, accelerating from a 39.1 percent fall in April, as consumers overseas bought fewer of the country's cars, electronics and other mainstay exports. Japan's monthly trade surplus reached 299.8 billion yen ($3.1 billion), the biggest in a year, but due to a sharp fall in imports that further underscores weakness in the economy. Exports to the United States, the world's largest economy, fell 45.4 percent in May, marking the 21st straight monthly decline.
Japan's economy shrank at a 14.2 percent annual pace in the first quarter better than first thought, but still its worst quarterly contraction ever as trade wilted amid the worst global recession in decades. Economy Minister Kaoru Yosano said last week the slump had hit bottom but warned a recovery will depend on the world economy.
In markets, Japan's benchmark Nikkei 225 stock average rose 40.71 points, or 0.4 percent, to 9,590.32 after falling nearly 3 percent Tuesday. Elsewhere in Asia, Hong Kong's Hang Seng rose 353.78 points, or 2 percent, to 17,892.15, while South Korea's Kospi was up 0.2 percent and Australia's benchmark gained 0.3 percent. Taiwan's index jumped 3 percent and Singapore's market rose 2.4 percent.
FRANKFURT In a bid to further unclog credit markets in the euro zone, the European Central Bank said it will lend a record 442 billion euros ($616.26 billion) to banks for 12 months. The bank's 12-month operation was launched earlier in the day and will begin Thursday. The ECB said that 1,121 institutions subscribed to the offering, its biggest since December 2007.
BERLIN Germany's cabinet approved a budget for 2010 that foresees taking on record debt to help safeguard the country against the global financial crisis. The new budget anticipates 86.1 billion euros ($120.05 billion) in fresh debt, nearly double this year's 47.6 billion euros ($66.37 billion), which is already the largest credit to be taken out by the German government since World War II. Finance Minister Peer Steinbrueck defended the high debt as unprecedented but necessary to manage an economy the government predicts will shrink by 6 percent in the coming year.
LONDON Bank of England Governor Mervyn King said he had concerns about how quickly the British economy may recover from the global financial crisis and called for more government action to keep the country's huge budget deficit under control. King said that the "little evidence" that the bank had on the effect of its program to boost the money supply begun through asset purchases three months ago "seemed positive," but warned that a withdrawal of economic stimulus too early may create the risk of a renewed downturn. He added that the international monetary system needed to be reformed to ensure a sustainable recovery and prevent a repeat of the crisis.
Separately, the cost of three-month euro loans between banks slid after the European Central Bank successfully concluded its first-ever 12-month money auction, while the equivalent dollar rate fell to a new low ahead of a key policy statement from the U.S. Federal Reserve. Analysts said the implications on money markets is to put downward pressure on short-term rates but may not do much to boost bank lending the real aim of the Bank's extra loans.
In markets, the FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed up 49.96 points, or 1.2 percent, at 4,279.98 while Germany's DAX rose 128.86 points, or 2.7 percent, to 4,836.01. The CAC-40 in France was 67.94 points, or 2.2 percent, higher at 3,184.76.
BEIJING China defended its curbs on exports of industrial raw materials against unfair-trade complaints by the United States and Europe and announced it has filed its own challenge to a U.S. ban on imports of Chinese poultry. The Ministry of Commerce said the curbs comply with Chinese trade commitments and are meant to protect the environment.
In markets, Chinese shares rebounded to an 11-month high on optimism about the economy after a government official issued a forecast of strong second-quarter growth. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index jumped 29.6 points, or 1 percent, to close at 2922.3, the highest since July 17. An official of China's statistics agency said economic growth in the April-to-June quarter should be 8 percent compared with the year-earlier period, analysts said.
MOSCOW Russia's economy will shrink by 7.9 percent this year, plunging millions of Russians into poverty and pushing the unemployment rate to 13 percent, the World Bank said. The contraction in gross domestic product has been bigger than anticipated, and growth is unlikely to pick up even with buoyant oil prices this year, said Zeljko Bogetic, the World Bank's lead economist for Russia. Bogetic also warned that the social effect could be significant. The World Bank estimates up to 7.5 million Russians could fall below the poverty line this year, putting huge pressure on the government to boost social spending and contain mounting discontent as wage arrears grow and layoffs continue.
BRUSSELS The European Commission gave Hungary another two years to curb its budget gap, postponing its deadline until 2011 as it deals with a severe recession. European Union finance ministers have told Hungary repeatedly to reduce its deficit because it has gone over the maximum 3 percent of gross domestic product set by EU budget rules every year since it joined the bloc in 2004. The financial crisis has hit Hungary hard and forced it last year to seek a 20 billion euros ($27.89 billion) bailout from the International Monetary Fund and the EU to plug the gap between government spending and plunging tax revenues.
ZURICH Swiss engineering company Sulzer AG said it is cutting 1,400 jobs or about 11 percent of its global work force because of the economic downturn. Most of the jobs will go in Europe and the Americas.
Separately, the Swiss franc dipped sharply on unconfirmed talk that the Swiss National Bank had intervened in the currency markets to reduce the value of the currency.
 Load-Date: June 25, 2009

 

End of Document
