

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
February 17, 2009 Tuesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1393 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Tuesday:
WARSAW, Poland The deepening financial crisis in eastern Europe sent stocks and currencies sinking across the continent as fears escalated that troubles in former communist countries could wallop western Europe's already-stressed banking system. Markets sagged after ratings agency Moody's said faltering economic conditions in eastern Europe would hit the local subsidiaries of major Western banks and potentially hurt their corporate parents, primarily in Austria, Italy, France, Belgium, Germany and Sweden. A report by Danske Bank said "no currency in the region will be unaffected." Warsaw's WIG20 stock index was down 7.5 percent and the Prague BCPP exchange hit a five year low, down 7.6 percent to 645.8 points. Over the past 12 months, the MSCI EM Eastern Europe index of stocks has plunged nearly 70 percent. 
Currencies have been hard hit, with Poland's zloty slumping 15 percent in 2009 alone to 4.9 against the euro. That prompted Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk to pledge government intervention in the foreign exchange market to prop up the currency if it falls to 5 zlotys. The Czech koruna has fallen nearly 10 percent this year to 29.68 against the euro, its lowest since October 2005. Between Sept. 2008 and February, Hungary's forint fell 28.9 percent, the Ukrainian hrvynia 42.2 percent and the Russian ruble sunk 32.2 percent against the U.S. dollar.
TOKYO Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso's already shaky government was rocked by the sudden resignation of his finance minister over allegations he appeared drunk after a recent G-7 meeting. Finance Minister Shoichi Nakagawa, who has denied being drunk, offered his resignation late Tuesday after earlier in the day saying he would stay on until after parliament approves the budget for the fiscal year, probably in late April. On Monday, official figures showed that Japan's economy shrank at its fastest rate in 35 years in the fourth quarter and shows no signs of reversing course anytime soon. Japan's gross domestic product contracted 3.3 percent from the previous quarter, or an annual pace of 12.7 percent, in the October-December period, the government said, strangled by a drop in demand for its exports worldwide. That was worse than expected and the steepest slide for Japan since the oil shock in 1974. It is more than triple the 3.8 percent annualized contraction in the U.S. in the same quarter. Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average sank 1.4 percent to 7,645.51.
MOSCOW Russia's economy will contract by 2.2 percent this year under the weight of the financial crisis and lower commodity prices, the country's deputy economic development minister said, according to the state-owned RIA Novosti news agency. Andrei Klepach's estimate was the first official announcement of a sharp fall in the Russian economic growth, with the government previously predicting only a 0.2 percent contraction for 2009. The minister said the forecast had been revised due to increasing investment outflows, which he estimated at 14 percent this year. Russia's stock markets reacted with steep drops in late trading. Both the RTS, Russia's benchmark index, and the larger MICEX exchange shed 9.4 percent by the close of the day. The national currency fell 2 percent against a dollar-euro basket. But even after the latest forecast revisions, the government is still more optimistic than most analysts about the year ahead.
PARIS It's the kind of high-wire act Nicolas Sarkozy relishes. With France's economy collapsing faster than in decades and his approval rating at a nadir, the French president Wednesday will attempt to head off mounting unrest at a so-called "social summit" with labor unions and employer representatives. Sarkozy considers it a make-or-break moment: "I'm betting my term on it," he told aides last week, according to French newspaper Le Figaro, considered close to the conservative government. The CAC-40 in France fell 86.99 points, or 2.9 percent, to 2,875.23. Elsewhere in France, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the head of the International Monetary Fund, said he's "not optimistic" about the world economy on France-Inter radio. He urged more coordination among countries as they lay out national stimulus packages and said they "need to be more robust" like the one in the United States.
BERLIN German investor confidence improved in February amid high expectations for a new stimulus package for Europe's biggest economy. The Mannheim-based ZEW institute's survey showed financial experts' outlook for the next half-year brightened for a fourth consecutive month as the index surged to minus 5.8 points from minus 31 points in January. That was also better than the minus 45.2 in December but is still far below its historical average of positive 26.4 points. The DAX was 150.04 points, or 3.4 percent, lower at 4,216.60.
LONDON Lower energy costs helped push Britain's annual inflation rate to a nine-month low of 3.0 percent in January from 3.1 percent in the previous month despite widespread shop price rises. The annual rate of the consumer price index eased for a fourth consecutive month, although the fall was much more modest than expected. Analysts were anticipating a decline to around 2.5 percent. The Office for National Statistics said the biggest downward effect came from the ongoing fall in oil prices. The FTSE 100 index of British shares closed down 100.62 points, or 2.4 percent, at 4,034.13.
AMSTERDAM The Dutch economy has deteriorated at an "unprecedented" rate since December, Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende said, after a new government estimate predicted the economy will shrink 3.5 percent this year. Addressing the nation in a televised press conference from the seat of government in The Hague, Balkenende said the country is in a "heavy recession" and that his government will focus on job creation to help the economy recover.
SHANGHAI Chinese shares fell as investors took profits after reports the central bank was investigating a surge in bank lending that fueled a rally and whether it increased financial risks. The Shanghai benchmark lost 2.9 percent to 2,319.44. Elswehere in Asia, Hong Kong's Hang Seng dropped 3.8 percent to 12,945.40, and South Korea's Kospi plummeted 4.1 percent to 1,127.19. Markets in Australia, India and Singapore also declined.
SINGAPORE Singapore's non-oil exports plunged 35 percent in January as global demand collapsed, a bad 2009 omen for a region that's prospered during the last decade largely on selling goods abroad. Exports, which account for two-thirds of the city-state's gross domestic product, fell in January to 10.0 billion Singapore dollars ($6.6 billion), according to Trade and Industry Ministry figures. Exports fell a seasonally adjusted 3.2 percent in January from the previous month. Singapore was the first Asian country to report its January export figures, and the dismal numbers bode ill for the region. While Singapore relies more on demand from the West than most other Asian countries, such a steep drop in sales abroad could be a harbinger of an ugly first quarter.
SAO PAULO, Brazil Latin American stocks closed sharply down on concerns about the global economy and fears that European banks could face massive losses. Brazil's Bovespa index plunged 4.5 percent to 39,969, while Argentina's Merval index fell 4.5 percent to 1,073 and Mexico's IPC sank 3.4 percent to 18,854.
CAIRO Egypt remains committed to pushing ahead with its ambitious economic reform program, the country's prime minister said Monday, even as he raised the possibility that its currency may depreciate against the U.S. dollar as the global economic crisis hits the Arab world's most populous nation. Ahmed Nazif's comments at a business round-table underscored the government's optimism about the country's ability to weather the global economic meltdown, despite mounting evidence that the financial crisis is exacting a toll on the country.
ZURICH Switzerland's blue chip stock index dipped below 5,000 points for the first time in over five years. The Swiss Market Index, or SMI, closed at 4,941.31 points, a drop of 2.7 percent compared to Monday and about 11 percent lower than at the start of the year. Almost all of the index's 20 reference stocks were down. The last time the SMI stood below 5,000 points was in summer 2003.
 Load-Date: February 18, 2009

 

End of Document
