

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
February 27, 2009 Friday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1186 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Friday:
LONDON Eastern Europe's struggling banks will receive 24.5 billion euros ($31.1 billion) worth of emergency help to shore up their battered finances, leading international financial institutions said ahead of a meeting of regional leaders this weekend. The European Bank of Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the World Bank, and the European Investment Bank (EIB) said they will provide the package to the region's banking sector to help fund lending to businesses hit by the drying up of previously cheap lines of credit and the contraction in world trade. The initiative by the three international financial institutions came as Hungary's Prime Minster Ferenc Gyurcsany continues to lobby for an extensive rescue package from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund for the Eastern European countries and banks.
KIEV, Ukraine The International Monetary Fund signaled that Ukraine was making progress toward receiving a second crucial installment of a $16.4 billion emergency loan after the aid program was frozen earlier this month. The IMF said it was ready to reconsider its loan requirements and allow Ukraine to run a bigger budget deficit after the financial crisis grew worse. The IMF had previously insisted that Ukraine trim the 2009 deficit from 3 percent to 1 percent of the GDP. But Ceyla Pazarbasioglu, the head of the IMF mission to Ukraine, said Friday that a balanced budget was impossible given the economy would contract by 6 percent or more this year and said the country could run a deficit as long it secures external funding.
MOSCOW Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin sought to calm fears about the country's sharp slide into recession, saying this year will bring "no catastrophe" to the economy. Putin made the statement during a meeting with lawmakers from the Kremlin-leaning United Russia party. Russia's economy shrank 8.8 percent in January compared with a year earlier. The ruble has lost one-third of its value since September and unemployment rates are soaring. Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin said on Thursday that Russia's energy-reliant economy will slump in 2009 even if oil rises to $55 a barrel.
BEIJING China is confident it can meet its growth target of 8 percent this year though "downward pressure" from the global economic crisis is growing, the deputy chairman of its planning agency said. The comments in a nationally televised news conference were Beijing's latest effort to reassure uneasy consumers and companies and encourage them to keep spending a key part of its multibillion-dollar plan to pull the economy out of its slump. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index lost 38.4 points, or 1.8 percent, to close at 2,082.85. For the week, it fell 7.9 percent, but it rose 4.6 percent for all of February. China is still the world's best-performing major market so far this year, driven by hopes about the government's multibillion stimulus package. But with the last in a series of stimulus plans released Wednesday, investors seem to have soured on the market. In Hong Kong, the Hang Seng pulled back 83.37 points, or about 0.7 percent, to 12,880.89 in a back-and-forth session. South Korea's Kospi rose 0.8 percent to 1,063.03.
BERLIN Inflation in the 16 countries that use the euro tumbled to its lowest level for nearly a decade in January compared to a year ago while unemployment crept up to 8.2 percent, the European Union's statistics office said. The statistics likely provide more reasons for the European Central Bank to cut interest rates next Thursday. Meanwhile, in Germany, the continent's biggest economy, annual inflation rate ticked up to 1 percent in February after hitting a five-year low the previous month, an official estimate showed Friday. Year-on-year consumer price inflation edged up from 0.9 percent in January, the Federal Statistical Office said. Meanwhile, officials from General Motors Europe proposed that its Opel unit loosen its ties with the beleaguered U.S. parent company and said the German automaker needs 3.3 billion euros ($4.2 billion) in government aid to stay afloat. The DAX lost 2.5 percent to 3,843.74. Elsewhere in Europe, France's CAC 40 dropped 1.5 percent to 2,702.48.
TOKYO Japan's industrial production plunged at a record pace in January, the government said, as collapsing overseas demand forced manufacturers to keep slashing output and jobs. Household spending and retail sales also fell. Production at manufacturers tumbled a stunning 10 percent from the previous month, the largest decline since Tokyo began measuring such data in 1953. The drop, which comes after a 9.8 percent decline in December, reflects the unprecedented speed at which Japanese companies have throttled factory lines as exports dry up. However, the government's survey forecast that output would start recovering in March. The benchmark Nikkei 225 stock average added 110.49 points, or 1.5 percent, to 7,568.42, its highest closing level since Feb. 17. For the month, the Nikkei lost 5.3 percent.
NEW DELHI India's economic growth slowed sharply in the fourth quarter to 5.3 percent from the same period a year earlier on contracting agricultural and manufacturing output, the government said the slowest pace in about six years.. Asia's third-largest economy grew 7.6 percent in the July-September quarter but slowed as the U.S. financial crisis erupted, dragging on global growth as Western consumer demand waned and companies cut costs. Agriculture was the worst hit in the October-December quarter, falling by 2.2 percent, the government said. The country's main index tumbled by 2 percent.
STOCKHOLM, Sweden Sweden's economy contracted sharply by an annual 4.9 percent in the fourth quarter due to falling business inventories, exports and industrial production, the national statistics agency said. It was Sweden's biggest drop in gross domestic product since Statistics Sweden started presenting seasonally adjusted figures in 1994, agency spokeswoman Sofia Runestav said. Nordic neighbors Denmark and Finland also presented negative numbers for the final quarter of 2008.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia Malaysia's trade-driven economy grew a dismal 0.1 percent in the fourth quarter of 2008 from a year earlier, bringing full-year growth to 4.6 percent, the government said. The manufacturing sector was badly hit, contracting by 8.8 percent in the October-December period after having recorded positive growth for the previous 26 quarters, the Department of Statistics said in a statement.
WARSAW, Poland Poland's central bank chief said that the country's economy is fundamentally sound the bank's second public statement this week aimed at boosting the wobbly currency amid deepening economic turmoil.
LONDON British Prime Minister Gordon Brown kept up the pressure on the former head of bailed-out Royal Bank of Scotland, saying that Sir Fred Goodwin's annual pension of 693,000 pounds ($992,000) was "unjustifiable, unacceptable." Brown repeated the government's determination to take legal action if Goodwin won't give the money back.
 Load-Date: February 28, 2009

 

End of Document
