

A look at the Defense Department's funding request for the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan
The Associated Press
September 26, 2007 Wednesday 8:46 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 374 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




In February, the Defense Department submitted a request for $141.7 billion to fund the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
In July, the department raised that figure to $147 billion.
A third request, to be submitted by President Bush, will ask for approximately $42 billion more, bringing the total request to almost $190 billion.
The breakdown, according to the congressional testimony of Defense Secretary Robert Gates:
Among the items in the initial request:
 $70.6 billion for operations, which includes incremental pay, supplies, transportation, maintenance, and logistical support to conduct military operations.
 $37.6 billion to repair and replace equipment that has been destroyed, damaged, or stressed by the ongoing conflicts.
 $15.2 billion for force protection, including new technologies and equipment to protect troops from improvised explosive devices and other threats.
 $4.7 billion to train and equip Afghan and Iraqi security forces.
 $1 billion for the Commander's Emergency Response Program, funds that can be dispensed quickly and applied directly by U.S. commanders for local needs.
The additional request in July included:
 $5.3 billion to buy 1,520 Mine Resistant Ambush Protected (MRAP) vehicles.
Among the items in the president's request:
 $6 billion to support the Army and Marine combat formations currently in Iraq through fiscal year 2008. This takes into account Bush's announced intention to redeploy five Army Brigade Combat Teams by next summer.
 $14 billion for force protection, $11 billion of which will go toward fielding approximately 7,000 more MRAP vehicles on top of the 8,000 MRAPs already funded or requested. This also includes funding to defeat enemy snipers and to modify Army combat vehicles to improve survivability.
 $9 billion for reconstitution to ensure we give our forces the equipment and technology they need for future combat operations.
 $6 billion for training and equipment that will accelerate the deployment readiness of Army units. This includes $1 billion to support National Guard pre-deployment training. This will be part of the president's additional request.
 $1 billion to improve U.S. facilities in the region and consolidate our bases in Iraq.
 $1 billion to train and equip Iraqi Security Forces.
 Load-Date: September 27, 2007

 

End of Document
