

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
March 10, 2009 Tuesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1377 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Tuesday:
LONDON Industrial production in France, Britain and Sweden slumped by more than anticipated in January, official figures showed, further underscoring the scale of the recession hitting the continent's hard-pressed manufacturers.
In France, the statistics office Insee said industrial production plunged by 3.1 percent from the previous month, way more than analysts' expectations of a much more modest 0.5 percent decline. Meanwhile, Britain's Office for National Statistics said manufacturing output dropped by 2.6 percent during the month, more than double market expectations, while Sweden's SCB statistics reported a 2.5 percent decline, more than the 2 percent expected.
The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed up 172.83 points, or 4.9 percent, at 3,715.23
BEIJING China's consumer prices fell in February, adding the threat of deflation to the nation's economic woes, and officials warned the next few months look grim as the global downturn worsens. The 1.6 percent drop in the consumer price index highlighted weakness in the world's third-largest economy as exports and consumer demand cool. Such a decline, if it continues, can drag down growth if consumers put off purchases in expectation of lower prices, forcing companies to cut wages and investment. The government downplayed the likelihood of a deflationary spiral. A fall in consumer prices will be a relief to struggling Chinese households. But deflation could undermine the 4 trillion yuan ($586 billion) stimulus, which aims to reduce reliance on exports by encouraging China's own consumers to spend more.
Shanghai's benchmark advanced 1.9 percent. Elsewhere in Asia, South Korea's Kospi added 1.9 percent to 1,092.20, while Australian and Singapore benchmarks also rose.
FRANKFURT The Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, said it booked a 46 percent profit increase for 2008, but warned that the country's economy faces significant risks as global demand for its exports weakens. Bundesbank President Axel Weber said the bank expects the German economy to contract for longer, and more sharply, than previously forecast.
Meanwhile, Weber, also a governing council member of the European Central Bank, said he would like the euro area's main interest rate to be cut no further than to 1 percent.
Germany's DAX ended 194.95 points, or 5.3 percent, to 3,886.96.
MILAN Italy's Banco Popolare became the first Italian bank to seek state aid to strengthen its capital base, announcing it will issue bonds to the government. The Verona-based bank said it intends to sell €1.45 billion ($1.85 billion) of convertible bonds to the government "to ensure adequate capital to the group, allowing it to reinforce support to families and small and medium-size businesses." So far, none of Italy's bigger banks have sought any government aid.
TORONTO Prime Minister Stephen Harper said Canada will emerge from the global financial crisis faster than any other country, but there won't be a recovery until the U.S. financial system is repaired. Canada has avoided government bailouts and has not experienced the failure of any major financial institution.
TOKYO Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average fell 31.05 points, or 0.4 percent, to 7,054.98 the lowest closing level since Oct. 6, 1982 when the index finished at 6,974.35. Asian markets in Malaysia and the Philippines also were lower.
SAO PAULO Latin America's largest economy shrank in the fourth quarter of last year compared to the previous quarter as the global economic crisis put a halt to Brazil's business boom. The economy contracted 3.6 percent from October to December compared to the third quarter, Brazil's IBGE statistics agency said. It was the biggest decline since Brazil started compiling the information in 1996. Overall, Brazil's economy expanded 5.1 percent in 2008, but most of the gains came during first three quarters of the year as Brazil rode an unprecedented economic boom. Investors shrugged off the news. Sao Paulo's Ibovespa stock index gained 4.3 percent in afternoon trading. Elsewhere in Latin America, the IPC index in Mexico was up 3.2 percent, while Argentina's Merval gained 4.7 percent.
PARIS The global economy will shrink this year as the world enters "a great recession," the head of the International Monetary Fund said. Speaking in a taped interview with French television channel France 24, Dominique Strauss-Kahn said economic data has worsened since January, when the IMF forecast global growth in gross domestic product of 0.5 percent this year. On Sunday, the World Bank said the global economy will shrink this year for the first time since World War II and that the global financial crisis will make it tougher for poor and developing nations to access needed financing.
France's CAC-40 rose 144.39 points, or 5.7 percent, to 2,663.68.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia Malaysia's government unveiled a massive 60 billion ringgit ($16.2 billion) economic stimulus package, but acknowledged the export-dependent nation may not be able to avoid a recession and mounting job losses. The package is in addition to 7 billion ringgit ($1.9 billion) of stimulus spending announced in November.
Finance Minister Najib Razak said the government has slashed its economic growth forecast. It expects the economy will shrink 1 percent in the worst case scenario and grow 1 percent in the best case scenario. It earlier expected 3.5 percent groth this year.
BRUSSELS European Union finance ministers agreed to urge governments to double the International Monetary Fund's resources to $500 billion and give it a key role overseeing risks to the global economy. They also pledged to start reducing their budget deficits by 2011 at the latest to try and stabilize their economies.
ALMATY, Kazakhstan Oil-rich Kazakhstan will spend $930 million this year on fighting rising unemployment as the global financial crisis continues to take a toll on Central Asia's largest economy, a senior minister said.
Deputy Prime Minister Erbol Orynbaev said the money will be used to finance retraining programs for unemployed workers and provide support for ailing domestic companies.
BUCHAREST, Romania Romanian officials said they are in talks with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund for rescue loans that news reports said could reach €19 billion ($24 billion). Western financial analysts said the expected influx of capital would calm fears of an immediate meltdown, but would not eliminate the need for a steep depreciation in the Romanian currency, the leu, which has plummeted by 20 percent in the last year. Romanian President Traian Basescu and National Bank Governor Mugur Isarescu warned that there would be zero growth this year.
Meanwhile, ailing U.S. carmaker Ford Motor Co. will receive €143 million ($182 million) in aid from the government of Romania, where the company owns a carmaking plant, lawmakers said.
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates Dubai Islamic Bank said it has foreclosed on a real estate project and set aside cash to help cover losses after court papers indicated the bank was the victim of a half-billion dollar fraud. Documents filed with the Dubai public prosecutor's office and reviewed by The Associated Press name seven businessmen allegedly involved with the crime, which is said to have cost the bank $501 million. The suspects include three Britons, two Pakistanis, one Turk and one American. The amount of the alleged fraud is far larger than in two other cases that have been referred to court since the booming Gulf city-state launched an anti-corruption investigation last year.
HONG KONG Struggling banking giant HSBC Holdings PLC, seeking $17.7 billion in fresh capital, sought to reassure nervous investors after a dramatic plunge in its share price that sparked a Hong Kong securities watchdog probe. The sudden drop that left HSBC's stock down 24 percent Monday at its lowest close since 1995 has shaken the former British territory, where the bank has deep roots and has been seen as a blue-chip investment by generations of retail buyers. On Tuesday, the shares rebounded 13.9 percent to 37.6 Hong Kong dollars. The bounce helped the benchmark Hang Seng index, which added 349.47, or 3.1 percent, to 11,694.05.
 Load-Date: March 11, 2009

 

End of Document
