

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
January 26, 2007 Friday 3:08 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1376 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




TRINIDAD: Sapped sugar industry to close after 300 years of production
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) Trinidad and Tobago will shut down its centuries-old sugar industry, which was pushed to the brink of collapse by cuts in subsidies from the European Union, agriculture officials said.
The twin-island Caribbean nation plans to shutter the sapped business after this year's cane crop is produced, Agriculture Minister Jarrette Narine told The Associated Press.
"The prime minister agreed to shut down the sugar industry when the 2007 crop ends after the farmers asked him to do it," Narine said Wednesday.
Raffique Shah, chief of the Trinidad Cane Farmers Association, said Prime Minister Patrick Manning accepted a proposal to end all sugar production in the oil-and gas-rich country, which has built one of the region's fastest-growing economies around petroleum-based exports.
The Cabinet is expected to accept the industry shutdown, said Shah, who represents the majority of the 4,000 cane farmers who have been producing since the government closed its state-owned sugar company, Caroni Ltd., in 2003.
Shah said the country's remaining farmers have proposed that producers be paid compensation for stopping cane cultivation and expect government support when switching to another crop. He estimated that more than 22,000 acres (8,900 hectares) of cane fields would be freed for food production.
CARIBBEAN-CHINA: China outpaces Taiwan in trade with Dominican Republic, official says
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) The Dominican Republic had more than twice as much trade with China in 2006 as with Taiwan, a sign of Beijing's growing influence in the Caribbean, China's chief representative in Santo Domingo said.
The news comes as the Dominican Republic, one of a handful of countries that maintains formal relations with Taiwan, announced plans to increase trade with the rival Asian nations.
Cai Wei Quan on Thursday said trade between the Caribbean country and mainland China totaled $490US million (euro378 million) last year. Trade with Taiwan totaled $180US million (euro139 million) over the same period, Taiwanese Embassy spokesman Tomas Chen said.
Cai said that in the last three years trade with China has increased fourfold, calling Dominican relations with Beijing a "mutual necessity."
"China is disposed to deepen and establish relations with this country," Cai told The Associated Press. "We never oppose business relations with Taipei ... (but) the Dominican Republic can make the decision to recognize that in this world there is only one China."
Juan Guiliani Cury, deputy foreign minister for economic affairs, said that China "has become a very important partner in technology, electrical energy and could be a source of investment."
VIRGIN ISLANDS: Governor pledges territory will not issue more bonds to meet pension debt
CHARLOTTE AMALIE, U.S. Virgin Islands (AP) The U.S. Virgin Islands will not double its long-term debt to help close a sizable gap in the pension system, Gov. John deJongh Jr. said during his first state of the territory address.
DeJongh said the territory's roughly $1US billion (euro773 million) pension shortfall was the result of decades of government mismanagement and described the three-island chain's fiscal health as "precarious."
"I cannot support the further issuance of debt under the illusion that this will solve our problems," said deJongh, who worked in the private sector as a financial adviser before edging out an independent candidate in a runoff election for the top post in November.
The U.S. territory's former governor, Charles Turnbull, had said that issuance of $600US (euro463 million) in bonds was needed to meet the islands' pension shortfall. In one of its final acts of 2006, the Senate voted to issue the pension bonds to cover part of the projected deficit in the Government Employee Retirement System.
HAITI: Discount carrier Spirit Airlines to begin flying to Haiti in March
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) Discount carrier Spirit Airlines will offer service between Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and Haiti's capital beginning in March, the airline said.
Fort Lauderdale-based Spirit will fly to Port-au-Prince three times a week starting March 22 and will offer daily flights starting in May, the airline said in a statement.
One-way fares between Fort Lauderdale and Port-au-Prince will start at $93US (euro71) according to Spirit's Web site, compared with $255US (euro197) for American Airlines flights listed on that company's Web site.
Barry Biffle, Spirit's chief marketing officer, said the new service would give the 250,000 people of Haitian descent living in South Florida "a new low-fare option for travel."
Spirit currently flies to 29 destinations, including 12 in the Caribbean. Earlier this week, the airline announced a new service between Fort Lauderdale and Aguadilla, Puerto Rico.
MARTINIQUE: Workers at Club Med go on strike, hundreds of guests leave
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) A labor strike at the Club Med resort in the French Caribbean island of Martinique has prompted hundreds of guests to leave while management and employees negotiate, a company spokeswoman said.
The strike began Wednesday morning because of a dispute over how the workers would split up the 35-hour work week required under French law, said Kate Moeller, a spokeswoman for Club Mediterranee SA's North American and Caribbean operations.
The company that operates the resort and employs the workers who have gone on strike Societe Martiniquaise de Villages de Vacances was handling the negotiations, Moeller said. It was not clear how many workers have gone on strike at the resort, located in Sainte-Anne on the island's south coast.
There were 525 guests from Canada, Europe and the United States at the resort on Wednesday. But many flew home or opted to stay at other hotels in Martinique that were offered by Club Med after the strike began, Moeller said by telephone from Coral Gables, Florida.
JAMAICA: Consultant hired to determine borders of area home to Maroons
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) The Jamaican government has hired a consultant to determine the boundaries of a jungle territory home to descendants of freed African slaves who are fighting plans for bauxite mining in the area, the agriculture ministry said.
Ministry spokesman Rohan Richards said Wednesday the consultant would determine the borders of Cockpit Country, spanning four parishes in northwest Jamaica. He refused to elaborate.
The government could use the consultant's information to decide what land does not belong to the Accompong Maroons descendants of slaves freed by the Spanish in the 17th century to repel invading British forces and can therefore be mined.
Last month, Agriculture Minister Roger Clarke said he withdrew a license for U.S.-based aluminum producer Alcoa Inc. and state-owned Clarendon Alumina Production Ltd. to begin bauxite mining in the area after the Maroons said they would not allow it and environmental activists threatened protests.
Sydney Peddie, the Maroons' leader, has said opening up the area to mining would breach a 1739 treaty signed with the British that gave them some 24,700 acres (9,995 hectares) in the inhospitable terrain of rocky cliffs and limestone towers.
DOMINICAN-OIL: Dominican official seeks refinery in encounter with Saudi oil minister
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) The Dominican Republic's foreign minister will travel to Saudi Arabia to lobby for a new oil refinery in the Caribbean country that faces fuel shortages, his office said.
Foreign Minister Carlos Morales Troncoso is scheduled to meet with Saudi oil minister Ali Naimi in February. A date has not been set, but the meeting would take place immediately after a Feb. 1 trip to Washington to discuss Haitian affairs with U.S. State Department officials, the ministry said Thursday.
Dominican officials have been pushing for a refinery in hopes of ending fuel shortages, lowering prices and becoming a transshipment point for oil to other Western Hemisphere ports, including the United States.
Fuel prices are high in the Dominican Republic, where regular gasoline sold for $3US.62 (euro2.79) per gallon on Thursday. Saudi Arabia holds over 260 billion barrels of proven oil reserves, a quarter of the world's total.
 Load-Date: January 27, 2007

 

End of Document
