

A timeline of the electricity crisis in the Gaza Strip
The Associated Press
February 9, 2008 Saturday 8:36 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 372 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body




The timeline behind Gaza's electricity crisis:
2006
June 28: Israeli warplanes bomb Gaza's only power plant, destroying all six transformers, after Hamas-allied militants tunnel into Israel and seize an Israeli soldier. At its peak, the power plant produced 118 megawatts, meeting half of Gaza's needs. After the bombing, Gaza suffers widespread power cuts and it takes months for the plant to resume partial operations. As of December, the plant is able to produce 80 megawatts, but Israel's restrictions on shipments of industrial diesel fuel reduce actual production to about 55 megawatts.
2007
June 14: Hamas seizes control of Gaza by force, ousting troops loyal to moderate Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas. Israel and Egypt virtually close Gaza's borders, severely restricting movement in and out of the territory.
Sept. 19: Israel declares Gaza a "hostile territory," setting the stage for fuel and electricity cuts.
Oct. 28: As rocket attacks from Gaza on Israeli towns intensify, Israel begins reducing fuel shipments to Gaza, including industrial diesel for the power plant and gasoline for cars. Rolling blackouts are extended to several hours a day, and many gas stations shut.
2008
Jan. 17: Israel closes Gaza's borders hermetically, following particularly heavy rocket fire.
Jan. 20: Gaza's power plant shuts down after running out of fuel, leaving one-third of Gaza without power. Plant resumes partial operation two days later after Israel renews fuel shipments.
Jan. 23: Hamas militants knock down a border fence, enabling hundreds of thousands of Gazans to pour into Egypt.
Feb. 3: Egyptian troops reseal the breached Gaza-Egypt border.
Feb. 5: Hamas suicide bomber kills woman in Israeli town of Dimona.
Feb. 7: Israel starts reducing the 120 megawatts it provides from its own power station. Initially just over 1 percent will be cut.
ELECTRICITY AT A GLANCE:
 Gaza's consumption increases by about 10 percent a year, and the strip currently needs about 240 megawatts, says Rafiq Maliha, manager of the Gaza power plant.
 Gaza is supplied by 17 power lines 10 from Israel, five from the local power plant and two from Egypt.
 Gaza's electricity deficit is at least 20 percent, according to the Israeli human rights group Gisha.
 Load-Date: February 10, 2008

 

End of Document
