

Ahmadinejad says Iran ready to halt enrichment program provided the West does the same
The Associated Press
February 20, 2007 Tuesday 4:13 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 487 words
Byline: By ALI AKBAR DAREINI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEHRAN Iran
Body




Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad on Tuesday said his country was ready to stop its enrichment program and return to talks provided Western nations also stopped their own.
Ahmadinejad told a crowd of thousands in northern Iran one day ahead of a U.N. Security Council deadline that it was no problem for his country to stop, but that "fair talks" demanded a similar gesture from the West.
"That ... we shut down our nuclear fuel cycle program to let talks begin. It's no problem. But justice demands that those who want to hold talks with us shut down their nuclear fuel cycle program too. Then, we can hold dialogue under a fair atmosphere," Ahmadinejad said.
The White House dismissed Ahmadinejad's call.
"Do you believe that's a serious offer?" White House press secretary Tony Snow asked. "It's pretty clear that the international community has said to the Iranians, `You can have nuclear power but we don't want you to have the ability to build nuclear weapons.' And that is an offer we continue to make."
The Security Council has set Wednesday as a deadline for Iran to stop uranium enrichment or face further economic sanctions.
Iran has long insisted that it will not stop its nuclear activities as a condition for negotiations to start.
"The condition they set for talks is a condition that deprives us of our rights," Ahmadinejad said of the United States and its Western allies. "We have never been after confrontation and tension. We have always been for dialogue but dialogue under fair conditions."
Ahmadinejad's speech was unusually conciliatory, avoiding fiery denunciations of the West.
"We are for talks but they have to be fair negotiations. That means, both sides hold talks under equal conditions," he said.
He added, however, that it was unacceptable for countries to demand that Iran stop its nuclear activities without reciprocity.
"We say how is it that your (nuclear fuel) production facilities work 24 hours a day, but you feel threatened by our newly established complex and we need to shut it down for talks," he asked.
Iran has rejected the sanctions as "illegal" and said it would not give up its right under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty to enrich uranium and produce nuclear fuel.
The United States and several of its Western allies believe that Iran is using its nuclear program to produce an atomic weapon charges Iran denies, saying its aim is to generate electricity.
Enriched to a low level, uranium is used to produce nuclear fuel but further enrichment makes it suitable for use in building an atomic bomb.
Ahmadinejad said Iran would not give in to coercion, and warned the U.S. and its allies that they would fail to force it into giving up its nuclear program.
"If you want to speak from the position of power and make use of the oppressing leverage of some international institutions, you have to know the you will fail against the unity and resistance of the Iranian nation," he said.
 Load-Date: February 21, 2007

 

End of Document
