

Airports feel the sting of airlines' cost-cutting
The Associated Press
May 17, 2006 Wednesday 2:06 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 2273 words
Byline: By SCOTT MCCARTNEY, The Wall Street Journal
Body




The new terminal at Toronto's Pearson International Airport features soaring ceilings, terrazzo floors and millions of dollars of modern art helping to make it one of the most expensive airports in the world for airlines and passengers.
Then there's the new terminal at Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam. Gates have no bathrooms, no bridges linking passengers directly with planes and only eight seats for each planeload of people. Among the few amenities: some green plastic plants and a few pictures of windmills.
The same economic forces in the air-travel business that have created buy-your-own box lunches in coach and fully reclining seats for long flights in business class are now showing up in a split at airports. The split is creating tensions as cash-strapped airlines balk at paying for first-class airports. Air Canada, the main tenant of the new terminal in Toronto, says it can't afford the high fees.
Airports have long been considered economic-development tools for the communities that own them. Many, like Toronto, erected palatial terminals to showcase their cities and passed on the costs to airlines and passengers. Even as airlines have gone bankrupt, airport earnings have risen.
Now, the combination of financial woes of traditional airlines and the explosion of low-cost competitors around the world is forcing big changes in airport design and operation. Airlines, which have already won concessions from employees, travel agents and suppliers, are now putting pressure on airports to cut costs and fees. And low-cost carriers have sparked the creation of bare-bones depots, like Schiphol's "Pier H," in Europe and Asia.
"Many airport monopolies still operate in the dark ages. And our patience has worn out," says Giovanni Bisignani, director general of the International Air Transport Association, the airline trade group that has spearheaded an attack on airport charges in Europe, Asia and the Americas.
Pressure from airlines has had some results. Tokyo's Narita Airport agreed to reduce charges to airlines 10 percent last year. In March, the Australian government called for an inquiry into pricing at privatized airports that are posting profits. Last month, Mr. Bisignani took the fight to the European Union, asking regulators there for a directive pushing European nations into more robust regulation of airport monopolies. If airlines and airports can't resolve differences, the EU has said it could step in with a proposal this fall. And Star Alliance airlines, which include UAL Corp.'s United, Lufthansa in Germany and Ace Aviation Holdings' Air Canada, threatened in December to organize boycotts of airports with high charges.
In years past, local taxpayers typically funded airports by issuing bonds, just as they'd pay for roads and bridges, and collected some revenue from airlines and passengers. But as municipal finances tightened, communities shifted more of the cost directly to airport customers. In many countries, the cost of nearly every ticket includes a "facility charge" capped in the U.S. at $4.50 per boarding that goes to the airport to cover bond payments on new terminals and runways. Parking fees, retail-store rents and advertising display charges all go toward paying for airports, along with federal grants and landing fees and rents collected from airlines.
Some privatized airports earn profits for shareholders. Communities now draw cash out of municipal airport funds to pay for roads and community improvements. In Canada, the federal government taxes airports at hefty rates to generate revenue.
The battle over fees between cost-conscious airlines and image-conscious airports highlights a strange fact about the airline business. While airlines historically have struggled to earn profits the U.S. industry has tallied cumulative losses of $38 billion since 2001 suppliers, vendors and others dependent on airlines usually do well. Maintenance firms, leasing companies, manufacturers like Boeing Co. and city-owned airports feed off of the money-losing airline business, but are profitable themselves.
Some airports have resisted airline pressure, moving ahead with expensive plans they see as economic-development projects to accommodate long-term growth. Aeroports de Paris SA is continuing with a plan to renovate terminals and raise charges to airlines 5 percent a year for the next five years, after price increases totaling 35 percent over the past five years. The British government and airports operator BAA PLC are bucking airlines in proceeding with a $5 billion plan to build a second runway at London's Stansted Airport.
Others are responding to airlines' concerns. A $1 billion new terminal at San Francisco International Airport was designed in the dot-com boom but opened in 2001, after the bust. The new facility led to a doubling of fees and charges at SFO to about $20 per passenger from $10 just as United, its biggest tenant, filed for bankruptcy-court protection. Under pressure, the airport has cut costs and reduced charges to $15 still one of the highest rates in the U.S. "In retrospect, our timing was bad," says airport spokesman Michael McCarron.
San Jose International and Los Angeles International have both recently scaled back big projects, recognizing that airline tenants can't afford grand schemes. Denver International, which was attacked for its high fees when it opened in 1995, has since cut costs and reduced fees, winning back low-cost Southwest Airlines. And some airports, such as Schiphol and the Cologne Bonn Airport in Germany, have moved ahead by luring new airlines with low operating costs. In the low-margin airline world, a savings of a few dollars per passenger can turn an unprofitable flight into a money-maker, especially among discount airlines charging less than $100 per ticket.
"Nowadays if you start to build a new terminal, you are no longer able to build a castle," says Michael Garvens, chairman of the Cologne Bonn Airport, which opened a terminal for low-cost airlines in December 2004.
Air Canada, which has its largest hub in Toronto and emerged from bankruptcy reorganization in 2004, says it tried to tell the Greater Toronto Airports Authority that the carrier couldn't afford grandeur before the airport went ahead with plans for a $4.1 billion construction project. The plan includes Terminal 1, a people-mover system and the largest parking garage in North America. Air Canada joined with other carriers in proposing a less-expensive alternative, but the airports authority rejected it. After that, collaboration with airlines waned, says John Segaert, Air Canada's general manager in Toronto, who was involved in the discussions. "They did what they wanted," he says.
"We found (the airlines' plan) to be very limited in design and not reflective of the connectivity we need for a major hub airport. It had limited capacity," says Steve Shaw, vice president of corporate affairs for the Toronto authority. "The airlines were consulted and were kept very informed."
Landing fees in Toronto nearly tripled to $31.06 per metric ton this year from $11.05 per ton of aircraft weight in 2000. Per-seat terminal fees for international flights escalated 70 percent over the same period to $8.32. Passengers get hit with a $13.47 "airport improvement fee." In all, the airport estimates that costs to airlines and passengers will work out to $37.98 per passenger this year. The Transportation Research Laboratory, an independent London-based group, estimated the costs even higher, at $51.20 per passenger, tallying all costs on a sampling of eight aircraft types.
Air Canada says its costs in Toronto have increased "hundreds of millions" of dollars a year since Terminal 1 opened. Despite the increased costs, continued construction has left the airline's operations spread over four terminals, with some passengers bused to remote gates. Until next February, passengers from the U.S. connecting to Air Canada flights will have to transfer between terminals. As a result, Air Canada thinks the new terminal, despite its niceties, has actually cost it customers.
The terminal has soaring curved ceilings that sparkle in shades of white with some gray and silver accents. Floors are terrazzo throughout; a three-story, pink granite wall stretches for half a mile. The terminal is decorated with nearly $9 million of modern art, including a giant floor-to-ceiling "fish tank" with plastic cubes, rather than fish, swirling in the current.
Terminal 1 forgoes sources of revenue that would help ease the burden on the airlines. It is largely devoid of advertisements. And airlines complain that, unlike other large airports, the 4.2-million-square-foot terminal doesn't have a mall. The lack of retail space even prompted Air Canada to give up a passenger check-in counter in one gate area so the airport could put in a bar.
The airport authority recently let automobile companies put some new cars on display inside the terminal to generate revenue. Officials are also working to reduce the airport's rent payments to Canada's federal government, with any savings passed on to airlines.
Since the new terminal opened, the airport has been running deficits. Last year, expenses exceeded revenue by $106 million, which the airport authority said "can be primarily attributed" to increased interest and amortization costs from Terminal 1. Of $960 million in costs last year, more than half $488 million went to cover debt payments and amortization.
Mr. Shaw says costs in Toronto were pushed higher by the complexity of air traffic, with domestic, international and transborder service with the U.S. all requiring separate facilities. The airport wanted a building with long life that would be highly flexible, he says. "And we tried to build a signature building, one that would reflect Toronto and be a major gateway."
Now, he says, "We're working hard to ensure costs will be as low as they can be."
In contrast to Toronto's Pearson, airports around the world are increasingly catering to low-cost carriers. The airport serving Cologne and Bonn in Germany had fallen out of favor once the capital of the reunified country was transferred to Berlin from Bonn in 1990.
In 2002, Mr. Garvens, a Lufthansa veteran newly hired as airport chairman, decided low-cost airlines might be his airport's ticket to revival. The airport offered low-cost carrier Germanwings available gates and incentives like advertising money. A new low-cost terminal and a train station that gave the airport rail service for the first time both opened in 2004.
The airport also changed procedures to help low-cost carriers empty planes and fill them back up quickly. German law prevents refueling planes while passengers are boarding unless a fire brigade is in position. "So we send a fire truck and position it at the aircraft every time," says Mr. Garvens.
The new terminal, which has glass walls on four sides and a simple metal ceiling, was designed and built in a year and cost $32 million. It's full of retail space and was built without jet bridges that shepherd passengers seamlessly from the building to the plane. Instead, the carriers wheel out portable stairs to the planes, allowing them to load and unload passengers from the front and rear simultaneously. That makes for quicker stops and more flights per day at gates. Rates are also lower for gates without jet bridges.
Cologne Bonn last year handled 9.5 million passengers, up 73 percent from 5.5 million in 2002. "Airports are faced with a buyer's market today. You have to compete for business," says Mr. Garvens.
In Amsterdam, Schiphol Airport has also adapted to low-cost carriers. "Pier H," a long, skinny terminal with seven gates, was built in nine months at a cost of $38 million.
How was it kept so cheap? The terminal's only bathroom is at the security checkpoint, a 10 to 15 minute walk from some of the gates. Seating is severely limited and there's no retail in the terminal itself. Lighting is fluorescent and the floors are linoleum tile, with steel side walls and ceiling.
The terminal is uncomfortable by design. Schiphol, the fourth-largest airport in Europe, wants passengers to congregate in its massive shopping area which includes a mall, a casino and a museum and not head for Pier H until 30 minutes or less before the flight.
Since passengers will spend little time in Pier H, no bathrooms were needed, says airport spokeswoman Kathelijne Vermeulen. "If you just communicate well to them, the passengers know that they have to go to the bathroom in the beginning," she says.
Landing fees for an Airbus A320 are 25 percent lower at Pier H than at a Schiphol gate with a jet bridge. For easyJet, which averaged about 20 flights per day into and out of Amsterdam last year, the savings add up to about $1.4 million per year.
The warehouse-like conditions are fine with many customers. David Jones, a food-company executive from Manchester, England, flies through Pier H every week. "I always wait until the last minute to go to the plane anyway," he says. "More airports are going to go this way to cut the cost, I think."
But for travelers hit with flight delays, Pier H can be difficult. Airlines tell customers to wait out delays back in the main terminal. But that means long walks and an additional trip through security checkpoints.
Sione Raaijmakers from Amsterdam also found the facilities lacking. Her children were parched and no one had told her there was no cafe in the terminal. The lack of chairs meant sitting on the floor. "I think it's quite inconvenient not to have a toilet and a changing room," she said. "It's at least a 20-minute walk to go to a bathroom."
 Load-Date: May 18, 2006

 

End of Document
