

Allawi's poor showing displays the power of sectarian politics in the new Iraq
The Associated Press
January 20, 2006 Friday 7:12 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 644 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD Iraq
Body




Ayad Allawi looks like the poster child for America's vision for Iraq secular, pro-Western, tough on terrorism.
To Iraqis, the former prime minister and other secular figures proved less attractive.
That underscores a truism: In the new Iraq, politics and religion go hand in hand.
Allawi's ticket, which included prominent Sunnis and Shiites, won only 25 of the 275 seats in the December election, according to results announced Friday.
That represented a 38 percent loss from the number of seats won by Allawi's ticket in January 2005 although the former prime minister himself was elected to parliament.
However, another prominent secular Shiite and former Washington favorite, Ahmad Chalabi, didn't even win a seat.
Instead, the voters turned to candidates who ran under a religious or in the case of the Kurds, an ethnic label.
An alliance of religious Shiite parties swept the Shiite heartland south of Baghdad, claiming 128 seats and emerging as the strongest bloc. Two Sunni Arab factions fared well in the Sunni strongholds north and west of the capital. The Kurdish alliance maintained its hold in the northern Kurdish area.
That doesn't necessarily mean Iraq is on the verge of becoming a cleric-ruled state like Iran. With their Western suits and polished English, a number of leading figures in Shiite and Sunni parties show little interest in a government run from the mosques.
But the results make clear that in a polarized society such as Iraq, people vote for their own kind. That was true in Bosnia, where voters have repeatedly elected leaders from the same ethnically based parties that dragged the country into civil war a decade ago.
And it is true in Iraq. Sunni Arabs, a minority community that dominated political life for generations, now feel threatened by Shiites who were brutally suppressed by Saddam Hussein's regime.
Shiites, who have been repeatedly targeted by suicide attackers believed to be Sunni religious extremists, turn to candidates they trust to defend the interests of their community.
That's far from the prewar dreams of U.S. neo-conservatives who envisioned a secular, democratic Iraq to serve as a beacon for Western-style democracy in a sea of Middle Eastern authoritarianism.
It is also far different from the early days of the U.S. occupation, when the American governor, L. Paul Bremer, sought to promote a secular agenda, including guarantees of women's rights and limitations on the role of Islamic law, or sharia, in the legal code.
Over time, however, U.S. officials here have come to accept that religion will play a major role in Iraqi political life for years to come. U.S. diplomats have worked feverishly to encourage Sunni Arabs to join the political process an essential step to ensure that the Americans can depart someday without the country plunging into civil war.
The Americans acknowledged the influence of the Shiite clergy when they agreed to the January 2005 election at the insistence of the most prominent figure, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani.
In the case of Allawi, he and his secular allies found themselves buffeted from both sides. Allawi, who once had close ties to the CIA, was hand-picked by the Americans to serve as prime minister when the U.S.-led coalition installed the first sovereign government here after Saddam's fall.
Allawi's tough stand against both Sunni insurgents and radical Shiite militias won him a wide following among many Iraqis as well as foreign governments.
However, his one-time membership in Saddam's Baath Party, his efforts to bring former regime supporters into the security services and his backing for the U.S. attack on Shiite militiamen during his administration all made him unpalatable to the Shiite hierarchy.
And the presence of prominent Sunnis on his ticket was not enough to offset the appeal of rival blocs strongly identified as champions of Sunni interests.
 Load-Date: January 21, 2006

 

End of Document
