

Author of 'The French Connection,' 'The Green Berets' and other books dies at 82
The Associated Press
February 22, 2008 Friday 10:58 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 309 words
Dateline: HOPKINSVILLE Ky.
Body




Robin Moore, the author of several books including "The French Connection" and "The Green Berets," has died after a long illness. He was 82.
Moore died Tuesday night at a hospital in southwestern Kentucky, said Dennis Monroe with Lamb Funeral Home.
Moore once said that he moved to the small town in 2005 with his wife, Helen, because it borders Fort Campbell, a sprawling Army post on the Tennessee border that is headquarters to a Green Beret group.
Born Robert L. Moore Jr. on Oct. 31, 1925, in Massachusetts, he wrote his books under the name Robin Moore. Among his best known were "The Green Berets," published in 1965 and "The French Connection," published in 1969. He also helped write "The Happy Hooker," which was published in 1972.
He co-wrote "The Ballad of the Green Berets," which became the signature song of the Special Forces unit.
Maj. Gen. Gary L. Harrell, deputy commander of the Army's Special Operations Command at Fort Bragg, called Moore a "devoted advocate" for the Special Forces and said his writings became textbooks for the Army's unconventional forces.
"They were both educational and inspirational and introduced the world to the Green Berets," Harrell said in a statement posted Friday on an Army Special Forces Web site. "He will be missed."
"The Green Berets" was written following Moore's service as a civilian author alongside soldiers with the 5th Special Forces Group (Airborne) in Vietnam.
"The French Connection," about a New York drug bust, inspired a movie that won five Academy Awards in 1971 including best picture.
In 1986, Moore pleaded guilty to selling fraudulent literary tax shelters. The government charged that Moore published books and sold the royalty rights to promoters and investors at inflated prices based upon arbitrary and unrealistic values.
A complete list of Moore's survivors wasn't available Friday.
 Load-Date: February 23, 2008

 

End of Document
