

Bush: The direction of the fight in Iraq 'is beginning to shift'
The Associated Press
April 20, 2007 Friday 10:30 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 791 words
Byline: By DEB RIECHMANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: EAST GRAND RAPIDS Mich.
Body




President Bush said Friday that sectarian murders have dropped by half in Baghdad since the U.S.-Iraqi military buildup began in February, rejecting a Democratic leader's claim that the war is lost.
The president said early signs show the operation to quell violence is meeting expectations.
"There are still horrific attacks in Iraq, such as the bombings in Baghdad on Wednesday, but the direction of the fight is beginning to shift," Bush said in his second speech on terrorism in two days.
Bush spoke at a high school in suburban Grand Rapids to about 500 students and members of the World Affairs Council of Western Michigan. Outside, dozens of protesters shouted anti-war chants and held signs that said "No blood for oil," "End imperialism now" and "Sieg heil Bush."
Bush urged Americans not to be swayed by the violence inflicted by suicide bombers and focus, instead, on incremental gains Iraqi and U.S. forces are making day by day, block by block in Baghdad. Weapons stockpiles are being seized, extremists are being captured and displaced families are returning home, he said.
"When a family decides to stop depending on militias to protect them or a young man rejects insurgency and joins the Iraqi army, it doesn't usually make the evening news," Bush said.
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., says the war in Iraq is "lost" and can only be won through political and economic diplomatic means. He said the surge is not accomplishing anything. Republicans have pounced on Reid for his comments, accusing him of turning his back on the troops and hurting military morale in Iraq.
Sen. Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat who chairs the Armed Services Committee, defended Reid on Friday. Levin said he agreed the military fight in Iraq cannot be won and that Bush's strategy lacks the necessary leverage to force Iraqi politicians to reach a settlement.
Bush "doesn't have the teeth," Levin told reporters in a conference call. "He doesn't have the pressure on the Iraqi leaders by just repeating, which he's done now for a month, that our patience is not unlimited."
Sen. Amy Klobuchar, D-Minn., said the United States needs to send a clear message to the Iraqi government that American troops won't stay there indefinitely. Klobuchar, who visited Baghdad and Fallujah last month, said the best thing America can do for its troops is to get its Iraq policy right.
"This means, as recommended by the bipartisan Iraq Study Group, that we begin the process of redeploying our troops with the goal of withdrawing combat forces by next year," she said in remarks prepared for broadcast Saturday following the president's weekly radio address.
Klobuchar said it might be necessary for some troops to stay in Iraq to train Iraqi police, to provide security for American forces that remain behind, and to conduct special operations.
"This means not a surge in troops but a surge in diplomacy, economy and Iraqi responsibility," she said.
Pushing back against Democrats, Bush said that not all the troops that he ordered in January in a military buildup have arrived. It's too early to assume defeat, he said.
"Ultimately, withdrawal would increase the probability that American troops would have to return to Iraq and confront an enemy that is even more dangerous," Bush said.
In past addresses on the war, Bush has worked to paint a rose-colored picture of progress in Iraq. This time, he showed the audience in Michigan maps and a photograph of the rubble left by a massive bombing earlier this week.
Bush acknowledged that since the new security operation began in Baghdad and Anbar Province, a stronghold of Sunni insurgents, some of the highest casualty levels of the war have been reported. That likely will continue as more troops move into more dangerous neighborhoods in Baghdad, he said.
"We must also expect the terrorists and insurgents to continue mounting terrible attacks," he said, and then showed the audience a photograph of what was left after four large bombs exploded in mostly Shiite areas of Baghdad and killed 230 people at a bus stop. He said it had all the "hallmarks of an al-Qaida attack."
It was the deadliest day in the city since the mid-February start of the U.S.-Iraqi campaign to reduce violence in the capital and Anbar Province.
"Anbar province is still not safe," Bush said.
After the speech, Bush made an unscheduled stop at the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Museum, where the former president was buried in January. He laid a bouquet of white roses on a stone wall that marks Ford's grave and paused there for a few moments. The 38th president, who grew up in Grand Rapids, died Dec. 26 at age 93.
Associated Press writers James Prichard in Grand Rapids, Mich., and Steve Karnowski in Minneapolis contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: April 21, 2007

 

End of Document
