

Bush's state of the union is only part of the story
The Associated Press
February 1, 2006 Wednesday 8:30 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 840 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




The union according to President Bush is making progress on health care, holding terrorists at bay, seeing test scores go up, and winning in Iraq. The union looks somewhat different according to a fuller set of facts.
Whether promoting a plan to "save Social Security" or describing Iraqi security forces as "increasingly capable of defeating the enemy," the president skipped over some complex realities Tuesday night in his State of the Union speech.
HEALTH CARE:
Noting that the government must help provide health care for the poor and elderly, Bush asserted, "We are meeting that responsibility."
His prescription drug benefit is a new entitlement for up to 42 million disabled and older people. But implementation has been rocky. The government acknowledges tens of thousands of recipients probably didn't get medicine due to confusion and computer glitches, prompting some lawmakers to seek an extension of the May 15 signup deadline to work out the snafus.
Overall, the number of uninsured has increased nearly 5 million since Bush took office in 2001, to 45.5 million in 2004, two-thirds of the total from low-income families, according to the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation.
And while total federal spending on the health care "safety net" for the uninsured edged up from 2001 to 2004 adjusted for inflation, slightly more than 1 percent spending actually decreased from $546 to $498 per uninsured person due to the jump in uninsured, the Kaiser group said.
HOMELAND SECURITY:
Without offering evidence, Bush said his domestic spying program has had clear results. "This terrorist surveillance program has helped prevent terrorist attacks," he stated.
Administration officials generally haven't gone that far; instead saying they have gotten valuable information that otherwise would have gone unnoticed. For security reasons, they do not provide specifics.
Bush said he was using his "authority given to me by the Constitution and by statute" and noting that "appropriate members of Congress have been kept informed."
Bush did not address the counterarguments that he failed to heed a separate 1978 law that specifically calls for court approval to conduct the surveillance. Some lawmakers have also questioned why Bush did not brief more than eight members of Congress about the program, which has been in effect since 2001.
ENERGY:
Bush proposed cutting reliance on Mideast oil, a goal that has eluded other presidents and one that would still leave the country vulnerable to unstable sources elsewhere.
By identifying only Mideast oil imports for reductions, Bush was ignoring some of the largest sources of U.S. petroleum, among them Canada, Mexico, Nigeria and Venezuela. The U.S. considers Venezuela a source of political instability in the region; relations with Mexico have been strained over immigration; and violence has curbed nearly 10 percent of Nigeria's oil output.
Imports of oil and refined product from the Persian Gulf make up less than a fifth of all imports, according to the government.
Bush has spoken of reducing reliance on foreign oil in every State of the Union speech, if not as explicitly as in this one, and presidents back to Richard Nixon outlined similar goals, to little or no effect.
Nixon announced Project Independence in 1973, setting a goal of energy self-sufficiency in seven years. Then, the U.S. imported 35 percent of its oil; now it's close to 60 percent.
SOCIAL SECURITY:
Bush said Congress did not act last year on his "proposal to save Social Security." In fact, his plan does not take care of Social Security's future solvency; instead, he wants to let younger workers divert some of their Social Security payroll taxes into private investment accounts to take advantage of the possibilities for a better return.
IRAQ:
Bush's upbeat account of progress in Iraq, coupled with an acknowledgment that "our enemy is brutal," left unstated a variety of setbacks in turning control over to Iraqi forces, including Iraqi Army desertions in the volatile west.
EDUCATION:
On the theme of improving math and science education, Bush boasted: "We have made a good start in the early grades with the No Child Left Behind Act, which is raising standards and lifting test scores across our country."
In 2005, fourth-graders and eighth-graders posted their highest-ever math scores on the National Assessment of Educational Progress, and black and Hispanic children narrowed their achievement gap with whites in both math and reading. But the fourth-grade reading performance was essentially flat, and in eighth grade, reading scores dropped.
SPENDING:
The president said that "every year of my presidency, we have reduced the growth of non-security discretionary spending." That doesn't tell the full story because the category he cited omits big-ticket spending items including Iraq, natural disasters such as Katrina and homeland security.
He spoke of saving taxpayers $14 billion next year if his budget proposals are adopted, not mentioning some of those savings would come from health care programs such as Medicaid.
 Load-Date: February 2, 2006

 

End of Document
