

Charges against the suspects in the Fort Dix case
The Associated Press
December 22, 2008 Monday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 295 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




 Mohamad Ibrahim Shnewer, 23, Cherry Hill, U.S. citizen born in Jordan. Drove a taxi, did construction work and worked at family's market.
Guilty of conspiracy to kill military personnel, not guilty of attempted murder and guilty of possession or attempted possession of a firearm in furtherance of the conspiracy.
 Dritan "Tony" Duka, 30, Cherry Hill, illegal immigrant born in the former Yugoslavia, operated a roofing business.
Guilty of conspiracy to kill military personnel, not guilty of attempted murder, guilty of possession or attempted possession of a firearm in furtherance of the conspiracy, guilty of possession or attempted possession of a machine gun and guilty of two counts of possession or attempted possession of a firearm by an illegal alien.
 Eljvir Duka, 25, Cherry Hill, illegal immigrant born in the former Yugoslavia, operated a roofing business.
Guilty of conspiracy to kill military personnel, not guilty of attempted murder, not guilty of possession or attempted possession of a firearm in furtherance of the conspiracy and guilty of possession or attempted possession of a firearm by an illegal alien.
 Shain Duka, 27, Cherry Hill, illegal immigrant born in the former Yugoslavia, operated a roofing business.
Guilty of conspiracy to kill military personnel, not guilty of attempted murder, guilty of possession or attempted possession of a firearm in furtherance of the conspiracy, guilty of possession or attempted possession of a machine gun and guilty of two counts of possession or attempted possession of a firearm by an illegal alien.
 Serdar Tatar, 25, Philadelphia, legal U.S. resident born in Turkey, was assistant manager of 7-Eleven store in Philadelphia.
Guilty of conspiracy to kill military personnel and not guilty of attempted murder.
 Load-Date: December 23, 2008

 

End of Document
