

China's Hu prepares to attend G-8 with his nation at the heart of the world's concerns
The Associated Press
December 10, 2007 Monday 4:29 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 832 words
Byline: By DAVID RISING, Associated Press writer
Dateline: BERLIN 
Body




Chinese President Hu Jintao comes to the Group of Eight summit this week in Germany with his country at the center of some major international concerns: global warming, China's burgeoning trade surplus, and fears about a bubble in the Chinese stock market.
Beijing's response to these issues promises to have far-reaching consequences for the health of the global economy and in the case of climate change the very future of the planet.
But as another G-8 summit swings by with China sitting at the table only as a guest, there are few expectation that world leaders will play hardball with Hu or that China will volunteer many concessions.
"I wouldn't expect too open a reaction from China they are certainly careful in making any kind of concessions which might, in their perspective, endanger China's domestic growth and therefore cause problems of social security and domestic stability," said Eberhard Sandschneider, a China expert at German Council on Foreign Relations.
He wondered what motivation China would have to compromise on climate change when the West itself is still struggling to reach consensus, noting the U.S. rejection this week of Germany's call for all-encompassing targets to cut carbon dioxide emissions.
"It's obviously difficult for the Western countries ... and so long as this is not happening, our Chinese friends will certainly sit on the fence and not get too involved."
Although it is already the world's third-largest economy, Hu has been attending the elite gathering since 2004 as one of several leaders from developing countries apparently content to avoid the responsibilities that go from being a member of the club.
Meanwhile, China is on track to become the world's No. 1 emitter of the greenhouse gases that are believed to contribute to global warming, surpassing the United States perhaps as early as 2009.
At a briefing Thursday in Beijing by 11 mid-ranking officials from four Chinese government agencies, there was an attempt to show China is actively engaged on the issues.
"I don't think China will be a 'Mr. No,'" a Foreign Ministry official said, using a nickname once given to an obstructionist Soviet leader. "We want to be a Mr. Cooperation or a Mr. Partnership."
But the officials all of whom spoke on customary condition of anonymity largely reiterated stock positions and defended Beijing's gradualist approach to many issues on which the U.S. and EU have demanded action.
China has rejected U.S. requests that it accelerate the revaluing of its currency, the yuan, which American manufacturers contend is undervalued by as much as 40 percent. That makes Chinese products cheaper for Americans and U.S. goods more expensive in China and also has spinoff effects on European manufacturers.
Economists are also concerned that China's galloping stock mark is experiencing a bubble, prompting Chinese authorities to take steps last week to cool it down.
At the same time, China is exempt from the 1997 Kyoto Protocol limiting emissions one of the reasons the U.S. itself rejected the treaty.
"China sees the current situation to its advantage and will pursue it as long as it feels the U.S. and the European Union will not act," said Peter Morici, a professor at the University of Maryland's Robert H. Smith School of Business.
"So I doubt they will get anything of real substance out of China."
With global caps on emissions and the trading of carbon credits between countries, Morici argues that the currency issue and the controlling emissions are two sides of the same coin.
"C02 is becoming a second currency C02 is almost becoming like ration coupons and China wants to be exempt from rationing," he said. "It would be much simpler if China would agree to the same standards as the EU or U.S. on building new plants or retrofitting old plants and China is well capable of doing this with its huge trade surplus ... but they don't want to do it."
The undervalued yuan also contributes to greenhouse gas emissions, when jobs are lost to China because it increases industrial production in a nation that has less stringent ecological standards than the West.
"Every time a manufacturing job moves from Indiana to Shanghai, global petroleum use goes up and global C02 emissions go up, because China uses petroleum so inefficiently," Morici said.
Another issue that is expected to arise is the strife and humanitarian crisis in the Sudanese region of Darfur, in which Beijing has called for negotiations, not sanctions, as the best way to elicit cooperation from Sudan, a key oil supplier to China.
Sandschneider held out little hope of any major agreements coming out of the group G-8 sessions, but said it was possible that U.S., E.U. or other delegates may be able to press China in bilateral talks.
"Important things will happen behind the scenes that's part of conferences like that but the specific dynamics of what could happen or what will happen is almost impossible to forecast... No delegation is playing its cards openly at the present time," he said.
 Load-Date: December 11, 2007

 

End of Document
