

Editorial Roundup: Excerpts From Recent Editorials in Newspapers in the US and Abroad.
The Associated Press
April 9, 2008 Wednesday 4:44 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 2961 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Excerpts from recent editorials in newspapers in the United States and abroad:
April 3
Journal Star, Peoria, Ill., on the nation's environmental responsibilities:
This week, representatives from more than 160 countries are meeting in Bangkok to discuss an international climate treaty to replace the decade-old Kyoto Protocol. Again, the United States is shying away from a leadership role. ...
Which makes us wonder: If an asteroid was hurtling toward Earth would the Bush administration likewise sit on its hands?
Of course not. ...
Last month a hunk of ice the size of Chicago broke off its Antarctic shelf. Another block as large as Connecticut is said to be "hanging by a thread." Canada and Russia are fighting over who rightfully owns buried natural resources that are becoming accessible for the first time thanks to retreating sea ice. ...
Regardless of whether this change is manmade or 100 percent natural (though, for the record, the overwhelming scientific consensus says man's fossil-fuel-burning habit is a big contributor), there's no excuse for doing nothing. World leaders, especially those in the United States, need at the very least to plan for the increased droughts, altered planting seasons, coastal flooding and stronger storm systems that experts are forecasting.
And if we cut air pollution and save energy while we're at it, is that such an awful thing?
On the Net:
http://www.pjstar.com
April 3
El Paso (Texas) Times, on airline safety:
Cross-wired brakes. Cracks in fuselages. Missed inspections. Fuel leaks caused by a faulty bolt. Questions about fire-suppression systems.
Questions about commercial aircraft safety have been making headlines for the past several weeks, but the biggest question has to be, how were these problems allowed to get this far?
Airline passengers and crew members are entitled to a reasonable expectation of safety when they fly. ...
Maintenance of aircraft should be meticulous, airline standards of safety and maintenance must be high and problems with aircraft shouldn't be ignored.
There's a lot of pressure on airlines these days. Fuel costs are spiking, on-board service and amenities are decreasing, competition for passengers is fierce, and on-time and baggage problems don't seem to get better.
What must not happen is that safety concerns are sacrificed in pursuit of the almighty dollar. ...
This sudden spate of safety concerns with airlines makes one wonder whether the Federal Aviation Administration is paying enough attention to airline safety. ...
It seems likely that the airlines need to spend more time on inspection and maintenance of their equipment.
And the FAA should provide closer oversight of the airlines' safety procedures.
Passengers deserve that.
On the Net:
http://www.elpasotimes.com
April 4
The Republican, Springfield, Mass., on regulating cigarettes:
We live in a nation of regulations. ...
Except when it comes to cigarettes and other tobacco products, that is.
When it comes to federal oversight of a pack of Marlboros, there is no federal agency, no governing authority.
It's astonishing, really. The Food and Drug Administration does not have the authority to regulate a pack of cigarettes. Nor does the Department of Health and Human Services. No department or agency in the federal government has that authority.
The U.S. House of Representatives is looking to change that, and has taken a real step toward giving the FDA the authority it needs to have over cigarettes and other tobacco products.
One wonders why this hasn't long been the case. Let's see: Nicotine is a drug. And cigarettes are a device for dispensing nicotine. Since the Food and Drug Administration is the federal agency charged with regulating drugs, there shouldn't be much debate over who will be the regulating authority. ...
The law would grant certain authority to the FDA. The agency could monitor cigarette labels. It could ban flavored cigarettes, which attract and addict younger smokers. And it could restrict advertising that claims that some cigarettes are safer than others. ...
This is a good law, long overdue. It deserves broad support.
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/4zxlps
April 5
The Emporia (Kan.) Gazette, on Westboro Baptist Church protests:
The hate mail, masquerading as a news release, was printed in big, black type. It began this way: "Thank God for another teenager killed in Kansas in a fiery car crash in Bonner Springs, Fri., Mar. 28. He died for the sins of Kansas. God Hates Kansas."
In the news release, Topeka's Westboro Baptist Church announced that it planned to picket the funeral of Mark A. Holmes, 18, who was killed in an accident near Bonner Springs on Mar. 28. ...
The day of the funeral, Gov. Kathleen Sebelius signed the revised bill that is meant to control picketing at funerals. The bill will not take effect until next week.
Had the new law been in effect this week, it wouldn't have made much difference for Holmes' family and friends. ... The law keeps the picketers at arm's length, but does not banish them from sight.
What good is this law? Its only real virtue is that it does set limits, in case the Westboro people get too enthusiastic in their crusade to torment the grieving.
But you would think that Mark Holmes' parents would have had enough torment already. Their son is dead. ...
But for the Westboro folks, Holmes, like all of the soldiers killed in Iraq and Afghanistan, was not a human being. He was just a convenient object lesson singled out by a vengeful God intent on punishing all people who do not accept Fred Phelps as his prophet. ...
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/3qhzhf
April 6
The Daily Nonpareil, Council Bluffs, Iowa, on using foreign languages on the state's official voter registration forms:
Polk County District Judge Douglas Staskal has ruled that the secretary of state's office has been violating the state's English-only law by using foreign languages on the state's official voter registration forms.
The ruling stems from a lawsuit filed last year by Rep. Steve King, R-Iowa, who authored the law in 2002 when he served as a state senator. ...
Staskal ordered Secretary of State Michael Mauro to stop using foreign languages on the voter forms. He also called a state administrative rule that permits the use of other languages "an arbitrary act in violation of law."
Others would call the Iowa administrative rule permitting the use of other languages an act of common sense. The simple fact is not every Iowan has the same level of mastery of the English language. ...
Robert Brammer, a spokesman for the attorney general's office, said that state officials were studying the ruling and would consult with Mauro on whether to appeal the decision. ... Brammer said that although state law requires all official forms to be in English, it does not prohibit the state from providing materials in other languages, too.
That's as it should be. ...
State officials were not attempting to circumvent the law. They were trying to be helpful. ...
On the Net:
http://www.nonpareilonline.com/
April 7
Northwest Arkansas Times, Fayetteville, Ark., on dealing with gas prices:
Every person we know very well has complained about the rising price of gasoline. Some appear to be resigned to the inevitable that gasoline, like the air we breathe, is a requirement of life, and the public simply has no choice but to pay the going market price. ...
But a lot of Americans aren't content to just sit back and take it. ... Two news items from recent days cover issues related to their frustration regarding inaction by the nation's congressional representatives.
The first item regards a February vote in the U.S. House of Representatives that means to rescind $18 billion worth of tax breaks that the nation's largest oil companies currently receive, and to redirect those funds toward development of renewable fuels and clean energy. ...
Whatever ideas our leaders settle on (investing heavily in hybrid and nuclear technologies, for instance) it will require billions in funding. Where will those dollars come from? The tax breaks currently heading into the pockets of oil companies seems like an obvious place to start. ...
That said, the oil companies have a good argument when it comes to Congress allowing them to expand drilling operations along the nation's coastlines, which is the second news item.
Importantly, this oil would arrive without OPEC-sized bills attached. And it would probably help drive down the cost of gasoline at the pump (at least somewhat). ...
The short-term needs that can be aided by drilling can't be ignored, but drilling is only desirable if it's part of a long-term plan to reinvent how we fuel our nation.
On the Net:
http://www.nwarktimes.com/
April 8
Staten Island (N.Y.) Advance, on Congress vs. Big Oil:
The threat of being hauled before a congressional hearing to be dressed down by angry members of Congress usually gives people the willies. Not the shameless executives of Big Oil. ...
The lawmakers demanded to know how, with gasoline prices soaring and Americans straining under the financial burden, the oil companies can report total profits of $123 billion and still get enormous government subsidies.
Of course the answer is simple: Because they can. And no, they don't feel bad about it.
They said that the price of crude oil, much of it imported, dictated the price of gasoline, and that's a function of limited supply and skyrocketing worldwide demand. If Americans want cheaper oil, they should allow a lot more drilling along coasts and in other areas where it's now prohibited.
The legislators made a big show of their displeasure for the cameras, threatening to curtail or even end tax breaks for Big Oil.
But it was all for show. In the end Congress did nothing, and the oil executives left in their waiting limos to go have a nice dinner at an expensive restaurant and have a good laugh about Congress' feeble revolt. ...
There are ways to reduce the economic burden soaring oil costs mean, of course. They involve reducing our dependence by raising the fuel efficiency of vehicles driven in the U.S. and developing reliable and renewable alternative energy sources. But those would mean Congress would have to take the initiative. It's not going to happen by Congress huffing and puffing and scolding Big Oil for not playing nice.
On the Web:
http://www.silive.com
April 8:
The Indianapolis Star, on young voters:
If you're college age or slightly older and a young, hip candidate for president hands you free tickets to a Dave Matthews concert, he's got you registered and he's got your vote.
Well, not necessarily.
While some fans at Sunday night's show in Bloomington described themselves as swung voters, it remains to be seen whether the Barack Obama campaign's rockin' outreach will roll over as dividends in the May 6 Indiana primary or beyond.
Voters in the 18- to-29-year-old bracket tend to vote Democratic and thus far have favored Obama over Hillary Clinton. Their turnout has been higher than normal throughout the primary season, as it was in the 2006 midterm elections.
For Republicans, however, there is plenty of comfort to be found in recent history. John Kerry expected to profit from a massive "Rock the Vote" effort in 2004; but after all the music and celebrity exhortations had died away, turnout by the young only modestly improved over the 2000 election. And their allegiance was not to be taken for granted: Just 56 percent went for Kerry. ...
Whether the lure is dead-serious debate or a modern-day Pied Piper with a guitar, increased political participation by the emerging generation is not just welcome, but vital. The paramount issues debt, defense, health care, education, jobs, Social Security are issues of the future and of the young.
Word to the newcomers: After the rock comes the hard part.
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/6ra885
April 7
Lietuvos Rytas, Vilnius, Lithuania, on Ukraine and Georgia's bid to join NATO:
Even before the NATO summit it was obvious that Ukraine and Georgia were unlikely to receive any signal that they would be accepted to the bloc. Arguments by the United States and some of its East European partners on the strategic importance of these two countries were met with stronger counter-arguments why they cannot be allowed to join.
Many European countries have serious doubts over Kiev and Tbilisi' readiness to join NATO. ... On the other hand, NATO is often referred to as an alliance dominated by one state - the U.S. This fact has probably fueled hopes in Ukraine and Georgia that Washington would be able to make enlargement skeptics change their minds.
This simply did not happen. It is hard to say if the efforts by American leaders alone would were enough to document the promise to Kiev and Tbilisi that they may be able to join NATO in the future. But now Ukraine and Georgia know for sure that the fate on this question is completely in their own hands.
On the Net:
http://www.lrytas.lt
April 8
The Independent, London, on a public inquest into Princess Diana's death:
Unlike many newspapers, The Independent always believed it was right that a public inquest be held into the death of Diana, Princess of Wales. Now that the inquiry has found that Diana was unlawfully killed due to the "gross negligence" of her driver, Henri Paul, that evening in Paris 11 years ago, we continue to believe that it was right that the inquest was established. It is vital not only that justice is done, but that it is seen to be done. It is true that there was no compelling evidence that Diana was murdered, as Mohamed Al Fayed whose son Dodi perished in the same crash has long asserted.
But it is equally true that Diana had written, only months before her fatal journey, that she feared some people were plotting her assassination and that it would involve "brake failure". That is hardly typical behaviour of those who die in car accidents.
And whatever one's personal belief about that crash in the Pont d'Alma tunnel, the plain fact is that a considerable number of people in Britain believed, before this inquest began last year, that what happened to Diana was not an accident. Indeed, some will still have questions about how exactly Diana died and not just Mr Al Fayed. That is their prerogative.
But for the rest of us, it is to be hoped that this verdict will, at the very least, bring an end to the unedifying soap opera that has accompanied this inquest.
After six months, 250 sworn testimonies, and considerable public expense, it is difficult not to breathe a sigh of relief that it is finally over.
On the Net:
http://www.independent.co.uk/
April 9
Helsingin Sanomat, Helsinki, Finland, on the Olympic torch:
The Olympic torch relay is not meant to be a political weapon for the host country of the Olympics or its critics. However, separating sports from politics, in line with Olympic ideals, is seldom successful and on the part of the Beijing games it has utterly failed.
The nationalistic riots in Tibet and China's clumsy way of relating the events have inflamed the situation to such an extent that protests against the torch's trip are certain to continue as it travels through 20 countries to China.
The International Olympic Committee has good reason to meet this week to evaluate the desirability of continuing the torch relay. But it won't be solved by simply directing it only to those countries where demonstrations would not be allowed.
From China's viewpoint, it seems that it wants to both protect its great national Olympic project and reject the nationalism of its minorities. The situation could be quite different if after the Tibet riots China had been even a little critical when assessing its own national policies and accepted the offer of dialogue with the Dalai Lama. Now, that too would no longer probably be sufficient to calm the fervor surrounding the torch relay.
On the Net:
http://www.helsinginsanomat.fi/english/
April 9
Times of India, New Delhi, on the agricultural potential of Africa and India:
The ongoing India-Africa summit in New Delhi may have taken a leaf out of China's aggressive wooing of Africa. Yet India and Africa share a far older relationship and many common problems.
Centuries of colonialism have badly dented self-confidence in both India and Africa, a situation from which they are only just emerging.
As newly independent nations they found industry more prestigious, at the cost of neglecting agriculture. Since many in India and Africa struggle to feed themselves, spiralling food prices across the world will hurt them the most.
Yet India and Africa have the potential to become the granaries of the world. Besides abundant sunlight and fertile soil, they have regions that are favourable for the cultivation for practically every commercially important crop in the world.
In terms of productivity per acre, India scores badly for most crops. Yet even now, it is the second highest producer of fruits and vegetables.
Africa has a variety of soils and agro-climatic zones. It's crying out for its own green revolution.
India has had its green revolution which, however, is running out of steam in terms of feeding its ever-expanding population. Indian farms badly need a makeover.
If India and African nations were to realise their joint agricultural potential, think of the effect that would have. Currently, 60 per cent of Indians and 70 per cent of the African population are engaged in farming.
Agriculture directly generates demand for rural labour. It delivers the most bang for the buck in terms of employment generated and gives opportunities to the poorest.
South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa enjoy the dubious reputation of hosting the majority of the world's poor. Enhancing agricultural productivity and growth in India and Africa could destroy the last big concentrations of poverty in the world. ...
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/4qye5e
 Load-Date: April 10, 2008

 

End of Document
