

Editorial Roundup: Excerpts From Recent Editorials in Newspapers in the US and Abroad.
The Associated Press
March 19, 2008 Wednesday 7:26 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 3099 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Excerpts from recent editorials in newspapers in the United States and abroad:
March 17
The Times Reporter, Dover-New Philadelphia, Ohio, on Gov. Ted Strickland:
Speculation has been building since last summer that Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland might be in the running for the No. 2 spot on the Democratic presidential ticket this November. ...
Strickland comes from a swing state, has served in Congress, is a former Methodist minister and most importantly is a white male, a demographic that Democratic presidential candidates haven't done well with for more than 40 years.
Strickland, though, repeatedly has denied he's interested in the job.
We hope he means what he says.
We give the governor high marks for what he's accomplished in his first year in office, but there is much more to be done. The state needs a new energy policy, it's facing a serious budget shortfall, the school funding system still needs to be fixed and Ohio remains uncompetitive when it comes to attracting new businesses. ...
On the Net:
http://www.timesreporter.com/
March 17
The Times-Picayune, New Orleans, on funding for storm protection:
The Army Corps of Engineers' ability to complete 100-year storm protection for the New Orleans area by the 2011 hurricane season depends on whether Congress meets a much earlier deadline for approving the money.
Unfortunately, there's no guarantee that will happen. The corps' 2009 budget includes the $5.76 billion President Bush has requested to pay for the work. But if the money isn't approved by the start of the fiscal year on Oct. 1, corps officials told a Senate committee, the work likely won't be completed in time.
That's worrisome, given Congress' track record. Louisiana Sen. David Vitter pointed out that the corps' budget has only been adopted by the start of the fiscal year once in the past decade. He contends that it's unlikely to happen this year, in the midst of a presidential election.
His concern is well-founded, and he's suggesting a reasonable remedy: include the money for levees in the emergency spending bill for Iraq and Afghanistan. Those are likely to be taken up in the next few months.
That's what should happen. Providing protection against a 100-year storm deserves to be treated with a sense of urgency. New Orleans must not be left without robust storm protection any longer than necessary. ...
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/35v7u3
March 16
Naples (Fla.) Daily News, on a recent poll and open government:
There is a good reason the federal government should try to be open and transparent. The public wants it that way. But fewer and fewer only 20 percent, according to a new poll believe it is. That's down from 33 percent just two years ago.
Openness and transparency is essential to public trust in government, but more and more Americans believe the federal government is closed and secretive; thus, it is reasonable to assume that the level of mistrust is rising as well.
A poll by Scripps Howard News Service and Ohio University found that almost three-quarters of Americans found the federal government closed and secretive and that the percentage that consider it "very secretive" has doubled to 44 percent from 22 percent in 2006. The next president should make it a goal to reverse that trend.
The poll was commissioned by the American Society of Newspaper Editors in observance of National Sunshine Week, which started Sunday. ...
Candidates for public office should take note. The poll found that for offices for president, through Congress, governors' mansions and state legislatures right down to the city councils and school boards, Americans, by around 90 percent, rated a candidate's position on open government as somewhat important or very important.
Open and transparent government, then, is not only good public policy, it's good politics too.
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/2lavhu
March 13
Chicago Tribune, on the Federal Reserve's response to the credit crisis:
It may not be as sexy as $300 in your pocket, but the Federal Reserve Board's decision to pump $200 billion worth of Grade A liquidity into financial markets will do more to help the economy than the politically popular "stimulus" plan. The Fed is showing some welcome creativity as it tries to ease a credit crisis triggered by rising mortgage defaults and falling home values. ...
The new Fed effort will allow banks to temporarily swap their troubled mortgage-related assets with Fed-owned safe assets cash and Treasury securities. In 28 days, the banks have to return the safe assets and take back their troubled mortgage-related assets. The Fed hopes the gears will have been greased by then and that normal market activity in mortgage securities can resume.
There's no guarantee this will solve the problem. Fed efforts to stabilize financial markets by injecting liquidity in other ways haven't worked. But this one was greeted with hosannas Tuesday on Wall Street, where the stock market posted its biggest one-day gain in five years. The market gave up some of those gains on Wednesday, but economists still give the plan a good chance of succeeding.
Unlike rate cuts, this doesn't create an inflation risk. Unlike the stimulus checks, this doesn't add to federal debt. It's a safe gamble, and it shows that Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke can respond to a crisis in creative fashion.
On the Net:
http://www.chicagotribune.com
March 19
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, on Obama's speech about race in America:
Even before he made what might become a career-defining speech in Philadelphia yesterday, Sen. Barack Obama was ahead of his Democratic primary rival, Hillary Clinton, in party delegates and the popular vote.
But that lead was threatened by the specter of race, in recent comments made by Clinton surrogate Geraldine Ferraro, the first female Democratic vice presidential nominee, and in recorded rants by Mr. Obama's longtime minister, the Rev. Jeremiah Wright. ...
With a tough primary ahead on April 22 in Pennsylvania, the Illinois senator addressed the controversy in a speech that drew upon the best traditions of American oratory.
He rejected the black minister's inflammatory comments, placing them in the context of America's conflicted racial history. He also said that his own white grandmother, and by extension other Americans, have avoided the hard work of confronting society's tragic racial assumptions and stereotypes. ...
As an example of contemporary oratory, it was stunning. As political rhetoric, it was designed to do far more than damage control and, in the end, distilled the essence of his candidacy.
If Barack Obama wins the Democratic nomination in the most unlikely campaign in American history, chances are good that his Philadelphia speech will have been a watershed moment.
On the Net:
http://www.post-gazette.com/forum/
March 16
Press and Sun-Bulletin, Binghamton, N.Y., on how to handle the Florida and Michigan primaries:
Parents know the conversation all too well; heck, kids do too. Mom or Dad says, "Don't do that, because there'll be consequences." ... The reason is pretty simple: In life, there are no do-overs.
That lesson seems to have been lost on the Democratic Party chiefs in Florida and Michigan, however. They were told last year by the Democratic National Committee not to move their primaries ahead of the Feb. 5 Super Tuesday vote, or whatever delegates were selected would not be seated at the party's August presidential convention in Denver. The punishment for disobedience, essentially, was getting shut out of the process which you'd think would be exactly what any savvy party leader would want to avoid.
But the allure of being among the first states in the nation to vote for president the media attention! the money! the glory! apparently outweighed any threat that their votes would mean nothing. So, like petulant kids, Florida and Michigan went ahead and held nominating contest anyway even though candidates agreed not to campaign there and Sen. Barack Obama's name was not even on the Michigan ballot.
... Now that the Democratic race is tighter than a snare drum, though, the duo is scrambling for votes in tiny states such as Wyoming and Clinton especially is eying the barred Florida and Michigan delegates with longing. She argues she "won" those noncompetitive contests which technically is true and that her party can't afford to "disenfranchise" millions of voters.
Ah, but there's the rub. A self-inflicted wound caused by hubris shouldn't win a lot of sympathy with anyone. After all, Florida and Michigan's party bosses took the risk that their votes would be discounted, and they lost. End of story, right?
Not so. Now both states are talking about "do-over" votes either in person, by mail or both in time for the national convention. ...
It appears now that a Florida revote is unlikely, but that Michigan could hold one June 3. If that happens, at least one of the whiny children will get his way which should be enough for wise parents everywhere to grind their teeth in frustration.
On the Net:
http://www.pressconnects.com
March 16
The Pantagraph, Bloomington, Ill., on the Iraq war:
With the approach of the fifth anniversary of the Iraq war, this is a good time for the country particularly its elected leaders to take stock of the situation and where we are going.
Debating how or why we got into the war serves little purpose. The focus needs to be on what happens from here on out.
The war has been costly in terms of dollars spent and even more costly in lives lost or changed forever.
Our military and their families have made tremendous sacrifices, especially military personnel who have served multiple combat tours in Iraq and/or Afghanistan and those who have made the ultimate sacrifice. ...
Meanwhile, the monetary price tag for the war has zoomed. About $400 billion has been allocated thus far. The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office estimates that by 2017, the combined costs of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan will be $1.2 trillion to $1.7 trillion. About 75 percent of that money would go to fighting the Iraq war if nothing changes.
It is time to start serious public discussion about the best and most responsible way to end this national nightmare.
Although the ultimate decision is unlikely to be made until after November's presidential election, the discussion and planning can't wait until then.
On the Net:
http://www.pantagraph.com.
March 16
Bristol (Va.) Herald-Courier, on opening government:
... We want to know what our politicians are doing and, of equal import, why they are doing it. That's why journalists and community activists alike remain ever vigilant on the lookout for attempts to revise state laws to allow more secrecy and for efforts to skirt the existing law. ...
Locally, this newspaper's most recent test of open records laws was a comprehensive look at public employees' salaries. Our work revealed that many rank-and-file government employees are underpaid and that some at the top reaches of government are earning handsome sums that may or may not be justified.
Without access to public records, these stories could not have been written. But getting the records wasn't easy. A significant number of local governments ignored the requests or provided partial or incomplete data. Many had to be contacted multiple times and threatened with litigation. Now, imagine that a regular citizen is attempting to gain salary data or any other public record. The obstacles placed in their path, whether in a deliberate effort to thwart the law or through ignorance, would discourage all but the most adamant record-seekers.
Until all politicians wake to the realization that open government is the best way to do business, we'll be watching closely and shining a light on any transgressions that we uncover. Keep government in the sunshine.
On the Net:
http://www.bristolnews.com
March 18
Diena, Riga, Latvia, on the demonstrations in Tibet:
Once again China is suppressing Tibetan disturbances. Last Friday a peaceful protest dedicated to the anniversary of the Tibetan insurrection turned into a pogrom. Army contingents appeared the next day. Beijing maintains that no more than 16 lives were lost, while Tibetan authorities say it is approximately 80. ...Currently foreigners are not admitted in Tibet, and so the information flow is very limited. ...
Beijing calls the Dalai Lama the "ringleaders of a separatist clique" and is accusing him of organizing the unrest, although there is no basis for this. In recent years Tibet's spiritual leaders no longer insists that Tibet should have full independence from China. He has resigned from the government-in-exile and is prepared to seek a compromise. This has had no effect on China's leadership, and so the complete colonization of Tibet continues...
The Tibetan protest coincides with the final preparations for the Beijing Olympic games - in the hope that the protest would be noticed. It was. The European Union and the U.S.A. have called on China to show restraint and "respect Tibetan culture." Calls to boycott the games have received no response. Even the Dalai Lama recognizes that China "deserves" to hold them. The Tibetans are in a desperate situation. Their own forces are weak, and there is no place to search for help.
On the Net:
http://www.diena.lv
March 17
Aftenposten, Oslo, Norway, on Iran's elections:
And the winner is: supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. ... The supreme leader, of course, was not up for election, since he is above such activities. But the national assembly is once again filled with people who are fiercely loyal to the supreme leader. That, not in the least, is because Khamenei and the powerful Guardian Council he leads barred 1,700 reform-minded candidates from the election. The reason: they had displayed "insufficient loyalty to Islam and Iran's 1979 revolution." ...
The election result, with all of its shortcomings, cannot be misunderstood. Iran will not change its policies in any area important to the outside world, not nuclear policy, oil policy or foreign policy.
That is the reality we must face. The theocrats, lead by the Guardian Council, still make the decisions in Iranian politics. That has not changed significantly, even if the election of some people with strong bonds to the military elite the Revolutionary Guard have increase their numbers in the national assembly. But that does not mean the Ayatollahs are weakened, even if Iran is struggling with domestic problems, including strong inflation and high unemployment, with young people especially hurt by the latter. ...
The tiny group of reformists in the assembly will once again be pushed aside. That is not surprising. They have been kept out of political processes before. But there is grumbling in the Iranian society, where authorities must use iron fisted methods and large resources to retain control.
On the Net:
http://www.aftenposten.no
March 19
The Times, London, on Iraq:
Inevitably, five years after the invasion of Iraq, there are attempts, especially by those who are, or were, hostile to the allied coalition, to draw up a balance sheet. In many ways it makes for sorry reading. So many opportunities were missed, so much was left to chance. An extraordinary military victory was vitiated by inept occupation policies. Iraq's history, make-up and traditions were ignored, its sufferings and weaknesses played down. A rundown country has been further weakened by a bloody terrorist campaign, an explosion of atavistic hatreds, virtual civil war and the mass exodus of its ablest citizens. As our analyses over the past week have shown, a tyranny has been overthrown - but at a great cost.
Recriminations, however, are a poor basis for future policy. What matters now, especially to Iraq's long-suffering people, is how the country can be helped towards recovery. Already that recovery has begun. Security is incomparably better than it was two years ago. There are fewer sectarian killings and suicide bombings. Al- Qaeda is on the run, as sickened Iraqis turn on the pathological murderers. People are venturing out of their houses and on to the streets. Trade is beginning to recover and exiles are coming home. A government paralysed by wrangling and sectarian suspicion has passed vital long-term legislation. Wrecked infrastructure is slowly being repaired. Oil revenues are at last bringing in the huge sums needed to fund Iraq's rehabilitation. ...
Iraq cannot recover without the help of its neighbours. The most influential is Iran, a country with a vital security interest but one also with a huge capacity for mischief. ...
Most importantly, however, Iraqis themselves must press their bickering Government to make those compromises essential to hold the country together. This means dividing oil revenues fairly, institutionalizing regional autonomy, curbing tribal factionalism and sectarian militias, expanding trade and overcoming the tradition of vendetta politics. Real democracy may be a long way off. But with a framework for co-existence, tolerance and enterprise at home, and recovery sustained abroad, Iraq has, at last, a chance.
On the Net:
http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/leading article/article3578441.ece
March 18
Asahi Shimbun, Tokyo, on violence in Tibet:
Unrest in the Tibetan capital of Lhasa left many people killed and injured following clashes between Buddhist monks, local citizens and Chinese troops. Details of the situation remain sketchy, but we urge the Chinese government to refrain from using military force so as to prevent an escalation of bloodshed.
The violence in Lhasa stemmed from protests recently staged by monks over Chinese rule. ...
Tibet has witnessed numerous protests by Buddhist monks, as well as clashes with Chinese troops. The unrest dates back to 1951, not long after the founding of the People's Republic of China, when the Chinese People's Liberation Army occupied Lhasa.
In 1959, the Chinese army used force to suppress a Tibetan uprising. The Dalai Lama fled. In 1965, the Chinese government declared Tibet as an autonomous region. In 1989, independence protests turned into rioting, and China enforced martial law. The latest clashes are said to be the largest since then. ...
Chinese authorities must refrain from using military force and accept that the only way to pacify the situation is through dialogue with the people. They should accept the fact that more civilian casualties will have a serious impact on the Olympics.
Throwing barbs at each other will only exacerbate the conflict with the Dalai Lama. It will only make the possibility of a peaceful resolution slimmer. ...
On the Net:
http://www.asahi.com/english/Herald-asahi/TKY200803180051.html
 Load-Date: March 20, 2008

 

End of Document
