

Editorial Roundup: Excerpts From Recent Editorials in Newspapers in the US and Abroad. - Correction Appended
The Associated Press
April 16, 2008 Wednesday 6:17 PM GMT

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 3108 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Excerpts from recent editorials in newspapers in the United States and abroad:
April 10
The Republican, Springfield, Mass., on trade pact process:
Four strikes and you're out.
That's what a game of baseball might be like if Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi had her way. If that's how she felt at the moment, that is.
On Monday, President Bush sent a proposed trade agreement with Colombia to Congress, starting the clock on the legislative process. When a proposed trade pact goes up to Capitol Hill, Congress has 90 legislative days to take action. Lawmakers can approve the pact, or they can vote it down. They cannot amend the agreement, and they cannot just debate it to death, effectively killing it by just talking about it.
These rules are in place so that a president can negotiate an agreement with another nation in good faith, with both sides knowing that the pact will be voted on as is in the Congress.
But Pelosi is trying to change those rules in the middle of the game. ...
If she is successful in her efforts to remove the clock from the game, a president trying to negotiate a trade pact in the future will not be able to reliably assert that there are rules and that those rules are followed.
By playing politics at this moment, Pelosi is threatening to derail future trade agreements. ...
We would hope that she would rethink this, or that members don't go along with her efforts to change the rules. ...
On the Net:
http://www.masslive.com/republican/
April 10
The Hays (Kan.) Daily News, on ending Olympic torch's travels:
We remain unimpressed by the 85,000-mile journey of the Olympic torch from ancient Olympia in Greece to Beijing.
The longer-than-usual trek was designed by China, the host country, to draw positive attention to its growing economic and political influence in the world. Instead, the flame has drawn negative attention to China's human rights record particularly with concern to Tibet. The torch has attracted protesters and violence in almost every major city it's passed through so far.
Perhaps it's time for the International Olympics Committee to end the resurrected tradition and simply have host countries light the flame at the games' site.
The Olympics are intended to showcase the world's best athletes in a variety of sports and to encourage good relations amongst the world's countries. The trouble is, not every country has good relations with others when the quadrennial event comes along. And the games take on overtones of political impasse.
If all the running of the Olympic Torch is going to accomplish is extend the amount of time people spend arguing those same political positions, then we shouldn't run anywhere with the flame. Put it out and wait for the games to begin. The ritual is not worth preserving.
On the Net:
http://www.hdnews.net/
April 10
Portland (Maine) Press Herald, on troop withdrawals:
... Gen. David Petraeus spent Tuesday and Wednesday in Senate and House hearings touting again how the president's troop surge has helped to make Iraq a less-violent place. But when pressed, he conceded that the end is not in sight. ...
As a result, Petraeus said he is recommending that there be a pause in troop withdrawals once the force reaches about 140,000 this summer. That's down from a peak of 160,000, which was reached months after President Bush announced in early 2007 that a "surge" of additional forces would be sent to Iraq in an attempt to quell the violence there. ...
Particularly troubling was testimony from the U.S. ambassador to Iraq, Ryan Crocker. He said he did not think that a long-term security agreement currently being discussed with Iraq needed to come back to the Senate for approval.
Even if Crocker is correct legally, it is unclear whether the United States will live up to such an agreement under a different president. Given that Bush has just a few months left in office, it would be wrong for the administration to make promises that may not be kept.
Petraeus' testimony makes clear that a rational plan for ending the U.S. combat role in Iraq won't be coming from this president. That task will be left to one of three people, Sens. John McCain, Hillary Clinton or Barack Obama.
The current president should be mindful of the need to get out of their way.
On the Net: http://pressherald.mainetoday.com/
April 11
Fort Worth (Texas) Star-Telegram, on airline regulation:
Track the latest turmoil in the U.S. airline industry back to one word: airworthy.
As in, if an airplane has not been inspected and maintained exactly according to a complicated set of very specific and detailed instructions issued by the Federal Aviation Administration, it is deemed to be not airworthy. ...
There is a very real difference between not airworthy and unsafe. The first term says that there may be conditions on the airplane that could make it unsafe. The second says that those conditions exist and that there is a high risk that the airplane will not fly properly or could crash.
The FAA's job is to make sure that all planes are airworthy and never become unsafe. That's a good thing. But here's the bad thing an example cited by Ron Ricks, a senior vice president at Southwest:
An FAA directive says that a particular bolt on Boeing 737 aircraft must be inspected periodically and replaced under certain conditions. When it is replaced, the mechanic may add a washer. A Southwest mechanic decided one recent Friday evening that the bolt on one aircraft should be replaced and two washers should be added, but the FAA directive did not mention a second washer. The plane was grounded until the following Monday to get FAA permission to add a second washer.
An extreme example, for sure, but it illustrates the current problem. Even regulatory compliance can go to a ridiculous extreme. ...
On the Net: http://www.star-telegram.com
April 11
The Northwest Herald, Crystal Lake, Ill., on flight fiasco:
... When it comes to air travel, safety should be the top priority. The FAA should ensure that airlines, many of which are struggling financially, do not place customers at risk to save a few bucks. ...
Given the timing of the crackdown, however, opens the FAA up to criticism. The current safety audit began shortly after FAA officials received harsh criticism related to Southwest Airlines. Calvin Scovel, inspector general of the Transportation Department, told a congressional hearing that the FAA's relationship with Southwest had become too cozy and collaborative. The inspection lapses dated to 1999, and the FAA allowed Southwest to self-disclose violations of mandatory safety requirements. ...
Now, in the past week, the FAA has forced the cancellations of more than 3,100 flights. The vast majority of the flights were with American Airlines and involved MD-80 aircraft. ...
Are we to believe that all of these planes were safe to fly just two weeks ago, but now the concerns about safety are so severe that all of these flights had to be canceled? It appears that the FAA is sending a message to airlines that its safety directives cannot be ignored or manipulated. Thing is, if the FAA were doing its job all along, such a message would not be needed, and such widespread cancellations would not have happened. ...
On the Net:
Editorial Web site link: http://www.nwherald.com.
April 12
The Ironton (Ohio) Tribune, on nation's economy:
... It seems that both political parties are out of touch with one of the biggest problems facing our nation and that is fuel costs. ...
The Democrats want to push another stimulus plan even though we haven't had time to see if the first $168 billion plan works and focus on other programs such as unemployment benefits and food stamps. ...
No amount of incentive checks, tax credits or other packages will truly "fix" our economy if gas prices continue to soar, driving up the costs of everything else. ...
Many Republicans, on the other hand, seem content to do very little, if anything. They join the president in continually saying that everything will get better.
Saying it over and over again doesn't make it true.
Our leaders need to continue the economic revitalization plans already implemented but also make energy costs the top priority.
Anything less just continues to ignore that proverbial elephant until our nation's economy gets completely trampled.
On the Net:
http://www.irontontribune.com/
April 13
The Tuscaloosa (Ala.) News, on using torture:
... Late last week, the Associated Press using one of those well-placed confidential sources that Bush fears and loathes confirmed that administration leaders from Vice President Dick Cheney on down approved using torture in the interrogation of terror suspects after asking the Justice Department to endorse their legality. ...
Those involved in the meetings, which were held in the White House Situation Room, asked the Justice Department to legitimize the interrogation techniques they approved. The political manipulation of the department has been a recurrent theme of the Bush administration.
Justice responded by issuing at least two memos between 2002 and 2003 that said the torture was legally justified.
Both legal opinions were withdrawn later after they were exposed in the news media.
Ashcroft a conservative icon and a key supporter of the USA Patriot Act was said to be troubled by the meetings.
"Why are we talking about this in the White House?" he was quoted as saying. "History will not judge us kindly."
He is absolutely right. Long after the Bush administration is history, our nation will continue to be tarnished by its record of disregard for the rule of law and human rights. ...
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/56d6x2
The Watertown (N.Y) Daily Times, on World Food Program.
April 15
Haitian lawmakers on Saturday ousted Prime Minister Jacques Edouard Alexis amid growing unrest over food prices in a nation marked by chronic hunger. ...
In the Philippines, retail rice prices have escalated 20 percent to 30 percent. ...
In Bangladesh, the price of rice has jumped by more than 30 percent since a cyclone hit the country last year and destroyed some 3 million tons of food crops. ...
It was against this backdrop that Dominique Strauss-Kahn, head of the International Monetary Fund, and Robert Zoellick, World Bank president, over the weekend issued back-to-back warnings of dire consequences from high food prices, especially in developing countries. ...
Globally, food prices have shot up 40 percent since the middle of last year. The U.N.'s World Food Program says it will fall about $500 million short of what is needed to feed 89 million people this year.
In assessing blame, it has become easy to point the finger at policies encouraging development of biofuels, which have put a demand on crops such as corn but also caused farmers to abandon less profitable food crops in favor of government-subsidized biofuels.
While that may contribute to the problem, long-term drought, natural disasters, civil wars, corruption and domestic polices also play a role.
Regardless of the causes, the crisis from rising prices and resulting hunger can destabilize governments as seen in Haiti. Mr. Zoellick called on governments "to put our money where our mouth is" and provide the World Food Program with the $500 million it needs by May 1. The United States and other nations must respond.
On the Net:
On the Web: http://www.watertowndailytimes.com
April 10
Asahi Shimbun, Tokyo, on Olympic torch:
... Disruptions of the Olympic torch relay, which is supposed to lift the mood leading up to the Beijing Games, are becoming increasingly rampant. Demonstrators are protesting against the Chinese government's crackdown in Tibet in an effort to win global condemnation of Beijing's policy there. ...
While most of the protesters were Tibetans and members of human rights groups, some ordinary citizens supported them. ...
How does the world regard China's Tibet policy? Instead of ignoring international protests by saying the uprising was "orchestrated by the Dalai Lama and his supporters," we urge China to squarely face the reality.
China apparently wants to keep the sports festival quite separate from politics, but reality is not that simple. ...
In addition to the Games themselves, the torch that travels around the world also carries the pride of the host nation.
While countries where the torch passes are enforcing strict security, France took a soft approach by deploying police officers on roller skates to protect the torch. Apparently, it was a message that although France does not tolerate violence, it equally respects freedom of speech as it does to the protection of the torch.
What is worrisome is the reaction among ordinary Chinese. Every time scuffles over the torch relay are reported, the negative reactions to overseas protests among the people seem to rise. If countries give the Chinese public the impression that they are doing nothing to stop disruptions, it could incite Chinese nationalism.
While the Olympics are inseparable from politics, in order to make the event a success, wisdom is needed so as not to let politics dampen the event. China, as the host nation, along with the global community is urged to come up with such wisdom. ...
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/3hq6ln
April 15
The Observer, London, on credit crunch:
There are two ways to view today's meeting between Gordon Brown and the big banks. One is to decry it as populist panic from a prime minister trailing desperately in the opinion polls. Nothing will come of the meeting, runs this line, except a few not utterly hostile headlines. Does this government even realise the hole it is in? Economic competence once its great strength now threatens its future.
The other way to see the summit is as the start of a serious attempt to tackle big finance. Here is Mr. Brown's opportunity to tell banks that their reckless lending and trading caused the credit crunch, and unveil plans to try and prevent it happening again. Bankers won't like it (their trade association last week warned against "legislating in haste" and - off the record, naturally - executives are even more hostile), but tough. Implicit in Mr. Brown's promise yesterday that "we're on the side of homeowners and businesses" is a willingness at last to take sides - and about time too. Populism? Maybe, but that's not always a bad thing in politics. It would certainly mark a change in tone for a government that has often seemed deaf to the concerns of ordinary voters, who are being thrown about as the economic brakes are slammed down hard. They face job cuts and a spike in mortgage bills - while the banks behind all this are given not punishment but public money. It is high time this balance shifted. The chancellor who has begun calling on mortgage lenders to pass on interest-rate cuts to customers is the same one who, in his budget speech a month ago, made barely any mention of home loans apart from praising the Danish long-term mortgage market. ... If ministers have finally realised that banging on about how awful everything was before 1997 is no substitute for actual action, it is about time. ...
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/4kr9r9
April 16
Politiken, Copenhagen, on Silvio Berlusconi and the parliament elections in Italy:
A clear majority of Italian voters have put government power in the hands of a man who in his 15-year political career clearly has proven that he is not capable of governing his country.
It is well known that (Silvio) Berlusconi mixes politics and private business interests in a way that doesn't belong in a modern democracy.
He has shamelessly used his power over the media both those he owns and those public service channels which parliamentary majority again gives him command over to promote his own interests.
He has gotten bills passed that were tailor-made to give him more personal advantages, such as protecting him from prosecution. He has used his control over both the government and the media to attack democratic institutions that have been in his way.
And time after time, Italy has been relegated to the role of a clown on the international stage because of him.
There are several reasons why so many Italians decided to vote for such a man.
One of them is, of course, the media tycoon's ability to shape 'reality' to suit him. Then comes the widespread disillusionment with politicians and cynicism toward democracy which prompt many Italians to expect very little from their leaders.
On the Net
http://www.politiken.dk
April 16
The Hindu, Chennai, India, on rising food prices:
There has been no dearth of expressions of concern over the catastrophic consequences of the rising food prices for the global poor. Yet even as global organisations including the World Bank and the IMF have joined in the chorus, there is the realisation that there are no easy or quick fix solutions to the crisis. Soaring food prices have threatened food security and led to riots in quite a few countries. According to the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), food prices have increased by 75 per cent in dollar terms since 2000. The rise has been particularly pronounced in 2007. While the escalation in rice prices is fairly more recent, the prices of wheat, corn and many food products have been witnessing a surge since 2006. ... In practically all developing countries, rising up to the challenges posed by the soaring food prices has become the single most important item on their governments agenda.
The stakes are indeed very high. The World Bank President, Robert Zoellick has said that the rise in food prices could push 100 million people in developing countries deeper into poverty. Earlier, the IMF had warned that hundreds of thousands of people are at risk of starvation. While they emphasise the dimensions of the food crisis, the world bodies really do not offer any new plan of action. Thus the World Banks recently adopted "new deal" to tackle the crisis is a reiteration of well recognised interventions. Basically, it calls for expanding social security programmes targeted at the poor over the short-term and improving agricultural productivity in the long-run. However, exceptional situations such as the food crisis require the world organisations to go beyond such customary advice. Two factors aggravating the food shortage can be neutralised only through global cooperation. The switch from food crops to biofuels in the United States and the European Union, often by subsidising their farmers, is one of them. The pernicious influences of climate change on food production are well documented and they can be countered only with the active participation of the developed countries. The latter should also be persuaded to rethink their biofuel policies.
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/3vumgq
Correction




In an editorial roundup sent April 16, The Associated Press incorrectly attributed an editorial on the credit crunch to The Observer of London. Instead, the editorial ran in another British newspaper, The Guardian.
Correction-Date: April 22, 2008
 Load-Date: April 17, 2008

 

End of Document
