

Fake stings on the rise in India as the number of 24-hour all-news channels soars
The Associated Press
September 13, 2007 Thursday 5:37 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 703 words
Byline: By SAM DOLNICK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW DELHI 
Body




In India, it's the season of the fake sting.
The report was sensational: A math teacher in New Delhi turned her classroom into a brothel, forcing high-school students into prostitution.
A television reporter set up a sting to expose her, posing as a customer and secretly taping a conversation with the teacher. A young woman who said she was one of the teacher's students described her ordeal on camera.
After the report aired, a mob attacked the school, dragged the teacher outside and beat her. Protesters set a car on fire and stoned passing traffic. Police arrested the teacher "solely on the basis of the sting operation," Delhi Police spokesman Rajan Bhagat told the Hindustan Times.
But there was one catch: Police now believe it was all made up.
Rashmi Singh, the young woman posing as a student-turned-prostitute, was neither of those things, police say, but appears to have been an ambitious reporter looking to make her mark.
The reporter posing as a customer, Prakash Singh, was allegedly working with someone whom the teacher owed money to, according to authorities.
And the teacher, Uma Khurana, who was fired from her job and spent 10 days in jail, was "more of a victim than an offender," judge Alok Agrawal said when he ordered her released on bail Monday.
She's not the only purported-sting victim: On Monday, three men were arrested for posing as journalists in an attempt to blackmail a member of Parliament.
The three men tried to bribe parliamentarian Rameshwar Oraon then announced they were conducting a TV news sting. They told him they would quash the report if he paid them.
Oraon didn't fall for it, and the three were charged with impersonation and extortion.
In the school-prostitution sting, Prakash Singh and Rashmi Singh have been arrested on criminal conspiracy charges, along with the man to whom the teacher owed money.
And Khurana is reportedly considering a defamation case against the TV channel, Live India.
That fake sting operation dubbed "Stink Operation" by local newspapers is a glaring example of the dishonesty some say is rife in India's hyper-competitive media world.
Less than a generation ago, newspaper reporters had only one another to elbow aside, and India had just one television channel, the state-run Doordarshan. Today, there are more than 100 24-hour news channels raising the stakes and the opportunities for dirty tricks.
"Indian journalism has never been more competitive and adversarial," said Tarun Tejpal, the editor of Tehelka, an investigative newspaper that regularly conducts stings.
But the intense competition, some say, has led to shady tactics.
"A number of channels never reveal whether money has changed hands, whether stories have been purchased, or in what circumstances an unsuspecting, hapless source has been lied to," Barkha Dutt, one of India's most prominent television reporters, wrote in a recent newspaper editorial in the Hindustan Times.
The Hindi-language channel that aired the fake sting, Live India, relaunched itself as a 24-hour news channel just last month.
Journalists have long used sting operations as investigative tools in India, sometimes reaching into the country's most hallowed offices.
In one of the most famous examples, in 2001 Tehelka showed images of senior politicians from then-Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee's coalition receiving cash from journalists posing as defense contractors.
The sensational report led to the resignation of the defense minister and president of the then-governing Bharatiya Janata Party.
Looming in the background of the current sting scandal is the government's proposed Broadcast Bill, which includes a highly regulated media code that critics call draconian.
Information and Broadcasting Minister P.R. Dasmunsi is expected to use the fake sting to bolster his case that the media needs governmental oversight.
In an editorial, the Hindustan Times bemoaned "the colossal hammering of credibility that the entire media faces in the aftermath of the sting operation."
But with media competition and public corruption two constants of Indian life, stings and fake stings are unlikely to disappear.
"This is not the first time someone has done a spurious thing," Tejpal said. "You will have more of this."
 Load-Date: September 14, 2007

 

End of Document
