

Hezbollah has come far from the days of suicide bombings and kidnappings
The Associated Press
August 19, 2006 Saturday 4:26 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1815 words
Byline: By SCHEHEREZADE FARAMARZI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAALBEK Lebanon
Body




There are more posters of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini here than in towns in his native Iran, where he toppled 2,500 years of monarchy nearly 30 years ago, established an Islamic republic, and set out to export his Shiite Muslim ideology beyond his Persian nation.
The first target of his global revolution was Baalbek, a predominantly Shiite city in religiously diverse, ethnically Arab Lebanon.
Support for the late Khomeini and his successor, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has dwindled among their own people, but here and in much of southern Lebanon, it has swelled to a fervor that once marked the early years of Iran's Islamic revolution.
Iran's influence is embodied in Hezbollah, the party of God, Lebanon's most robust, organized and sophisticated Shiite group. Hezbollah has become a virtual state-within-a-state, with a small army of about 6,000 soldiers who just fought off mighty Israel.
Thanks to Hezbollah, Lebanon's Shiites historically neglected and oppressed by feudal landlords are now a rising political force. The party, with a $100 million annual budget largely supplied by Iran, runs a network of charities, holds positions in parliament and the cabinet, and has its own satellite television and radio stations.
It all began in 1982, when Khomeini dispatched about 650 of his Iranian revolutionary guards to Baalbek, ostensibly to fight off an Israeli invasion of Lebanon. In the following years, that number grew to 2,000, and they set out to train local Shiite guerrillas who would soon form the core of Hezbollah.
The Iranians decorated the bleak streets of Baalbek to resemble an Iranian town, with murals of Khomeini and of women donning the chador, the all-enveloping black cover worn by many Iranian women. They set up a training camp, but they built a hospital, too.
"We were worried when Hezbollah was first set up here," said Munira Ali, 50, a Shiite school teacher who, unlike many women in Baalbek, does not cover her head in the traditional manner.
"We thought they would put the chador on our heads," she said, "that they would hijack the country, ban dancing and stop tourists coming to Baalbek," famed for its ancient Roman temples. "But when we started getting to know them, we found they are more open than us, that they are cultured, educated and not at all backward."
Today, murals still tell women that the veil is the embodiment of their honor, but unveiled women generally are not harassed, as they are in Iran. The streets of Baalbek and the largely Shiite suburbs of Beirut, or what is left of them after recent Israeli bombardment, still resemble Iranian towns. Posters and murals of fallen Hezbollah guerrillas, set against a background of red tulips, a symbol of martyrdom in Iran, adorn walls and lampposts.
After its 1982 invasion of Lebanon, Israel occupied a southern strip of the country for 18 years. But when it unilaterally withdrew in 2000, unwilling to endure more casualties inflicted by Hezbollah, it made the party and its leader, Hassan Nasrallah, instant heroes.
"Lebanon became safe for the first time in its history," said Mahmoud Komati, deputy chief of Hezbollah's politburo. "This created a sense of trust among the people."
Nasrallah, the only Arab leader to evict Israel from Arab land without having to sign a peace treaty, was now one of the most important leaders in Lebanon. And the Shiites took center stage in the country's political arena.
Iran, however, was not the only foreign power exerting influence in Lebanon. Neighboring Syria has been a force since 1975, stationing 25,000 troops in the country until they were pulled out last year under international pressure.
Syria, too, supported Hezbollah and also Amal, another Shiite group, helping them enter mainstream politics.
But it was Nasrallah's charisma that drew many Shiites to his party, including some who do not share his fundamentalist ideology.
Most Lebanese Shiites do not share Hezbollah's adherence to the principle of wilayat al-faqih, or rule by the Islamic jurist a principle that the Iranian regime is based on. Most accept Grand Ayatollah Mohammed Hussein Fadlallah as the highest religious authority, a position Hezbollah reserves for Iran's Khamenei.
During the latest conflict with Israel, Nasrallah appeared on Hezbollah's al Manar television six times, bringing the country to a standstill as everyone tuned in. His speeches are delivered in a soft voice, without the fiery, rambling rhetoric of many Arab leaders.
Munira Ali, the schoolteacher in Baalbek, said she and many of her secular friends were drawn to Hezbollah after short, plump Nasrallah, took its helm in 1992.
"He's honest. That's the most important thing. He has an amazing charisma," she said. "I don't doubt a word he utters."
Ali, her colleague Afrah Younes, 50, and several other Shiites interviewed said they regularly donate money to the party's fund for the poor, the handicapped, orphans and widows.
"Hezbollah is the only group we trust," Younes said. "You want us to give to others who steal?"
But Abbas Beydoun, reflecting the views of many Lebanese and some press reports, disputed the view that Hezbollah is free of corruption. About 1,000 of its men are on the Lebanese army's payroll even though they remain Hezbollah fighters, said Beydoun, a Shiite newspaper columnist.
Following Israel's withdrawal in 2000, "government doors opened to Shiites," Beydoun said, with large numbers of them getting government jobs of all sorts.
Participation in government also meant money, with large, unspecified sums allocated to the Council of the South for highways, hospitals and development projects run by Hezbollah's ally, Amal.
Hezbollah, meanwhile, expanded its network of civil institutions including hospitals, orphanages, and schools. It also beefed up its militia with sophisticated weapons, most imported from Iran but some, including American arms, bought on the international market.
In Lebanon's 128-seat parliament, where seats are allocated according to religious identity, Hezbollah is now the largest single block with 14 deputies. The party also has two ministers in the Lebanese cabinet.
In such a system, it is impossible to get anything done without building alliances, and Hezbollah has proven adept at it. It has found unlikely allies including the right-wing Christian Phalange Party and the National Liberal Party, both supporters of Israel during the 1975-92 civil war. More recently it has allied with the Christian Maronites of Michel Aoun's secular Free Patriotic Movement.
Despite his dependence on Iranian arms and Syrian support, experts say, Nasrallah has achieved a significant degree of autonomy from Tehran and Damascus.
Regionally, Hezbollah has championed the Palestinian cause and backs Hamas, even though it is a Sunni group.
"Their discourse and political and military activities revolve around very secular goals and objectives," said Amal Saad Ghorayeb, a political science professor who is an expert on Hezbollah. "Their identities are multilayered; they're not just Islamic groups, but they're also Arabist and nationalist organizations and that's why they have mass appeal."
Hezbollah has, however, suggested that it would not reject a two-state solution for Palestinians.
In the beginning, Hezbollah expressed a desire to establish an Islamic state in Lebanon, but it quickly realized the impracticality in a diverse nation with large populations of Sunnis, Druse and Christians. Now, its stated goal is to stand up for the "downtrodden" Shiite population, the largest sect in Lebanon but a minority in the Arab world.
Despite its openness to other religions and sects, however, Beydoun describes Hezbollah as an internally closed party that doesn't allow criticism or dissent.
"Its hardline supporters are not exposed to any other thoughts," he said. "It's what I call a fascist party similar to Stalinism, a party that survives on intelligence (gathering)."
Hezbollah members lead secluded lives in their southern Beirut suburbs and are totally immersed in party activities, socializing only with fellow members, he said. They also marry within the party.
"I was born a Hezbollah," said Ahmed Awadneh, 29, sitting outside his home in the Beirut suburb of Bourj al-Barajneh, three days before it was bombed by Israeli warplanes. "It has mass influence over the young."
Hezbollah has changed since the 1980s, when its name was synonymous with kidnappings of Westerners and bombings of Western military and diplomatic targets.
The group was behind a string of attacks: the 1983 bombings of the U.S. embassy and the Marine barracks and French military headquarters in Beirut, the 1984 bombing of the U.S. embassy in east Beirut, the 1985 hijacking of a TWA plane in which an American serviceman onboard was killed.
Hezbollah now says that it opposes terrorism, and it denounced the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States. But it makes exceptions for Israeli targets, regarding such attacks as resistance against an oppressor.
Hezbollah is still labeled as a terrorist group by the United States, but Europeans and others agree the party has not been linked to any attack on a Western target since the 1980s.
Experts say Hezbollah has even acted as a buffer against al-Qaida in Lebanon, aborting a few attempts by the group to attack Israel from Lebanese soil. Hezbollah apparently detained 14 al-Qaida operatives in Lebanon this year and handed them over to the Lebanese army intelligence.
Al-Qaida in Iraq has claimed that on Dec. 27 it fired rockets from Lebanon into northern Israel, provoking Israeli airstrikes on a Palestinian base in central Lebanon. Hezbollah said privately that it was not amused.
"That's why we haven't seen a very strong al-Qaida presence in Lebanon, unlike in other countries," said Ghorayeb, the political science professor.
"It's not for Israel's sake obviously," she said. Until the recent Israeli offensive, Hezbollah's war with Israel was "bound by certain rules of the game" to which both more or less adhered to for the past 10 years.
Hezbollah's attempts to stop al-Qaida infiltration led Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, leader of al-Qaida in Iraq, before he was killed by American troops in Iraq, to accuse the party of acting as a border guard for Israel.
Observers say that if Hezbollah were to be dismantled, al-Qaida could fill its place and the Lebanese government would be powerless to stop it.
The conclusion of its latest war with Israel, triggered by Hezbollah's capture of two Israeli soldiers in a cross-border raid on July 12, is another watershed for the party. Will Shiites and other Lebanese hail the party for courageously fighting off the Israeli army or blame it for causing widespread devastation?
In that regard, Hezbollah appears to be off to a good start. Hours after the cease-fire went into effect, Nasrallah appeared on television with a promise to help Lebanese rebuild their homes, and even help them buy new furniture.
 Load-Date: August 20, 2006

 

End of Document
