

How the U.S. lost its ability to make the giant forgings nuclear power plants need
The Associated Press
September 18, 2007 Tuesday 4:51 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 328 words
Byline: By JOHN WILEN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Utilities will need huge steel forgings for their new nuclear plants, but they don't have much choice of suppliers.
"Right now, all roads lead to Japan Steel Works," said Dale Klein, chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
The story of how the United States lost its ability to make the containment vessels at the heart of nuclear power plants has as much to do with Three Mile Island as Pearl Harbor.
The 1979 accident at the Pennsylvania nuclear plant is widely credited with killing the domestic nuclear power industry. As it turns out, it also drove big changes in the steel industry.
"Those particular kinds of forgings weren't made by the largest steel companies, they were made by forgers," said Richard Fruehan, a professor and director of the Center for Iron and Steelmaking Research at Carnegie Mellon University.
Reactor vessels are 70 to 90 feet high the size of a 6-story building and 22 to 23 feet in diameter. They weigh about 60 tons.
When utilities stopped building nuclear plants, the few domestic forgers that had made big castings either went out of business or reinvented themselves in many cases as auto parts makers.
The legacy of World War II also partly explains the loss. Building strong steel and shipbuilding industries became official postwar Japanese government policy, said Frank Giarratani, director and professor of economics at the Center for Industry Studies at the University of Pittsburgh. These new Japanese steel plants started life with a competitive advantage over America's aging infrastructure. And in recent decades, while the U.S. nuclear industry stagnated, Japan and other countries continued building plants.
U.S. forgers could rebuild their ability to make huge steel castings. But the equipment costs millions, and there are few dedicated domestic customers.
Giarratani thinks the domestic forging industry is content to specialize in high tech, precision work: "The U.S. is done with that phase of industrial development."
 Load-Date: September 19, 2007

 

End of Document
