

In close Senate, Lieberman could be the man of the hour
The Associated Press
November 5, 2006 Sunday 2:07 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 681 words
Byline: By ANDREW MIGA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HARTFORD Conn.
Body




Election Day could make Sen. Joe Lieberman one of the most popular men in Washington.
It has nothing to do with the avuncular, 64-year-old's personal appeal and everything to do with jockeying between Democrats and Republicans for control of the Senate.
Expected gains by Democrats have raised the prospect that the Senate could end up in a 50-50 tie, or something close to it. That could set off an intense bidding war for Lieberman's party loyalty, particularly among Republicans who have already chipped in cash and other support for his re-election bid.
Potential lures to get the three-term Connecticut senator to switch sides include key committee chairmanships.
"Those are always the incentives, the carrots that are most attractive," said," said Richard Holtzman, an assistant professor of political science at Bryant University in Rhode Island. "It makes perfect sense that Republicans would try to talk him into changing teams."
Lieberman, the Democrats' vice presidential nominee in 2000, lost the party primary in August and is running as an independent, counting on GOP votes to help him secure another term. He describes himself as an "independent-minded Democrat" and promises that if he wins Tuesday, he'll caucus with the Democrats.
President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney have praised Lieberman's support for the Iraq war.
"I think when they (insurgents) see something happen such as (what happened) in Connecticut this year with the Democratic Party in effect (having) purged Joe Lieberman, primarily over his support for the president and the war, that says to them that their strategy is working," Cheney said in an ABC News interview.
Lamont said Cheney's remarks were an insult to Connecticut voters. A Lieberman spokeswoman said Cheney was wrong when he said Lamont's triumph was a victory for insurgents.
"I doubt if the insurgents are following the Connecticut Senate race," Lieberman said Saturday night.
Republican New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg endorsed Lieberman, held a major fundraiser for him and has provided get-out-the-vote help.
A slew of Republican heavyweights such as Joseph Albaugh, one of Bush's closest political confidantes during his 2000 White House run, have contributed to Lieberman as well.
"When he's getting so much of his support from the Republicans, when the Bush-Cheney (team) is out there campaigning for him, when all of his money is coming from Republicans and Republican-linked lobbyists, there's going to be an awful lot of pressure on him," Democratic rival Ned Lamont said Saturday.
If Democrats win control of the Senate a tall order that requires a six-seat gain Lieberman is in line to become chairman of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee. Cheney would break the tie for the GOP in a 50-50 Senate, but a one-seat advantage for the Democrats would touch off some serious courting of Lieberman.
"Joe Lieberman has repeatedly said that if re-elected to the Senate, he will absolutely caucus with the Democrats," Lieberman spokeswoman Tammy Sun said.
But Lieberman also has been candid about the bruised feelings involving longtime friends such as fellow Connecticut Sen. Christopher Dodd. He endorsed Lieberman in the primary but is backing Lamont in the general election because of the party nomination.
Veteran GOP consultant Dave Carney said he expects Republicans to make a push for Lieberman to switch ranks, but he predicted the senator will stay put. That way, said Carney, he could wield more power as a centrist.
"If he stays where he is, he could be the undisputed 800-pound gorilla in the Senate," Carney said. "He will end up as the powerbroker, the go-to guy. Both sides will need him as a bridge. To get anything done, you would need his seal of approval."
Ron Napoli, a Waterbury, Conn.-Democrat who volunteered on Lieberman's first state Senate race more than three decades ago but is backing Lamont, said the GOP courtship of Lieberman is already in full bloom.
"And he's responded," said Napoli, who added that he would not be surprised if Lieberman breaks party ranks to join the GOP.
 Load-Date: November 5, 2006

 

End of Document
