

Iran says 135 swans in the Caspian Sea have died of the H5N1 virus of bird flu
The Associated Press
February 14, 2006 Tuesday 4:56 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 691 words
Byline: By ALI AKBAR DAREINI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEHRAN Iran
Body




The deadly strain of bird flu has killed 135 wild swans on the Iranian part of the Caspian Sea coast, the first such cases detected in the Islamic Republic, the government said Tuesday.
Indonesia also reported its latest bird flu death Tuesday a 23-year-old man while four members of a family were being treated in a hospital for symptoms of the virus.
Health workers in Nigeria, meanwhile, tried to entice frightened poultry farm workers to be checked for the virus, and a U.N. expert said the strain may have surfaced in the neighboring African country of Niger.
Iran's official Islamic Republic News Agency said laboratory tests confirmed the H5N1 strain killed the swans at two locations in the Anzali marshlands during the past two weeks.
Iran's Veterinary Organization said all meat provided under Health Ministry regulations in Iran were free from bird flu and not dangerous to humans, IRNA said.
The strain has killed at least 91 people in Asia and Turkey since 2003, according to the World Health Organization. The virus has been detected in Iran's neighbors Turkey and Iraq.
Almost all the human deaths have been linked to contact with infected poultry, but experts fear the H5N1 strain of the virus could mutate into a form that spreads easily among people, possibly starting a human flu pandemic.
In Indonesia, the government said it will intensify the slaughtering of fowl in bird flu-infected areas.
The man died in Jakarta on Sunday, said senior health ministry official Hariadi Wibisono. Tests by a local laboratory showed he had bird flu, but samples were sent to a World Health Organization lab in Hong Kong for confirmation.
The family under observation lived in west Java province and had contact with chickens, said Sardikin Giriputro, an official at Jakarta's infectious diseases hospital. Tests were being conducted to see whether they had bird flu.
As of Monday, WHO had confirmed 25 human bird flu cases in Indonesia, 18 of which were fatal.
The H5N1 strain was first confirmed in Africa last week in fowl on a large commercial farm near the northern Nigerian city of Jaji. Officials said Tuesday that checks a day earlier of 20 farm workers had not turned up any signs of the disease.
So far authorities were only checking for signs of infection because they lacked equipment to test blood samples underscoring the difficulties of identifying and containing the deadly bird flu strain in Africa's most populous nation.
Julius Gajere, the doctor running the Jaji tests, said some 140 farm workers had not been located as tests began Monday as many workers were likely fearful of the tests and what might become of them if results showed they were ill with bird flu.
"We have offered to pay their fares to and from the test center and expect a better response today," Gajere said.
Niger, the world's least-developed nation, has said it was investigating two roosters found dead in a market in Zinder, near the Nigerian border.
Juan Lubroth, a senior animal health officer at the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization, said experts still do not know if it was avian flu, but "it's likely that it's H5N1. It's highly suspected cases of H5N1."
In other developments Tuesday:
 Two birds found dead in Austria appear to have been infected with the deadly H5N1 bird flu strain, Hans Seitinger, a health official for Styria province. the Health Ministry announced strict measures meant to control the disease outbreak.
 Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko said Ukraine and Russia will create a joint commission to fight bird flu, which officials fear could spread in the spring when birds start to migrate.
 Russia plans to begin human tests of a potential bird flu vaccine in April, the country's chief epidemiologist said. Russian news agencies quoted Gennady Onishchenko as saying that the tests will be conducted on volunteers and "over a period of five weeks we will observe how the people's immune systems react."
 Germany's Agriculture Minister Horst Seehofer orders all domestic birds kept indoors starting next week, moving up the previously planned measure to prevent migrating fowl from possibly spreading the bird flu virus.
 Load-Date: February 15, 2006

 

End of Document
