

Italian foreign minister confirms Iraq troop withdrawal by the end of the year
The Associated Press
June 7, 2006 Wednesday 8:21 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 344 words
Byline: By SINAN SALAHEDDIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD Iraq
Body




Italy's foreign minister said Wednesday that Italy will not withdraw all its troops from Iraq until the end of the year, sticking to a timeline set by former Premier Silvio Berlusconi even after the election of a new center-left government.
But Foreign Minister Massimo D'Alema, who was in Baghdad to discuss the plans with Iraqi leaders, said Italy would begin reducing the number of Italian troops in Iraq this month.
The announcement came two days after an attack on an Italian military convoy in southern Iraq killed a soldier and wounded four others. Premier Romano Prodi said Tuesday that the attack would not hasten Italy's withdrawal from the country.
Prodi took office last month after elections ousted staunch U.S. ally Silvio Berlusconi from power. D'Alema noted that pledges to bring the troops home were a crucial part of the victory.
"We have a voters' mandate: The troops are coming back home," he said.
It was the first indication by the new government of the timing of the complete pullout of Italy's 2,700 troops from Iraq the fourth-largest foreign contingent after the United States, Britain and South Korea. Berlusconi earlier had vowed to complete the pullout by year's end.
D'Alema met with his Iraqi counterpart, Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari, shortly after his arrival in Baghdad, and was scheduled to meet with Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, the Italian Foreign Ministry said.
D'Alema also plans to meet with U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice in Washington next week to discuss the pullout.
On Monday night, an explosive device hit an Italian military vehicle escorting a British logistics convoy in southern Iraq, wounding all five soldiers on board. One died shortly afterward, and his body was to be flown to Italy later Wednesday.
Italy's military has reported 32 deaths in Iraq. The Italian contingent is based in Nasiriyah, about 200 miles southeast of Baghdad. They were sent in by Berlusconi to help rebuild Iraq after the 2003 ouster of Saddam Hussein.
Associated Press writer Alessandra Rizzo in Rome contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: June 8, 2006

 

End of Document
