

Let the (travel) Games begin
The Associated Press
February 11, 2008 Monday 3:53 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1923 words
Byline: By CANDACE JACKSON
Body




It's true for athletes and tourists alike. The hardest part of the Olympics is getting in.
In the U.S., tickets have been sold out since October, just weeks after they went on sale. Most of the big-name hotels in Beijing have been booked solid for six months or more by Olympic personnel and tour operators. First- and business-class seats on many of the marathon direct flights from the U.S. are sold out, and coach fares are almost double normal prices.
But there are still options. By April, the official U.S. supplier is getting another batch of tickets for lower-profile events. Some high-end hotel rooms might open up as reservations lapse. Flying there also might get easier because a U.S.-based carrier has come up with a way to respond to soaring demand: sending bigger planes. This past week, Northwest Airlines said it will add 10,000 more seats in and out of Beijing during August by swapping Airbus A330s for Boeing 747-400s. The move will double the number of business-class seats and add 127 coach seats to each flight. Northwest still has flights available to Beijing that depart cities such as Minneapolis and Detroit and make a stop in Tokyo.
The best tactic for procrastinators is an expensive one. Tour operators like Roadtrips have plenty of luxury package deals, with tickets to track and swimming and a stay at the Park Hyatt, starting at $12,480. CoSport's $11,426 package includes a seven-night stay at the Presidential Plaza and tickets to basketball and tennis events.
More than 1.1 million people are expected to visit Beijing during the Aug. 8 to Aug. 24 event, about 40 percent of them from overseas, estimates the Beijing Municipal Bureau of Tourism. The opening ceremonies start at 8:08 p.m. on Aug. 8, 2008 considered numerically lucky in China because the word for the number eight sounds like the word for prosper. Officials have experimented with ways to control the weather during the Olympics, including rocket-launching chemicals into the clouds to keep rain away from events.
Unlike Athens, which was widely criticized for running behind schedule on preparations, nearly all 37 of Beijing's new or refurbished hosting venues already have been completed. There's a new BMX racing venue with dirt tracks and jumps for the Olympic debut of the sport. The National Aquatics Center looks like a giant cube of bubbles and the National Stadium, which is hosting the opening and closing ceremonies, is known as the "Bird's Nest" for its dramatic exterior weave of welded steel. The city is expected to spend nearly $40 billion on new structures and transportation for the Olympics, more than triple the amount spent on 2004's Summer Games in Athens.
Despite the progress, it might not be the easiest Olympics for foreign visitors. Persistent pollution is still seen as a major problem in Beijing, with levels of nitrogen dioxide surpassing the World Health Organization's clean-air guidelines by 78 percent. The Beijing Organizing Committee for the Olympic Games admits that air quality is a concern and has set up monitoring stations at sports venues.
One of the biggest challenges for travelers will be getting around the city. In a metropolis of more than 15 million people, Beijing has more than three million vehicles on the road. To ease traffic jams during the Olympics, the government will remove more than half the cars on roads, acccording to a report in the state-run China Daily newspaper. Though the details are unclear, Beijing experimented last year with keeping half the city's cars off the road using an odd-even license-plate-number system, requiring drivers of private cars to alternate days on the road depending on their number. The China Daily report also says the local government will stagger working hours to ease rush-hour traffic.
Flights
From East Coast cities such as New York, getting to Beijing takes about 13 hours on a nonstop flight. With airspace into the country tightly controlled by the government, American carriers got only six new routes into China for the year. During the Olympics, seats on flights from the U.S. have booked up quickly. "Whatever you choose, you're just going to be lucky to find seats," says Lorraine Martinez, a travel agent based in Pembroke Pines, Fla., who has been fielding last minute-inquiries for summer travel to Beijing.
Several American carriers fly directly into Beijing, including United and Continental. Coach seats on a Continental Airlines flight from Newark, N.J., departing Aug. 7 and returning Aug. 24, are still available for about $2,000 round-trip, but business- and first-class seats are sold out. (A coach ticket costs $1,255 for the same days in July.) Foreign carriers such as Korean Air still have availability in first, business and coach classes, though you'll have to make a stop in Korea.
Accommodations
For last-minute travel planners, a high-end hotel-room shortage is perhaps the biggest obstacle. Of the roughly 4,800 hotels expected to open in time for the Olympics, only about 800 are expected to be star-rated, meaning the remaining 4,000 might not accept credit cards or have any English-speaking staff. The Games' organizing committee has reserved about 20 percent of the rooms at rated hotels for Olympics personnel.
A handful of midrange Western-style hotels still have some rooms available. While InterContinental Beijing Financial District has been sold out for months, the hotel's low-frills sister brand, Holiday Inn, has space. Rooms at the Holiday Inn Downtown Beijing usually go for around $93 a night during the summer months but expect to pay more than five-star prices during the Olympics, with rates starting at about $615 a night. Several others downtown have space left, including the Holiday Inn Temple of Heaven.
The five-star JW Marriott Beijing has been sold out for six months, but the less-fancy Courtyard by Marriott Beijing Northeast still has rooms starting at $667 a night, including breakfast for two.
There are still dozens of hotels under construction, but even many of those have long been sold out. Still, a few hotel companies are waiting until construction is further along before they take reservations, including Starwood, the parent company of brands such as Westin and Sheraton. Starwood has several new hotels opening in Beijing this summer, including the boutique-style aloft brand, which will have 42-inch flat-screen television sets in every room, and a new Westin, which is a 15-minute cab ride from Olympic Park. Rates will range from about $550 a night at the aloft to $1,180 a night at the new Westin (minimum stay is seven nights). Aloft will start taking online bookings in March.
Over the next couple of weeks, at least a few sold-out upscale hotels say they might open up new reservations to the public as some unconfirmed bookings are released. The Shangri-La says it might start a waitlist for new bookings in March.
A potentially cheaper option is to try to rent an apartment while in town. HomestayBeijing2008.com still has about 360 private apartments (ranging from studios to five bedrooms) available on its Web site, at prices that are generally lower than at major hotels. A one-bedroom in the heart of the city is listed for about $275 a night, though there's an additional booking fee of 20 percent of the total cost of stay. (Some rentals also require a refundable deposit of around $1,500.)
Tickets to Events
Face-value tickets were released in two waves from CoSport in the U.S. starting last April and then again in October. Sead Dizdarevic, the company's chairman and chief executive, says about 53,000 tickets went to Americans this time, up about 50 percent from the Athens Games in 2004 and sold out quickly.
CoSport still has tickets available in bundled packages that include hotels, meals and tours.
Of course, there are plenty of event tickets on the resale market. Anbritt Stengele, president of Sports Traveler, a tour operator and ticket reseller, says overall sales are up 200 percent compared with Athens, and the opening and closing ceremonies are nearly sold out. Reserved seats with the best views are listed for as high as $8,475 a ticket for the opening ceremonies.
Some of the most popular tickets include swimming and gymnastics competitions. Bargain hunters could try for lesser-known events during the middle of the Olympics, which is a less-popular period. For example, reserved seats for an Aug. 12 archery competition are listed for about $75. By comparison, reserved seats for an Aug. 17 swimming event are listed for as high as $1,220 on ticket reseller GoTickets.com.
There's a possibility that another, smaller, wave of face-value tickets might be released by April through CoSport, depending in part on how many tickets the Olympic organizing committee has left after distributions to officials. Mr. Dizdarevic says the announcement will be made on the CoSport Web site three weeks in advance of when it happens, but tickets will only be sold if CoSport gets a significant number of them. "If it's less than 5,000 we don't know what we'll do," he says.
Package Trips
Plenty of luxury packages are still available from tour operators. Some include tickets and some don't. Luxury outfitter Abercrombie & Kent, for instance, has reserved rooms in sold-out upscale hotels such as the Peninsula and the Grand Hyatt Beijing as part of package trips but travelers have to arrange their own event tickets. Prices range from $9,000 to $15,000 for six nights.
Roadtrips, a Canada-based operator that specializes in sports travel, still has six-night packages available starting at about $6,000. This includes hotel stays in places such as the sold-out Great Wall Sheraton, tickets to several events, and guided group tours of the city. Texas-based Ludus Tours says it's holding about 15 percent of its tours until as late as July because families of the athletes often need arrangements on short notice after the qualifying trials. The company is owned by two runners who once competed in Olympic qualifying trials themselves, though they say most of their customers aren't necessarily going to the Games just for track-and-field events.
For those who are turned off by the hassles of visiting Beijing, there's another option: Hong Kong. That's where all six of the equestrian events will be held after veterinarians voiced concerned about equine disease in mainland China. Horse lovers can still book a room at the JW Marriott in Hong Kong for about $255 a night, and event tickets are selling for under $100 on resale Web sites such as Sports Traveler. But many events are for early birds. A Sunday dressage event, for instance, cost about $90 and start at 6:30 a.m.
Kersten Zhang contributed to this article.
Tip Sheet
Contacts
HOTELS
 aloft Beijing;
011-86-10-8846 0206: http://www.starwoodhotels.com
 Courtyard by Marriott
Beijing Northeast: For reservations e-mail hongkongglobalsalesmarriott.com
 Holiday Inn Central Plaza Beijing:
http://www.ichotelsgroup.com, 011-86-10-8397 0088
 Holiday Inn Downtown Beijing:
http://www.ichotelsgroup.com, 011-86-10-6833 8822
 JW Marriott Hong Kong:
http://www.marriott.com, 011-852-2810 8366
 Shangri-La Hotel Beijing:
011-86-10-6841 2211, http://www.shangri-la.com
 The Westin Beijing, Chaoyang:
011-86-10-6466 9691, http://www.starwoodhotels.com
PACKAGES
 Abercrombie & Kent:
011-852-2865 7818, http://www.akdmc.com
 CoSport:
1-877-457-4647, http://www.cosport.com
 Ludus Tours:
512-351-7825, http://www.ludustours.com
 Roadtrips:
1-800-465-1765, http://www.roadtrips.com
 Sports Traveler:
1-888-654-7755, http://www.sportstraveler.net
 Load-Date: February 12, 2008

 

End of Document
