

Main St. voters ponder election, live the issues
The Associated Press
August 30, 2008 Saturday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 2192 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE As the presidential campaign rolls through its final weeks, The Associated Press is offering an occasional series of stories looking closely at how ordinary voters are sizing up the issues and candidates and making up their minds. This kickoff story takes the pulse of people along "Main Streets" in communities coast to coast.
%byline(By PAULINE ARRILLAGA%)
%bytitle(AP National Writer%)
%endtag(%)
As the political conventions play out on TV, real life plays out along America's main streets.
Voters there say they are living the issues that convention speakers go on and on about. To them, the sputtering economy is not a policy dilemma, it's working extra shifts to cover the bills. Energy? They see it at the pump and in the pass-along price hikes at their small businesses. The war? They worry for kids they've watched grow up, now marching off to Iraq and Afghanistan.
That's what folks interviewed along five thoroughfares across the country say people like Debra Scavo, an out-of-work interior designer who lives on Central Avenue, Phoenix's version of "Main Street."
Living off credit cards and dwindling savings, driving a friend's car after selling her own, praying each night for a job so she can pay her mortgage, she describes herself as ordinary, average, one of those everyday Americans the politicians on TV talk about as the parties gather Democrats last week in Denver, Republicans this week in St. Paul.
But that's politics, says Scavo. "Entertainment," she declares, like "Survivor" or "American Idol" or any other reality program that comes off as more style than substance.
Real life is found on Central Avenue and streets like it in places like Sunbury, Pa., Wake Forest, N.C., Fremont, Calif., and Miami Beach where more Americans who think of themselves as "ordinary" are grappling with the issues and pondering the traits they're looking for in their leaders.
These main streets of America hubs of their respective communities and, in a larger sense, the heart of our nation reflect good times past, the struggles of the present and a mostly optimistic, sometimes cynical, spirit guiding the future.
From the front porch of "Pop" Snyder's Lunch, owner Bill Hudson takes a drag on his cigar and surveys the world in front of him. This is Market Street, the main thoroughfare of Sunbury, Pa., pop. 10,000. It's a lovely downtown, with pleasing architecture and a small-town bustle that masks deeper problems.
Here is what Hudson sees: Traffic, but the cars seem to be passing through. Parking that's too plentiful. A large commercial building that sits vacant.
Though economists say otherwise, Hudson, 61, believes the country is headed for another depression. He sees it in his own business, where he is trying to hold the line on prices. He sees it in Sunbury, and in the nation as a whole: "I don't know how people who are retired and living on Social Security are going to survive the winter with food prices and oil prices."
He's voting, unenthusiastically, for the Republican, John McCain, though Hudson admits he doesn't pay much attention to politics. Working 12-hour days, he doesn't have the time.
Up the block at McGuigan's Public House, 25-year-old waitress and bartender April Cornell sits on the front steps, too, waiting patiently for the first customer of the day. It's almost noon.
Life hasn't turned out as Cornell envisioned it. When her daughter Kianna was born five years ago, she planned to be a stay-at-home mom. For a while, her husband's income was enough. But gas was $1.59 then, and everything else a bit cheaper, too.
Now, she logs 16 hours each Tuesday, another 16 on Friday, and five hours each on Wednesdays and Thursdays at McGuigan's, earning $4 an hour plus tips. She cleans houses, to boot.
Cornell, a registered independent, is avidly following the campaign "I'm a huge CNN fan" but is torn about her choice.
Neither McCain nor Democrat Barack Obama are talking about the things that matter, she says. Maybe they don't know how.
"I want McCain or Obama to walk one week in my shoes. Neither one of them are like me. I don't get carted around in a limousine. I don't get trips to Hawaii. I didn't even go on vacation this year. I can't even tell you the last time I was to a beach. You know, (Obama) being in Hawaii, McCain's wife owning what is it, a brewery? and not even knowing how many properties they own.
"I know how many properties I own." She laughs. "I own one."
Twenty-five minutes later, Cornell picks herself up off the steps and heads back inside the restaurant, still waiting for her first customer.
As main streets go, Wake Forest's South White Street has done a better job than most at reinventing itself. Except for the occasional empty storefront, the brick and stucco buildings are occupied by businesses that have found a niche like Shorty's grill, here for 92 years.
For $1.65, third-generation proprietor Bill Joyner will serve you the house specialty a beef-and-pork hot dog with onions, mustard and homemade chili, "all the way."
"We ain't got anything that's low-cholesterol," the 56-year-old Joyner says from behind a counter lined with honey buns and Moon Pies.
When times are tough, Joyner's trade booms. People want "something cheap." Nonetheless, during July Fourth week Joyner had to raise prices: hot dogs, by 20 cents; everything else, by a quarter.
Fuel delivery charges, he explains. "They used to not ever do that."
Across the counter, diner Rusty Kelley, who owns of a grading and hauling company, notes his fuel costs have quintupled to around $50,000 a month, while his profits have dipped 30 percent "easy."
"As smart as our country is, we ought to be able to come up with some kind of alternative fuel. ... Whether it's water, whether it's steam or whether it's electric, we as a whole are smart enough to get away from some of this fuel."
The 45-year-old registered Republican thinks Obama is leaning in the right direction on that issue, but he worries about the candidate's youth and inexperience. That bothers Joyner, too, but so does McCain's age.
"He's too old," he says. "It'll take a toll on you, being president. It does everybody else."
The woman is hard at work, smoothing out and folding four baskets of clothes at the Wash and Dry on Thornton Avenue in Fremont, nestled between San Francisco and Silicon Valley. But Estela Peinado knows hard work. It is as much a part of her as her Mexican heritage, or the children she put through college on money earned baking bread.
This main street is a pollster's dream. If the statistics tell us the economy and the war are foremost on Americans' minds, the Americans here agree.
There's Peinado, 61, for whom retirement is a fantasy. She and her 65-year-old husband share a house with a grown daughter, a son and his wife, helping them out as they look for work. She hears the candidates' speeches on Spanish-language television, but she wishes she could address them instead. Fix the economy, she'd say. Now.
"I go shopping, I can't buy meat; we're sticking to chicken. We don't go out to eat," she says in Spanish, smoothing and folding.
Next door, his elbows on the worn counter of Tariq Insurance Agency, Tariq Malik has given the election a lot of thought. He has nothing but time to think and worry, ever since the bottom fell out of the housing market and his business went from issuing 200 policies a month to two or three.
"No one is refinancing, no one is selling, there is nothing, nothing, nothing," says Malik, 44, waving the Pakistan Times as he talks, frustrated with standing all day in an empty shop and with the sacrifices he's asked of his wife and four boys. He's lost much of what he'd built since arriving in the United States from Pakistan in 1991 and then becoming a U.S. citizen.
Escalating mortgage payments cost the family their five-bedroom home; they crowd now into a three-bedroom place. Credit card bills have gone unpaid, and creditors are clamoring. There were no vacations this summer. Instead, Malik blew off steam playing pickup soccer with other Pakistani-Americans against a team of Brazilians in a local park. His team lost.
As for the presidential race: "I don't care who wins or who loses, as long as there is food in our kitchen, and the killing stops," he says, referring both to the violence in Pakistan and the war in Iraq.
This killing weighs heavily on Rick Gonzalez, too, a barber nearby. He knows eight young men and women who have served in Iraq or signed up, including a nephew.
"These are kids I saw grow up, and join right out of high school. One of them, he came back, tried to get a job, but was really shaken up. You know how they come back. ... He couldn't make it outside the service, so he signed up for another round."
Miami's Ocean Drive is a place that lives up to stereotypes: shirtless men in board shorts and women in bikini tops; big, frozen, unnaturally colored drinks; costumed dancers atop a bar. But there are apartments, too, and offices, which remind visitors this main street is not just a tourist playground.
Drew Hockemeier is no tourist, this place no playground for him.
Seven-day work weeks have caught up with the 26-year-old, and so on a weekday morning, he's asleep on the bright red couch with leopard print pillows at Tattoo Lounge. It's too early for tattoos.
Hockemeier grew up in Philadelphia. He dropped out of college, moved to Florida about six months ago and eventually gained a job here, near 5th and Ocean, where people come for tattoos and piercings.
He will vote in November, but he doesn't get excited when talking about his candidate.
"I guess," he says, "I'm going to vote for Barack Obama."
Tattooed in black script on his right forearm is the word "integrity." He wishes politicians had more of it.
Irene Marie mentions that same word. She is 57 and over the last 25 years has built Irene Marie Models into a thriving firm. This is the offseason, though, and Marie has found time to follow the political campaigns. She has voted for Democrats, but has leaned Republican. This year, she's not sure.
"Obama has the breadth of possibilities for a new beginning, a new way. But I'm not sure if he has the capability to achieve it. I'm not sure if he has the wisdom," she says. "John McCain has a little bit more wisdom. But in an interesting way, he doesn't have what Obama has, which is he has a connection."
Still, she says, "integrity" means more to her than any portrayal of a candidate as being a regular Joe.
"I don't have to have a drink with my candidate. What's most important to me is they're honest."
Not everyone cares. Not everyone sees this election as historic, or important, or life-changing.
At a bar-restaurant called Durant's back on Central Avenue in Phoenix, a patron cozying up to an Irish whiskey dismisses the whole electoral process with a bathroom-humor reference borrowed from "South Park." He chuckles, saying he has no intention of voting for president.
For some, there is the cynicism born of mistrust in all things Washington, or the apathy that comes with living the good life. Besides, asked some on this main street: How much can one man do for me?
At the Phoenix library, 48-year-old Margaret Zamora, an Obama supporter, offers one answer:
"The difference that the president makes isn't so much what he does, but it's how he gets people to think. They're looking at a president for hope. And if they have hope, people start thinking different. Then things start changing."
This, from a woman who lives in a domestic violence shelter. For her, health insurance isn't part of a platform, but that thing that could mean the difference between a toothless grin and a new set of dentures.
Debra Scavo, a McCain backer, shares that kind of faith, too, even as she shoulders so many of the concerns of the day.
It's not just a lack of work. She has Medicaid, but it runs out next month. Social Security? She's 50 and wonders how much will be left when she retires, if she's able to.
As bad as all of it is, the tears don't come until talk turns to her son, Phillip, 20 years old and a newly minted Marine.
Her future is uncertain; his could mean war and life-or-death.
"The military has a saying: They break you down to build you up. Sometimes, in our world, our country, our economy, sometimes we might have to go through difficult times and things will have to get worse before they get better. But you have to find the right person ... to keep us afloat and keep us above water while we go through those difficult times."
She tells herself that, too: "Keep you head above water, girlfriend. You'll be OK."
And so she gets up at 4:30 a.m. to hike the mountain near the home that she clings to. And she comes back and sits at her desk, across from a window bare of any curtains or shades, and calls the clients who once paid $25,000 for window treatments, to see if they might have work.
Then she keeps herself busy, trimming her trees and sweeping the scraps from her driveway on Central Avenue her tears, for now, gone.
EDITOR'S NOTE Contributing to this story were AP writers Michael Rubinkam in Sunbury, Allen G. Breed in Wake Forest, Juliana Barbassa in Fremont and Matt Sedensky in Miami. Arrillaga reported from Phoenix.
 Load-Date: August 31, 2008

 

End of Document
