

McCain out to win the hearts and minds of voters on the Iraq war
The Associated Press
September 12, 2007 Wednesday 4:47 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 407 words
Byline: By AMY LORENTZEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: COUNCIL BLUFFS Iowa
Body




Republican presidential hopeful John McCain said Wednesday he's out to win the hearts and minds of voters on the Iraq war.
McCain, who is traversing Iowa in bus festooned with a "No Surrender" banner, argues that the U.S. military is succeeding in Iraq and should continue its mission. He plans to take his bus tour to two other early voting states, New Hampshire and South Carolina, later this week.
"Really, the mission here is to try to make sure that Congress does not make a vote to set a date for withdrawal," he told reporters after an event at the VFW Post in Council Bluffs. "That's really what this tour is about."
Although the war isn't popular, McCain said President Bush's decision to increase the number of troops in Iraq is working.
"We have suffered enormous losses and Americans are frustrated and angry ... but we do have a new strategy and a new general and it is succeeding and we ought to give it a chance to succeed," McCain told about 100 people in a red-white-and-blue themed VFW basement.
If the U.S. leaves Iraq too soon, McCain said instability would engulf the region.
"I do believe that if we leave, there will be chaos, genocide in the region and we will be back," he said.
McCain, a former Navy pilot who spent nearly six years as a prisoner in Vietnam, said these are difficult times in Iraq, but he noted that his fellow Vietnam veterans could recall similar difficulties.
"It took us a long time to restore our military and it took a leader who believed that our best days were ahead of us," he said, referring to former President Ronald Reagan.
McCain said the country again needs a great leader who can push for victory in Iraq and a defeat of terrorism.
"America has still got its greatest days ahead of us, but we have got to show the courage and steadfastness to see this thing through, otherwise we will pay a very, very, heavy price in American blood and treasure," he said.
The audience at the VFW hall, which included veterans of five wars, seemed strongly supportive of McCain.
Phil Killion, a Vietnam War veteran from Council Bluffs, said likes McCain's Republican values and believes his background would enable him to lead the troops fighting in Iraq.
"I don't think they (the other candidates) really know what war really is, what really goes on," said Killion, a 58-year-old retired train dispatcher. "I believe that he's the right man for it."
On the Net:
John McCain for president: http://www.johnmccain.com/
 Load-Date: September 13, 2007

 

End of Document
