

Nepal's king vows democracy, but will it end the crisis?
The Associated Press
April 21, 2006 Friday 10:41 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1084 words
Byline: By TIM SULLIVAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KATMANDU Nepal
Body




Chanting, whistling and calling for the king's downfall, the crowd stretched down one hill and up the next as it grew from what looked like tens of thousands of people to 100,000 to 150,000.
For 16 straight days, demonstrators have taken to the streets of this Himalayan nation, demanding King Gyanendra bring back democracy.
On Friday evening, the king promised just that though it appeared unlikely that many people believed him, or that the crowds would be gone anytime soon. The opposition even pledged more demonstrations.
"Executive power ... shall, from this day, be returned to the people," the king told the country of 27 million a place once famed for its spectacular mountain ranges and hippies in search of Eastern spirituality but now known for its chaotic, bloody politics.
Gyanendra, whose family has ruled since the 18th century, said his dynasty has an "unflinching commitment toward constitutional monarchy and multiparty democracy." He called on the seven main opposition political parties to quickly name a prime minister.
The king, never an electric public speaker, looked particularly uncomfortable during Friday's speech, which was broadcast on state television and radio. He appeared frozen rigidly in front of a cloth backdrop, staring directly into the camera as he spoke.
His glumness is unsurprising. In a country where kings were revered as godlike just a few years ago, Gyanendra is deeply unpopular, isolated in a collection of palaces and has lost control of much of the rural areas to a Maoist insurgency that has left nearly 13,000 people dead as it tries to create a communist Nepal.
Observers fear the country could, at its worst, descend into chaos, creating a power vacuum into which the Maoists, with their long history of violence, could step in.
In addition, many demonstrators are increasingly demanding that he give up all his power something the king is clearly loathe to do.
Late Friday, the U.S. State Department urged the king to follow up his promise to restore democracy.
"The people of Nepal deserve a democratic government that can return stability and peace to their country," spokesman Sean McCormack said in a statement.
Opposition leaders saw little in the speech to resolve the crisis, which began when the king seized power in February 2005, saying he needed to crush the Maoist insurgency.
"This is incomplete," said Minendra Risal of Nepali Congress Democratic party, one of the seven opposition parties that have joined with the Maoists to protest the king's seizure of power.
The king, he noted, fell short of a key opposition demand the return of parliament and creation of a special assembly to write a constitution. The constitutional assembly "is the aspiration of the people."
Most opposition leaders want a constitution that would make the king a ceremonial figure or eliminate the monarchy entirely.
But they saw other problems too: Under the new plan, the king would retain an undefined political role in a constitutional monarchy and apparently keep control of the military.
"This looks like another attempt by the king to fool the people," said Subash Nemwang of the Communist Party of Nepal. "It is a desperate attempt to save the regime."
In the streets, the reaction was angrier.
On the outskirts of Katmandu, scene of the most violent protests, many said Gyanendra could not be trusted.
Other demonstrators voiced cautious optimism. "We have won the battle, but we still must win the war," said Grihendra Shrestha.
Late Friday, the coordinating body of the seven-party alliance issued a short statement, though it was unclear whether it was a direct reaction to the speech. "The general strike and other protests will further intensify," it said.
Nepal's crisis has escalated since a general strike called by the parties and the Maoists began two weeks ago. Protesters have filled the streets daily, leaving the country paralyzed, stores emptied of goods and the situation dangerously volatile. Security forces firing at protesters have killed at least 14, and wounded many more.
Reflecting the king's unpopularity, at least a half-dozen protests broke out Friday in and around Katmandu, all in defiance of a curfew. In the largest, more than 150,000 protesters filled the streets on the outskirts of the city.
In the Kalanki neighborhood, where police fatally shot three demonstrators Thursday, shouting and whistling crowds called for the king's downfall despite the presence of hundreds of heavily armed police and soldiers.
One group of protesters destroyed a police checkpoint a tin shack covered ringed by barbed wire then vandalized a government office, throwing out portraits of Gyanendra before setting the building afire.
Doctors wore black bands in protest at Katmandu's Model Hospital, where many wounded demonstrators were taken Thursday including two boys aged 5 and 10.
As the tension grew, so did the international pressure on Gyanendra.
"His time is running out," U.S. Ambassador James Moriarty told reporters hours before the king's speech. "Ultimately the king will have to leave if he doesn't compromise. And by 'ultimately' I mean sooner rather than later."
Despite the talk of compromise, the crackdown persisted. Two senior opposition leaders were arrested Friday as they tried to return to Katmandu, said Amrit Bohara of the Communist Party of Nepal.
The two men, Jhala Nath Khanal and Bamdev Gautam, both leaders of the party, have been important conduits in negotiations between the opposition and the insurgents.
The Maoists remain a major unknown. Although they have recently allied themselves with the political parties, their violent history they only recently were killing politicians worries even their allies.
Shortly before his arrest, Khanal said he only hesitantly trusted the guerrillas.
"They talk about democracy now, but violence is a part of their philosophy," he said in New Delhi.
When Gyanendra claimed direct control over the government 14 months ago, he argued that he had to bring order to a corrupt political scene and end the communist insurgency.
While many initially welcomed the king's move, hoping he would bring stability, his popularity waned badly as the insurgency worsened and the economy faltered.
"It's not enough for us. We are demanding a new constitution with a presidential system a republic," Prakash Thapa, a teacher, said Friday after the king's speech. "This country does not need Gyanendra, the thief."
Associated Press writers Matthew Rosenberg and Binaj Gurubacharya contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: April 22, 2006

 

End of Document
