

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
February 27, 2009 Friday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1578 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Bill Holm
MINNEAPOLIS (AP) Bill Holm, an author who wrote about a dozen books and traveled the world, died Wednesday. He was 65.
The Rehkamp & Horvath funeral home in Marshall said Holm died at the Avera Heart Hospital in Sioux Falls, S.D. The funeral home did not give a cause of death.
Holm, a poet and essayist, was born in 1943 on a farm north of the town of Minneota. He continued to live there while working as an English professor at Southwest Minnesota State University in Marshall, where he taught for 27 years before retiring in 2007.
He wrote around a dozen books, including "The Windows of Brimnes," named for his cottage near the small fishing village of Hofsos in Iceland, where he spent his summers in the land of his ancestors. It was published in 2007 by Milkweed Editions.
Some of Holm's other titles included "Boxelder Bug Variations" (1985), "Coming Home Crazy" (2000), "Eccentric Islands" (2000), "The Heart Can Be Filled Anywhere on Earth" (2001), and "Playing the Black Piano" (2004).
Last year, Holm won the annual McKnight Foundation Distinguished Artist award, which is given to people who could work elsewhere but choose to stay in Minnesota and make a difference in the state's cultural life. The award included a $50,000 cash prize.
Ann Bryan Mariano
BOSTON (AP) Ann Bryan Mariano, who covered the Vietnam war for Overseas Weekly and successfully fought Pentagon efforts to bar the pro-GI, anti-establishment paper to American troops in the war zone, died Wednesday. She was 76.
Mariano died in Belmont, Mass., of Alzheimer's diseaese, according to her second husband, Robert McKay.
A Texas native who earned a journalism degree in 1953 at Texas Tech University, she signed on in Germany in 1959 with the Overseas Family, a paper for American service members in Europe. As U.S. combat forces expanded in Vietnam in 1965, she was named Saigon bureau chief for the Overseas Weekly, a sister paper geared to military readers as an alternative to the semi-official military daily, Stars and Stripes.
With a small staff of ex-soldiers and freelancers, the OW reported on equipment shortages, corruption, race tension, morale and other topics. Its coverage annoyed U.S. military officials enough that they banned it from newsstands in Vietnam, Japan and other Asian countries.
In 1966, the Overseas Weekly sued the Pentagon. It lost the case, only to see it reversed a year later on appeal.
In 1973, Mariano returned to Vietnam, where she worked as a stringer for The Associated Press and the Daily Express of London, and helped to find homes in the U.S. for Vietnamese orphans.
When Saigon fell to communist forces in 1975, she helped Vietnamese employees of the OW escape the country.
Mariano also worked for several years as an editor and writer at The Washington Post.
Wendy Richard
LONDON (AP) British actress Wendy Richard, whose four-decade television career included roles as a sexy sitcom shop assistant and a working-class matriarch on the soap opera "EastEnders," died Thursday after a long battle with breast cancer. She was 65.
Richard died in a London clinic with husband, John Burns, by her side, agent Kevin Francis said.
Born Wendy Emerton, Richard was raised above the pub her parents ran in central London. She left school at 15 and worked at the Fortnum and Mason department store before studying drama.
She had parts in several of the cheap-and-cheerful "Carry On" film comedies, and in TV shows including "Up Pompeii!" and "The Likely Lads" before becoming famous as Miss Brahms, a staff member of the fictional Grace Brothers department store in 1970s sitcom "Are You Being Served?"
Richard was known to millions around the world as put-upon matriarch Pauline Fowler in "EastEnders," a long-running soap set in a close-knit east London neighborhood. Richard appeared in the show's first episode in 1985 and stayed for 21 years, depicting Pauline through trials that included her daughter's teen pregnancy, her son's HIV diagnosis and her husband's breakdown, imprisonment and death.
Richard was diagnosed with cancer in the mid-1990s and again in 2002, and learned last year that the disease had returned and spread.
Harrison Richardson
GORHAM, Maine (AP) Harrison Richardson, a Portland trial lawyer, former legislator and one-time candidate for governor who played a key role in the enactment of both the state income tax and landmark environmental legislation, died Thursday. He was 79.
Richardson had suffered a debilitating stroke last summer and died at his home, his family said in a statement.
Richardson, a leader of the Republican party's liberal wing during the late 1960s and early 70s, was narrowly defeated in the 1974 gubernatorial primary by James Erwin. Independent James Longley went on to win the general election over Democrat George Mitchell and Erwin.
Elected to three terms in the Maine House, from 1965 to 1971, Richardson served as majority leader during the last two. He also served a term in the Maine Senate.
He was among a group of influential Republicans who joined with Democratic Gov. Kenneth Curtis in helping to pass a state income tax in 1969 and successfully defended it during a citizen-initiated repeal referendum two years later.
An early leader in the passage of environmental laws, Richardson was perhaps proudest of his sponsorship of a statute that taxed oil shipments through Maine waters to create a fund to clean up spills. The precedent-setting legislation became a model for other coastal states.
Richardson was a former chairman of the board of trustees at the University of Maine, where he played football and was an all-New England tackle in 1953. Before enrolling in law school, he served as a company commander with the Marines in Korea.
Clarence Swensen
PFLUGERVILLE, Texas (AP) Clarence Swensen, who played a Munchkin soldier in the 1939 classic "The Wizard of Oz," died Wednesday. He was 91.
A funeral home in Pflugerville confirmed Swensen's death. He had being in poor health since suffering a stroke in 2005, the Austin American-Statesman reported.
In the late 1930s, Swensen joined The Stanley R. Graham All Midget Circus troupe, which performed at the Texas State Fairgrounds in Dallas. It eventually led to an offer from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to play a Munchkin, earning a salary of $700.
Swensen had regularly attended Wizard of Oz festivals. He was among seven of the surviving actors who played the inhabitants of Munchkinland present when the Munchkins received a collective star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2007.
Wilbert A. Tatum
NEW YORK (AP) Wilbert A. Tatum, retired publisher of the New York Amsterdam News, the Harlem-based newspaper that has covered the city's black community for a century, died Wednesday during a trip to Croatia, the newspaper said. He was 76.
Nayaba Arinde, an editor at the weekly paper, confirmed Tatum's death. She said he had been ill recently but did not know the cause of his death in a hospital in Dubrovnik, where he was traveling with his wife, Susan.
A member of a group that purchased the Amsterdam News in 1971, Tatum rose to become board chairman and editor-in-chief, took majority control of the paper in 1982 and bought out the last investor in July 1996. In December 1997 he retired as publisher and editor-in-chief, replaced by his daughter, Elinor Ruth Tatum. He remained board chairman and publisher emeritus.
The Amsterdam News, one of 50 black newspapers in the United States when it was founded in December 1909, marks its centennial this year.
A prominent and sometimes controversial voice on racial, political and other issues, Tatum also served as deputy borough president of Manhattan in the early 1970s.
In 1993, he was briefly named publisher and editor of the New York Post during a chaotic staff revolt against a new owner, Abe Hirschfeld, and a threat of bankruptcy. In 1996, a Manhattan jury ruled that Tatum had diverted more than $1 million from the Amsterdam News for his personal use.
Norm Van Lier
CHICAGO (AP) Norm Van Lier, one of the most popular players in Chicago Bulls history and one of the NBA's top defensive players in the 1970s, was found dead in his home just blocks away from the Bulls arena on Thursday. He was 61.
The Cook County Medical Examiner's office confirmed Van Lier's death but said a cause was not immediately known.
Van Lier, who most recently worked for Comcast SportsNet Chicago, had been scheduled as a pre- and post-game analyst for Wednesday night's Bulls game with the New Jersey Nets.
Comcast officials became concerned after Van Lier did not show up for work and could not be reached Thursday, so an employee was sent to his apartment and tried to get inside, said Jim Corno, president of Comcast SportsNet Chicago.
Authorities responding to a subsequent well-being check request found Van Lier unresponsive. He was pronounced dead at the scene, said Chicago Fire Department spokesman Quention Curtis.
Van Lier began his NBA career with Cincinnati in 1969. He later spent more than six seasons with the Chicago Bulls before finishing his career with Milwaukee in 1979.
A three-time All-Star, Van Lier played on five playoff teams.
Van Lier was a defensive standout and a fan favorite who was given the name "Stormin' Norman" for his fiery play and defensive tenacity.
Van Lier retired after the 1979 season with 8,770 points and 5,217 assists. He finished among the league's top 10 in assists eight times, and among the league's top 10 in steals per game three times, according to Basketball-Reference.com.
 Load-Date: February 27, 2009

 

End of Document
