

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 1, 2007 Saturday 12:13 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1589 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Rassim al-Jumaili
BAGHDAD (AP) Rassim al-Jumaili, a veteran Iraqi comedian who left his homeland for Syria after the U.S. invasion and played a sarcastic dictator in his final role earlier this year, died of heart problems. He was 69.
Al-Jumaili died Saturday in neighboring Syria, where he fled in 2003, joining dozens of Iraqi actors escaping the violence in their country, Iraq's Sharqiyah satellite channel reported. Iraqi state television later said Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki agreed to a burial in Baghdad for al-Jumaili.
Iraqi president Jalal Talabani said he personally would pay to have al-Jumaili's body transported to Iraq.
Al-Jumaili's last role was in "The Leader" series, which was widely seen in Iraq during the holy month of Ramadan, in which he played an unnamed, sarcastic dictator. The series, which depicted the daily suffering of Iraqis, was believed to be a parody of the post-Saddam administration.
Al-Jumaili was born in Baghdad in 1938. He graduated from the Collegue of Fine Arts in 1964 and joined the army as an officer and member of the military theater. In the early 1980s, he broke into the entertainment business performing in stage productions in Baghdad.
Seymour Benzer
LOS ANGELES (AP) Seymour Benzer, a groundbreaking biologist whose work linking behavior and genes laid the foundation for modern neuroscience, has died. He was 86.
Benzer died of a stroke Friday morning at Huntington Hospital in Pasadena, said Jill Perry, a spokeswoman for the California Institute of Technology, where Benzer was professor emeritus.
Benzer's research in the 1960s countered the common belief that human behavior was shaped primarily by environment, giving genes a far bigger role than they were previously assigned.
His research led to major discoveries in the exploration of diseases like Alzheimer's and Parkinson's.
In perhaps his most well-known work, Benzer manipulated the gene mutations of fruit flies in the late 1960s.
In one study, Benzer and a student corrected the sleep patterns of the flies by injecting them with genes from other fruit flies.
That and related work essentially led to the new field of neurogenetics, and many of his colleagues believe it ought to have won him a Nobel Prize, one of the few awards that eluded him.
Benzer received more than 40 major awards, including the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research, the National Medal of Science, the Peter Gruber Award for Neuroscience and the $500,000 Albany Medical Center prize, the nation's richest prize in medicine and biomedical research.
Reynaldo P. Glover
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) Reynaldo P. Glover, chairman of the Fisk University board of trustees and a Chicago lawyer, has died. He was 64.
Glover died Tuesday of pancreatic cancer, the school announced. The 1965 Fisk graduate had served as chairman of the historically black university's board of trustees since February 2004.
He was at the helm during the cash-strapped school's controversial attempt to sell artworks donated to the school by Georgia O'Keeffe to raise money. The effort has become bogged down in the courts, and the school's attorneys have said Fisk could run out of cash by the end of the year.
Glover earned his law degree from Harvard Law School in 1968 and began his legal career as national executive director of the Law Student Civil Rights Research Council in New York.
He later went into private practice in Chicago. He served as chairman of the board of trustees of the City Colleges of Chicago from 1988 to 1991.
Evel Knievel
CLEARWATER, Fla. (AP) Evel Knievel, the red-white-and-blue-spangled motorcycle daredevil whose jumps over crazy obstacles including Greyhound buses, live sharks and Idaho's Snake River Canyon made him an international icon in the 1970s, has died. He was 69.
Knievel had trouble breathing at his Clearwater condominium Friday and died before an ambulance could get him to a hospital, said longtime friend and promoter Billy Rundle. He had been in failing health for years, suffering from diabetes and pulmonary fibrosis, an incurable condition that scarred his lungs.
Immortalized in Washington's Smithsonian Institution as "America's Legendary Daredevil," Knievel was best known for a failed attempt to jump Idaho's Snake River Canyon on a rocket-powered cycle and a spectacular crash at Caesar's Palace in Las Vegas. He suffered nearly 40 broken bones before he retired in 1980.
Though Knievel dropped off the pop culture radar in the '80s, the image of the high-flying motorcyclist clad in patriotic, star-studded colors was never erased from public consciousness. He always had fans and enjoyed a resurgence in popularity in recent years.
Knievel earned $1 million for his jump over 13 buses at Wembley Stadium in London the crash landing broke his pelvis and more than $6 million for the Sept. 8, 1974, Snake River Canyon jump.
He decided to retire after a jump in the winter of 1976 in which he was again seriously injured.
Jim Nesbitt
FLORENCE, S.C. (AP) Jim Nesbitt, who wrote country music songs that drew both laughter and critical acclaim, has died. He was 75.
Nesbitt died Thursday of congestive heart failure at his South Carolina home, said his son, Timothy Nesbitt.
Known by some as the "King of Country Comedy," Nesbitt made the Billboard country charts 13 times between 1961 and 1970.
"Looking for More in '64" reached No. 7 and "Please Mr. Kennedy," which had the same melody as "The Ballad of Davy Crockett," hit No. 11 in 1961. Nesbitt also wrote "Runnin' Bare," a novelty version of Johnny Preston's No. 1 pop hit "Running Bear."
Nesbitt's son, who at one time played bass in his father's band, said Nesbitt was always joking around, right up until the day he died.
Cashbox Magazine president Bruce Elrod planned to put Nesbitt on the cover this month as a surprise for what would have been his 76th birthday Saturday. Elrod said the magazine, which used to rival Billboard a half century ago, will keep Nesbitt on the front, only the tone will be different.
Roger B. Smith
DETROIT (AP) Roger B. Smith, who led General Motors Corp. in the 1980s and was the subject of Michael Moore's searing documentary "Roger & Me," has died, the automaker said. He was 82.
Smith died Thursday in the Detroit area after a brief illness that GM did not identify.
Smith began his career at GM began in 1949 as an accounting clerk and eventually rose to become its chairman and chief executive in January 1981, posts he retained at the world's largest automaker until his retirement in 1990.
With Japanese automakers gaining momentum in the U.S. as Smith's tenure began, he responded with GM's first front-wheel-drive midsize cars. He also formed a controversial joint venture with Toyota Motor Corp. to manufacture cars in California; created the Saturn small-car brand to fight the imports; and acquired Electronic Data Systems and Hughes Aircraft Corp.
Moore became famous with "Roger & Me," which explored how GM's plant closings and layoffs affected his hometown of Flint.
The 1989 film chronicles Moore's fruitless attempts to interview Smith about the devastation in Flint, although magazine articles and documentaries have alleged that Smith granted interviews to Moore prior to the film's release.
Smith often faced questions about the documentary, which contained interviews of people who said they lost their homes after GM plant closures in Flint.
GM's U.S. market share dropped from around 45 percent when Smith took GM's top job to just over 36 percent when he left. The company's market share currently is about 24 percent.
Bobby Van
GARDEN CITY, N.Y. (AP) Bobby Van, a Juilliard-trained pianist who founded a landmark Hamptons "gin mill" frequented by artists Willem De Kooning and Roy Lichtenstein, along with literary giants including Truman Capote, Kurt Vonnegut and Willie Morris, has died. He was 64.
Robert Craig Van Velsor, known as Bobby Van, died Tuesday of a staph infection, said his ex-wife, Marina Van. He had been receiving dialysis treatments for a failing kidney, she said.
Although he sold the restaurant in 1986, for nearly two decades Van played host to nightly gatherings by some of the world's greatest writers and artists, drawn to the mahogany wood decor and Tiffany lamps in the saloon in downtown Bridgehampton.
Other writers frequently seen hanging out at "Van's" included George Plimpton, Irwin Shaw, Winston Groom and James Jones, Marina Van said.
Although he dropped out of Juilliard for financial reasons, Van never lost his love of the piano a centerpiece of the saloon.
After serving in the Army in Vietnam, Van opened the restaurant in 1969. There are now four other Bobby Van's Steakhouses in New York City and two in Washington.
Betsy Zaborowski
BALTIMORE (AP) Betsy A. Zaborowski, who provided education, employment and adaptive technologies for the blind and served in several leadership positions with the National Federation of the Blind, has died. She was 58.
Zaborowski died Thursday morning of cancer at her home in Denver, said her husband, James Gashel. She had lived until recently in Baltimore, where the federation is based.
Zaborowski was diagnosed with retinal blastoma at age 3 and later lost her eyesight.
From 2003 through this year, Zaborowski served as executive director of the NFB's Jernigan Institute, a research and training facility. She also spent eight years as the NFB's director of special projects.
Among the institute's programs was a summer science academy for blind middle and high school students that offered new ways for the blind to participate directly in scientific experiments.
 Load-Date: December 2, 2007

 

End of Document
