

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 28, 2007 Friday 4:20 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 2121 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Jim Beauchamp
ATLANTA (AP) Former major league player and longtime Atlanta Braves coach Jim Beauchamp died Tuesday of leukemia. He was 68.
The death was confirmed by the family.
Beauchamp was the bench coach for the Braves between 1991 and 1998, during the team's transformation from a last-place team to a perennial contender. He was a part of the 1995 World Series championship team and most recently served as supervisor of the club's minor-league field operations.
Beauchamp spent 22 years with the Braves as part of a 50-year career in baseball in the major and minor leagues.
Beauchamp, who was born on Aug. 21, 1939 in Vinita, Okla., had a 10-year major league playing career as a first baseman and an outfielder with St. Louis, Houston, Milwaukee, Atlanta, Cincinnati and the New York Mets, playing his final major league game for the Mets in 1973. His career batting average was .231, with 14 home runs.
Benazir Bhutto
RAWALPINDI, Pakistan (AP) Benazir Bhutto, one of Pakistan's most famous and enduring politicians and the first woman to lead a Muslim nation in modern times, was assassinated Thursday by an unknown suicide attacker at a campaign rally. She was 54.
She was shot in the neck and chest by an attacker who then blew himself up, said Rehman Malik, Bhutto's security adviser. At least 20 others were killed in the attack.
Educated at Harvard and Oxford universities, Bhutto served twice as Pakistan's prime minister between 1988 and 1996.
Her father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, founded the populist Pakistan People's Party and served prime minister of Pakistan before his ouster in a 1977 military coup. Two years later, he was executed in the same park where his daughter gave her last speech Thursday.
Benazir Bhutto surprised many by agreeing to an arranged marriage in 1987 with Karachi businessman Asif Ali Zardari. But her marriage to Zardari would play a major role in her downfall when he was accused of taking millions of dollars in kickbacks from foreign companies.
Zardari was called "Mr. 10 Percent" during Bhutto's first term because of these alleged kickbacks; in her second term, the take and the monicker were upgraded to "Mr. 40 Percent."
Bhutto tried for a third term and lost; she left Pakistan in 1999, just before a court convicted her of corruption and banned her from politics.
The verdict was later quashed, but she remained in self-imposed exile. Musharraf later signed an amnesty halting any corruption charges against her and others.
Bhutto returned to Pakistan from an eight-year exile on Oct. 18. On the same day, her homecoming parade was targeted in a suicide attack that killed more than 140 people.
Joe Dolan
DUBLIN, Ireland (AP) Joe Dolan, one of Ireland's first pop music stars who entertained audiences for decades with Vegas-style showmanship, died Wednesday from a brain hemorrhage, his family announced. He was 68.
Dolan collapsed at his family home in suburban south Dublin on Christmas night and died after falling into a coma at a hospital.
He was the most celebrated and fondly caricatured survivor of Ireland's bygone "showband" era of the 1960s and 1970s, when homegrown rock 'n' roll acts toured the country playing cover versions of international hits.
His biggest hit in 1969, "Make Me an Island," reached No. 3 in Britain and No. 1 in 14 other countries. Other hits that climbed the European charts included "You're Such a Good-Looking Woman" in 1970, "Lady in Blue" in 1975 and "I Need You" in 1977.
His last Irish No. 1 came in 1997, when he re-recorded "Good-Looking Woman" with a popular fictional TV comedian, a puppet named Dustin the Turkey.
"He was a fantastic showman, had great stage presence, had a distinctive singing voice and never forgot his roots," said Prime Minister Bertie Ahern.
Dolan, with a bushy brow and beaming smile, was known for the power and quality of a voice that fell somewhere between Tom Jones and Tony Bennett. Unlike other showband stars, he found success overseas with original material.
He had an irreverent sense of humor, most recently demonstrated when he underwent a hip replacement operation in 2005 and had his original hip bone sold for charity on eBay.
In recent years, Dolan kept touring and recording regularly, and was in the middle of a concert series in Dublin in November when he left the stage after just four songs, suffering from exhaustion. He canceled a planned Christmas tour.
Daniel Bradley Gaylord
BOURNE, Mass. (AP) Daniel Bradley Gaylord, who sold the first advertisements for the Cape Cod Times and later became the newspaper's publisher, died Tuesday. He was 95.
Gaylord died at Falmouth Hospital, his wife, Judith, told the Times. She said her husband suffered a fall in September and was receiving rehabilitation.
Gaylord was the last surviving member of the team the started the paper, which was first published in 1936. The paper was called the Cape Cod Standard-Times until 1975.
Gaylord learned the newspaper business from his uncle, who was president and publisher of the Daily Oklahoman and the Oklahoma City Times.
The Cape Cod Standard Times' first owners, E. Anthony & Sons Inc., hired Gaylord as one of two advertising representatives. Twelve years later, he became the paper's publisher. In 1953, he became general business manager of the company, which included the New Bedford Standard-Times, two radio stations and the launch of a New Bedford television station.
Gaylord retired in 1967.
Oliver Jackson
ABILENE, Texas (AP) Oliver Jackson, the former Abilene Christian track and field coach whose athletes won four Olympic gold medals and set 15 world records, died Wednesday. He was 87.
Jackson died at home of natural causes, said Lance Fleming, the Abilene Christian sports information director.
The former president of the U.S. Track and Field Coaches Association, Jackson was head track and field coach at Abilene Christian for 16 years, from 1948-63. His teams won NAIA titles in 1952, 1954 and 1955. In 1964, he coached the national team during its pre-Olympic tour.
At Abilene Christian, Jackson coached three U.S. Olympic team members: sprinter Bobby Morrow, quarter-miler Earl Young and pole vaulter Billy Pemelton.
Morrow won gold medals at the 1956 Olympics in the 100 and 200 meters and 400 relay. Young won a gold medal in the 1960 Olympics in Rome in the 1,600 relay, and Pemelton finish eight in the pole vault in the 1964 Olympics in Tokyo.
A 1959 Sports Illustrated article called Jackson "probably the best relay coach in the United States."
Jackson was inducted into seven halls of fame, including the U.S. Track and Field Coaches Association, the NAIA and the Texas Sports Hall of Fame.
Jaan Kross
TALLINN, Estonia (AP) Jaan Kross, a writer and poet whose novels portrayed the fate of the small Baltic nation, died Thursday after a long illness, his family said. He was 87.
A prisoner during Nazi rule in the early 1940s and a survivor of a Siberian labor camp, Kross was known for historical novels. "The Czar's Madman," an epic about a Baltic-German nobleman, is considered to be one of his major works and was translated into English and several other languages.
Although set in the 19th century the hero of the book, who was imprisoned as a traitor, was widely believed to reflect the author's own experience of eight years in exile during the 1940-1991 Soviet occupation when thousands of Estonians were exiled and killed.
Born on Feb. 19, 1920, in Tallinn, Kross studied law at Tartu University, Estonia's leading academic establishment. He published his first novel, "Between Three Plagues," in 1970 16 years after becoming a professional writer. Following Estonia's regained independence in 1991, he briefly served as a lawmaker in 1992-93 but became frustrated by politics and resumed writing.
For many years, Kross remained Estonia's strongest candidate for the Nobel Literature Prize.
Kross, who wrote a dozen novels and was a prolific poet, was awarded several Estonian and international prizes, including the Amnesty International Golden Flame Prize in 1990.
Hugh Massingberd
LONDON (AP) Hugh Massingberd, who developed the obituary into entertaining and irreverent brilliance at The Daily Telegraph, died Tuesday. He was 60.
Massingberd had been diagnosed with cancer in 2004, the newspaper reported.
His term as obituaries editor, from 1986 to 1994, was "just a lucky time ... a time when so many legends of the century were dying," Massingberd said in a 1996 interview.
The Daily Telegraph said Massingberd found his inspiration at a theatrical rendering of "Brief Lives" by the waspish 17th century writer John Aubrey who said of a barrister "He got more by his prick than his practice."
That line inspired Massingberd, as he later wrote, to chronicle "what people were really like through informal anecdote, description and character sketch."
A parade of remarkable characters took their last bows in the Telegraph during Massingberd's term.
There was Maj. Donald Neville-Willing, who found his dentures a liability in romance; John Allegro, "the Liberace of biblical scholarship," whose promising career as a scholar of the Dead Sea Scrolls degenerated into a series of books claiming that Christianity was a hallucinogenic mushroom cult; and Nerea de Clifford, author of "What British Cats Think About Television," who had concluded: "Most cats show an interest of some kind, though it is often of hostility."
Massingberd's creed was that an obituary should give pleasure to relatives and friends, as well as the general reader.
Stu Nahan
LOS ANGELES (AP) Longtime Los Angeles sportscaster Stu Nahan, also familiar to movie fans for his appearances in the series of "Rocky" films, died Wednesday. He was 81.
Daughter Kathy Derington said Nahan died at his home in Studio City. He had battled lymphoma since being diagnosed in January 2006.
A former minor league hockey goalie, Nahan had been a sports anchor for three different television stations in Los Angeles. He retired from TV in 1999, and most recently did pre- and post-game radio shows for the Los Angeles Dodgers.
Among his other jobs, Nahan at one time worked telecasts of the Los Angeles Kings' NHL games.
Nahan was a goalie at McGill College in Montreal and was signed by the NHL's Toronto Maple Leafs in 1946. He played for the minor league Los Angeles Monarchs, but his playing career ended when the Monarchs folded in 1952.
He began his broadcasting career in radio, doing play-by-play for a minor league baseball team in Modesto. He began his first nightly sports reports on a Sacramento television station. Nahan also hosted a children's TV program there, as "Skipper Stu." He later moved to Philadelphia, where he was "Captain Philadelphia" on another children's show, and did play-by-play for the NHL's Flyers and the NFL's Eagles.
He returned to California in 1968 and started his long run as a sportscaster in Los Angeles.
In addition to the Rocky films, Nahan also appeared in the film "Fast Times at Ridgemont High" and the TV movie "Brian's Song."
Opendra "Bill" Narayan
KANSAS CITY, Kan. (AP) Opendra "Bill" Narayan, an AIDS researcher who was developing a vaccine aimed at helping poor people around the world fight the virus, died Monday. He was 71.
Narayan, a senior faculty member of the University of Kansas Medical Center, died of a heart attack. The university confirmed his death.
Narayan gained prominence more than a decade ago after developing a form of HIV that caused a disease in monkeys that was similar to AIDS in humans. He used his new animal model to test vaccines and received nearly $50 million in grants, including more than $16 million from the National Institutes of Health, for research at the KU medical center.
Narayan helped found Lenexa-based ImmunoGenetix to bring his AIDS vaccine to market. President James Laufenberg said the company was working on an application to the Food and Drug Administration for permission to test Narayan's vaccine on a small number of people, and hoped to begin clinical trials within two years.
Narayan's vaccines were not intended to prevent people from becoming infected, but he had demonstrated that vaccinated monkeys did not become ill after being infected with the simian version of HIV.
He was looking for an easy-to-administer vaccine that could help people in less-developed countries who could not afford expensive drugs.
Billy Pugh
CORPUS CHRISTI, Texas (AP) Billy Pugh, an inventor whose safety nets were used to pluck Apollo astronauts from the ocean on their return to Earth, died Wednesday. He was 83.
Pugh, who died of prostate cancer, developed the "Billy Pugh Net" in 1955 to make it safer to transfer workers between boats and offshore oil rigs and platforms.
Pugh became internationally known when his net was used by NASA to pick up astronauts after splashdown.
 Load-Date: December 28, 2007

 

End of Document
