

Please don't drink the tap water ... unless you're in the Olympic Village
The Associated Press
May 9, 2007 Wednesday 6:44 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 417 words
Byline: By STEPHEN WADE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: BEIJING 
Body




Avoid drinking tap water during the 2008 Beijing Olympics unless you're living in the Olympic Village.
That was the advice from a high-ranking Beijing official on Wednesday, explaining the city's attempt to "guarantee water safety" for the Olympics. He acknowledged the billions spent to clean and modernize the Chinese capital haven't been enough to provide potable tap water.
"The quality of the water provided by the water plants is safe enough," said Bi Xiaogang, vice director general of the Beijing Water Management Bureau.
"The water is contaminated during the secondary supply process, in the transfer of water. Therefore it is not safe to drink from the tap," Bi said. "We are still working on upgrading the secondary facilities. But in the Olympic Village we will provide safe drinking water from the tap."
The lack of potable tap water, chronic traffic jams and filthy air are major problems facing Beijing officials as they try to give the Chinese capital a complete facelift with about 500,000 foreign visitors expected for the 17-day Olympics.
"The 2008 Olympics Games are a national event," Bi said. "Ensuring the water supply is something that the Communist Party of Beijing and the government of Beijing attach great importance to."
Upgrading infrastructure is part of a two-pronged effort to get ready for the Olympics. The other involves a campaign to improve human behavior: teaching people to line up, coaxing taxi drivers to be more polite and getting everyone to curtail the habit of spitting.
As much as $160 billion is being spent to ready Beijing for the Olympics, much of it going into new subway lines, highways, hundreds of towering skyscrapers and new water treatment plants.
Despite upgrading water plants and urging conservation, Beijing faces severe water problems. The city has no major rivers and relies on rainfall, underground supplies "and support from surrounding provinces and cities," Bi said.
Beijing is also going through a decade-long drought, which has strained the fragile water supply. Few residents of the city of 15 million drink from the tap, relying heavily on bottled water.
Bi said a canal that will divert water from river-rich central China to the arid north will be ready in April 2008, taking the pressure off Beijing's limited supply.
"It is continuing on schedule," Bi said. "It will be able to divert water from full reservoirs in Hubei (central China) province to Beijing to alleviate the shortage of water and ensure water security for the Olympic Games."
 Load-Date: May 10, 2007

 

End of Document
