

Sri Lanka's civil war rages in the shadows
The Associated Press
October 4, 2008 Saturday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1526 words
Byline: By RAVI NESSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MADHU, Sri Lanka 
Body




There are no worshippers at Sri Lanka's holiest Christian shrine.
The cherished statue of the Virgin Mary in the pale yellow church gazes out onto emptiness. The two villages nearby are abandoned. Everyone has fled for safety deep into rebel territory, disappearing into the black hole of Sri Lanka's civil war.
The conflict deadlier this year than the fighting in Afghanistan has grown increasingly ferocious as a new government offensive pushes deep into the rebels' power base in the northern jungles.
Yet it is taking place mostly in the shadows. The government has barred independent observers and foreign journalists from the war zone. Last month it banned foreign aid groups as well, promising to make up for their absence by providing aid itself.
That leaves the military and rebel-linked Web sites as the only source of information on the course of the war, the growing number of casualties, and the plight of some 220,000 displaced civilians trapped in the shrinking territory controlled by the Tamil Tigers. Analysts and diplomats say neither side can be trusted to report accurately on the latest fighting in the 25-year-old civil war between the ethnic Tamil separatists and the government, dominated by the Sinhalese majority.
"The scale of the blackout is extremely worrying," said Yolanda Foster, Amnesty International's Sri Lanka researcher. "There is no one really left to report and act as a witness to the outside world."
In a rare visit to the restricted area just south of the war zone, The Associated Press heard of the repeated displacement of thousands of civilians, of fighting far deadlier than the government reports, and of growing disenchantment with the Tamil Tigers in the areas under their control.
The modesty of the Madhu church belies its importance to Sri Lanka's Christians, who make up about 7 percent of the population. Our Lady of Madhu, a statue of the Virgin Mary that stands over the altar inside, is believed to hold miraculous healing powers and usually attracts hundreds of thousands of worshippers to an annual pilgrimage.
Now, abandoned cows lazily chew grass in overgrown fields. A pair of wild monkeys shares a fallen mango.
The church used to be located inside rebel-held territory, 130 miles north of Colombo, the capital. When the government started shelling the area last year people started leaving the worshippers who came every day, the dozens of workers who lived in the church compound, the 3,000 residents of two nearby villages.
Father Emilianuspillai Santhiapillai, the priest at the church, described the heartbreak of watching hundreds of departing families clogging the dirt road with tractors and other vehicles. Some were so poor they only had bicycles to move their belongings. Others carried what they could on their heads.
Most moved just a few miles up the road, out of artillery range, Santhiapillai said. But as the fighting pushed toward them, they had to flee again, he said. Some moved as many as eight times.
"When the shells start falling, they moved. When the army captures that place, they move again," he said, rifling through snapshots of the exodus. "Stage by stage, they were displaced."
With each move, villagers left behind more of their goods, and spent more of their dwindling cash, he said. They are among more than 160,000 civilians who have fled deeper into rebel-held territory for safety.
The church itself came under fire, and Santhiapillai fled in April, just before government forces overran the area. He rode in the back seat of a car, his arms draped around the statue to protect it.
"Even as we were going, the shells were falling," said Sister Ida Thomas, a nun at the compound.
By August, with the government in control of Madhu and the traditional festival looming, Santhiapillai and the statue returned.
But the pilgrimage was not the joyous gathering of 500,000 people of previous years, he said. With the government still concerned over security and the possible infiltration of rebel fighters, only 500 worshippers were allowed through the thicket of checkpoints, he said.
Now, no worshippers can come at all, and the priest and nuns are sequestered in the abandoned area, only allowed out with an army escort, he said.
"They should let people come, otherwise there is no reason for the statue to be here," he said. "They are afraid."
While civilians flee for safety, many of the soldiers fighting the war are dying.
About an hour away from Madhu, in the government stronghold of Medawachchiya, mourners sat quietly on plastic chairs amid the dust and trees in the yard outside C. Priyadarshna's house, hours after the Special Forces soldier was buried with full military honors. His comrades bowed in turn before his grieving mother.
The death of the 22-year-old lance corporal cast doubt on the government's account of the toll the war is taking on the military as it slowly pushes its way into the de facto state the rebels have set up in the north. President Mahinda Rajapaksa has said he hopes government forces will capture the rebels' administrative capital of Kilinochchi by the end of the year. But it's impossible to tell at what cost.
The military says the war killed 856 government troops and 6,290 rebels from January until the end of August. Analysts and diplomats reject those numbers as a gross exaggeration of rebel fatalities and a drastic undercount of its own. The rebels give only sporadic death tolls, which many question as well.
On Sept. 15, the day Priyadarshna was killed, the government announced the deaths of three soldiers. But his comrades said Priyadarshna and six other soldiers from his unit were killed in an intense battle in the Kilinochchi district.
One soldier said the troops were hit by what appeared to be a chemical weapon, perhaps a burn agent, loaded into a shell or a rocket-propelled grenade. Three of the bodies, including Priyadarshna's, were so badly disfigured they had to have closed casket funerals, he said.
Military spokesman Brig. Udaya Nanayakkara denied the rebels were using deadly chemical weapons, saying six soldiers suffered minor breathing problems from inhaling tear gas.
Other battles in the area that day killed eight more soldiers for a total of 15 military fatalities, or five times the official death toll, according to an official involved in the transfer of bodies from the war zone. The official spoke on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the topic.
A message of condolence from the military praised Priyadarshna as a "hero" who gave his life to the fight against the "terrorists."
It gave no details of his final battle.
Those still living under rebel rule are increasingly worried about their safety and increasingly defiant of the Tamil Tigers' hard-line regime, according to Vincent, a 47-year-old fisherman and one of the few civilians who managed to flee to government-held territory.
"People there are very scared, and they all want to come," he said. "If you stay there, you are just going to get killed."
Vincent, who fled last month from his home in a tsunami resettlement village of 100 families in the east coast region of Mullaittivu, asked that only his first name be used, fearing rebel retaliation against relatives he left behind. He now lives in the Sidambarapuram relocation camp north of Medawachchiya.
In recent months, Vincent's village in Mullaittivu has come under incessant attacks from air force jets, sometimes as often as four times a day. Shelling from both sides shook the ground, he said.
And the economy crashed. The price of cement skyrocketed to nearly 40 times what it costs in Colombo, and construction came to a halt, Vincent said.
Farmers stopped planting, fearing the fighting would force them to move before they could harvest, he said.
Fishermen risked their lives every time they took to their boats, because the rebels assumed they were fleeing and navy patrols worried they were attacking, he said.
As the fighting worsened, the rebels began conscripting more people by force, demanding more taxes from villagers and preventing all but a few chosen residents from talking to outsiders, such as Red Cross delegates, about their plight, he said. Rebel spokesmen have turned off their satellite phones, probably because of fears they will be traced, and the government has severed land lines to the rebel areas.
Vincent and his family of eight fled in August to prevent the rebels from conscripting one of his sons, jumping into his fishing boat late one night during a brief gap between rebel beach patrols, he said. Though people won't speak openly, many have stopped believing the rosy assessments given by the rebels, known formally as the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, Vincent said.
"The LTTE is telling us they are going to regain the land they are losing, but the people don't think they can get it back," he said.
Anger with the rebels who are historically ruthless in suppressing dissent has grown so strong that one furious form of defiance has become common in recent months, he said. When rebels bring a slain conscript home for burial, his grieving parents often beat up the fighters accompanying the body, he said.
The guerrillas let them.
 Load-Date: October 5, 2008

 

End of Document
