

Subpoenas at the ready, Democrats press the White House to allow Rove, top aides to testify
The Associated Press
March 23, 2007 Friday 7:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 859 words
Byline: By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Democrats, armed with subpoenas for President Bush's political guru Karl Rove and other top aides, are pressing the White House to allow the advisers to answer questions under oath about the firing of federal prosecutors.
The brokering has already begun. Republican Sen. Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania floated a compromise with Bush's counsel Fred Fielding, even as both sides publicly ratcheted up the standoff. The White House said Fielding would pass the proposal to Bush.
Bush's counsel discussed the dispute Friday in a meeting at the Capitol with Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, a close White House ally.
The two did not delve into specific proposals for Bush's aides to testify, but Cornyn said he urged Fielding to release as much information related to the prosecutor firings as possible, warning that he wanted "no surprises" to emerge.
"I told him, 'Everything you can release, please release. We need to know what the facts are,' " Cornyn said.
A Senate panel joined the House on Thursday in authorizing subpoenas for the aides, and the White House insisted it would fight attempts to compel Rove and others to appear on camera, testifying under oath.
It was the latest chapter in an unfolding drama pitting Democrats, who have promised to use their congressional majority to end the Iraq war and scrutinize the Bush administration, against a president who is battling to protect his prerogatives and exert his influence.
A compromise could avert a full-blown legal confrontation and prolonged court battle.
Specter, the former Judiciary chairman, reached out to the White House on Thursday afternoon with his proposal to allow the aides to be questioned publicly by just a limited number of lawmakers without putting them under oath.
Fielding "listened attentively and said that he had no authority to negotiate, but that he would take my suggestions to the president," Specter said.
Neither Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont nor Rep. John Conyers of Michigan, the Democratic chairmen of the judiciary panels, appeared in any rush to issue the subpoenas.
"I'll issue them when we're ready," Leahy said Thursday night, adding that he wants to see more documents and await the outcome of a hearing on the matter next week.
Democrats said their action gave them a bargaining chip in negotiations with Bush. The White House has said the aides would provide only limited interviews with select lawmakers behind closed doors, without a transcript and not under oath.
"We all would like them to get off their mountain and come down and negotiate," said Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y.
He said Friday that Specter's proposal reflects a bipartisan willingness to strike a deal with the White House on the matter.
A court clash with the executive branch over subpoenas could produce months and even years of legal wrangling, possibly delaying an opportunity for lawmakers to question Bush's top aides until after he leaves office.
In letters to Fielding on Thursday, House and Senate Judiciary Democrats said they couldn't accept Bush's conditions.
"Unfortunately, these letters show they aren't as interested in ascertaining the facts than going on a political fishing expedition," said White House spokeswoman Dana Perino.
Attorney General Alberto Gonzales, fighting for his job amid the furor over the fired prosecutors, promised to cooperate with Congress in the inquiry. "I'm not going to resign," he told reporters Thursday after an event in St. Louis.
Rep. Paul Gillmor, R-Ohio, said Gonzales has become a "lightning rod" for criticism and joined GOP lawmakers who want him out. "It would be better for the president and the department if the attorney general were to step down," Gillmor said.
Bush is standing by Gonzales and insists that the firings were appropriate. Democrats argue they were politically motivated.
Members of both parties want to know why the Justice Department fired eight well-regarded U.S. attorneys over the winter; whether politicians pressured the prosecutors to rush corruption cases; and whether the firings were punishment for the prosecutors' balking at Bush administration priorities.
Prosecutors are appointed to four-year terms by the president and can be dismissed by him at any time.
The Senate panel voted to approve subpoenas for Rove, former White House counsel Harriet Miers and her former deputy, William Kelley. The House authorized similar subpoenas a day earlier.
Democrats object to Bush's offer, which Fielding relayed to Capitol Hill on Tuesday, in large part because there would be no transcript and the testimony would not be public.
"I've had a lot of those unstructured briefings and found that I was given, in many instances, not the whole truth, nothing near the whole truth," Leahy said.
Leahy and Specter have formally asked Gonzales' former top aide, Kyle Sampson, who resigned amid the furor, to testify voluntarily next week before the Judiciary panel. The panel approved a subpoena for Sampson last week.
Bradford Berenson, Sampson's lawyer, on Thursday requested a delay until at least April 2 to give his client "more time to review the matter" and to allow Berenson to take a previously scheduled vacation with his family.
 Load-Date: March 24, 2007

 

End of Document
