

The dollar gains against the euro and pound with central banks standing pat on interest rates
The Associated Press
January 11, 2008 Friday 1:30 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 280 words
Dateline: BERLIN 
Body




The dollar gained on the euro and pound Friday in European trading after central banks stood firm on interest rates.
The 15-nation euro bought $1.4780 in midmorning European trading, drifting lower from the $1.4793 it bought in New York late Thursday after Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke said it would act aggressively in confronting economic woes.
The British pound slipped to $1.9578 after the Bank of England kept its own rate unchanged, but signaled a cut was likely in February. That was down from the $1.9609 it bought late Wednesday.
Bernanke's comments came after the Bank of England and the European Central Bank kept their own benchmark refinancing rates unchanged at 5.25 percent and 4 percent respectively, but remained split between the opposing challenges of higher inflation and worries about economic growth.
Those two factors could put the central banks on different paths in the coming months, with the ECB striking a hawkish note in the face of strong euro-zone inflation while the Bank of England is widely expected to deliver a cut next month to restore shaky consumer confidence.
That compares to the Fed, which has so far cut rates three times to 4.25 percent, with Bernanke signaling more cuts to come.
"Despite suggestions from Bernanke that further rate cuts would be seen from the Fed in due course," the euro and the pound were weaker, said James Hughes of CMC Markets.
Higher rates, used to combat inflation, also can strengthen a currency, and the euro's near-record strength has raised concern among businesses and politicians about the competitiveness of European exports.
In other trading, the dollar was down to 108.96 Japanese yen from 109.54 yen.
 Load-Date: January 12, 2008

 

End of Document
