

The 2008 Pulitzer Prize winners
The Associated Press
April 7, 2008 Monday 11:24 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 2237 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The 2008 Pulitzer Prizes for Journalism:
PUBLIC SERVICE: Reporters Dana Priest, Anne Hull and photographer Michel du Cille, The Washington Post.
Priest, Hull and du Cille won for their work exposing the widespread mistreatment of wounded veterans at Walter Reed Army Medical Center. Their series, "The Other Walter Reed," sparked a national outcry and resulted in immediate reforms by military leaders, the White House and Congress.
In its entry letter, the newspaper wrote that the effect of the Walter Reed series can be measured by the changed lives of the soldiers featured in the articles, but also by a changed system. The Army has restructured its system for oversight of wounded soldiers and added hundreds of personnel to oversee their care.
BREAKING NEWS REPORTING: Staff, The Washington Post
The newspaper was honored for its coverage of the deadly shooting rampage at Virginia Tech University on April 16, 2007. In the 72 hours after student Seung-Hui Cho killed 32 students and teachers and himself, the newspaper wrote about the failure of the university's mental health system to help Cho, despite many warning signs. The paper also gave readers profiles of Cho and each of his victims. The Pulitzer Board praised the paper for "its exceptional, multifaceted coverage" of the developing story in print and online.
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING: Walt Bogdanich and Jake Hooker, The New York Times, and staff of The Chicago Tribune.
The work of two newspapers to expose hazardous consumer products jointly won the category of investigative reporting.
Bogdanich and Hooker of the Times were awarded for their stories on toxic ingredients in medicine and other everyday products imported from China, leading to crackdowns by American and Chinese officials. The newspaper developed and built computer programs and a database to analyze tens of thousands of companies that sold drug ingredients to Chinese businesses.
The Chicago Tribune was honored for its exposure of faulty governmental regulation of children's' toys, car seats and cribs. The paper's stories resulted in an extensive recall of dangerous products and action by Congress to tighten controls and supervision of children's' products.
EXPLANATORY REPORTING: Amy Harmon, The New York Times
Harmon won for her coverage of the human dilemmas and ethical issues that accompany genetic testing. In her reports, Harmon used stories about individuals who faced difficult decisions after DNA tests revealed they inherited genetic mutations or genes for potentially deadly diseases. The Pulitzer Board commended Harmon for her "striking examination" of the impact of new genetic technology on American life. "We're among the first to grapple with information about our health, past and future lodged in DNA," Harmon said. "You can learn where your ancestors are from, what kind of children you might have, how you're likely to die."
LOCAL REPORTING: David Umhoefer, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
Umhoefer was honored for his investigation into a pension scandal in Milwaukee County. His stories uncovered violations of county ordinances and IRS rules by county employees to boost their pensions by tens and, in some cases, hundreds of thousands of dollars. Umhoefer built his own database after sifting through county records, revealing a pension system marred by cronyism, conflicts of interest and the illegal deals. His work prompted change and may lead to prosecution of key figures in the scandal.
NATIONAL REPORTING: Jo Becker and Barton Gellman, The Washington Post
Becker and Gellman were honored for their work detailing Vice President Dick Cheney's powerful and often hidden role in shaping national policy. The reporters' four stories revealed Cheney's influence on the Bush administration's policies on the economy, the environment, military tribunals and the makeup of the nation's highest court.
In its entry letter, the newspaper writes that Becker and Gellman's "Angler" series presented an unrivaled view of the inner workings of the White House and a revealing portrait of Cheney's "outsized and until now unsuspected influence on some of the president's signature domestic policies."
INTERNATIONAL REPORTING: Steve Fainaru of The Washington Post
Fainaru "took personal risks to expose a hidden side of the Iraq war" in his Pulitzer-winning reporting, the Post said. His efforts "took him deep into the world of private armies in Iraq, where tens of thousands of security guards are fighting a war parallel to the one waged by the U.S. military," the Post said. "In 2007, Fainaru documented how the private armies opened fire indiscriminately at insurgents and civilians and operated outside military and government regulation."
The coverage prompted new oversight and legislation.
FEATURE WRITING: Gene Weingarten of The Washington Post
Weingarten's "Pearls before Breakfast," according to the Post, "began as an audacious experiment in social science: What would happen if one of the greatest musicians in the world appeared incognito outside a Washington D.C. Metro station at rush hour and played some of the most beautiful music ever composed on one of the most valuable violins ever made?"
When readers learned that violinist Joshua Bell had played his Stradivarius "to an indifferent, unheeding audience," some said they were inspired to make fundamental changes in their lives. More than 40 clergy members crafted a sermon around the message they found in the story.
COMMENTARY: Steven Pearlstein of The Washington Post
Throughout 2007, Pearlstein "was ahead of his peers in chronicling the spread of `loosey-goosey lending,' as he called it, and anticipating its impact on the wider economy."
"Neither liberals nor conservatives consider him a reliable ally," the Post noted in its nomination letter. "One day he can be bitingly sarcastic, the next professorial and unjudgmental, but it is rare that he doesn't offer some original insight."
CRITICISM: Mark Feeney of The Boston Globe
Feeney was honored for his command of the visual arts, from film and photography to painting from the highs and lows of human existence.
"We live our lives horizontally," Feeney wrote about an exhibit on aerial photography. "What vertically we do know via leap or stair, elevator or airline is by comparison severely limited. We can rise, but for only so long."
EDITORIAL WRITING: No prize was awarded.
The finalists were Maureen Downey of The Atlanta Journal-Constitution for editorials on harsh sentences for consensual sex by teenagers; Rodger Jones of The Dallas Morning News for editorials calling for mandatory roll call votes on statewide legislation; the (Madison) Wisconsin State Journal staff for a campaign against abuses in the governor's veto power.
EDITORIAL CARTOONING: Michael Ramirez of Investor's Business Daily.
Ramirez won for what the judges called his "provocative cartoons that rely on originality, humor and detailed artistry."
BREAKING NEWS PHOTOGRAPHY: Adrees Latif, Reuters
Latif, based in Bangkok, was awarded the Pulitzer for his image of a fellow journalist struggling to aim his camera at a soldier despite being fatally wounded during a demonstration in Myanmar.
In a first-person account posted by Reuters, Latif described photographing from a catwalk as troops fired into a peaceful demonstration in September. He said he did not realize the man on the ground was Japanese videographer Kenji Nagai until colleagues identified him from Latif's photos hours later.
Nagai was among at least 10 people killed during the protests.
FEATURE PHOTOGRAPHY: Preston Gannaway, the Concord (N.H.) Monitor
Gannaway, who has been on the Monitor's staff since 2003, won the Pulitzer for her "intimate chronicle of a family coping with a parent's terminal illness," the Pulitzer board said. She was the National Press Photographers Association's 2005 photographer of the year for the New England region and runner-up in 2006.
A North Carolina native, Gannaway recently won the NPPA's Best Published Picture Story award for newspapers under 115,000 circulation.
The 2007 Pulitzer Prizes for Letters, Drama and Music:
FICTION: "The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao," by Junot Diaz
Diaz, a Dominican-American, was awarded the Pulitzer for his novel about a young, obese Dominican immigrant and his tragicomic quest for love. "Oscar Wao" also won this year's fiction prize from the National Book Critics Circle awards.
Diaz's fiction has been published in The New Yorker, The Paris Review and "The Best American Short Stories."
DRAMA: "August: Osage County," by Tracy Letts
Letts took the Pulitzer with "August: Osage County," about an Oklahoma patriarch whose disappearance sparks an acrimonious family reunion. The show originated at Chicago' Steppenwolf Theatre Company last summer and opened in New York in December.
In the Broadway production, the patriarch was portrayed by Dennis Letts, the playwright's father, who worked as an English professor for years at Southeastern Oklahoma State University. Dennis Letts died of cancer in February.
Tracy Letts was a Pulitzer finalist in 2003 for "Man from Nebraska."
HISTORY: "What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815-1848," by Daniel Walker Howe
Howe was awarded the Pulitzer for "What Hath God Wrought," which also was a National Book Critics Circle finalist. He also is the author of "Making the American Self: Jonathan Edwards to Abraham Lincoln," "The Unitarian Conscience: Harvard Moral Philosophy, 1805-1861," and other books.
Howe is the Rhodes professor of American history emeritus at Oxford University and professor of history emeritus at the University of California, Los Angeles.
BIOGRAPHY: "Eden's Outcasts: The Story of Louisa May Alcott and Her Father," by John Matteson
Matteson said his 14-year-old daughter was an inspiration for his book, which is about a girl's relationship with her father. "Not only did I understand parenting better after writing the book, but being a parent helped me to write the book," Matteson said.
Matteson, who holds a doctorate in English from Columbia University and a law degree from Harvard, teaches literature and legal writing as an associate professor of English at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York City. He has practiced law in California and North Carolina.
Matteson said his daughter wants to become a writer and he couldn't wait for her to get out of school to tell her the news.
POETRY: "Time and Materials," by Robert Hass; "Failure," by Philip Schultz
Schultz, who has written several collections of poetry including "Living in the Past," is founder of The Writer's Studio in New York City and a graduate writing program at New York University. Schultz, who lives in East Hampton, N.Y., grew up in a tough neighborhood in Rochester, N.Y. In a recent interview with Garrison Keillor, Schultz said he was a "terrible student" who suffered from dyslexia and didn't learn to read until he was in the fifth grade.
Hass, 67, grew up in San Francisco, loved the Beat poets as a young man and still lives in the Bay Area, where he teaches at the University of California, Berkeley. The U.S. poet laureate from 1995-97, his work is rooted in his California upbringing and reflects his commitment to the environment. "Time and Materials," which won the 2007 National Book Award, was his first new collection of poetry since 1996. He is married to poet and anti-war activist Brenda Hillman; "Time and Materials" includes strong criticism of the Iraq war.
GENERAL NONFICTION: "The Years of Extermination: Nazi Germany and the Jews, 1939-1945," by Saul Friedlander
Friedlander, a 75-year-old history professor at UCLA, was born in Prague to German-speaking Jews and spent his boyhood in Nazi-occupied France. For two years, he hid from the Nazis in a Catholic boarding school, where he dreamed of being a priest. His parents were killed in Nazi death camps after they were caught trying to flee to Switzerland.
After the war, Friedlander re-embraced his Jewish identity and emigrated to Israel, where he served in the Israeli army. He has written many other books on Nazi Germany and World War II including a personal memoir, "When Memory Comes." "The Years of Extermination" is the second of a two-volume history of Nazi Germany, following the 1997 publication of "The Years of Persecution, 1933-1939."
MUSIC: "The Little Match Girl Passion," by David Lang
Lang, 51, is co-founder and co-artistic director of New York's Bang on a Can, an arts group dedicated to commissioning, performing and presenting new and experimental music. In recent projects Lang has collaborated with filmmakers and other visual artists in the creation of monumental musical environments. Lang has said he believed it was necessary to thwart musical rules to "regain the mystery of hearing music for the first time." He said he might base a piece on "the life span of a potato" or the "rhythms of a blacksmith's hammer in the Middle Ages."
Bob Dylan won a special citation in music. Dylan, 66, was named to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988. Since his days writing protest songs, the singer and songwriter has been regarded as the rare popular musician worthy of serious literary attention. His work has been analyzed in classrooms and critical essays, and he is the only rock star to write a memoir, "Chronicles: Volume One," that received a National Book Critics Circle nomination. His most famous songs include "Blowin' in the Wind," "Like a Rolling Stone" and "Mr. Tambourine Man."
 Load-Date: April 8, 2008

 

End of Document
