

The Beijing of history falls to the bulldozer ahead of the 2008 Olympics
The Associated Press
March 31, 2006 Friday 6:08 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 833 words
Body




EDITOR's NOTE John Roderick reported for the AP from East Asia during the four tumultuous decades that followed World War II. In an occasional series, he remembers China's rocky past and examines the impact of those events as the country prepares to host the 2008 Olympics.
%byline(By JOHN RODERICK%)
%bytitle(AP Special Correspondent%)
%endtag(%)
Beijing, one of the fabulous cities of antiquity, is experiencing late-life growing pains as it feverishly struggles to look more modern for the 2008 Olympics.
The trip-hammers, cranes and concrete mixers are going full throttle to build what the city confidently promises to be the best stadiums, swimming pools, gymnasiums and playing fields to host the international games since their revival in 1896.
But the process of tidying up a city steeped in history but hurtling toward the future threatens to wipe out one of Beijing's unique architectural and social jewels, the hutong.
Narrow lanes which lead to the walled compounds blanketing much of the Chinese capital, the hutongs are masterpieces in the art of living. A chunk of Beijing's 15 million people occupy them.
Hutong (pronounced hoo-tong) is from the Mongolian word for well, named because it's believed the compounds were located near wells. They came into use during the era of the Mongol emperor Kublai Khan, who made Beijing his capital, and defined the city during the Ming dynasty about a hundred years later.
Often containing graceful gardens and moon gates, their occupants lived cheek by jowl, but the courtyard's high walls kept neighbors as distant or as close as they chose to be, one of the secrets of successful living in a crowded metropolis.
For years now, in anticipation of hosting the Olympics, Beijing has been bulldozing the hutongs to make way for the modern homes and new roads the city undeniably needs. Some of the hutongs were dilapidated and dirty, eyesores the city fathers didn't want Olympic visitors to see.
So the process continues, reducing the number of hutongs every year. Within a decade, it is predicted none will remain.
The destruction has gathered an air of inevitability, despite occasional protests by elderly occupants and the politically well-connected.
Last December, after five of the hutong compounds in the central, most picturesque part of the city had been torn down, eight distinguished advisers to the government publicly called for the preservation of the remaining 60.
This is not the first time the Communist regime has sacrificed a cultural treasure to the demands of modernity. The imposing city walls came tumbling down after the Communists came to power in 1949, freeing up space for urban expansion and doing away with a symbol of the old society.
As a new AP correspondent overawed by the splendor of the city, then known as Peiping, I strode the old wall in 1946, lost in day dreams of Kublai Khan and Marco Polo, the 13th-century Venetian traveler and teller of wondrous tales who claimed to live next to it for 20 years.
The Beijing hutongs also exerted their magic spell on me when I spent 1947 in one of them, 16A Ta Tien Shui Jing, the Great Sweet Water Well lane.
I whiled away my days leisurely writing dispatches on an old portable typewriter, delivering them to the post office like a true American imperialist in my own private rickshaw, pulled by a tireless and uncomplaining coolie.
Listening to the sounds of whistles attached to the legs of doves wheeling in the air above my hutong, I decided to spend the rest of my life in Beijing.
That was before the Communists marched into the city to shatter the quiet with their program of regimentation, Marxist progress and hostility to Americans of any kind.
They had no time for dreams or indulgent Americans like me.
One of the Chinese I knew then, an ex-pilot in the Nationalist air force, decided to stay on after the Communists took over in 1949. An agricultural student, he wanted, as did many other idealistic young Chinese, to contribute to the "New China" Mao Zedong represented.
An accomplished university gymnast and all-round athlete, my friend ended up in a work camp in the countryside, swilling the pigs, as punishment because he incautiously admitted he knew me, now a hated American.
I lost track of him during the next tempestuous Chinese half-century. Then, in an irony of life, the Olympics reunited us. The year was 1993, and China was making a failed bid to stage the 2000 games. My friend, freed from persecution after Mao's death, was the coach of the Chinese national boxing team. When an AP correspondent in Beijing interviewed him, he asked if I was alive. Told I was, he broke the long silence with a letter.
We kept in contact by mail for several years. In one letter he told me his skill in boxing saved his life when thugs in the countryside tried to kill him.
Today he is married with two children and free, retired in Shanghai on a teacher's pension. Age and distance have kept us apart. But for him, and for me, the 2008 games will have a very special meaning.
 Load-Date: April 1, 2006

 

End of Document
