

Thumbnails of the top ministers in the incoming Palestinian coalition government
The Associated Press
March 14, 2007 Wednesday 10:47 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 534 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The top ministers in the incoming Palestinian coalition government:
ISMAIL HANIYEH, 47, of Hamas is the designated prime minister. Haniyeh has served as prime minister of the outgoing Hamas-led government. Born in Gaza's Shati refugee camp, he graduated from Gaza City's Islamic University in 1987 with a degree in Arabic literature and became a close associate of Hamas founder Sheik Ahmed Yassin. In 1998, he took charge of Yassin's office, then rose to prominence after Israel's 2004 assassinations of Yassin and Yassin's successor, Abdel Aziz Rantisi. Haniyeh's outgoing government had few accomplishments during its year in power, due to international sanctions, conflict with Israel and bloody infighting. He remains extremely popular with the public, partly because he still lives in a refugee camp.
AZZAM AL-AHMED, 59, is the designated deputy prime minister. The chief of Fatah's parliament bloc, al-Ahmed is a combative legislator known for sparring with his Hamas colleagues. Al-Ahmed grew up in the West Bank and Jordan, earning a B.A. in economics from Baghdad University in Iraq. He served as the PLO ambassador to Iraq from 1979 to 1994. Loyal to the late Yasser Arafat, he rose through the ranks of Fatah, joining a key leadership body, the Revolutionary Council, in 1989. He was first elected to parliament in 1996 and won re-election a decade later, one of the few Fatah lawmakers to survive a public backlash against the party's corruption and mismanagement. Al-Ahmed served as a Cabinet minister in several Palestinian governments.
ZIAD ABU AMR, mid-50s, is the designated foreign minister. He is a U.S.-educated political scientist with a doctorate from Georgetown University. A former college professor, Abu Amr has been elected to parliament twice as an independent, although he was supported by Hamas in last year's legislative vote. He has frequently served as a mediator between Hamas and Fatah, and served as a Cabinet minister in 2003. He lives in Gaza City.
SALAM FAYYAD, mid-50s, is the designated finance minister. The internationally respected economist is considered the Palestinians' best hope for persuading the West to end economic sanctions against their government. Fayyad previously held the finance post, earning the trust of the international community by curbing Yasser Arafat's freewheeling spending and cracking down on corruption. Fayyad, who was born in the West Bank, holds a doctorate from the University of Texas and is a former executive at the International Monetary Fund. He lived in the U.S. for 15 years.
HANI KAWASMI, 52, is the designated interior minister, a sensitive position that oversees several Palestinian security services. Kawasmi is a seasoned bureaucrat and devout Muslim who is seen as a key link between Hamas and Fatah. He is scion of a prominent West Bank family that moved to Gaza 20 years ago, and the nephew of a PLO official who was assassinated in Jordan by unknown assailants in the mid-1980s. Kawasmi has never been a member of any political party but is considered to have good relations with them all. He was an administrator at Gaza's Islamic University, a Hamas stronghold, before taking a senior post in the Interior Ministry.
 Load-Date: March 15, 2007

 

End of Document
