

US presses North Korea to follows the rules of the international finance system
The Associated Press
November 20, 2007 Tuesday 2:19 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 358 words
Byline: By JOHN HEILPRIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




U.S. negotiators opened two days of talks with North Korea on Monday saying they were pressing for the communist government to follow the rules when doing business with companies abroad.
The head of the U.S. delegation, Daniel Glaser, said the two sides intended to look at "the North Korean conduct that has resulted in North Korea being isolated from the international financial system and to discuss the steps that North Korea has to take to become reintegrated."
Over two days of talks, Glaser, a deputy assistant secretary in the Treasury Department, said the United States also would emphasize to Kim Jong Il's communist government that "the international financial system is a rules-based system with its own set of expectations."
Glaser has been the main U.S. negotiator in other financial discussions that played a role in North Korea's agreement to scrap its nuclear program in exchange for oil and other incentives.
Conservatives have said the Bush administration seemed willing to drop its hard-line stance against alleged North Korean financial crimes to find a solution to a nuclear standoff with the North.
The United States has alleged that North Korea was involved in money laundering, counterfeiting and other illicit activities, which held up the nuclear disarmament efforts.
"Our challenge is to explain the international financial system and to explain those rules," Glaser said, adding that U.S. officials plan "to work with our counterparts in North Korea to help them understand what they need to do to meet those expectations."
The North Koreans left the talks at the U.S. Mission to the United Nations without speaking to reporters.
In March, Stuart Levey, a U.S. Treasury undersecretary for terrorism and financial intelligence, said Glaser had repeatedly expressed similar concerns to the North Koreans.
"Indeed, financial institutions around the world have made independent determinations that doing business with North Korean-related entities presents an unacceptably high risk of being tainted by illicit conduct," Levey said then. "North Korea is responsible for its own isolation from the international financial community."
 Load-Date: November 20, 2007

 

End of Document
