

What options the United States can pursue in the Iran nuclear crisis?
The Associated Press
January 29, 2006 Sunday 5:53 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 690 words
Byline: By ANNE GEARAN, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Days ahead of an important vote, U.S. officials sound less bullish about the prospects for quickly sending Iran before the U.N. Security Council over the country's nuclear program. A look at the issue and options for the Bush administration:
Q. What does the United States want?
A: Convinced that Iran is hiding ambitions to build a nuclear bomb, the United States and its European allies want the Security Council to take over international oversight of Iran's case and perhaps impose penalties. The administration wants an unimpeachable majority of other countries to vote with the U.S. when the U.N. nuclear watchdog agency, the International Atomic Energy Agency, considers the matter on Thursday.
Q. Why the Security Council?
A. It can impose penalties that U.N. member states are supposed to heed. The administration says that the weight the council carries may be enough to persuade Iran to back down.
Q. Are there other diplomatic options?
A. Yes, but they are dwindling. International negotiations to persuade Iran to give up disputed portions of its program have gone nowhere. A separate Russian offer to enrich uranium for Iran's energy program, preventing Iran from access to the sensitive technical know-how, may yield results; Iran says the idea needs work. On Saturday, Iran's foreign minister said his nation and Russia have agreed to allow more countries to participate in the plan to provide Iran with enriched uranium.
Q. What else could the United States do?
A. The U.S. could try to blow up or sabotage Iran's nuclear facilities; the administration says such a military operation is not now on the agenda. At the same time, Bush and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice say the president reserves the right to use force. A targeted strike could end or set back Iran's nuclear capabilities; a full-scale invasion similar to the U.S.-led drive into Iraq is considered far-fetched. Even a limited strike would be unpopular with some U.S. allies and could rally Iranians behind their confrontational president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Israel, which feels threatened by harsh rhetoric from Ahmadinejad, could one day use military force.
Q. Is the U.S. involved in talks with Iran?
A. The U.S. has not been involved in a nearly two-year bargaining effort led by European countries, but it agreed to support the talks from the sidelines last spring. The U.S. has had no diplomatic relations with Iran since the storming of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran in 1979. The U.S. imposed its own economic penalties after that and has little economic leverage over Tehran without international support.
Q. Does the U.S. want international economic penalties against Iran?
A. Not immediately, although that is an option for the Security Council. The U.S. faces opposition from several nations, including Russia, China and perhaps India, to moves that would cripple Iran economically or that could disrupt Iran's oil exports. Russia is a major trading partner of Iran; China is a large oil consumer and drilling partner; and India also gets energy from Iran.
Q. What if the U.S. cannot get the case to the Security Council?
A. Although there may be some moves to delay a vote at the IAEA meeting on whether to send Iran's case forward, Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns predicted Friday that a vote will take place. He also repeated U.S. assertions that Washington has the votes for referral. The U.S. and its European allies, many of whom are as convinced as Washington that Iran is up to no good, have not said what they would do if the IAEA votes no.
Q. Iran says it only wants to develop nuclear energy, not build bombs. What gives the U.S. the authority to try to intervene?
A. Legally, the U.S. or any other nation cannot by itself deny Iran the right to develop nuclear capability for civilian energy production. Iran signed an international nonproliferation treaty that lets Tehran pursue nuclear energy as long as it does not pursue weapons. The U.S. has been the loudest voice claiming that Iran has flouted its responsibilities under that agreement and must now be subject to more intense scrutiny at the Security Council, with all that that implies.
 Load-Date: January 30, 2006

 

End of Document
