

Yet again, the people of Beirut adapt to the rhythm of war
The Associated Press
August 8, 2006 Tuesday 5:25 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 553 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER TORCHIA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIRUT Lebanon
Body




Beirut, yet again, is in the line of fire, but Beirutis have plenty of practice living in war.
On the city's famed Hamra Street, the Starbucks coffee shop is closed, but most of the tables are full at Wimpy's. An upscale store selling ceramic tiles is shut, but a bookstore is open a 2004 novel, "It's Time to Return to Lebanon," on its shelves.
A 15-year civil war turned Beirut into a battleground until 1990. In the years since, the city recovered its reputation for beach fronts and boutiques, international cuisine and cosmopolitan flair.
Now the old image of Beirut a place of bombs, death and displaced people is back, with Israel bombarding Hezbollah guerrilla strongholds and Lebanese infrastructure.
Once again, vast tracts of Beirut stand virtually empty, their residents transformed into refugees by the attacks that began July 12. Some fled by boat to Cyprus or overland to Syria, while others took shelter in northern Lebanon.
Hundreds of civilians have died in airstrikes on vehicles and villages in southern Lebanon, but Israel says its bombing is selective, concentrated on Hezbollah positions near its border, on Beirut's southern edges and in the Bekaa Valley.
People on Hamra Street and in many other areas of Beirut, particularly Christian areas with no allegiance to the Shiite Muslim Hezbollah, go about their business in relative safety, though occasional booms in the distance serve as reminders of war.
Shopkeepers aren't making much money. Yellow tape seals off empty gasoline stations, traffic is scarce, and seaside hotels and amusement parks stand idle and shuttered.
A symbol of Beirut's stylish resilience in times of trouble, the Summerland Hotel was torn down a year ago for renovations. The Summerland, which opened in 1979 at the height of the civil war, had huge fuel tanks so it could operate even when fighting shut off power and a large security force to fend off gunmen.
One of the few pockets of nightlife in Beirut these days is Gouraud Street, where taxis wait for revelers at closing time around midnight. Torino Express, a hip, dimly lit, tightly packed place, stays open an extra hour. On Sunday night, the DJ played melancholy British pop from the early 1980s and a bartender announced last call by saying: "Beer? Check? Beer? Check?"
Around town, posters for a June 10 concert in Beirut by the American rapper 50 Cent still cling to walls, a memento of the city's days as a party town.
The jewel of Lebanon's rebirth after the civil war was the renovated part of downtown near Parliament, where elegant apartment buildings, banks and shops sit next to parks, squares and excavated Roman baths. The war-torn area was rebuilt by Solidere, a company founded by former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, who was assassinated last year.
Israeli warplanes have spared downtown Beirut. But a clock tower that once drew vacationing families is now surrounded by mounted photographs of children maimed, burned or killed by Israeli airstrikes.
Lebanese soldiers and police are periodically deployed in central Beirut, not in response to Israeli attacks but to provide security for dignitaries here to discuss the crisis.
The soldiers find other ways to help at one point, a black hearse broke down on a main road, and two soldiers in camouflage uniforms joined the driver in tinkering with the engine.
 Load-Date: August 9, 2006

 

End of Document
