

$Adv06-09; The last DJ standing turns to the Internet
The Associated Press
July 3, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1190 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It's 8 p.m. on a sticky summer Sunday in the city. One of America's last great freeform disc jockeys grabs a microphone and starts his weekly six-hour shift.
Vin Scelsa opens with a blast of Captain Beefheart and the Magic Band. He's soon moves to Miles Davis blowing "Summer Night," followed by Dick Van Dyke's "Put on a Happy Face" - a nugget from the "Bye Bye Birdie" movie soundtrack.
Country music legend Ray Price, 74, stops by for a chat about his half-century in the business. And Scelsa's show - self-deprecatingly titled "Idiot's Delight" - is once again off and running, an eclectic mix of music and monologue.
It's the kind of radio loved by Scelsa and his legion of listeners. But when the veteran DJ flips on the radio at home, the sounds he hears are not so sweet: abrasive talk radio, lousy music, Howard Stern imitators - lousy Howard Stern imitators.
"So many people find commercial radio uninteresting, and unchallenging and unenlightening," Scelsa observes. "There's a huge audience that listens to music, but doesn't listen to radio."
Scelsa, a New York City radio veteran since 1967, now offers an alternative: He's taking his acclaimed WNEW-FM show to the Internet. Scelsa has seen the future of rock 'n' roll radio - and it ain't on the radio.
"If radio's a lost cause, am I supposed to put my tail between my legs and slink away?" Scelsa asks. "No. There's a new medium, so I'm giving it a shot. It can't hurt."
His thrice-weekly Internet entry, "Vin Scelsa's Live at Lunch," debuted in May as Arbitron numbers indicated people were turning off their radios more frequently these days.
In 1993, the average listener spent a little more than 23 hours a week with their radio. That number has shrunk to 21 hours, says Arbitron spokesman Thom Mocarsky.
The Vin-ternet show, available around the world, airs live Tuesday through Thursday from noon to 3 p.m. EDT on www.artistent.com. It's also stored there for repeat listening at Web surfers' convenience.
Typically, there is no such thing as a typical Scelsa show.
On the June 1 Webcast, Scelsa - broadcasting from his suburban New Jersey home - paid homage to the late Tito Puente before segueing through tunes from Radiohead, Hank Williams, The Clash, Aimee Mann and Joe Ely.
There are no commercial breaks, just all Scelsa all the time.
Freed from Federal Communications Commission restrictions, Scelsa also did a bit on off-color language, then played - uncensored - the George Carlin "seven dirty words" routine.
"It's much more liberating for me," Scelsa says happily, although his early listenership of about 4,000 people is a fraction of what he draws on the radio.
Scelsa's not alone in enjoying the new media's freedom. On Los Angeles-based knac.net, an expanding audience hears a wider range of music and DJ's spouting four-letter words. Another L.A. station, KIIS-FM, has hired "I-jays" to run its interactive Webcast. Ex-J. Geils Band frontman Peter Wolf is host of a radio show via the same site as Scelsa.
These shows, unlike most available Internet radio, are created specifically for the medium.
Hundreds of stations worldwide provide live streams of their broadcasts, allowing listeners to sample shows from Ireland, Brazil or New Orleans. (The site www.I-probe.com provides links to 1,800 stations.)
Other services, like ClickRadio, offer a jukebox approach - listeners can choose their songs and hear them through the Internet, freeing them from the tyranny of music selected by station executives (known in the business as playlists).
Why this explosion of Internet options?
Critics offer plenty of reasons: Radio has too many commercials; there's less music; and the quality of the music … well, not everyone loves Britney Spears and the Backstreet Boys.
Take Rob Sheffield.
Writing in Rolling Stone, Sheffield recently described contemporary American radio as "a handful of media oligarchs imposing their uniform playlists on a nation of DJs who wouldn't know how to pick their own songs even if they were allowed to."
Take Prince.
Speaking at a recent Manhattan news conference, the artist formerly known as The Artist dissed the radio business.
"We need to get back to the day where DJs got to play their own records," Prince suggested. "We've got to get rid of playlists. If you ask people, they're sick of hearing the same thing over and over again."
Take Chris Scaiano.
Driving in his car, the 30-year-old Bronx resident turns off the radio and turns on the CD player. "New York radio is horrible," Scaiano says bluntly. "I don't want to listen any more."
It was not that way in 1967, when Scelsa began his career at the East Orange, N.J.-based college station WFMU-FM. He graduated to program director, earning $45 a week, before making the 1970 jump to commercial radio at the ABC's FM station, WPLJ.
It was there that radio "consultants" first became the bane of Scelsa's existence. He moved around, finally landing his weekly Sunday show in 1985 (it started in the morning, and eventually moved to nights).
"Idiot's Delight" became a cult favorite - "The Rocky Horror Picture Show" for the musically astute. The show shifted to WNEW-FM in January 1996, where it's still on.
What Scelsa envisions for his Internet show is something rare these days: a music program with personality.
That was once the standard in New York, long the epicenter of the radio world. In the 1960s, DJ "Murray the K" Kaufman was the honorary "Fifth Beatle," a larger-than-life voice booming from the radio. In the '70s, Frankie Crocker rode a white steed into Studio 54, announcing his return to the market.
DJs had attitude. In 1965, Kaufman quit in the middle of his show when management at WINS-AM instituted a playlist. Executives shrugged and switched to an all-news station.
"The stations were once selling the music and the DJs equally," says Ben Fong-Torres, author of "The Hits Just Keep on Coming: The History of Top 40 Radio."
No more. Music is often MIA, as on New York's top-rated Howard Stern show, and marketing is omnipresent.
"It's become more of a science in the last 20-25 years," says Fong-Torres, a former Rolling Stone writer. "Today the emphasis is demographics, everything broken down by age, sex, musical preference, region."
Radio's other drastic change was deregulation, allowing businesses to snatch up a variety of stations in a single market. Diversity was out; conglomerates were in.
"The airwaves belong to a few big corporations," Scelsa complains. "The notion that I grew up with in the '60s, that the airwaves belonged to the people and the owners held the license in public trust, has completely disappeared."
Listeners to Scelsa's first few internet shows came from places as varied as Red Bank, N.J., Kailua, Hawaii, and Alpharetta, Ga. To Scelsa, that's cause for optimism.
"I compare this to my early days at WFMU," Scelsa says. "In 1967, very few people owned FM radios. Most people did not own stereo receivers.
"I believe enough people around the country and around the world are interested in creative, freeform music, and they will flock when it's there."
On the net:
www.artistent.com 
www.I-probe.com 
www.clickradio.com 
End Adv for July 6-9 and Thereafter
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY315 of July 3
 Load-Date: July 4, 2000

 

End of Document
