

$Adv13-16; THE PUBLIC LIBRARY:; Bye-bye Marian the Librarian - say hello to the new public library
The Associated Press
April 10, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 2144 words
Byline: By HILLEL ITALIE, Associated Press Writer
Body




Imagine a place where you can rent videos, get your hair braided or sing in a rock 'n' roll band, a place where you can also attend plays, fax a document or walk among rows and rows of computers.
Imagine Starbucks, Amazon.com and bonus membership cards; market research, tracking systems and snappy slogans.
And imagine poetry recitals, reading groups, writing workshops and more books than you could ever read, from volumes of local history to display racks with the latest bestsellers.
Imagine all of this at no charge.
Almost no charge.
Imagine today's public library.
For more than a century, libraries were held up - and apart - as sanctums where knowledge was sacred and noise was muffled by a librarian's forbidding "sssh." Aloof, demanding, incorruptible, they were seen as both teachers and historians, informing and compiling without regard to popularity or profit.
But in the past 30 years, libraries have endured both a shift in public culture and reductions in public funds. Tax cuts in the 1970s and '80s, and budget cuts in the early 1990s pushed libraries to charge for services and to find other ways to raise money. Meanwhile, seekers of knowledge found they could turn elsewhere - to the local superstore or to their computers.
In response, like once-isolated countries opening their borders, libraries are expanding the definition of libraries. They aren't just centers for learning, but have evolved into centers of entertainment and social service. They no longer count on the public coming to them, but look for ways they can appeal to the public.
"Libraries have traditionally been extremely self-contained and conservative and traditional," says Steve Coffman, who directs a fee-based business center at the County of Los Angeles Public Library.
"We have tended to think of ourselves as a special case, and that none of the other rules apply to us. But the fact is a lot of people can do the things we do. Barnes & Noble can, and the Internet. We have to look for other models for how he run our libraries."
Change began with the buildings themselves. Hundreds of new facilities have been constructed over the past seven years and many others renovated, thanks in part to private donations and voter-approved bonds. Public libraries are getting bigger - the new central branch in Charleston, S.C., for example, is twice the size of the old one. They're also more computerized (about three out of four provide Internet access) and, they hope, more in tune with the times.
In New York City, the Queens Borough Public Library offers ballroom dancing, tax advice, theater and even an "Open Mike" night. In Buchanan, Texas, the Lakeshore Library calls itself "The Best Little Library in Texas" and provides such free amenities as yoga, exercise classes and tea and coffee.
The Hindsdale Public Library in Illinois posts homework assignments online with links to library resources and Internet sites. Washington's King County system remains open until midnight on Fridays and stages such events as tattoo clinics, "battles of the bands," break-dancing and hair braiding.
Statistics indicate that the new approach is working. According to a Gallup poll, almost two out of every three Americans visited a public library in 1998, up from 51 percent in 1978. Circulation figures, which include books, CDs and videos, increased from 1.3 billion in 1990 to 1.6 billion in 1996, the most recent year available from the American Library Association.
"I know some people have this 'Marian the Librarian' image of public libraries," said ALA President Sarah Ann Long, "but if you walk into a library these days, that image should quickly go away."
Librarians are reinventing themselves. They are told - and tell each other - that they must learn from the private sector. Many now call their patrons "customers," refer to themselves as "entrepreneurs" and "merchandisers" and worry about making the correct "investments."
A booklet distributed by the San Jose Public Library in California is entitled "The Merchant Librarian," and calls on "merchants and promoters of the library collection" to visit "grocery stores, bookstores, department stores, museums, other libraries, anyplace that has items for sale."
In Fairfax County, Va., the library has a department of research and development and divisions for marketing and fund raising. Library director Edwin Clay III, who teaches a course called The Entrepreneurial Librarian at Catholic University, said he was influenced by his work in the private sector.
"When you're in the business world, it gives you an idea of how things should operate," Clay said. "We're very entrepreneurial."
From coast to coast, the public library has evolved from being a haven from commerce to an experiment with it. Starbucks, for example, has two franchises attached to public libraries: the Ferguson Public Library in Stamford, Conn., and the main branch of the Multnomah County system in Portland, Ore.
It's an arrangement all parties see as profitable. The culture of coffee has never been far from the culture of the book and the existence of one seems to enhance the other.
"When coffee shops began to crop up in large bookstores we began thinking that it was something we should do. We see it as a service to our customers," said Ferguson library President Ernest A. DiMattia, Jr.
Other businesses have become involved with public libraries. Amazon.com and Barnesandnoble.com both have affiliate programs, a profit-sharing arrangement through which a patron can buy a book from an Internet seller. Dozens of libraries, from the Tacoma system in Washington to the New York Public Library are now members.
"We have a number of commercial endeavors," says Karen Van Westering, manager of publications for the New York library. "We do some commercial publishing in connection with Simon & Schuster and others and we have two library shops. Also, we're interested in Internet selling and Barnes and Noble has long been a supporter of the library."
But the booster spirit does not run throughout the library community. Some worry that commercial tie-ins compromise a basic principle: Libraries are not mandated to choose among patrons or among businesses. Agreeing to do business with a Starbucks or an Internet seller is a tax-supported endorsement of one product over another.
"When Amazon.com came to us there was pretty strong feeling that it wasn't the right thing to do," says Nancy Pearl, executive director of the Washington Center for the Book at the Seattle Public Library. "It's not the library's role to pick among bookstores."
"Amazon and Barnes and Noble do ask for exclusives," Van Westering says. "Given our druthers, we'd rather have done it with others, too."
Another controversial practice has been the charging of fees. A brochure from a public library in Paso Robles, Calif., promotes the "Library Plus Card … an exciting and economical way to maximize your use of library services." For an annual cost of up to $40, purchasers receive such benefits as computer and typewriter use, photocopying privileges and home delivery.
"A few years ago, we were short on funding and we had to come up with something new," says Paso Robles city librarian Ann Robb. "The idea was to provide some services that we didn't have before and they would be fee-based."
In 1989, the Los Angeles County Public Library began the fee-based FYI program. FYI offers a variety of business-related services, with costs ranging from $10 for a government document to potentially thousands of dollars for extensive research.
Coffman, director of the library's FYI program, said patrons had been asking for computer-based research facilities and there wasn't money to give them for free.
"The first issue to us was that if you don't offer the services, nobody at all has access," he says. "And say if you're a woman getting her business off the ground. If she can't go to the public library, she'll have to get help from somewhere else. Their objective will be to maximize their profit. Ours will be to get her what she needs."
"I think the commercialization that's going on is to be deplored," says David Sabsay, a California-based library consultant and the former director of the San Jose Public Library. "I would rather see libraries looking for ways to increase public funding rather than tapping the poor user. It's supposed to be a free, public library."
The first libraries in the United States were either private or charged for services. That changed thanks to a minister named Dr. Abiel Abbot. Arriving in Peterborough, N.H., in 1827, he was eager to encourage reading among his fellow citizens. Abbot began lending his own books and by 1833 had helped persuade the town to provide money for the country's first free, tax-supported library. Much of the original collection was religious, but it also included works by Cervantes, Daniel Defoe and Washington Irving.
Peterborough still operates today, but other public libraries took years to catch on. The first major branch didn't open until the 1850s, in Boston, and only in the 1900s did libraries really proliferate, with millions of dollars donated by industrialist Andrew Carnegie.
Libraries expanded throughout the 20th century, especially after World War II, when the rise of suburban communities created the need for new facilities all over the country. Today, there are 8,946 libraries.
In the early years, the mission of public libraries was very much a mission. Driven by the spirit of Yankee reform, they viewed themselves as educators of the underclasses. The ideal librarian, observed one 19th-century official, was "the city physician," called upon to "administer from the bibliothecal dispensary just the strengthening draught that will suit each case."
But these days librarians are more likely to let patrons fill out their own prescriptions. Fairfax County, for example, has a "tracking" system that allows libraries to identify trends in circulation and adjust new purchases accordingly. When managers noted heavy borrowing of computer, health, travel and home decorating books, they bought more books in those categories.
Inspiration came from the suburban Baltimore County libraries, known for decades as the "Give 'Em What They Want System." This model was implemented by longtime director Charles Robinson, who joined the library in 1960s and began to reduce the number of individual titles purchased each year, while increasing copies of popular books.
"People who read best sellers are taxpayers," says Robinson, who retired in 1996 and now serves as director emeritus. "And if you're going to have a bunch of taxpayers who come to the library every week, what I am going to do? Get this unusual book about poetry in South Africa because I think it's good literature? And if you buy a book which nobody reads you're cheating the taxpayer."
Baltimore County's circulation per capita quadrupled over a 25-year period and the system's influence is now so strong that libraries don't have to use Robinson's name to borrow his ideas. The belief is common that libraries cannot simply choose what they think the public needs, but what the public wants.
"I worked with Charlie in the Baltimore system (in the 1970s), and what was then very new and very controversial has become a standard philosophy," says Elliot Shelkrot, director and president of the Philadelphia Free Library. "By the time I joined the Philadelphia library (in the mid-1980s), many of the things we were doing in Baltimore had been adopted there."
"His ideas have merit, but he's carried them too far," Sabsay says. "There's no depth to the Baltimore County collection. You end up leaning too heavily on what people request."
While libraries - including Baltimore County - still stock historical documents, government archives and other items you don't find at a superstore, they now make the kinds of decisions associated with superstores. Should they take the initiative in deciding what to purchase, hoping that patrons will come around? Or should they simply base their purchases on what patrons have already bought?
Either decision is risky. You could end up buying books no one checks out, but you could end up not buying a book that over time becomes a classic. Under the system of "Give 'Em, What They Want," a library would have rejected "Moby-Dick," which took decades to find an audience.
"Libraries get caught up justifying themselves and one easy way of justifying yourself is to look at circulation," Pearl notes. "The thinking becomes that because John Grisham and Tom Clancy are going to circulate far more often than Shakespeare's 'Coriolanus,' why not put your money into John Grisham and Tom Clancy? I don't feel this is good for the future of libraries."
---
MONDAY: Part two: Library schools increasingly ride the information highway
 
End adv
 
---
On the Net: The American Library Association: http://www.ala.org/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY372-373 of April 10
 Load-Date: April 11, 2000

 

End of Document
