

$Adv 26; For the new president, the accumulation of moral authority is on hold
November 22, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 796 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




By this time in the normal course of events, the vital transition would be well under way - the transition that makes a politician into "Mr. President," a leader accepted even by those Americans who did not want him in the White House.
Winning the title does not instantly bestow the standing.
Now either George W. Bush or Al Gore will have to try to earn it in an abbreviated interregnum, against a tide of bitterness and divisiveness that is rising, not ebbing.
The transformation from campaign stridency to solemn presidency is one that normally unfolds over the 10 weeks between the division of elections and the unity symbolized by inauguration. A careful step at a time, new presidents prepare for power with overtures to Congress, with courtesy messages to world leaders and, from the wisest winners, gestures to the rivals they have just defeated.
In this tangled, bitter, overtime struggle to determine whether Gov. Bush or Vice President Al Gore will be the 43rd president, that transition is going to be far more difficult than the complicated but customary task of choosing a White House team, nominating a Cabinet, and drafting an agenda for the first chapter of a new administration.
For that, there are precedents, seven transitions from one president to his newly-elected successor since World War II, six of them shifting power from one party to the other. There's even a new guidebook produced by a Brookings Institution team on the appointments that shape a new president's administration.
But not since 1876 has a presidential election been disputed as this one is, and when Rutherford B. Hayes was declared the winner, only two days before inauguration, Democrats said he'd stolen the office. Despite that start to what he had promised would be his single term, it was not a powerless one. He ended Reconstruction, restoring self-rule to the Civil War South, and he began the process that eventually led to reform of the corrupt civil service.
When he was campaigning, Bush often said that when he took his programs to Congress, he'd tell them that he came with a message from the American people. He won't have one, nor would Gore should he win the White House by recount in Florida, for the decisive, and undecided 25 electoral votes that will make a president.
That will have to be done with persuasion and bipartisanship in a Congress so narrowly held by the Republicans that there will have to be compromise to get anything done, whoever is president.
These are the days and weeks for that to be happening - as when Ronald Reagan roamed the corridors of the Capitol, looking in Democratic leaders as well as the Republican Senate that had come to control on his coattails. He and Nancy already had been to the White House, welcomed by President Carter, the man he had just defeated. "I think you'll like the place," Carter said.
Eight years ago it was President George Bush's time to swallow defeat and welcome Bill Clinton to the White House for a two-hour post-election talk on world trouble spots and pending problems. They called it warm and informative.
One Clinton task of the weeks between winning and beginning was to ease away from his campaign promise of a middle class tax cut to shift to an economic program designed to deal with deficits he said were worse than he'd been led to believe. Clinton said it would be irresponsible for any president to ignore changing circumstances.
This also is the period in which presidents-elect reach out to the people and groups who had most opposed them, Ronald Reagan, for example, to black leaders, promising suspicious minorities that he would defent their rights "even at the point of a bayonet."
It is a time for symbols of the American way of transferring power - of messages to and from foreign leaders, as in Soviet Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev's to John F. Kennedy on Nov. 9, 1960, to express hope, hollow, as it turned out, for Cold War steps toward improved relations. Kennedy replied by wire that "a just and lasting peace" would be his major task. All that two years before the brinksmanship of the Cuban missile crisis.
The symbolism can be momentous or minor. President-elect Clinton conferred with Reagan in Los Angeles, and came away with both advice and a jar of jelly beans.
From such episodes are presidents made. Elections determine who the new man will be. The gradual process of coming to power determines how he will be seen by the Americans he has been chosen to lead.
In this incredible season, that gathering of the moral authority of the new leader is on hold while the hostilities of the campaign are waged on in courtrooms and the counting rooms of Florida.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears has reported on Washington and national politics for The Associated Press for more than 35 years.
 Load-Date: November 23, 2000

 

End of Document
