

$Adv 15; Wary of going negative, the candidates join the Golden Rule club
The Associated Press
October 12, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 749 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




So Al Gore and George W. Bush agree on the Golden Rule, although it doesn't cover what they are trying to do unto each other in their presidential campaign debates.
Neither has managed to draw political blood from the his rival in the first two rounds, with one to go, Tuesday night in St. Louis.
That probably will be another cautious confrontation, since Gore and Bush both are wary of being condemned for the sin of negative campaigning. The long knives are wielded offstage, usually by their campaign lieutenants, not to be seen on television camera.
The St. Louis debate will be in a less manageable format, invited voters asking questions of the nominees, who got so cordial in Winston-Salem, N.C., Wednesday that Bush said it sounded like a love fest.
Not for long, though. When the opening came, the Texas governor said he thinks Gore's credibility is an issue the voters should consider because the vice president has a tendency to overstate and misstate his examples and his record.
Gore was ready. He confessed to errors in the Oct. 3 opening debate, said he'd try to do get the details correct, and pledged that as president he would "get the big things right."
Bush said whether that's good enough for him "depends on what he says in the future in the campaign," but the Republicans obviously aren't going to be dropping an attack line that has helped their nominee gain on Gore in the polls that now rate them even.
Bush may be vulnerable on the exaggeration question, too, after saying, vehemently, incorrectly, and twice, that all three men convicted in the pickup truck dragging murder of a black man in Texas are sentenced to die for it.
In fact, the jury sentenced two to death, the third to life in prison. Bush used the example in defending his position against a measure Gore favors to increase penalties for offenses deemed hate crimes. "We can't enhance the penalty any more than putting those three thugs to death and that's what's going to happen in the state of Texas," Bush said.
Both shied from the hardest lines their campaigners have used. The governor said he didn't use such words as "serial exaggerator" about the vice president. The people who speak for his campaign did that. And Gore said he hadn't called Bush a bungler. "I don't use language like that," he said. Again, his campaigners have.
By then, they were well past the dozen points on which they'd agreed earlier, including Bush's praise of administration policy in the Middle East crisis and toward Yugoslavia.
All that agreement is what got them to the Golden Rule, which came up when they were differing on the gun controls Gore wants toughened. Bush was saying that gun laws aren't the only answer to school violence, that the society must get back to teaching children right from wrong.
"But there's a larger law," Bush said. "Love your neighbor like you'd like to be loved yourself."
"I also believe in the Golden Rule," said Gore, "and I agree with a lot of the other things that the governor has said."
But debating is about disagreeing, and trying to raise doubts about the other candidate by posting challenges he can't rebut. By that standard, the debates so far are about as even as the preference polls, with neither nominee able to show a clear advantage.
What the debates have done is produce raw material each side has been shaping into issues, Bush on his rival's credibility, Gore on the governor's capability for the presidency.
They also have shredded the form charts. As the veteran of 40-plus campaign debates, Gore was supposed to have the advantage, and debate coaches generally agree that he has shown it. But that has not been reflected in the between-debate polls, even though they show the vice president is rated stronger on issues ranging from the economy and health care to world affairs.
Bush held his own with the more experienced vice president on foreign policy, but then had trouble countering when Gore piled on statistics in criticizing the Texas record on child health care.
Bush's rebuttal was to say that Gore could "throw all those kind of numbers around" but Texans are doing what's right. He did not dispute the Gore statistics.
That is the sort of debater's flaw that leads experts in the field to judge Gore the better at it. But the fine points of debate scoring are pointless in this series. The real experts render their judgments three weeks from Tuesday.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Walter R. Mears has reported on presidential campaign debates for The Associated Press since 1960.
 Load-Date: October 13, 2000

 

End of Document
