

'Big Brother': In the house and on the air
The Associated Press
July 6, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 666 words
Byline: By FRAZIER MOORE, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Well, they're all moved in and the tape is rolling.
CBS' "Big Brother" premiered Wednesday by showing the arrival of 10 strangers the night before who will share a house (and 28 TV cameras) for the next three months.
"Houseguests, are you ready?" asked host Julie Chen, as the contestants gathered at the threshold of the 1,800-square-foot home built at a Los Angeles-area studio lot.
They stepped into the house, where the dozens of cameras and microphones will track their cohabitation on national TV and the Internet.
Then, disappointingly, fadeout. With no time for preliminary squabbles and hanky-panky, the hour was a mostly breathless buildup to the series to come, which CBS will air five nights a week (Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday).
Chen, who by day is the news reader for CBS' "Early Show," did a perky to-and-fro with another host, Ian O'Malley, who gave a tour of the house, showing off the infrared cameras in the bedrooms and the chickens in the enclosed backyard.
Footage of the original Dutch version of "Big Brother" served as background - and padding.
House rules (so to speak) for the series were covered: Every two weeks, the housemates will nominate two colleagues for expulsion, and TV viewers will vote out one of them by a phone poll. Then, from the three remaining players, the audience will choose the winner - who will be $500,000 richer.
And, for the first time, the 10 contenders were announced and profiled:
- Jamie, a beauty queen who works for a Seattle dot-com company. She expects to miss her daily lattes.
- George, a jolly roofer from Rockford, Ill. Says what he'll miss most is his family and his 23rd wedding anniversary.
- Eddie, a hunky lad from Commack, N.Y., who lost his left leg to cancer. A wheelchair basketball star and a student at the University of Texas, he vows, "I'm not gonna quit. I have the stamina."
- Josh, described as a ladies' man and a college student who says he plans to bring to the house a pair of work gloves and a box of condoms.
- Cassandra, a New Yorker who works as a communications specialist at the United Nations and wonders how she will maintain her dreadlocks without a stylist's assistance.
- Jordan, a buffed blonde who is a writer … and a dancer at a "gentleman's club."
- Curtis, a New York-based law clerk to a federal judge. He's a self-described Christian who says he's ready for romance at the house.
- Karen, a Columbus, Ind., mother of four and wife of 22 years. Looks forward to a little time for herself, even with nine strangers: "I'll only be taking care of myself."
- Brittany, who works at a drug company she describes as very conservative, then after work installs her nose ring and goes out dancing.
- William, who loves women, works out, works with children, and shaves his bald head twice a day.
The "Big Brother" bunch got in the door by submitting videotaped applications and undergoing what CBS called extensive screening and background checks.
In keeping with CBS' game plan that "Big Brother" should attract young demographics, the residents skew young and attractive. Of the 10, only George, Cassandra and Karen would be obvious ringers on MTV's house-sharing series "Real World."
The "Big Brother" Web site, maintained by America Online, was activated shortly after the broadcast ended on the East Coast. The site has bios for each resident, quotes about them from housemates, even details of the contents of the suitcases they were permitted to carry in.
Ultimately, viewers will get at least four live Internet video feeds from the house around the clock. CBS picks the cameras used at any given time, editing out nudity and profanity.
The "Big Brother" debut aired right after the sixth weekly episode of "Survivor" (where health club consultant Joel was voted off the island by his tribe). Setting the pace for TV's so-called reality craze, that castaways competition was the first series to make a ratings dent in ABC's hit "Who Wants to Be a Millionaire."
On the Net: http://BigBrother2000.com 
 Load-Date: July 7, 2000

 

End of Document
