

'Nerd' is the word: A history of the Internet from Bob Cringely
The Associated Press
November 23, 1998, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 851 words
Byline: FRAZIER MOORE, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




You might think you've stumbled on an arcane world when an in-joke inhabits the very title of this new film about the Internet.
Airing on PBS Wednesday at 8 p.m. EST, the documentary is called "Nerds 2.0.1: A Brief History of the Internet." A sequel to "Triumph of the Nerds," a 1996 history of the personal computer, "Nerds 2.0.1" bears the numerical designation for updated software.
But rather than go with 2.0, the 2.0.1 certifies this "update" is properly debugged.
Get it? Well, you should get just about everything else in this breezy, fact-filled survey, even if you think JAVA can be ordered at Starbucks and that you learn computer protocol from Miss Manners.
Returning as host and co-writer of this three-hour special is Robert X. "Bob" Cringely, an egghead cum blithe spirit who notes that, while 85 percent of Americans are not yet wired to the Internet, the numbers are mushrooming: Internet traffic doubles every 100 days.
He should know. Though he was born Mark C. Stephens, his alter ego Bob Cringely is recognized as a wired-in author, TV personality and weekly columnist on the PBS Web site. Now, thanks to him, this revolution is being televised.
And he wants you to know that, despite an occasional inside joke, the Internet is long past being just for insiders, those "geeks and nerds," as Cringely says, "who, largely by accident, invented it - making billions and billions of dollars along the way."
Like the six Stanford University graduates who started a Web media company now known as Excite. When interviewed in 1994, these digital frontiersmen were working out of a garage and living on burritos.
Three years later, Cringely revisits them: Their company is doing just fine, with the lads worth more than $ 100 million apiece.
Cringely points out that "www" addresses now adorn almost every household product label and TV commercial. You can order a book online from Amazon.com or purchase virtual favors by the minute from a cyber-sylph named "Kat."
All this, and the Internet is still in its infancy! Then Cringely takes you back, even before conception.
Sure, the Soviet satellite Sputnik launched the space race. But in those pre-NASA days, the Russians' one-upmanship jolted President Eisenhower into creating the Advanced Research Projects Agency, charged with nurturing high-tech projects of all kinds.
One of those projects would be the ARPAnet, originally meant just to link ARPA's own computers.
"The Internet was founded right in this room," says Cringely in a grand "Nerds" moment, all the grander for the gray anonymity of this Pentagon chamber where it all began.
Then in 1972, a couple of years after the ARPAnet had networked mainframe computers across the nation, the unanticipated "killer application" emerged. Today, it remains the favorite use for the Internet: e-mail. And Cringely introduces you to Ray Tomlinson, its unassuming mastermind, who bestowed stardom on the "at symbol" as his way to punctuate each e-mail address.
There is much more to "Nerds 2.0.1." It travels to the 1980s and the networking of those cool new PCs.
Then in the 1990s comes the World Wide Web. You meet Tim Berners-Lee, whom you can thank for conjuring a way to access any piece of information from any computer anywhere. And who introduced "www.blahblah.com"-speak. 
But like a good meal in a fine restaurant, what really put the Web over was its presentation. This took a giant leap with the arrival of the so-called browser.
Instead of humdrum lines of text, what you saw on the screen was "an attractive, easy-to-use shop window," Cringely says- "a gateway to the riches of the Internet."
The browser was the creation of a new life form in a computer biosphere first populated by nerds and suits, as Cringely observed during a visit to Manhattan last week. Call this newcomer the stylist.
"The World Wide Web is the first high-tech medium that has an aesthetic component," Cringely said. "For the first time, the business people and technical people have come to value aesthetics.
"For most of the history of the computer industry, you were considered a god if you were capable of using something that was hard to use. But if a Web site isn't easy to use, fast-loading, and, beyond all that, attractive - people won't go to it.
"Inclusion, not exclusion, is the rule now," he declared. Cringely and his special will make you all the more eager to log on.
---
Elsewhere in television …
DAVE'S FIFTH: It's Dave's anniversary, and stars including Jerry Seinfeld, Steve Martin, Puff Daddy and Mia Farrow will stop by to celebrate on "The Late Show with David Letterman 5th Anniversary Special." It will feature a retrospective look at some of the funniest, most outrageous and headline-making moments of the Emmy-winning late night series. There also will be an anniversary Top Ten List, encore performances of some of the best Stupid Pet and Human Tricks, and guest appearances by Michael J. Fox, John Goodman, Cindy Crawford and New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani. The 90-minute prime-time program airs tonight at 9:30 p.m. EST on CBS.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Frazier Moore can be reached at fmoore "at" ap.org
 Load-Date: November 23, 1998

 

End of Document
