

A happy happenstance: FDR the president was FDR the pack rat
April 27, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 756 words
Byline: By JOEL STASHENKO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HYDE PARK, N.Y.
Body




The most valuable collection assembled by Franklin Delano Roosevelt doesn't contain stamps or naval models or the other specimens he so avidly assembled.
As a collector, FDR's best subjects turned out to be FDR himself and the places he called home.
The three dwellings besides the White House that dominated his life are in public hands, restored and open for inspection by those curious about America's longest-serving president.
Springwood, in Hyde Park, was his birthplace and where he felt most at home. Also on the family land overlooking the Hudson River 70 miles north of New York City are the FDR Library and Museum. Eleanor and Franklin Roosevelt are buried on the grounds.
Off the coast of Maine, the Eleanor and Franklin Roosevelt "cottage" - it contains 34 rooms - is operated by a joint U.S.-Canadian commission on Campobello Island. The Roosevelt family used the island as a summering location starting when FDR was a child and it was at that cottage where he was stricken by polio in 1921.
At the Little White House Historic Site in Warm Springs, Ga., about 70 miles southeast of Atlanta, FDR discovered the warm mineral springs that for a time had given him hope of walking again. He died from a stroke there, sitting for a portrait, in 1945.
The homes share a lived-in feel and wide displays of FDR memorabilia. It's a happy historical coincidence that Roosevelt, one of the 20th century's leading figures, also was one of its great pack rats.
"If he had not been president of the United States, he would have still gone down in history probably as America's greatest collector," said Vernon Newton, director of the FDR Library and Museum in Hyde Park.
And he didn't just keep the ceremonial objects of a life of high public office. Roosevelt, and those around him, seemed to realize early on that he would not leave behind an estate, but a legacy, and the refuse of most men's lives would be museum pieces for his.
"You or I die, most of our stuff is going to end up in a Goodwill bin somewhere," said Tom Kelly, a presidential scholar and professor at Siena College in Loudonville, N.Y. "But in his case, almost immediately, everything was enclosed in amber."
Why else would the riding habit he used at age 7 survive, or the membership card that a riding club gave the youngster? There are football ticket stubs from college, and a seeming warehouse full of scribbled letters and notes starting from his childhood. After FDR's death, his family found 125 canes at the Little White House, and twice that number at Hyde Park.
The Roosevelts had owned property in Hyde Park since the mid-1800s but they never quite meshed with the community.
For one thing, they were rich; for another, they were Democrats.
"It's Republican country, it still is today," said Diane Lobb-Boyce, ranger for the U.S. Park Service at the Springwood site and a former Hyde Park town historian. "You also have to remember something about the Roosevelts: They lived here, but they were aristocrats. They wintered in New York. They summered at Campobello. They went to private schools. They went to Harvard. Local young men barely went to high school, let alone college."
Roosevelt never carried Hyde Park in his four presidential elections.
The Roosevelts fit in better at Campobello Island, where their neighbors were well-heeled vacationers seeking to escape the summer heat of New York and other large cities. But FDR's enthusiasm for Warm Springs was not returned by the rich people who'd been drawn to its buoyant mineral waters for generations.
By extolling the therapeutic effects of the waters on his polio-deadened legs, FDR caused other polio victims to flock to the area.
"The people who owned cottages around the area voted to keep the patients out," said Mary Thrash, interpretive ranger at Warm Springs. "He bought the resort and cottages as they became available to prevent them from doing that."
FDR formed the Warm Springs Foundation, a rehabilitation hospital for polio victims now called the Roosevelt Warm Springs Institute of Rehabilitation and run by the state of Georgia. With the waning of polio, the institute now specializes in treating the victims of head and spinal injuries, arthritis and stroke.
Visitors to all the FDR shrines come from two main groups: school children and people old enough to remember the Roosevelt era.
Older people come for nostalgia, Lobb-Boyce said.
"The older folks talk about the war and they talk about the Social Security benefits mostly," she said. "And everybody seems to have a personal memory about FDR."
 Load-Date: April 27, 1997

 

End of Document
