

A New Gingrich or Just the Calm After the Storm?
November 11, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 877 words
Byline: By LARRY MARGASAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A Democratic election campaign that portrayed the speaker of the House as the enemy of the people may have produced a more humble Newt Gingrich.
After a pounding so relentless that some Republicans ran away from him in their campaigns, Gingrich - who once contrasted Democratic policies and the Republican revolution in apocalyptic terms - now sounds like the calm after the storm.
"There ought to be a year of solving problems instead of attacking," the Georgian says. It's time to "reach out" to President Clinton and "give him a chance to lead" on an agenda that includes less government, tax breaks and a balanced budget.
Gingrich spoke with Clinton after the election, describing the exchange as positive. He also talked with Dick Gephardt - his first one-on-one conversation with the House Democratic leader in more than a year. They agreed to meet soon.
William Frenzel, a Republican House member for 20 years and now a Brookings Institution scholar, said Gingrich's transformation to a voice of reason is genuine.
It really began earlier this year, he said, after the speaker emerged from his "hideously unpopular" tactics, and began compromising. The result: passage of welfare reform, a minimum wage increase, changes in health insurance, agreement on spending bills.
"I think you'll see a continuation of the '96 Newt Gingrich rather than that of 1995, which was the slash-and-burn version," Frenzel said. Two years ago, he said, Gingrich and his followers "believed they were anointed forever and for all time to do whatever they wanted … . Americans like evolution rather than revolution."
Rep. Barney Frank, a Massachusetts Democrat and Gingrich critic, said he believes the speaker has indeed changed because "it's very much in his self-interest to be conciliatory."
Frank said Gingrich is reacting to the narrow victory of ethics committee chairwoman Nancy Johnson, R-Conn., accused by her Democratic opponent of trying to protect the speaker in an investigation of his outside activities; a smaller GOP House majority next year; and the realization of some Republicans that Gingrich's unpopularity was hurting them politically.
"He's got some people who are going to be very careful to keep their distance," said Frank.
In fact, Rep. Steve Largent, R-Okla., a Gingrich stalwart completing his first term, endorsed a columnist's suggestion that Gingrich step aside as speaker until the ethics issues surrounding him are resolved.
"I think it would reduce the amount of rhetoric that we would hear on the floor for the 105th Congress and allow us to work more constructively and move forward," Largent said on "Fox News Sunday."
Gingrich spokesman Allan Lipsett said the speaker's office wants the ethics committee to complete its investigation before Congress reconvenes in early January. "We fully expect Newt to be speaker in the 105th Congress," he said.
As Gingrich prepares to become the first Republican speaker since 1929 to succeed himself, there's no telling whether he will turn aggressive if comity breaks down.
But for now, Gingrich certainly sounds different then he did two years ago when, fresh from the Republicans' smashing 1994 House takeover, he blew like a great force across America.
Then, he blamed Democratic policies for threatening American civilization, by creating a society of "12 year-olds having babies, 15-year-olds killing each other, 17-year-olds dying of AIDS and 18-year-olds receiving diplomas they can't read."
He promised that the Republican "Contract With America" would change all that, and embarked on an ambitious timetable to have the House pass the agenda in 100 days.
But the speaker came to realize the House didn't control the government. There was a Senate, where Democratic filibusters could strangle Republican legislation. And there was a Democratic president with veto power.
House Majority Whip Tom DeLay, R-Texas, a hardline conservative known as "The Hammer," said Gingrich has made mistakes - and has already worked to rectify them.
"Every now and then he would make a statement that was used against him, used to beat him up, and he realized he had to be more careful about what he said and how he said it," DeLay said.
"Newt understands … we can't do more than what the American people would swallow."
At the speaker's re-election celebration, a reporter asked about his legislative priorities for the next Congress. "Well, I'd want to wait and let the president tell us what the top items on his agenda are," Gingrich replied. "He's won the campaign. He is the chief executive of the United States."
Both Frenzel and DeLay said the most trying moments for Gingrich may come from hard-line Republican conservatives, especially Largent's fellow second-termers.
"The question is whether the Republican caucus is ready to follow Newt's leadership" if the speaker wants to compromise on legislation, Frenzel said. He predicted the GOP members would do so.
DeLay agreed. "We could not avoid a lot of the things we did, because we had the contract," he said. "We promised it. When the freshmen came in, they wanted to complete the contract.
"The last few months of the second session (1996), our members were disappointed but realized, particularly freshmen, that you can only go so far with the votes that are available."
 Load-Date: November 11, 1996

 

End of Document
