

After the boom years: So goes Wall Street, so goes the city?
The Associated Press
October 28, 1998, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 956 words
Byline: By MICHAEL BLOOD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Ali Khan, who has fattened office workers on hot dogs and chicken sandwiches for eight years at his pushcart outside the World Financial Center, knew about the layoffs at Merrill Lynch & Co. before anyone told him.
Some of his regulars just vanished.
"Those people who come every day, I don't see them anymore," said Khan as he forked a row of unsold frankfurters on his grill. "When the layoffs come, it affects us. It changes your attitude - and everything."
Most importantly, his bottom line. Khan says his lunch business nosedived $ 200 a day following the job cuts, a big hit for a curbside cook who sells $ 5 plates of Indian curry and rice, hot dogs for a buck and 75-cent sodas plucked from dented ice chests.
Even with Wall Street's recent rally, the Dow Jones industrial average is still more than 900 points below its July 17 record of 9,337.97, and uncertainty has placed a cloud over the city economy. In ways economic and symbolic, no place in America is as tied to the rise and fall of stock prices as New York, where trading on Wall Street has taken place since the early 19th century.
Across the city, there are signs of change brought on by the volatility of the past 3 months. The luxury real estate market has taken a hit, and sales of expensive cars and clothing are expected to suffer, too. Tax revenues from city banks are falling - $ 17 million below projections for July through September.
At the venerable Four Seasons restaurant, management lowered the price of one prix fixe dinner to $ 59 from $ 80 in anticipation of a slowdown.
"If there is this terrible thing, that we are in some type of financial crisis, we want to say to our guests, 'You can come to the Four Seasons and you don't have to spend an incredible amount of money,"' said Julian Niccolini, a managing partner.
Barbara Corcoran, president of the Corcoran Group real estate brokers, said several deals fell apart immediately after the August market selloff unnerved investors - including a banker who said his stock portfolio took a huge hit. September saw prices drop, in some cases up to 10 percent, for homes priced over $ 1 million, she said.
The recent bounce on Wall Street coupled with a cut in interest rates has helped bring buyers back.
"When Wall Street does well, all Manhattanites feel well," Corcoran said. "I hope to make up for lost time."
Delmonico's, a wood-paneled restaurant near Wall Street dating to the 19th century, closed its doors after the '87 slump but reopened in May. Manager Chris Bradley said business rises and falls with the market each day.
"When it comes down more than 250 points, I can send one of my bartenders home," he said.
When the market takes off, it can lift the city like a rushing tide. In 1997, earnings in the financial industry accounted for nearly $ 2 of every $ 10 in the economy, and the municipal budget turned out $ 1 billion surpluses in 1996 and 1997 thanks in large part to plump profits on Wall Street.
Although the securities industry accounts for less than 5 percent of city jobs, it produced about a third of the city's income growth in recent years.
When stocks tumble? The impact extends beyond the pinstripe world of investment houses, where more job cuts are expected in the face of world financial turmoil.
"Guys are telling their wives, 'Hold off on that new carpet, that new anything,"' said retail broker Larry Appel, who stood outside the New York Stock Exchange after a day of trading.
The recently formed Citigroup had already announced job cuts when powerhouse brokerage Merrill Lynch eliminated 3,400 workers earlier this month, including hundreds in the New York area.
Bear Stearns reported a 60 percent profit drop in the latest quarter. More cuts are expected at brokerages, and there could be lost jobs in services tied to Wall Street like accounting, insurance and banking.
Economists don't foresee a speedy market recovery in coming months, but they stop short of predicting the kind of woes that followed the Black Monday crash in October 1987, after which Wall Street shed 25,000 jobs.
The years after the '87 decline saw a troubled real estate market, lost jobs, cutbacks in the defense industry and a national recession. The city raised taxes.
New York's economy remains vulnerable to a downturn but "I do not think that New York is going to suffer to the same degree it did in the late '80s and early '90s," said Mark Zandi, chief economist with Regional Financial Associates in West Chester, Pa.
"In the '87 crash, the market fell 20 percent and it was down 20 percent for a year. So far, we've only seen half those losses," Zandi said. "The real estate market was overbuilt, there was a severe credit crunch. I don't see that happening."
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani argues that the city is more resilient because of growth in areas like tourism and entertainment.
The slowdown "will have an impact (but) it should not have the devastating impact it would have had maybe five or six years ago," the mayor said.
Christopher Jones of the Regional Plan Association, a Manhattan-based research group, said ripple effects will be felt in New Jersey and Connecticut, which have seen a growth in financial "back office" jobs and where many Wall Streeters live.
"Just as you have less income pumping into the real estate market and retail sales in some of the higher-income services and stores, you will see a similar impact in the suburbs," Jones said.
The unease could spread to cities like Boston, another city with a high concentration of financial services.
But Richard DeKaser, director of the New England Economic Project, which forecasts the region's economy, said Boston is "still largely a city that's driven by more stable, or less volatile, financial service segments" than New York.
 
 Load-Date: October 29, 1998

 

End of Document
