

After Weeks in the Rose Garden, the President Takes on Dole
May 27, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 820 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Bob Dole's resignation from the Senate has not translated into a quick rebound in the polls. But, for a week anyway, it had one significant campaign impact: President Clinton was lured out of the Rose Garden.
For months, the White House has stuck to the disciplined script of Ronald Reagan's 1984 re-election campaign, using carefully crafted White House ceremonies and presidential events to boost the incumbent's standing.
Responses to salvos to Dole and other Republicans were largely left to aides, and sometimes Vice President Al Gore, as Clinton himself all but ignored the fact that he was coming under almost daily campaign criticism. Adding his own page to this traditional incumbent strategy, Clinton doesn't even plan to formally announce he is seeking re-election.
But Clinton made abundantly clear over the past week that he is a candidate.
Clinton challenged Dole on defense policy, specifically the Republican's call for a new missile defense system. Clinton also tried to pre-empt a major Dole policy speech on welfare, and tried to squelch a potential campaign issue by announcing he would sign a measure allowing states to outlaw same-sex marriages.
Then came a sharply personal exchange with his Republican challenger over abortion policy, and Clinton ended the week by buying more than $ 1 million in television time for a biting ad painting Dole as a quitter for resigning his Senate seat to campaign for president full-time.
"The rhythm has changed and it is noticeable," said Ann Lewis, Clinton's deputy campaign manager. Still, she suggested Clinton was drawn personally into the fray because of direct criticism from Dole, and that the preference is to stick to the Rose Garden strategy.
"When we can, as long as we can and as far into the year as we can, this president is going to go on doing the job of being president," Lewis said.
Both campaigns claimed victory in last week's skirmishes.
Dole aides believe Clinton's veto of legislation outlawing certain late-term abortions presents an opening to solidify Dole's Republican base and also to court Democrat-leaning Catholic voters in swing states. Welfare is one of several issues in which Dole will make the case that Clinton's rhetoric is rarely matched, and often contradicted, by administration actions.
The Clinton camp, in turn, doesn't believe many Catholics will be swayed on the abortion issue and that it is more important for Clinton to maintain his strong support among women who favor abortion rights.
Even Republicans who believed Clinton handled himself well last week were happy the president had directly joined the fray - and suggested it was at least partly a result of Dole getting out of the day-to-day Senate routine and into a position to directly challenge Clinton.
"While it won't show up on the ballot test for a while, the focus on issues is hurting Bill Clinton," asserted Republican National Committee Chairman Haley Barbour. "When people focus on issues, they will remember that he lives to tell people one thing and then do something else."
That will be a recurring GOP theme in the weeks ahead, and hardly sounded by Dole alone.
In last week's welfare debate, the Dole camp used Republican governors to challenge the credibility of White House statements that the president has quickly granted state waivers to experiment with radical reforms. Vowing to keep the issue in the news, several GOP governors promised to re-submit waivers that had been modified by the administration.
The sharp criticism from GOP governors was among the examples cited in administration complaints that the campaign had turned sour early, accusing Dole and fellow Republicans of unusually personal attacks on Clinton's character. Dole, for example, suggested Clinton's veto of the late-term abortion ban showed the administration lacked "moral vision."
Yet for all the White House complaints, the Clinton campaign for months had been airing ads sharply critical of Dole and House Speaker Newt Gingrich. "His campaign ads are highly negative and anything but gentle," said University of Wisconsin political scientist Charles O. Jones.
Indeed, the new Clinton ad labeling Dole a quitter for resigning his Senate seat surprised many strategists in both parties, not only because of its content but because it was launched after a fresh round of polls suggesting Dole's dramatic gesture had not brought him new support.
"Just because the guy is down doesn't mean you don't need to do things to keep him down," said Clinton adviser James Carville.
Barbour, however, suggested the tough attack on Dole, and Clinton's more aggressive campaign posture of late, was evidence of jitters.
"Candidates secure in their lead don't go harshly negative against their opponent more than five months before the election," Barbour said. "I think we've managed to get his attention."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE: John King is chief political correspondent for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: May 27, 1996

 

End of Document
