

Albright hopes 'new dynamics' will carry the day at the summit
The Associated Press
July 9, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 547 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Heading into a last-ditch Mideast summit, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said she hoped the "new dynamics" of President Clinton's meeting in seclusion with the Israeli and Palestinian leaders could ease the way to a settlement.
"We have always known this is a high-stakes summit," Albright said Sunday. "There's also high stakes if you don't go ahead. The situation there is serious. It could unravel. There could be violence."
Beginning Tuesday morning, Clinton is to meet with Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat at Camp David, the presidential retreat in Maryland's Catoctin Mountains.
"This changes the dynamics," she said.
Clinton, in announcing the summit last week, said the two sides were deadlocked on the key issues. The toughest appears to be Jerusalem's future, with Arafat seeking to wrest control of East Jerusalem from Israel and make it the capital of a Palestinian state.
Negotiators have made some real progress on the "final status issues," Clinton's national security adviser, Sandy Berger, said on CBS' "Face the Nation." But the leaders need to hold a summit because "they've taken things as far as they can. They've hit a wall and only now the leaders can make the tough decisions."
Albright declined to say whether the dispute had to be settled for an accord to emerge from the summit. "We have a responsibility to move forward here," she said on ABC's "This Week."
Some analysts have suggested that if Clinton could not get a total agreement the outcome could be a partial accord - in preference to a breakdown. There is talk already within the Palestinian and Israeli camps of a second summit, in August.
"I am not going to predict what has to be and not has to be settled at this summit," Albright said.
Meanwhile, Barak's political troubles worsened as his biggest coalition partner, the Shas party, said Sunday it planned to bolt the government and Foreign Minister David Levy, a moderate, said he was not going to the summit with the prime minister.
"Our ministers are resigning from the government and we are withdrawing from the coalition," Shas party spokesman Yitzhak Soudri told The Associated Press.
The move came hours after Natan Sharansky, the former Soviet dissident, withdrew his Russian immigrant party over prospective concessions to the Palestinians, including a toehold in Jerusalem.
The National Religious Party is leaving as well,
Barak's strength comes largely from the left wing of Israel's political spectrum. His concessions to the Palestinians far exceed any made by an Israeli prime minister, including his mentor, the late Yitzhak Rabin, who started the process of an Israeli pullback on the West Bank in 1993.
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators were beginning two days of presummit talks Sunday in Washington, with Albright and senior U.S. mediator Dennis B. Ross assisting.
Barak and Arafat were due to arrive separately late Monday at Andrews Air Force Base outside Washington and go directly to Camp David.
Arafat planned to bring a delegation of 50 to the summit, including Palestinian leaders, lawyers, and technical staff.
Among the delegates will be representatives from the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a political faction that in the past rejected peace efforts with Israel.
 Load-Date: July 10, 2000

 

End of Document
