

America's fondness for guns speaks from the heart of the heartland "But so it is: The trusty gun/Disastrously exploded/Is always sure to be the one/We didn't think was loaded."- From "Natural Perversities," by James Whitcomb Riley, the Hoosier Poet born in Greenfield, Ind., in 1849.
The Associated Press
September 19, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2745 words
Byline: By ARLENE LEVINSON, Associated Press Writers
Dateline: GREENFIELD, Ind.
Body




If you visited this central Indiana town - if you chatted with folks who live in the Whitcomb Meadows subdivision, or ate at the Riley House Restaurant on West Main Street - you probably would not see the guns.
But they're there: in safes at home, under seats of cars, in bedroom closets.
How many? No one knows. Police Capt. Danny Harrison's best guess is that there are firearms in two out of every three homes in greater Greenfield. That's roughly twice the ratio reported in a national survey released two years ago.
Don't get the wrong idea, Hancock County Sheriff Nick Gulling says. Greenfield is "not a gun-totin' town," full of Western bravado.
Sure, he says, there are "a lot of people who carry them that don't need to." They keep them for protection, even though they claim that most of the outlaws are 20 miles farther west, in Indianapolis.
But they keep them for other reasons, as well.
Guns for hunting. Guns for business. For family. For history. For the sensual pleasure of pearl handles, metal barrels, curly maple stock.
In that way, Greenfield is not unlike much of the rest of America. Yes, there is a criminal gun culture that sprays blood across the front pages. But there is also a law-abiding gun culture, woven deep in the heart of the heartland.
"Gun ownership goes with being close to rural life, whether it's your personal history, or where you live," says Philip Cook, a professor of public policy at Duke University.
Ask J. Paul Majors, a Greenfield dentist who keeps the BB gun of his youth. Or Greg Brand, who once shared a law practice with his father and cannot part with his dad's pistols. Or Jon Reeves, who instructs his kids, Tom and Jay, with his own father's rifle.
Not that everyone in this town of 15,000 loves guns. Last month, the Rev. David Edwards attacked "the near-worship of guns" from his pulpit at Greenfield Christian Church (Disciples of Christ).
And you won't find firearms in the house where Lori and Joe Urban are raising their toddler, Ariel.
"I feel safer without a gun than I do with a gun, for my daughter's sake," he says. "The more and more guns are glorified, the more and more I don't want one around."
Still, it is clear that most of Greenfield's citizens have little desire for more gun controls. There are many members of the National Rifle Association among them; they invoke the U.S. Constitution's right to bear arms, and a Hoosier bill of rights that provides for "the defense of themselves and of the state."
All of the hand-wringing over guns sounds strange here, says Dave Scott, editor of Greenfield's Daily Reporter and a gun collector.
"Folks here find that thinking foreign, because they've got a gun in their desk drawer, or in their bedroom," he says.
But if you ask, they will open their desk drawers, and their closets, and their hearts. And there you may find an arsenal.
 
 Tom Reeves, 21. Army reservist, Purdue University sophomore. Owns one gun.
 
 When Tom Reeves was less than a year old, his doting grandparents wanted to give him a pair of toy pistols.
"I said, 'No'," recalls his mother, Pixie.
She had grown up in rural Indiana, surrounded by guns. But by the time she became a parent, she could not abide violence, or violent playthings.
She made her children tear up guns and swords they had fashioned from cardboard and foil. "They were taught to love each other, not to even act like they were killing each other," she says.
But Tom has two parents.
As a youngster, Jon Reeves shot a BB gun and earned Boy Scout merit badges for marksmanship and rifle shooting.
Even now, as a scoutmaster, Reeves spreads his enthusiasm at Troop 770's annual display and safety talk, where scout leaders show their gun collections. "We have that amendment to the Constitution to allow people to protect themselves from their own government," he says. "And the police, they can't be everywhere."
Reeves keeps most of his weapons, including his boyhood BB gun, in the bedroom closet. His ammunition is in a garage safe, along with his father's handsome Colt Woodsman - just like the one Ernest Hemingway owned.
Mrs. Reeves has softened her stance. Some years ago, she attended a class in gun safety and decided to "open my mind up a little."
Her eldest son, denied toy guns, has embraced real ones.
This year, just before he turned 21, Tom applied for a handgun permit. Buying his black 9 mm semiautomatic was, he recalls, "a little bit exciting."
Tom wedges the Smith & Wesson into the pocket of his car door, ready with clips of regular and hollow-point bullets. "I like shooting," he says. "It's something fun. It's kind of cool."
He feels safe with his pistol. "There's crazy stuff in the world right now." Now he longs for a shotgun.
 
 James Lee Brand, 57. Trial lawyer. Number of guns owned, unknown.
 
 James Lee Brand didn't collect guns. He accumulated them. Guns from clients grateful to Greenfield's best defense attorney. Guns as payment from those short of cash.
Brand stored five or six handguns in a safe, a couple more in his bedroom closet, a few pistols under lock in his office desk. A dozen or more long guns were rusting in the basement and eventually vanished with a client who offered to get them cleaned.
"My recollection," says his daughter, Amy, "is he didn't know much about guns."
By his children's accounts, Brand was manic-depressive. For weeks when despair paralyzed him and drugs were not enough, doctors prescribed electroshock therapy. At those times, Amy's brother Greg, also a lawyer, would take away his father's guns until he was "on the upswing."
One spring morning three years ago, Amy was getting ready to take her father to Indianapolis for treatment.
First she heard him announce he was awake. Then she heard … what? A door slam?
"What was that?" she called out.
"Nothing."
Another slam? No.
Amy found her father on his bed, a bullet in his chest, his .44 Magnum on the floor. A bullet hole in the footboard accounted for the first shot.
Now, at night, before sleeping pills take over, Amy can still see the tattered shirt, smell the gun powder. "I carry a lot of guilt, for not being able to save him," she says.
Greg doesn't blame guns. They were the instrument, not the reason, for their father's suicide. "On the other hand," he says, "having a firearm available might have made that task easier."
 
 Joe Wisener, 63. Gun dealer. 130 guns.
 
 For Joe Wisener, guns are extensions of his arms. He waves them about, points them, clicks the hammers like he was snapping his fingers.
With one hand, he fingers a Ruger. It fires blanks, and he uses it in quick-draw competitions where he can draw and fire in .28 seconds. With the other, he grabs a Ruger .357 flat top.
"I've always just cherished guns, ever since I was a little kid," he says. "I like the bang, I like the recoil… . I'm just a gun nut."
Wisener owns some 130 high-end rifles and handguns. "Mine's a physical attraction to them, the ballistics of them. I enjoy sitting right there at the bench at night just loading shells."
He started selling specialty guns more than a decade ago. Now he does business as Joe's Fancy Guns from his home, paying $ 90 every three years to renew a federal firearms license. Prices for the guns range from $ 300 to more than $ 1,500.
Four or five times a year, Wisener totes his gems to gun shows. He spares no expense on displays, coddling guns in black velvet and sprinkling them with glitter, occasionally adding decorations that fit the season, like pumpkins at Halloween.
The truth is, he couldn't care less if he sells any. "I'm just mainly showing off my guns," Wisener says. Indeed, by choice, he sells only a few - to folks he knows won't cause him trouble.
He has adored guns for a half century, ever since he fired his first one - a 12-gauge shotgun.
"I was probably 8 years old," he says, still twirling the pistols. "I shot that thing and it lifted me right up and threw me down on my rear end. I just got up and said, '… I loved that."'
 
 Chelsie, 10, and Dakota Hood, 5. One BB gun, shared.
 
 When Chelsie Hood was 5, she begged and begged to go hunting. Finally, her father, Kevin, bundled her off to the woods. She sat for one hour, then for two hours and more, learning to read deer tracks, learning patience.
At 8, she got a BB gun. Now the giggly fifth grader leaves behind her Beanie Babies and hunts. She grunts and rattles antlers to attract deer. She even helps butcher her father's kill.
The hunt transports the family. Kevin calls it "the most peacefully exotic high you can have." Stacey, the wife he had asked on a teen-age date to hunt squirrels, says it is "the most relaxing time in the world." Chelsie agrees: "I like the outdoors, and I like the quiet."
Then, turning an adoring eye to her father, she adds: "It's mostly to be with him."
For deer-hunting, Kevin favors a .44-caliber Magnum Ruger Blackhawk, a handgun with a scope. He also owns 10 long guns, including a .22-caliber Stevens rifle that his grandfather bought from a J.C. Penney catalog in the 1920s.
Kevin carries a Colt .45 for protection. He bought a "female friendly" .38 Special for Stacey, but she prefers pepper spray.
This month, Chelsie is off to shoot rabbits and squirrels with her grandfather's shotgun, a .410-gauge Browning. Following family tradition, her younger brother, Dakota, will inherit his great-granddad's Stevens rifle.
Meanwhile, he struggles with Chelsie's BB gun. It's too big to brace against his shoulder, so he tucks the stock in his right armpit.
He's patient, too. "I like shooting the grass," he says.
 
 Dr. J. Paul Majors, 52. Gun manufacturer. About 100 guns.
 
 Dr. J. Paul Majors is a semi-retired dentist - a country dentist, as he says. But for the past 15 years, he has had a second, very different line of business.
He has made guns.
And not just any guns. Majors owns Century Manufacturing Inc., maker of an enormous .45-70 revolver modeled on a smaller 19th century Colt. No more than 2,500 exist.
With its whopping recoil - and a price ranging to $ 2,500 or more - the Century is not for the street thug. "I feel very comfortable making something that is not going to be used in a mass shooting in downtown America," Majors says.
He grew up poor and helped his mother, alone on an Illinois farm, however he could. He got his first rifle at age 9, and "we did eat a lot of rabbit and squirrels."
Now, he carries a 9 mm semiautomatic Smith & Wesson. "I'm not looking for trouble," he says, "but you'll never get rid of that element."
His safe at home is the size of a walk-in closet. Its racks gleam with some 50 long guns, some never used. Others have been used for target shooting or bird hunting. In other safes, he keeps about 50 handguns, including samples of the Century.
Majors first admired the Century revolver on the cover of Guns & Ammo magazine. In 1985, he bought the company that makes it. Eventually, he moved it to Greenfield and hired a Canadian gunsmith. Then business took off.
But the gunsmith suffered from depression and, in 1990, stopped taking his medication. "One day," Majors says, "he took a store-bought gun and put it in his mouth and pulled the trigger."
For Majors, business was never the same. He let his workers go and made the last Century a few years ago. A tinkerer, Majors now plans to finish a half-dozen left partly built.
They won't be for sale.
 
 Kathy Creech, 43. Store manager. One gun.
 
 Kathy Creech manages Chilly's, one of four liquor stores in town. She works long hours alone and keeps her protection behind the checkout counter.
His name is Pele, part hound, part Chow. He's all business when called to duty but quite playful when teased.
Creech dangles some beef jerky, then cocks her fingers like a gun:
"Bang! Bang!"
Pele drops, his head flat on the floor.
"That's everybody's favorite trick around here," says Creech, as she rewards him.
"A dog's much better protection in a liquor store than a gun. If you go for a gun, they're going to feel like they have no option but to shoot."
That's why she won't let her three employees bring their guns to work. But Creech has a .38-caliber handgun at home, and she's not bothered that customers carry firearms.
"I'd say that about three out of five people who come in carry guns," she says. "They take care of me."
 
 Dave Scott, 47. Newspaper editor. Number of guns? Won't say.
 
 When Dave Scott isn't editing Greenfield's Daily Reporter, he likes to escape to the Old West: His country place not far from town. There are Indian blankets, a saddle slung over a balcony rail, a sun-bleached skull of a steer.
He also likes to relive the Old West, shooting his way through contests and historical re-enactments. Sometimes his wife, Beth Ray-Scott, joins him in costume, but not on the firing range.
"It's a chance for grown men to be kids again," he concedes. "It's a sport, but it's also a fantasy."
Scott grew up in the 1950s and '60s, mimicking TV heroes "Hopalong Cassidy" and "The Lone Ranger." "Everybody played cowboys and Indians," he says.
A decade ago, Scott began reading books about the West and visiting historic sites on vacation. Soon he was shopping for antique handguns and replicas.
His collection includes an 1870s-era revolver and a 1883 Springfield rifle, official U.S. Army issue. "It gives me a link to a time and a place I never knew," he says.
Scott owns one modern gun - a .45-caliber semiautomatic. He carries it in his pickup, along with such other necessities as a flashlight and sunglasses.
 
 Cory Johnson, 40. Auto repair shop owner. Five guns.
 
 Leaning against the front counter of his auto repair shop, a well-worn NRA Fact Book nearby, Cory Johnson points to a white pickup truck outside.
A .45-caliber pistol is tucked beneath the seat on the driver's side. "It definitely makes me feel more secure," he says.
When he works alone at night, Johnson puts the gun in a desk or in a toolbox. It stays with him almost all the time.
Next door, in the house where he lives with his wife and son, Johnson has four other guns under lock: a .32-caliber handgun, a .22 Berretta handgun, an old shotgun, a .22-rifle with a scope.
The key, he says, is in a place his 9-year-old son will never find. Not that Colin is a stranger to guns. "I've taught him," Johnson says. "He knows what to do and what not to do."
Johnson learned from his own grandfather. They would pass hours "plankin'," setting up old tin cans and picking them off with rifles, feeling a rush each time a bullet sent one twirling skyward.
Only once has he aimed a gun at a person - the night he caught a teen-ager trying to steal a car stereo from his shop's parking lot. He yelled at the youngster, then held him at gunpoint until police arrived.
"I don't know if those kids spread the word that there's a mad man over here or what," he says, chuckling. "But it's never happened again."
 
 Art Jensen, 41. Pawnbroker. Two guns.
 
 Guns are big business for Art Jensen, but the thought that they can be big trouble is never far from his mind.
Jensen, a pawnbroker, owns a .45 handgun and a .22 rifle. About six years ago, he picked up a federal firearms license to cash in on the bustling gun market.
"This is a rural town. People like guns, so things just started rolling," he says, wedged between a case of handguns and a wall-mounted rack of long guns.
"It wasn't because I was a gun lover. It was a good business move. It just opened up another avenue for me to make a little money."
He figures he moves as many as 400 guns a year, about 25 percent of his sales. Prices average $ 200 for rifles and $ 300 for handguns, marked up only 10 percent.
But truth is, Jensen would much rather just sell other items, like weed whackers, secondhand guitars, used stereos. "I could sell this and make more money without having to do any paperwork," he says, pointing to a yellow-handled electric drill.
On every gun sale, Jensen faces a stack of papers, filling in name, Social Security number, serial number, criminal history and gun description. He meticulously documents each transaction, then prays that routine federal inspections don't uncover a mistake.
"You're always wondering, 'Well God, I hope I did that right,"' he says. "If they find anything wrong, they're going to eat me up."
Jensen recalls another Indiana dealer who sold a gun to a woman who used it to kill herself. If that dealer had made a mistake on any form, her survivors could have sued.
"It scares me to be a gun dealer anymore," he says. "Sometimes I feel like bailing out."
---
Arlene Levinson is a national writer based in New York. Rex Huppke is a staff writer in Indianapolis.
 Load-Date: September 19, 1999

 

End of Document
