

Amid the Splendor of Canada's Parks, Employees Fear the Future
July 22, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 915 words
Byline: By DAVID CRARY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BANFF, Alberta
Body




They work in one of the world's most beautiful places. But the mood of employees at Banff National Park is increasingly ugly.
A government plan to slash the park system's work force by 25 percent and turn over numerous services to private contractors has angered and demoralized workers at Banff and other parks across Canada.
Long-time staffers, many of them openly sentimental about their love for the national parks, are suddenly uncertain of the future. Some are planning protests, others talk about quitting.
"I'm on death row right now," said Jim Martin, a 13-year Banff veteran who has produced award-winning films about the parks.
His communications department is being dismantled and his job will end once current projects are complete.
"They have to offer me a new job, but it will be a 'McJob' - nothing to do with films," he said. "I had an intellectual and moral commitment to this job. Now I'm being told: 'We didn't really care. It didn't really matter."'
Parks Canada, the agency that oversees 38 national parks and 752 historic sites, is eliminating 1,000 of its 4,000 full-time jobs within two years. Its budget will shrink from the equivalent of $ 260 million to $ 189 million.
The cuts are in line with those faced by many federal agencies as the government battles to reduce its budget deficit. But parks employees have become more vocal than most other targeted federal workers, contending the cuts will make the parks less attractive, less safe, more commercial, more impersonal.
"They're making decisions based on fiscal, not environmental factors," said Carolyn Duchaslav, who works at the information center at mountain-ringed Lake Louise, Banff's crown jewel. "If they make a mistake, it's going to be irrevocable."
Tom Lee, the deputy minister in charge of national parks, insists environmental and safety standards will be maintained when private contractors take over maintenance, campground management and other services.
But he acknowledges employees are upset.
"This is fairly large-scale change," Lee said. "Certainly every employee would be concerned about their own personal situation. They are very dedicated people."
Whatever changes result, visitors probably won't notice them until next year. But they are encountering some low-key protests by employees handing out fliers outlining the staff's concerns.
Under the plan, which starts to take effect in November, parks employees will get first crack at running privatized services. The government is offering training and advice for those who want to form their own companies.
Representatives of the employee union say many of the workers do not consider themselves suited to be entrepreneurs and put a higher priority on serving the public than maximizing profits.
"I could have made more money elsewhere," said Ruth Remple, manager of campgrounds at Jasper National Park, Banff's neighbor in the Canadian Rockies. "If I'd wanted to be in the business side of it, I'd have left the park service long ago and opened my own campground."
Banff's plumbing and utilities supervisor, Brian Youngberg, said his four assistants are likely to lose their jobs or be forced to accept a sharp reduction in their current $ 9-an-hour wage. And he isn't planning to stay on in privatized maintenance,
"I can't see it working, but the government doesn't care whether it works or not," said Youngberg, who for 25 years has helped maintain the sinks, showers and toilets in Banff's 500 buildings.
He predicts large private companies will move into the parks within a few years, cutting corners and providing lower-quality service.
That pessimism is shared by the David Suzuki Foundation, a conservation group.
"A small, dedicated Canadian Parks Service has worked for more than a century to protect parks for future generations," wrote the foundation's executive director, James Ross Fulton. "To suggest that private contractors, who by definition are trying to increase their profit, can provide comparable protection is simply contradictory."
However, Harvey Locke, past president of the Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society, feels the government is on the right track if divestment of maintenance operations lets it concentrate more on conservation.
"I don't see what difference it makes to the parks who cleans the toilets," he said.
The parks draw about 26 million visitors annually. Banff, which became Canada's first national park in 1885, is the top draw with 4.5 million visitors a year, many of them from the United States, Japan and Europe.
Several employees said the government seems eager to maximize revenues from foreign tourists, pushing up entrance fees despite complaints that many Canadians can ill-afford the new rates.
"It's industrial tourism, not national park values; that's their priority," Martin said.
But the park service says fees are still modest. Most visitors arriving by car at Banff now pay $ 7.35 a day, up from $ 6. An annual pass to 11 national parks in western Canada has risen to $ 51.50 from $ 44.
Lee said the government makes no secret of its interest in revenue - the parks and historic sites generate roughly $ 1.5 billion a year.
But he said preservation remains a paramount concern, along with the development of new parks.
He also said the parks service will seek to employ local contractors wherever possible, rather than favoring big, nationwide companies.
"We don't have, nor do I foresee, the concession relationship that exists in the United States," he said. "We don't want to go in that direction."
 Load-Date: July 22, 1996

 

End of Document
