

An AP reporter falls at Little Bighorn - again - "We leave the Rosebud tomorrow and by the time this reaches you we will have met and fought the red devils, with what result remains to be seen. I go with Custer and will be at the death." - Mark Kellogg's last dispatch, June 1876.
The Associated Press
June 27, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 934 words
Byline: By DAVID FOSTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HARDIN, Mont.
Body




The director wanted Mark Kellogg to die well.
"I'll assign you a killer," Julie Luther said, surveying a field full of Indian warriors. "I want a good one for you."
She needn't have worried. A day later, I am surrounded by willing assassins. A brave with his face painted half-black is racing toward me on horseback, waving a war club.
I frantically urge old Jack the mule away, but the warrior quickly overtakes me and wallops me in the back. I slump across Jack's neck, and another warrior runs up and yanks me down from the saddle.
The fight is valiant but brief. Another blow from a club sends me to the ground, where I lie writhing until two Indian boys appear over me, whooping with glee. One pummels me with his club, then they scalp me and run off.
Mark Kellogg is most assuredly dead.
 
 ---
The Battle of the Little Bighorn, in which Lt. Col. George Armstrong Custer and more than 200 soldiers were killed by Sioux and Cheyenne warriors on June 25, 1876, was the biggest thing that ever happened in the rolling hills of southeastern Montana.
But the annual re-enactment of Custer's Last Stand, performed each June for tourists, comes a close second.
In four performances this weekend, on a grassy slope 20 miles from the actual battleground, a cast of more than 200 Indian warriors, cavalry troopers, white settlers and Indian villagers are portraying the battle and the events that led up to it: the westward march of settlers, the signing of treaties, the breaking of treaties.
For residents of Hardin and the surrounding Crow Indian Reservation, it's a chance to cash in on their common history. For participants, it's a chance to recreate the West's glory days.
"I do living history all around the West," said Joe Desson, who plays Lt. William W. Cooke, one of Custer's officers. "I try to give people a chance to touch the past."
I am here for the same reason.
This year is the 150th anniversary of The Associated Press - a fitting occasion, my bosses decided, to honor the 23 AP reporters killed in pursuit of the news.
The first to fall was Mark Kellogg, the only journalist to accompany Custer's ill-fated campaign. Kellogg's dispatches to The Bismarck Tribune and New York Herald were picked up by the AP and distributed to papers around the country.
Kellogg, 43 when he died, had muttonchop sideburns, angular features and an intense gaze that seemed forever to point him toward a new frontier town: La Crosse, Wis., Council Bluffs, Iowa, Brainerd, Minn., and finally Bismarck, in the Dakota Territory.
Kellogg pursued many occupations - grocer, telegraph operator, jailer - but he always returned to journalism.
He was a shameless booster of the rough prairie towns, and when Gen. Alfred Terry and the 7th Cavalry left Bismarck for a campaign to clear the countryside of "hostile" Indians, Kellogg eagerly went along.
Like many others of his time, he was enamored of one officer under Terry's command: Custer. Through today's lens of journalistic objectivity, Kellogg was almost worshipful of the flamboyant Custer - and downright racist toward the Indians.
Custer "is full of perfect readiness for a fray with the hostile red devils," Kellogg wrote in one dispatch, "and woe to the body of scalplifters that comes within reach of himself and brave companions in arms."
It's unfair to judge him by today's journalistic standards, said Sandy Barnard, a journalism professor at Indiana State University and author of "I Go With Custer," a Kellogg biography.
"If he wasn't a journalist in the modern sense of the word, he was a journalist in the 1870s sense of the word," Barnard said. "He had a great eye for detail, and he was very curious."
Add courageous. Unlike the soldiers, Kellogg could have turned around at any time. Instead, when his horse got tired, he mounted a gray mule and borrowed spurs to urge on his slow mount.
"He wanted to be with the troops," Barnard said. "He paid for his journalistic initiative with his life."
 
 ---
Would I do the same?
The question arises with some urgency as I sit atop Jack the mule, who's braying nervously as we hide behind the ridge above the re-enactment site, awaiting the cavalry's cue.
A thunderstorm has already spooked Jack and soaked me to the skin. My seat is sore, and my mouth is as dry as a tumbleweed. A novice rider, I'm about to gallop wildly down a hill toward death, before more than 2,000 spectators.
I fear that this re-enactment will be too authentic.
Then someone yells "Charge!" and the moment carries us all downhill. My hat flies off, the ground blurs beneath Jack's hooves, and the spectators disappear.
All I see are cavalry and Indians - especially the warrior with the black-painted face, waving his war club.
In a few minutes, Custer and Crazy Horse will joke with camera-clicking tourists and sign autographs. (No one will ask for mine.) Indians and troopers will get up and shake hands, then go into town and have a beer.
But not yet. I'm sprawled on the ground. Raindrops splatter my flushed face, but I do not move. I must lie here while Custer and his men race back up the hill for their last stand.
It gives me a chance to ponder the significance of a battle that suddenly seems too real.
The original battle was a glorious triumph for the Plains Indians - one of their last. It was Custer's ticket to legendary status. But for Kellogg, frontier reporter, it was not a good day to die.
If there is glory in death for the soldier, there is only a sense of unfinished business for the fallen journalist. The Battle of the Little Bighorn may have been the defining event of Kellogg's short life, but it was also the biggest story he never wrote.
 Load-Date: June 27, 1998

 

End of Document
