

An address for the homeless, at least for the census
The Associated Press
March 27, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 799 words
Byline: By GENARO C. ARMAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Gary Wolfe is homeless, but the Census Bureau is giving him an address. He's not getting a cozy bed nor a warm meal, but he will count - a change of pace for many homeless whose lives are often ignored.
Census surveyors started visiting homeless shelters Monday to locate as many of the nation's homeless as possible, in part to help determine where federally funded services should be provided.
But Wolfe doesn't believe it.
"I can't honestly say I've seen any money from the government from the census," he said on a brisk morning in downtown Washington, huddling under a gray blanket on concrete church steps that serve as his bed. Since he doesn't use a shelter or soup kitchen regularly, his address, for census purposes, will be the intersection of 10th and G streets.
"The census is irrelevant. The bottom line is that you have thousands of people out here who need help," Wolfe said.
To the Census Bureau, the homeless survey is known as a count of people without fixed addresses. From New York to Los Angeles, census-takers on Monday began surveying homeless shelters; on Tuesday, they will stop by soup kitchens and mobile food vans.
Then Wednesday morning, census workers will hit the streets to locate people like Wolfe, who don't sleep in the shelters and don't get their food regularly from soup kitchens. Enumerators will seek information from those lying on park benches and on top of steam grates that line city sidewalks, but they are not allowed to wake anyone up.
"I'll participate, I have no problem with that," said Fred Hall, a friend of Wolfe's, as he folded his blanket in the shadows of the recently built $200 million MCI Center sports and entertainment arena. "I don't know how much it will help, but I'll participate."
Meanwhile Monday, the Census Bureau reported on its Web site that 42 percent of households have returned census forms by mail within two weeks of getting them, with a national goal of 70 percent when the count is completed.
Both the Census Bureau and advocacy groups agree it will is almost impossible to count all the homeless, but they say this year's system is better than what happened in the last census. Critics contend the 1990 count, which took place over one night, was so flawed it was useless as a tool for designing programs to help the homeless.
The Census Bureau says it undercounted about 1.4 percent of the total population in 1990 and placed the number of homeless in 1990 at about 400,000.
The Clinton administration has estimated there are about 600,000 people in the country today without fixed addresses.
Big cities such as Detroit and New York are especially counting on an accurate census of the homeless to reverse population declines. A recent study by the Coalition of the Homeless in New York showed the city may have one of the largest homeless populations, hovering around 100,000.
"We empathize with the challenges" faced by the Census Bureau, said Mary Anne Gleason, director of the National Coalition for the Homeless. "It's an awesome task, and they are working hard at it."
Census Bureau director Kenneth Prewitt said: "We think what we have in place today, because of cooperation from advocacy groups and local leaders, will help us get a much better count than 10 years ago."
Census officials will use statistical methods to ensure they do not double-count people they may find in two different places.
To help convince the homeless it is in their best interest to cooperate, the Census Bureau has enlisted the help of homeless advocacy groups, as well as homeless people themselves.
Ross Weisiger, 58, is homeless and took a job as a census-taker last week. He will help count some of the people he knows from the downtown streets where he lives.
"Since they are paying $15 to $17 an hour, I said 'Hello', knock on wood," said Weisiger, who is about $10,000 in debt. "I'm homeless, and I'm interested in helping out the homeless. They want to use street people to count the street people."
Weisiger also worked as an enumerator in 1980 - before he became homeless - knocking on doors in suburbia, and surveying nursing homes. He knows he's got a much tougher job this year.
"I can tell you now there are 15 guys who are going to say 'No way, no how will I be counted,"' said Linda Kaufman of the downtown Washington business improvement district. She helped the Census Bureau identify areas of homeless concentration.
But Weisiger says he will do his best to change minds.
"People are not always aware what's at stake. They are into the mistrust of government," he said. "If the homeless don't want to be counted, I can't do anything about that. But if nothing else, we'll have a better count that we'd otherwise have."
On the Net: Census Bureau site: http://www.census.gov 
National Coalition for the Homeless site: http://nch.ari.net 
 Load-Date: March 28, 2000

 

End of Document
