

Anthrax hoaxes are becoming the bomb scares of the '90s
The Associated Press
December 30, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 654 words
Byline: By AMANDA COVARRUBIAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




On Christmas Eve, 200 shoppers and employees at a department store in Palm Desert were herded into the parking lot, ordered to take their clothes off and rinsed with a bleach solution after somebody called in an anthrax threat.
The call turned out to be a hoax, one of more than a dozen empty threats made by telephone or mail and aimed at schools, courthouses, even a nightclub in Southern California this holiday season by pranksters claiming to have released the deadly bacteria.
Anthrax threats are fast becoming the 1990s equivalent of bomb scares, and they are forcing disaster response experts to re-evaluate how to react to a biological threat.
"Anthrax has really taken off nationwide," said John Hoos, spokesman for the FBI in Los Angeles. "We don't know why, but it's one of those sexy terms of the '90s."
Nationwide, the FBI has investigated more than two dozen anthrax threats in recent months.
On Wednesday, the FBI announced the arrest of a 53-year-old accountant from Calabasas for investigation of a telephoned anthrax hoax Dec. 18 at the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Woodland Hills. The arrest of Harvey Craig Spelkin, who could face life in prison if convicted, was the first one in connection with the 20 such threats made in the Los Angeles area in the past few weeks.
The threats received in Southern California have been made by telephone and mail. In some cases, pranksters claimed to have released the bacteria into the air conditioning system.
Authorities say each threat has to be taken seriously. As a result, the hoaxes are racking up millions of dollars in expenses and causing officials to worry that more pressing needs are being pushed aside.
"With a bomb, you can send a robot in or a dog or whatever," Hoos said. "With anthrax, the amount of money it's costing taxpayers is tremendous."
On Saturday night, for example, 800 people were partying at a dance club in Pomona, 35 miles east of Los Angeles, when federal agents and officers from a county hazardous materials team walked in and stopped the music.
Someone had called 911 and reported that anthrax had been released at the club. For the next four hours, no one was allowed to leave while authorities searched for anthrax spores and took air samples for testing. Again it turned out to be a hoax.
In the Christmas Eve incident at the Palm Desert department store, firefighters had to create makeshift shower facilities with tarps and provide people with clothing after their rinsing.
But authorities in Los Angeles said one positive result is that the scares are teaching them how to determine quickly whether a threat is real, making them less likely to empty entire buildings - and denying pranksters the thrill of creating chaos.
"The longer you take in your response, it seems to encourage those doing the hoax," said Laurene Mascola, chief of communicable-disease control for the Los Angeles Health Department. "We're feeling more and more comfortable with our assessment tools."
Similarly, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is using the scares to help develop the nation's first comprehensive guide for public health agencies dealing with potential biological or chemical terrorism. The CDC is spending $ 120 million on the project.
Anthrax takes one to six days to take effect, producing flu-like symptoms in people who inhale its spores. Once the disease is fully established, it can kill within 24 hours if not treated with antibiotics.
No one knows why anthrax is the threat of the moment. Some speculate it's the influence of movies and books such as "Outbreak" and "The Hot Zone," which are about biological disasters.
Others note that biological and chemical warfare has been in the news lately: Saddam Hussein is accused of developing chemical weapons, and the Pentagon announced this year it would inoculate troops against anthrax.
Making a terrorist threat - even if it is an empty threat - can bring up to 10 years in prison.
 Load-Date: December 30, 1998

 

End of Document
