

As ranks of WWII vets dwindle, Sons of the Legion takes up the slack
The Associated Press
March 20, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 802 words
Byline: By DAVID CRARY, AP National Writer
Dateline: TOMS RIVER, N.J.
Body




As state commander of the Sons of the American Legion, Edward Marsden attends meetings at Legion posts across New Jersey. But if members adjourn for some beers, he parts company. At 16, he's too young to sit at the bar.
Marsden is a busy young man - Boy Scouts, a junior ROTC program, part-time work at a pizza parlor. But the Sons of the Legion, devoted to the legacy of America's war veterans, is his principal after-school passion.
"Some of my friends are supportive. They think it's cool," Marsden said. "And some are like, 'Why are you wasting your time with that?"'
As World War II veterans across the country die at a rate of 1,000 per day, the Legion is struggling to keep its membership close to 3 million. The Sons of the Legion, with 7,000 members in New Jersey and 230,000 nationwide, has helped revitalize some Legion posts that otherwise might have faced cutbacks and closure.
The Sons was founded in 1932, when families of World War I veterans did not anticipate another world war. Since 1982, when membership was 60,000, its ranks have increased every year. Strongholds of Indiana, Ohio and Pennsylvania have more than 20,000 members each.
In Toms River, a town of 7,500 near the coast of east-central New Jersey, the Sons shares facilities with American Legion Post 129. Relations between parent and offspring are cordial, though legionnaires in some posts mistrust the Sons.
"The biggest fear they have is that we're going to try to take over," Marsden said. "But we're not. We're there to help them with stuff they can't do."
Kenneth Esposito, grandson of a World War I bugler and member of the Sons' National Executive Committee, said some legionnaires underestimate the benefits of having a branch of the Sons at their post.
"We can tend bar for them, do all the maintenance, sweep the parking lots. We can go to their house, cut their grass for them," said Esposito, 38, of Rockaway, N.J. "A lot of these old-timers don't see it that way. They think we just want their buildings."
Most members of the Sons are in their 30s and 40s. Any male of any age can join if directly descended from a soldier who served during any of America's 20th century wars.
"It's one of the few organizations you can belong to from birth to death," said Edward's father, Thomas Marsden. He was enrolled in the Sons as a 6-year-old by his stepfather, a Navy Seabee during World War II.
"When I was growing up, it was a big thing to go with Dad to the Legion post, and fix up stuff, sit around and bull with other people," said Thomas Marsden, now 45.
"It's something I fell in love with - the family aspect, the patriotic aspect, helping the community. I brought my kids into the Sons for the same reason."
The Marsdens are three-generation Sons. Edward's 14-year-old brother, Lukasz, is chaplain of the local squadron; two of their nephews, 4-year-old Thomas Gray and 8-month-old Christopher Gray, have been lifelong members.
Edward first campaigned to be state commander in 1998, as a 14-year-old, and was defeated by an adult rival after incurring some resentment over his age.
"It was a disadvantage at times," he said. "People would ask if I was eligible to do this."
He ran again in 1999, and prevailed.
"What's interesting is that I'm this young and doing something that 40-year-old men want to do," Edward said. "They look at me as a cute kid and say, 'How the heck did he do it?"'
Age also has affected his relations with World War II veterans he has met at Legion posts and VA hospitals.
"Some of them, they look back at the war, and they don't want to say a thing about it," Edward said. "I don't blame them… They look at you and go, 'How can you know about the war when you're only 16.' I tell them I've learned a lot through ROTC, the Legion, Boy Scouts, and they almost understand."
One topic legionnaires are eager to discuss is Edward's future. He hopes to go to the U.S. Naval Academy and then join the Marines; his Legion friends from other service branches aren't shy in suggesting alternatives.
The adjutant of the American Legion in New Jersey, Vietnam veteran Ray Zawacki, has worked with Edward frequently over the past few years.
"It's a good feeling to see kids like that," Zawacki said. "More of America's youth should be involved in programs like these."
The Marsden clan was out in force for a testimonial dinner March 11 celebrating Edward's year as state commander. Legion and Sons of the Legion dignitaries, including some Edward befriended on his many out-of-state trips, also attended.
Perhaps the proudest person at the dinner was Edward's mother, Pat, who says too many Americans have allowed patriotism to become unfashionable.
"Patriotism, and pride in one's country - they don't just get wished on you," she said. "Our family is pretty hooked."
On the Net: Sons of the Legion: http://www.sal.legion.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY122-123
 Load-Date: March 21, 2000

 

End of Document
