

As the stock market glows, the worries grow.
The Associated Press
April 23, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 592 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The higher you go, the more nervous you get. When the plank is a mere two feet off the ground you might eagerly walk it for the gold coin at the other end. Raise the plank to 20 feet and you wonder if the risk is worth taking.
And so it is with the stock market: Investors are getting a bit edgy about the risk-reward ratio.
They know that today's economic and financial equilibrium can't continue indefinitely. It never does. They worry about arrogance. They cannot understand how this market overwhelms all obstacles, even the most recent downturn in profits.
But they can't identify precisely what will trigger the change or when it will come or how serious the consequences will be. Not knowing, they worry, just like the old farmer who looked at the fair sky and declared it a weather-breeder.
"I would estimate that at least nine out of 10 clients who call me about the stock market are very nervous at this point - I know I am," says Gary Halbert of Pro-Futures Capital, an Austin, Texas, advisory firm with generally knowledgeable clients.
From Montreal, the Bank Credit Analyst, whose research is widely used by institutions, cautions that "the landscape is much riskier than it appears, and we anticipate a turbulent period in the next six months." It refers to a stock market bubble.
Even those who aren't necessarily bearish, such as Stanley Nabi of Wood, Struthers & Winthrop, a subsidiary of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, comment that "Nonetheless, this euphoric scenario should not overwhelm a number of concerns … rarely dwelt upon."
There is the slowing of profit growth. And indications that retail sales, including cars, may be weakening. There's always the threat of inflation, and maybe even higher interest rates. And the trade imbalance, and Southeast Asia. And wage increases.
In the absence of certainty, any of these concerns can grow into problems. Like disease, they can spread; market analysts and advisory services read each other's stuff and pass it on. In the market, a fear can be worse than the reality, a rumor as powerful as a fact.
Consider the situation with wages and benefits, which have been rising. Since they are a very major factor in prices, many market analysts fear their growth may dig into profits or force prices higher. And so they are warning about both possibilities.
They offer statistics to document their worry: Bureau of Labor Statistics figures show average annual compensation growth of 3.4 percent in the 12 months that ended last December. In the previous 12 months it was 3.1 percent; and before that, 2.6 percent.
Greg Tarpenian doesn't dispute the numbers, but he carries the analysis further. Tarpenian is senior economist of the "Trade Union Advisor," an aptly named publication of the Labor Research Association. He contends such numbers must be placed in context.
"As the anti-wage growth propaganda heats up, remember one thing," he says. "Real wages are still 13 percent below where they were in 1974." He contends that average real weekly wages for production/non-supervisory workers are $ 41 less than in 1974.
He agrees that profits might be under stress in 1998, but argues that labor costs won't be the reason. He said that "a labor-led profit squeeze might be coming, but it's not quite here yet, despite wails from Wall Street."
Such disputes can continue indefinitely, and neither side will prove its case to the other. So, from whence will come the next undermining assault on the stock market? Who knows? The full, glaring clarity of the danger is likely to be uncovered only by historians.
 Load-Date: April 23, 1998

 

End of Document
