

As the century turns, the White House will be jumping
The Associated Press
December 16, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 538 words
Byline: By SONYA ROSS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Tapping his long list of famous friends, President Clinton is throwing a millennium celebration so glitzy and large that it might be easier to guess who's NOT coming to dinner.
Roughly 1,000 people will descend upon the White House on New Year's Eve. The guests are not hangers-on either - they range from Muhammad Ali to Elizabeth Taylor.
"It's meant to reflect all that's best about America," said Marsha Berry, the first lady's spokeswoman. "These people have been invited because they achieved greatness."
The nation's capital will begin turn-of-the-millennium festivities on Dec. 31 with opening ceremonies on Constitution Avenue near the White House, featuring the Marine Corps band and the 100-member New Millennium Choir, a young people's choir created especially for the occasion.
The president and first lady will unveil a time capsule that will be filled with "artifacts, ideas or accomplishments" from the end of the 20th century. Then Clinton will speak to children from a variety of countries at the Ronald Reagan International Trade Center.
That night, 500 people were invited as the president's guests to attend the splashy America's Millennium Gala at the Lincoln Memorial, where actor-rapper Will Smith will serve as host. Another 2,500 guests - diplomats, members of Congress and state politicians - also received invitations, and that's outside of the thousands of average folks expected to flock to the mall for one of the nation's largest millennium events.
But the most exclusive party - only 320 people - is a black-tie dinner inside the White House with the president and first lady. One hundred of their family members were invited also, but they will dine outside in a heated tent in the Rose Garden.
Besides Ali and Taylor, the dinner guests include opera divas Jessye Norman and Kathleen Battle, historian Arthur Schlesinger, poet Rita Dove, concert violinist Itzhak Perlman, playwright Neil Simon, and actors Robert De Niro, Jack Nicholson and Mary Tyler Moore.
After dinner, the Clintons will step out to the Lincoln Memorial gala, which is essentially a large outdoor concert produced by Quincy Jones and George Stevens Jr. The entertainment includes Robert Duvall, Diane Keaton, Kathy Mattea, Bobby McFerrin, Don McLean, Brian Stokes Mitchell, Kenny Rogers, Luther Vandross, Tricia Yearwood, Sam Waterston, BeBe Winans, and Luke Cresswell accompanied by the 25-member company of the Broadway production "Stomp,"
In the year's last half-hour, large projection screens erected beside the Lincoln Memorial will show "The Unfinished Journey," an 18-minute piece by Steven Spielberg featuring music, poetry and pictures celebrating the accomplishments of the 20th century. Dove and fellow poets Robert Pinsky and Maya Angelou contributed works, and an original score was composed by John Williams, who will also serve as conductor.
The president will speak in the final minutes of 1999 and, at the stroke of midnight, there will be fireworks and a light show.
Once the gala is finished, the first couple will return to the White House for another party, with dancing, with about 1,000 guests "that will go for quite a while, we think, into the new year," said White House spokeswoman Ann Lewis.
Breakfast is planned.
 Load-Date: December 17, 1999

 

End of Document
