

At stake: the fate of the famous Zapruder film
April 3, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 561 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The president was coming, and dress manufacturer Abraham Zapruder wanted to capture the moment. He grabbed his home movie camera, found a spot over a grassy knoll in downtown Dallas and gave America images that have burned into its memory.
In 26 seconds, Zapruder shot what one expert calls "the most important single piece of evidence" concerning the assassination of John F. Kennedy and another calls "the most important film ever made of a historic event."
Now a government agency, the Assassination Records Review Board, must decide what it should do - and whether it must pay - to make certain the famous Zapruder film is in the possession of the people of the United States.
It is in the National Archives for safekeeping but its legal status is in dispute. The widow and sons of Abraham Zapruder believe it remains theirs.
Experts in photograph preservation and students of the Kennedy assassination on Nov. 22, 1963, pleaded with the board Wednesday to keep the film from ever leaving the government's hands.
"It is inconceivable that Congress did not intend the JFK collection to include the most important single piece of evidence related to the assassination," said assassination scholar James Lesar.
Lesar, who runs the Assassination Archives and Research Center, the country's biggest private collection of Kennedy assassination documents, said the board should "expropriate" the Zapruder original for the sake of history.
Someday, he said, the government may reopen a criminal investigation into the events in Dallas, in which case the film could be crucial evidence.
What's more, he said, new technology could yield information on the shooting from images between the sprocket holes on the film - 20 percent of the exposed surface.
The board received divided testimony on whether the film isn't already in its possession. If not, members wondered how much the government should pay the Zapruders.
Lesar said the family may have already earned close to $ 1 million from selling reproduction rights over the years, "an enormous windfall."
Josiah Thompson, author of "Six Seconds in Dallas," estimated a fair evaluation - what the film could bring on the open market - would run $ 3 million to $ 5 million,
"I don't think the taxpayers should pay a penny," he said.
The film is deteriorating but still capable of being copied. The Zapruders turned it over to the Archives for safekeeping.
Film preservation expert Moses Weitzman called it a "wasting asset" that could be preserved for an additional 25 or 30 years and should be copied digitally for "permanent accuracy."
Ironically, the film is prime evidence to those who believe Lee Harvey Oswald alone could not have fired the shots that killed Kennedy and wounded Texas Gov. John B. Connally Jr.
At the same time, the movie was cited by the Warren Commission in its conclusion that a single gunman - Oswald, acting alone - was solely responsible.
In an interview, Lesar said his own view was that Oswald was "maybe a patsy."
A few days after the shooting, Zapruder sold the film to Life magazine for $ 150,000. Time-Life Inc. ultimately sold it for $ 1 to a company formed by the Zapruder family. It has been in the National Archives since 1978.
An unknown number of copies exist. Weitzman said it is crucial to keep the original because, in private hands, the images could be manipulated to make it tell a different story.
 Load-Date: April 3, 1997

 

End of Document
