

At The Movies: 'The Filth and the Fury'
The Associated Press
March 30, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 715 words
Byline: By TED ANTHONY, AP National Writer
Body




Some thoughts from "The Filth and the Fury," the new documentary about the Sex Pistols and the state of British punk in the 1970s:
"They were great. If I could only make out the words, they'd be greater." - American fan, after concert.
"They are the antithesis of humankind." - Repressed-looking British authority figure.
"We declared war on England without meaning to." - Band member John Lydon, alias Johnny Rotten.
Julien Temple's years-in-the-making documentary about the ruckus-raising lads with whom he spent so much time is an odd, rewarding beast. It offers a cold-eyed yet strangely sympathetic look at the band so many people loved to hate and so many others hated to love.
The Sex Pistols came together in a tumultuous period for England. The second half of the 1970s was full of labor strife, rioting, violence and broken promises. Many Brits suddenly found themselves out of work or underemployed, and they were angry.
From this stewpot of discontent emerged the British punk movement, characterized (like much cutting-edge music that came after it) by rebelliousness, ragged guitar riffs and mulitiple piercings. And no band drew the following - both positive and negative - of the Sex Pistols.
Temple, who has amassed an impressive array of footage from the Pistols' rise and brief reign, augments his MTV-influenced documentary with clips that suggest an England in transition - torn between puffery and proper conduct on one side, anger and untethered self-expression on the other.
The modern-day Pistols are interviewed in shadows, their voices clear but their faces obscured, as if Temple wants us to see only the sinewy, frantic faces of youth and prevent us from processing how much time has passed.
They talk of their influences - T. Rex, David Bowie, Alice Cooper, Roxy Music - and of how they were reviled and banned as their following grew and their shows caused disarray across England. They tell about how they envisioned punk as an explosion of individuality - and their disappointment when they saw so many of their followers conforming to some punk ideal.
They recount how amazed they were when their song "God Save the Queen" caused such outrage; Temple intercuts a performance of the song with Queen Elizabeth's 1952 coronation to point up the absurdity. And the director makes sure, too, to hammer home the Colonel Blimp puffery that, as he saw it, continually blocked the Pistols' professional progress.
Most intriguing, perhaps, is something that will come as a revelation to some: The most notorious Pistol, the late, drug-addled Sid Vicious, was an afterthought - a minimally talented hanger-on turned band member who went on to hog the spotlight and exhibit a raucousness that nonplussed even his bandmates. Temple's interviews with Vicious on a lawn chair shortly before his death in 1979 only accentuate that notion; even Lydon couldn't get through to Vicious' heroin-clouded brain.
"I could take on England," Lydon says, "but I couldn't take on one heroin addict."
You come away from "The Filth and the Fury" with two distinct conclusions about the genre. First, and most obvious, the British punk movement was a messy amalgam of rage and disaffection and, yes, ambition that produced some really good music. Second, the music and the rawness that accompanied it echo everywhere today - in the lyrics and guitar riffs of bands like Green Day.
As for the Pistols, they managed to both burn out and fade away. Vicious is long dead, violently, and John Lydon sits in the shadows chronicling a time when the fire burned brighter. That cold melancholy lingers long after the last riff of music, a reminder that even the most ardent of rebels grows gray and goes on. After all, laments Lydon, "Only the fakes survive."
"The Filth and the Fury," a Fine Line Features release, is directed by Temple. It is rated R for strong language, drugs and sexual content.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY379
 Load-Date: March 31, 2000

 

End of Document
