

At the Movies: 'The Bone Collector'
The Associated Press
November 2, 1999, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 769 words
Byline: By DAVID GERMAIN, Associated Press Writer
Body




What caliber of serial killer leaves an elaborately fiendish trail of bodies (and parts) that confounds the cops, yet ends up a bumbling milquetoast of a murderer in the final showdown with the good guys?
That's the disappointing conclusion to "The Bone Collector," Hollywood's latest entry in the bulk-meat butcher shop of horrors.
Unlike "The Silence of the Lambs" and "Seven," whose gore-minded villains met their makers with the same aplomb they applied to their misdeeds, the mass murderer of "The Bone Collector" finishes as a half-wit who seemingly couldn't plot the demise of a litter of kittens.
After a labyrinthine series of diabolical slayings, the killer is revealed as a whiny dullard with a contrived and foolish motive. The murderer is so incompetent as to be fought to a near standstill by a quadriplegic with only the use of a finger or two.
It's all the more dissatisfying because the movie wastes the promising story line of a stalker who copycats notorious murders from New York City's past and a paralyzed forensics investigator who uses an inexperienced cop as his eyes and ears.
The film stars Denzel Washington as Lincoln Rhyme, a New York City detective who's an expert on evidence gathering, and Angelina Jolie as uniformed officer Amelia Donaghy, his reluctant protege.
Through an accident on the job, Rhyme has lost the use of his arms and legs and ultimately, his will to live. Bedridden in his apartment and plagued by palsied fits, Rhyme secures a promise from a doctor friend to help him make the "final transition" rather than wait around for the seizure that will leave him with the IQ of a cinderblock.
When Donaghy stumbles on a gruesomely choreographed murder scene, with telltale clues such as a finger hacked off the corpse, detectives are baffled and seek Rhyme's expertise. Impressed by Donaghy's quick work to preserve and document the crime scene, Rhyme insists that she handle the forensics inspections when more bodies (and parts) start piling up.
Though Donaghy is tuned into Rhyme's steady voice and guidance by a headset, it's a laughable leap that the NYPD would stand aside and let an amateur lumber over such delicate murder scenes.
Were all the other detectives with an ounce of forensics experience on vacation that week? Wouldn't a rookie forensics investigator have served the plot as well as a rookie beat cop with nothing more than police-academy knowledge of crime-scene detection?
The killer plots an intricate spate of slayings, death by scalding steam, death by rats, death by high tide. The anatomically explicit murders seem devilishly inspired, cut from the same corpse as the savage mutilations in "Silence of the Lambs."
Yet in the end, it happens that the research to carry out the murders was cribbed from a single obscure book called "The Bone Collector," which recounts grisly New York stories of killings past.
That's the first sign that Rhyme and Donaghy's adversary may be on a par with a high-school kid who leaves a term paper till the last minute, then filches the whole thing from the Encyclopaedia Britannica.
And when the killer's identity is revealed in a blundering battle with Rhyme, the likely audience reaction is not going to be gasps and shudders but exclamations of, "That clown?"
While the film misfires, Washington and Jolie handle their roles well, with the sort of chilled restraint the rest of the movie needed. Washington plays Rhyme as a centered, bullish man who's on the denial side of the fence of personal fate, about to fall over onto the acceptance side. Jolie brings a deadpan determination, laced with a realistic dose of underplayed fear, to the street-savvy Donaghy.
The overall film, though, overshadows any subtlety in their performances with abrasive effect. Truck doors slam open thunderously to jolt viewers out of their seats, manhole covers are blown skyward like rockets.
Halfheartedly, "The Bone Collector" tries to be as slick and suspenseful as "The Silence of the Lambs." But it winds up as little more than a chop cut from the hindquarters of the weakest of the flock.
Distributed by Universal Pictures, "The Bone Collector" is directed by Phillip Noyce. It is rated R.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
End Adv for release anytime
 Load-Date: November 3, 1999

 

End of Document
