

At the Movies: 'The Rock'
June 6, 1996, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 749 words
Byline: By DAVID GOODMAN, Associated Press Writer
Body




Do you get queasy in pitching boats and bouncing cars? If so, bring your Dramamine to the multiplex. "The Rock" is an amusement park roller-coaster ride disguised as a movie.
Whether you're watching a black Humvee hurtling up and down vertiginous San Francisco streets, F-18s streaking over the Golden Gate Bridge or desperate men tumbling around in decaying tunnels under Alcatraz Island, "The Rock" is a movie that never stops moving.
Director Michael Bey ("Bad Boys") cut his teeth on TV ads and music videos, so he doesn't seem to like shots that last longer than four seconds. He's always doing something flashy: tracking, zooming in, using smoke and blue light, shaking the camera - every MTV trick in the book.
Still, "The Rock" remains a winning entry in this summer's slew of big releases, standing apart from so many other thrill-a-minute, technology-driven features.
That's in part because of a nicely balanced partnership between Academy Award winners Nicholas Cage and Sean Connery. Their bantering relationship and fine acting give the movie its much needed humanity and humor.
Another star of the film is the island prison just across the mist-shrouded bay from San Francisco. There have been so many films created for that hulking, natural set. The gimmick here is that everybody's trying to get in - not out.
Brig. Gen. Francis X. Hummel (Ed Harris) is a war hero wracked by the U.S. government's repeated refusal to honor and pay benefits to the families of 83 of his men killed in covert military operations.
Obsessed with justice, Hummel assembles an elite team of his most loyal Marines. They storm the island, slap befuddled tourists into cells and set up a makeshift command area. From there, they threaten to attack the Bay Area using a battery of rockets loaded with flesh-eating VX gas unless a $ 100 million ransom is paid.
The military hastily assembles a Navy SEAL team to infiltrate the abandoned prison. For guidance to its labyrinth of tunnels, they spring a top secret federal prisoner, Patrick Mason (Connery), the only person ever to survive an Alcatraz break. They also summon an easy-going FBI chemical whiz named Stanley Goodspeed (Cage) to detoxify the weapons.
It's a brilliant turn from Connery as the gruff, former British intelligence operative who likes to quote from the classics.
Indeed, there are a couple of times when the movie comes close to paying homage to the rudimentary technology and droll humor of Connery's early James Bond movies. "In my days, we did it all with snorkel and flippers," Mason reminisces before diving into San Francisco Bay with goggle cameras connected to video monitors back at operation HQ.
Cage ("Leaving Las Vegas," "Moonstruck,") is a perfect foil to the taciturn Connery. His Goodspeed is both straightforward and ironic, a '90s kind of FBI man who buys Beatles albums in their original vinyl and throws up before the mission.
His whimsical style in the sometimes goofy exchanges with Connery stop the movie descending into a formulaic action pic.
Harris ("Apollo 13," "Just Cause,") puts in a sturdy performance as the tortured military man who fools himself into believing that one day he'll be compared to Jefferson and Washington.
Like Hummel, much of the movie is grandiose and bombastic. The VX gas isn't just the regular stuff of mass terror, it's "one of the most deadly substances the Earth has ever known." And Hummel's men include a renegade Marine so wild-eyed his later scenes begin to reach the realms of self-parody.
This is a "Boys with Toys" feature all the way, with women playing second string to the whiz-bang electronic equipment. One exception is pretty newcomer Vanessa Marcil as Goodspeed's feisty girlfriend Carla.
"The Rock" is released by Hollywood Pictures. The R-rated movie contains one sex scene, various helpings of guts and gore, and what has become the obligatory prison-movie reference to gang rape.
It was produced by Jerry Bruckheimer ("Top Gun," "Dangerous Minds," "Crimson Tide") and the late Don Simpson. Executive producers were Connery, William Stuart and Louis A. Stroller.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: June 6, 1996

 

End of Document
