

At the Movies: 'The Out-of-Towners'
The Associated Press
April 1, 1999, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 572 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body




In "The Out-of-Towners," a middle-age couple from Ohio come to New York City and suffer through 24 hours of unadulterated hell. Sound like a movie Rudolph Giuliani would assail? No way. The mayor's in it.
Giuliani presides over a gala dinner at Central Park's Tavern on the Green, celebrating the donation of new lighting for the park. When the lights go on, the guests stare out the large window and see - Steve Martin and Goldie Hawn making out on the lawn.
This is the most hilarious scene in an otherwise uneven comedy based on the Neil Simon screenplay for the 1970 Jack Lemmon-Sandy Dennis movie of the same name. That version was far from vintage Simon, the couple's treatment at the hands of New Yorkers seeming more masochistic than funny.
The new "Out-of-Towners" begins with Henry and Nancy Clark (Martin and Hawn) back home in Ohio suffering the middle-age blues as their son flies off to study in Paris - their daughter has moved to New York. Nancy is beset with the empty-nest syndrome.
Henry has just been fired from his job at an ad agency, a victim of age discrimination, and he is afraid to tell his wife. His one hope: a job interview in New York. Nancy insists on accompanying him.
The trip seems doomed from the start. New York is socked in, and their plane is diverted to Boston. Their luggage is lost, they miss their train, buses are unavailable. They rent a car and become lost on the expressway. Their arrival in New York is marked by a crash through the Fulton Fish Market stalls.
On their way to the hotel the Clarks are accosted by a well-dressed Britisher who says he needs $ 5 for a phone call. The couple are charmed when the man allows them to think that he's Andrew Lloyd Webber, in town for the opening of a new show. He turns out to be a stickup man who robs the Clarks, taking his wallet and her purse.
At least the hotel can provide shelter, they think. But when they admit to no funds and no baggage, the smarmy hotel manager turns vicious and sends them back to the street. He is none other than John Cleese, playing a malignant version of his Basil Fawlty of "Fawlty Towers."
No need to list the remaining disasters that befall the Clarks. In a loose adaptation of Simon's original screenplay (not based on a play), Marc Lawrence has fashioned a variety of mishaps that are sometimes hilarious, sometimes wearying.
Sam Weisman, whose "George of the Jungle" was surprisingly entertaining, directs "The Out-of-Towners" with equal skill, displaying a sure hand for slapstick.
You couldn't find a better pairing for this kind of entertainment than Steve Martin and Goldie Hawn. Their styles blend perfectly, and they manage to convey the human quality amid all the chaos. The typecasting of Cleese proves a brilliant stroke; he lifts the film to a higher level with every scene.
The Paramount Pictures release was produced by Robert Evans, Teri Schwartz, Robert Cort and David Madden. Rated PG-13, language and adult material. Running time: 90 minutes, which is perfect for this kind of farce.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: April 1, 1999

 

End of Document
