

At the Movies: 'The Skulls'
The Associated Press
March 28, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 689 words
Byline: By CHRISTY LEMIRE, Associated Press Writer
Body




Mix "The Firm" with "Oxford Blues" and you have "The Skulls."
Part paranoia, part voyeurism, "The Skulls" explores the dark side of an exclusive campus society. It starts out as a guilty pleasure, but by the end the writing is so bad that it's impossible not to laugh out loud at scenes intended to be scary or serious.
Joshua Jackson, Pacey from the WB television series "Dawson's Creek," plays Luke McNamara, a "townie" attending an Ivy League school (clearly Yale, although the film never says so) on scholarship. He works in the cafeteria and rides his bike everywhere while his classmates go on hunting trips and tool around in BMWs.
Luke also is captain of the varsity crew team, which he has led to three Ivy League championships. That seems to be why the snobby members of the school's most elite secret society, The Skulls, show any interest in him.
The film's prologue tells us that some of the nation's most powerful men, including three former presidents, were Skulls - again a reference to Yale and its super-secret "Skull and Bones."
Luke knows he doesn't fit in, but he hopes that joining The Skulls will catapult him into law school, which he can't afford, and improve his chances with the rich, beautiful Chloe (Leslie Bibb of the WB's "Popular"), one of his best friends.
His first encounters with The Skulls are mindlessly fun to watch. See gorgeous young men of wealth and privilege zip around in their flashy sports cars! Spy on them as they stage elaborate, homoerotic hazing rituals involving cloaks and dungeons! It's all so vapid, you can't take it too seriously.
But at this point, the film starts taking itself too seriously. Luke's best friend Will (Hill Harper), an enterprising young journalist who disapproves of his involvement in The Skulls, investigates the group and winds up the victim of an apparent suicide.
Luke believes there's been a cover-up and does some digging of his own. He discovers that a fellow Skull, rich pretty boy Caleb Mandrake (Paul Walker), somehow is involved in Will's death. This is where the film switches from "Oxford Blues" to "The Firm."
Members of the group's old guard, including a U.S. senator (William Petersen) and a judge (Craig T. Nelson) who's also Caleb's father, are around constantly and go to great lengths to keep Luke from learning the truth. A senator and a judge! Don't these men have anything better to do? Shouldn't they be busy with … um … work, for example?
"Our rules supersede those of the outside world," the senator tells the new Skull initiates in a smooth Virginia drawl. Oh, OK. That explains why they have so much free time.
Later, the university provost (also a Skull alum, of course) chases Chloe across a football field and into her dorm when he catches her snooping. Like no one on campus is going to notice that.
Also ripping off "The Firm," the dorm rooms of Luke and Chloe are bugged, and frenetic piano music tinkles in the background as they scurry away from the mean old rich guys who are chasing them.
Nelson, like all the adults in this movie, plays a one-note role. Walker isn't bad in the beginning and tries to muddle through, but writer-producer John Pogue gave him some of the most laughable lines of all.
Jackson is so good on "Dawson's Creek," and he's good here, too. As an actor, he shows charm, intelligence and a real sense of comfort on the screen. After appearing in smaller roles in the teen films "Cruel Intentions" and "Urban Legends," this is his first chance to play the lead. Hopefully, his second chance will be in a better movie.
"The Skulls" is a Universal Pictures release. It was directed by Rob Cohen ("Daylight," "Dragonheart") and is rated PG-13 for violence and brief sensuality. Running time: 107 minutes.
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo planning
 Load-Date: March 29, 2000

 

End of Document
