

At the Republican convention, let the show begin
The Associated Press
July 31, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 695 words
Byline: By LAURA MECKLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




The applause after Elizabeth Dole' speech will begin at 10:29 p.m. Tuesday, and by 10:30 p.m., the introduction of John McCain will be under way.
After a two-minute "floor demonstration" for the Arizona senator, he'll begin speaking - right at 10:35 p.m.
At least that's the plan for a four-day show that rivals any TV production.
There's little difference between the Oscars, the Grammys, Radio City Music Hall and the Republican National Convention, at least as far as the man who produces the show is concerned.
It's all about the right picture, the best timing and making it look good on TV.
"It's classy," David Nash concludes, surveying the stage he's been building since February, when he began full-time work at the convention's executive producer.
There are simple things: a hard wood floor, house plants and a ring of American flags. And there are not-so-simple things: three giant high-tech screens that beam images into the hall from the stage.
"How it looks is very important," said Tim Fitzpatrick, spokesman for the $63 million convention. "We are obviously trying to reach an audience beyond the First Union Center."
For at least a week, the center, usually home to the Philadelphia Flyers and '76ers, is a giant TV studio, complete with 650 lights, 330 speakers emitting 162,000 watts of light. For while TV networks have cut back on their coverage, this is still the way most Americans will form their impressions of the GOP party.
Little, if anything, is left to chance.
Nash, a veteran producer at Radio Music City Hall, the Kennedy Center Honors and a host of other award shows, attends to the big picture - pacing and the overall look. He also looks out for the details.
So the giant monitors on the stage are not video screens; they're LED quality, meaning the picture is comprised of millions of pixels that make for a super sharp image.
The lectern itself, where George W. Bush will accept his party's nomination for president, is on a hydraulic lift, allowing it to pop up when it's needed, and disappear when it's not.
Don't be surprised, producers say, to see the podium drop down after Bush finishes speaking, allowing an unobstructed view of the nominee, his running mate and their wives as 150,000 balloons fall and they wave to the cheering crowd.
And when speakers address the convention under the hot lights, nothing ruins the moment like a bead of sweat dripping down. Not to worry: A personal air conditioning unit blows cold air from below the podium, right to the speaker.
Cameras are everywhere, including one that CBS positioned on top of the Texas delegation sign. They peek from walls positioned behind the podium and from inside the stairs that lead up to the stage.
Tall risers allow for dozens of cameras along to capture the scene. And to hide the risers, sheets of mirrored material cover their walls, reflecting the crowd and making it seem larger.
Republican groups around the country created hand-painted signs for delegates to wave, giving the floor a homespun quality. A sign-vetter, of course, tossed out any that weren't appropriate.
Then there's the convention program itself, which will beam Bush's message of inclusion with racially diverse speakers and videos celebrating social programs that work. Don't expect any divisive debate over, say, abortion, to beam from the convention proceedings, even if abortion rights Republicans have rented a truck to ride around town proclaiming support for their views within the GOP.
No, as far as the view from the convention is concerned, that truck could be across country. And other protesters are kept so far away that a delegate could miss them altogether. TV cameras, by the same token, will have to go out of their way to find them.
Inside the center, the speeches will be short, most fewer than five minutes, favoring regular Americans talking about their lives, rather than politicians talking about anything.
And there will be lots of music, from swing and classic rock tunes pumped out by a live orchestra to a gospel choir to Lee Greenwood, who is best known for the song "Proud to be an American."
Music pulls the production together, Nash explains. Just like at Radio City Music Hall.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo
 Load-Date: August 1, 2000

 

End of Document
