

At the Movies: 'The Postman'
December 23, 1997, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 857 words
Byline: By TED ANTHONY, AP National Writer
Body



AT THE MOVIES logo
OK. Before anything else, here's what you've been wondering: Is it better than "Waterworld"?
Yes, far better.
Kevin Costner goes, well, postal in "The Postman," a sci-fi-framed excursion into a postwar American outback. It is an unsettling, visually stunning examination of what could happen if the U.S. Postal Service became the vehicle for resistance against a megalomaniacal warlord with a taste for rape, violence and tyranny.
"Dances With Postcards"? Nothing so frivolous. In the end, Costner's latest excursion into big-budget filmmaking does disappoint - but only mildly, and only because it's not quite as good as it could have been.
In 2013, a decade after war destroyed the United States and the White House fell during the Battle of Georgetown, only vestiges of American society remain in the Great Northwest. Pockets of humanity struggle through life. Chevron stations sit in decay. Local government is paramount - and alone.
Into this tentative existence comes General Bethlehem (Will Patton), a former copy-machine salesman who epitomizes much of the anti-government anger and militia mentality that pervade the United States today. "War," he says, "gives men like me a chance."
Bethlehem and his men - bearded, on horseback, in leather jackets and rough-hewn outfits, they resemble nothing more than Civil War brigades - terrorize their way across the Northwest, conscripting forcibly from villages and killing anyone who gets in their way.
Then a drifter (Kevin Costner), thrown into Bethlehem's army while passing through, roils the mix. While trying to escape, he comes across an abandoned postal truck containing the skeletal, uniformed remains of the postman who drove it. In the back seat, he finds a bag of undelivered mail.
Appropriating the goods, he visits the village of Pine View, Ore., claiming to be a real-life postman - part of the "Restored United States of America," run by "President Richard Starkey" out of the Metrodome in Minneapolis. Because he carries letters from people long thought dead, he is believed, let in and accepted by the village.
The sheriff, though, is suspicious. "Those people don't need dreams, Mr. Postman," he tells the drifter. "They need something real."
This is strange, because dreams are exactly what these sad once-Americans crave. And Costner provides them, accepting new mail for the first time since the war and promising to return with news of loved ones and the new government. With him he takes Abby (Olivia Williams), whom he has impregnated because her husband, later killed by Bethlehem, cannot.
The drifter's true intentions are unclear, but after a winter in the mountains with Abby he finds that one of Pine View's people, an impassioned young man named Ford Lincoln Mercury (Larenz Tate), has taken the postal message to heart. Ford has created an entire platoon of postal carriers to deliver the mail and carry the mantle of the nonexistent Restored United States to the Northwest - and battle the spreading Bethlehem doctrine in the process.
"The Postman" fascinates in myriad ways. Stephen Windon's cinematography is breathtaking, depicting an old, tired land populated not with America's people but with its ghosts. This is a place with its best days behind it, not ahead - a sad parallel of our current obsession with nostalgia: When someone pines for the way things used to be, no one will argue.
Bethlehem's army, too, makes for an engaging exploration of the flip side of being American. He talks of making America rugged again, of giving the draftees he kidnaps a chance at transcending everyday existence and being a part of something bigger - all tactics, of course, of today's far-right movements. In "The Postman," the mail carries a distinct message: Federal government is good for you.
Tate's performance as a young man finding his purpose is moving and memorable. Costner's gentle-giant postman, the reluctant hero, has enough good in him to struggle over the chain of events his lie has initiated. But he also has an instinct to turn and run. This conflict, supposedly the centerpiece of the film, eventually degenerates into too many Costnerian sincere looks and backlit poses while music rises in the background.
Still, he has a respect for the postal service that Cliff Clavin would love. And, truth be told, Costner's earnestness - despite his occasional lapses into bad acting - fits this role perfectly. And look for musician Tom Petty as the mayor of a town Costner passes through.
Though the film loses steam two-thirds of the way through, its depiction of the United States as a neo-wilderness where a latter-day Odyssey can unfold is as appealing as it is unsettling.
With a wonderful premise, good execution and sometimes competent acting, "The Postman" is undermined primarily by one shortcoming: At nearly three hours, the film needed an editor - badly.
If you can get past that, it is an engaging, thought-provoking tale about exactly what it means to be an American.
"The Postman" is directed by Costner from a screenplay by Eric Roth and Brian Helgeland based on David Brin's novel. It is produced by Costner, Steve Tisch and Jim Wilson.
 Load-Date: December 23, 1997

 

End of Document
