

Austria brings the waltz, the hand kiss and the bow to Washingtonians
The Associated Press
June 25, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 711 words
Byline: By DONNA ABU-NASR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




One, two, three. STOP.
"No hopping. No kicking back. Just lift yourselves up a little bit," the waltz teacher instructed his students. "Let's try again."
Whirl, dip, rise. STOP.
"Now switch partners. Make somebody else suffer," Herbert Traxler teased the 60 young couples.
The eight-week waltz course at the Austrian Embassy is not just an opportunity for teen-agers and adults - some of them civil servants and Pentagon personnel - to have a fun evening out.
It's a preamble to Washington's second annual version of the Viennese Opera Ball that will be held on Sept. 25 and an introduction to European niceties, such as how to kiss a woman's hand - don't yank her hand up, no smacking, please, and the lips stop just short of the glove.
And on how to bow - don't stick your rear out.
The ball made its debut in Washington last year, bringing with it a touch of fairy-tale glamour and glitz, a whiff of the manners and traditions of imperial Austria and a taste of the cuisine and the Strauss waltzes the small Alpine republic takes pride in.
Leading the 1,300 guests on the floor were Chelsea Clinton, who had taken six waltz lessons with her friends at the White House, and the oldest living senator, Strom Thurmond, 95, who told a guest his waltzing may be a bit rusty because he switched to modern dancing a few years ago.
The event raised $ 50,000 for the American branch of SOS Children's Villages, an Austrian-based charitable organization that assists more than 200,000 orphaned or abandoned children in more than 128 countries. Two villages are in the United States, in Coconut Creek, Fla., and Lockport, Ill. Two others are planned for Madison, Wis., and Washington.
This year's event will be just as stately and lavish, said Ingeborg Kolodney, executive director of the Austrian-American Alliance for Children which is hosting the ball.
Like its Viennese sister, the Washington ball will be studded with celebrities and politicians. Invitations have been sent out to President Clinton, vice president Al Gore and dozens of lawmakers and diplomats.
The ball will take place at a downtown hotel, not as dramatic a setting as last year's National Museum. Organizers said the museum was difficult to organize - it had no sound system, lighting or dance floor - and too expensive.
"This year we felt the ball has been established, we have created the image but we wanted more money left over for the charity," said Kolodney.
Thousands of flowers, all white and red - the colors of the Austrian flag - will deck the dance floor where a replica of a famous statue of Johann Strauss, the king of waltz, will stand.
White-tie attire is de rigueur. Women can wear full gowns or slinky dresses and jazz things up with tiaras, feather headpieces and gloves.
Kolodney is keeping the menu secret, but she said it will be typically Austrian, will be prepared by an Austrian chef and will be adjusted to suit American taste. Pork and venison will not be served and there won't be too much garlic, onion and spices in the food. There will be dessert buffet stations outside the ballroom, giving the guests a chance to stroll, develop romances and have a refreshing cup of Viennese coffee.
The pageant of music and dance will begin with trumpets and fanfares, followed by the march of the pages, the march of the dignitaries and the opening cotillion, a polonaise performed by the couples, ages 15 to 25, who were training with Traxler. The men will be in white-tie tailcoats and the women in full-length white gowns, white gloves and a little crown.
Besides the 60 couples, 400 adults signed up for the 12-hour waltz course, also taught by Traxler, an Austrian-American who is also an economist at the Department of Health and Human Services. At 60 beats a minute, the Viennese waltz is twice as fast as its British and American counterparts.
Mary Coker, 50, from Middleburg, Va., is taking the lessons to "rejuvenate myself." She is training at home to perfect her steps for the ball.
Robert Cole, a computer specialist at the Justice Department, said a friend, an opera critic, told him he needed to learn how to waltz.
"I was a little shy about it at first. I didn't tell many of my colleagues," said Cole, 44. "But my everyday life is all American. This is a foreign thing, a nice change."
 

 

 
 Load-Date: June 25, 1998

 

End of Document
