

Back on the Bus: Bill, Hillary, Al and Tipper in the Northwest
September 19, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 605 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: CENTRALIA, Wash.
Body




Back on the bus with Hillary, Al and Tipper, President Clinton cruised in the rain through industrial towns and farm communities Thursday, getting his own poll results from signs along the highways.
Postal workers in the farm town of Yelm held up a banner: "Mr. President, We Deliver for You." But another person held a sign reading, "Clinton is scum."
In Rainier, a sign posted on a ladder read, "We'll vote, for beer."
From Puget Sound to Portland, Ore., Clinton's 14-bus campaign cavalcade tracked Interstate highways and two-lane backwoods roads. Thousands of people stood in the rain for a rally outside the Tacoma Dome - Clinton estimated 28,000 but even his press secretary acknowledged that was too high.
By late afternoon, the skies turned sunny. In heavily Republican Centralia, population 15,000, Clinton got the kind of reception that politicians dream about. Thousands of people jammed the main street for blocks to see and cheer the president. Some people had waited eight hours for a spot.
The president did not mention GOP rival Bob Dole. Instead he trained his fire on "Mr. Gingrich's Republican revolution," a reference to House Speaker Newt Gingrich.
"He told you two things that weren't so," the president said. "He said that we'd raise all these income taxes on working people and we were going to break the economy. Well, 10 and a half million jobs later, we know he was wrong. We've got the lowest unemployment rate in seven and a half years."
On the road, mostly friendly crowds turned out to wave and watch the president roll past.
"We love him," said Gary Overturf of Roy, a town with a wooden water tower and 432 people. When spring floods struck the area, "He came through for us."
Clinton said that of all the times he's visited Washington, this trip was the first time it had rained. "I feel that finally you have accepted me as one of your own," the president said happily, standing hatless without an umbrella or overcoat for his 30-minute speech.
Hillary Rodham Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and his wife, Tipper, also got soaked but didn't seem to mind.
It was another reprise of the bus trips that energized Clinton's campaign in 1992. There were four trips that year, and they were so successful that Clinton took the bus when he left his convention in Chicago last month.
An afternoon stop in Centralia brought Clinton to one of the most conservative regions of the Pacific Northwest. "We're competitive in even the most traditionally Republican areas of the country," Clinton campaign spokesman Joe Lockhart said.
Clinton has a comfortable lead over Dole in polls in Washington and Oregon. But in 1994, Washington was a political nightmare for Democrats. Tom Foley, D-Wash., then speaker of the House, led the political casualty list.
"Just remember," Clinton said, "two years ago, just two years ago, our friends in the other party were crowing that Washington state had led the way in the Republican revolution. That the people of Washington were dying to see our economic policies reversed and our crime policies reversed.
"They told you that we raised the income taxes of ordinary Americans. It wasn't true. … You now know that they were wrong in 1994," the president said. "We were right."
Introducing Clinton, Gore said that Republicans are "trying to take over all three branches of government" - the White House, the Supreme Court and Congress. He said the next president likely will name two or three members of the nation's highest court.
In his most barbed attack on Republicans, Gore said, "They want health insurance ripoff artists to rewrite the Medicare program so that it withers on the vine."
 Load-Date: September 19, 1996

 

End of Document
