

Beatty, Nev. - The Little Town That Glows In the Dark
July 28, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1626 words
Byline: By DEBORAH HASTINGS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEATTY, Nev.
Body




Well, radiation has been here longer than most folks in this tiny town, and it's done a lot of good.
Back in the '50s and '60s, when the mammoth Nevada Test Site was in full swing 13 miles down the road, it brought jobs and servicemen. So much money blew into downtown, four bars and seven cathouses sprang up.
Of course, radiation scared some people half to death, that's true.
Twenty years ago, for example, just about every building in Beatty set off Geiger counters. Like some doomsday science fiction movie, officials shut the town, rounded up everybody, made some urinate in cups, took blood, wrote down everything.
Then they confiscated every item that had been bought or stolen from the low-level nuclear dump on the outskirts of town. Those things - dishes, hand tools, lumber - were drenched with radioactive chemicals.
Now comes the U.S. Government and its plan to bore a 5-mile hole into Yucca Mountain, right on the Nevada Test Site, to make the world's first high-level radioactive waste dump.
This is a big deal: spent nuclear power plant fuel containing plutonium, which can radiate death and destruction for tens of thousands of years.
The feds say this is most likely a safe place to put it, though there are other scientists who say otherwise. The Department of Energy has already spent $ 4 billion and tunneled 3.5 miles into Yucca Mountain - just for testing, it says.
The state says no thanks; it's been fighting the whole thing since 1980. Nevada's two U.S. senators tied Washington in knots over a bill to put the fuel - now parked all around the country - in Yucca Mountain until a permanent site is picked.
And Beatty? The Beatty is resigned, as it's always been, to having little say in such matters.
That's Beatty's way. In this proud outpost of miners, ranchers and 1,600 assorted iconoclasts, people try to make the best of things.
---
Bob Revert has lived in Beatty all his life, as did two generations of Reverts before him. With his 31-year-old daughter, Joanie, who is president of the Chamber of Commerce and a member of the town council, he runs the Shell station, the hardware store, and a fuel business.
He sits in the restaurant of The Exchange Club Casino and Motel ($ 38 a night), the best this desert town 100 miles north of Las Vegas has to offer.
An ever-present unfiltered cigarette pinched between his knuckles, his husky voice barely passing a whisper, Revert tells of life with radiation.
He has no trouble recollecting the troubles of 1976, when government inspectors descended in droves. An irritating time. Frightening, too.
"They went house by house, I mean nobody was exempt. They tested quite a few people. They had all of us peeing in jugs."
The problem was this: Eleven miles down U.S. Highway 95, at the low-level radioactive dump run by U.S. Ecology, then known as Nuclear Engineering Co., some mighty illegal things were going on.
Since 1962, the repository had accepted contaminated items from military and commercial nuclear use: radium-dial clocks off submarines, radium-dial wristwatches that glowed eerily in the dark; washing machines used to clean atomic workers' uniforms; dishes, barrels, plywood - useful things, needed things.
Being out in the middle of nowhere, two hours from Las Vegas, people in Beatty didn't have much access to creature comforts. So employees at the dump sold these luxuries, or gave them away.
"It was being buried by the government, so why not use it?" Revert says. "It was all good-looking stuff, so people took it."
Then state officials got wind of it. Somebody had blown the whistle on dump employees. A giant crackdown followed. Nevada called in the Environmental Protection Agency and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
That's when the house-by-house searches started. Inspectors confiscated everything pinched from the dump. They even tore down a chicken coop Revert had built with plywood he didn't know was radioactive.
No one has ever came back and retested Beatty residents to see if all this radiation led to more cancer or birth defects. The government doesn't do such testing unless specifically asked. And no one has asked in Beatty.
"They thought the government had come in and stole their clocks," Revert said, summing up the town's attitude. "The average person in Beatty just accepted radiation as a way of life."
After a long legal fight, Nevada finally closed the repository in 1993, but its problems are far from over.
The dump leaks. Radioactive chemicals have been discovered just feet from the water table. U.S. Ecology officials insist there is no danger.
This is just the way things are. And the way they've always been.
For 20 years, Revert drove a truck at the 1,350-square-mile test site, sometimes motoring right through areas where above-ground nuclear detonations occurred.
Before such tests went underground in 1962, the whole town of Beatty would get up to watch.
"They set them off at two, three o'clock in the morning. It would light up the sky just like daylight. It was very exhilarating, to say the least," Revert says.
Beatty is upwind. "The (fallout) clouds usually blew toward Utah," Revert recalls, "and we said 'hey, let it have Utah.' "
But Revert knew, in his heart, that radiation wasn't exactly harmless. He has a friend, Little Joe Fellini, who still owns a big ranch near the Utah border. Bomb fallout blew right over his spread.
"He had a 6-year-old girl die of cancer," Revert says quietly. "The animals died, people died. One hundred head of sheep all died in one night. Natural causes, they said. Little Joe's cattle lost their hair."
Revert stops, takes a drag from his cigarette, looks his listener straight in the eye.
"You've never seen anything till you've seen a bald cow," he says.
---
Joanie Revert, Bob's daughter, doesn't want the Yucca Mountain dump - but she doubts that most of the town agrees.
"The reality of it is people don't think about it because it's so terrifying," she says late one night in The Exchange Club casino.
In fact, Nye County Commission chairman Cameron McRae says its no secret that his board doesn't really mind Yucca Mountain.
"The federal government is going to put that waste where it wants to," he says. His constituents "understand the risks, and only expect that they be treated fairly and equitably."
The Department of Energy has done all it could to court the public. It even offered free tours, complete with box lunches, into the 25-foot hole being bored by a $ 19.8 million, 460-foot-long, rock-spewing machine like those that dug the underground Chunnel between France and England.
The DOE hopes to have the 5-mile test tunnel, shaped like an elongated horseshoe because the boring machine can't back up, finished by January.
Geological, seismic and water testing continues, and authorities say they haven't decided whether the mountain is absolutely safe for nuclear waste.
But the government places great stock in the idea that the mountain's volcanic rock will seal in about 20,000 tons of used fuel now stored at nuclear reactors across the country.
DOE scientists also say the water table is extremely deep - some 1,800 feet - so chances are slim that any chemicals will seep into the groundwater.
Under government regulations, the department must certify the dump will be safe for 10,000 years. Only then can plans go forward; the target date for opening Yucca Mountain is the year 2010.
Don't count on it, says the state. "My belief is that it's certainly not going to be built in our lifetime," says Carl Johnson, an administrator with the Nevada Agency for Nuclear Projects, a state oversight board.
"We were ready in 1989 to declare that the site was unusable as a repository and should be eliminated as a potential site," Johnson says.
It sits smack in the middle of a volcanic and seismic zone. Two faults run through Yucca Mountain. And three years ago, a 5.6-magnitude quake centered 12 miles away wrecked the DOE's project office.
Nevada filed a bunch of lawsuits trying to block the dump. But in each case, Johnson said, the court ruled nothing could be done until a decision is made to actually start shipping nuclear garbage to Yucca Mountain.
It isn't clear when that decision will be made. But if Yucca Mountain is designated an interim site, state officials say, it's all over.
And that breaks Joanie Revert's heart.
"I love it here," says Ms. Revert, a dynamo of a woman who dresses impeccably and is more than ready to say exactly what she thinks. "I don't want to live in a big city. Kids play in the front yard here and you don't have to worry about somebody shooting them."
She tried to get the federal government to cough up big money, as long as it was going to fill a nearby mountain with radiation.
Beatty hired a lawyer to assess its land for "payment equity taxes" - a word game the feds play when they want to placate local governments.
It works like this: Even though the federal government is exempt from paying property taxes, it will open the purse strings when it wants to build something, or do something, that affects local residents.
Beatty's lawyer assessed the town's worth at $ 134 million. The government said all of Nye County was worth $ 34 million. End of story.
"If this is going to be 13 miles from my door, why don't we have jobs? Why don't we have more money?" Ms. Revert asks. "I want my kids to be able to live here as long as they want. How can I as a citizen feel safe?"
But she will never leave. Like Little Joe Fellini, bald cows or no, she will not be run off her land.
"This is my home," she says, her voice rising above the din of the jukebox and clanging slot machines. "What should I do? Move back East where they made all this ...? I don't know. Interview me when I'm dying a horrible death of cancer, maybe then I'll say I should have gotten out of here."
 Load-Date: July 28, 1996

 

End of Document
