

Beatty, Nev. - The Little Town That Glows In the Dark
July 27, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 950 words
Byline: By DEBORAH HASTINGS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEATTY, Nev.
Body




Well, radiation has been here longer than most folks in this tiny town, and it's done a lot of good.
Back in the '50s and '60s, when the mammoth Nevada Test Site was in full swing 13 miles down the road, it brought jobs and servicemen. So much money blew into downtown, four bars and seven cathouses sprang up.
Of course, radiation scared some people half to death, that's true.
Twenty years ago, for example, just about every building in Beatty set off Geiger counters. Like some doomsday science fiction movie, officials shut the town, rounded up everybody, made some urinate in cups, took blood, wrote down everything.
Then they confiscated every item that had been bought or stolen from the low-level nuclear dump on the outskirts of town. Those things - dishes, hand tools, lumber - were drenched with radioactive chemicals.
Now comes the U.S. Government and its plan to bore a 5-mile hole into Yucca Mountain, right on the Nevada Test Site, to make the world's first high-level radioactive waste dump.
This is a big deal: spent nuclear power plant fuel containing plutonium, which can radiate death and destruction for tens of thousands of years.
The feds say this is most likely a safe place to put it, though there are other scientists who say otherwise. The Department of Energy has already spent $ 4 billion and tunneled 3.5 miles into Yucca Mountain - just for testing, it says.
The state says no thanks; it's been fighting the whole thing since 1980. Nevada's two U.S. senators tied Washington in knots over a bill to put the fuel - now parked all around the country - in Yucca Mountain until a permanent site is picked.
And Beatty? The Beatty is resigned, as it's always been, to having little say in such matters.
That's Beatty's way. In this proud outpost of miners, ranchers and 1,600 assorted iconoclasts, people try to make the best of things.
---
Bob Revert has lived in Beatty all his life, as did two generations of Reverts before him. With his 31-year-old daughter, Joanie, who is president of the Chamber of Commerce and a member of the town council, he runs the Shell station, the hardware store, and a fuel business.
He sits in the restaurant of The Exchange Club Casino and Motel ($ 38 a night), the best this desert town 100 miles north of Las Vegas has to offer.
An ever-present unfiltered cigarette pinched between his knuckles, his husky voice barely passing a whisper, Revert tells of life with radiation.
He has no trouble recollecting the troubles of 1976, when government inspectors descended in droves. An irritating time. Frightening, too.
"They went house by house, I mean nobody was exempt. They tested quite a few people. They had all of us peeing in jugs."
The problem was this: Eleven miles down U.S. Highway 95, at the low-level radioactive dump run by U.S. Ecology, then known as Nuclear Engineering Co., some mighty illegal things were going on.
Since 1962, the repository had accepted contaminated items from military and commercial nuclear use: radium-dial clocks off submarines, radium-dial wristwatches that glowed eerily in the dark; washing machines used to clean atomic workers' uniforms; dishes, barrels, plywood - useful things, needed things.
Being out in the middle of nowhere, two hours from Las Vegas, people in Beatty didn't have much access to creature comforts. So employees at the dump sold these luxuries, or gave them away.
"It was being buried by the government, so why not use it?" Revert says. "It was all good-looking stuff, so people took it."
Then state officials got wind of it. Somebody had blown the whistle on dump employees. A giant crackdown followed. Nevada called in the Environmental Protection Agency and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
That's when the house-by-house searches started. Inspectors confiscated everything pinched from the dump. They even tore down a chicken coop Revert had built with plywood he didn't know was radioactive.
No one has ever came back and retested Beatty residents to see if all this radiation led to more cancer or birth defects. The government doesn't do such testing unless specifically asked. And no one has asked in Beatty.
"They thought the government had come in and stole their clocks," Revert said, summing up the town's attitude. "The average person in Beatty just accepted radiation as a way of life."
After a long legal fight, Nevada finally closed the repository in 1993, but its problems are far from over.
The dump leaks. Radioactive chemicals have been discovered just feet from the water table. U.S. Ecology officials insist there is no danger.
This is just the way things are. And the way they've always been.
For 20 years, Revert drove a truck at the 1,350-square-mile test site, sometimes motoring right through areas where above-ground nuclear detonations occurred.
Before such tests went underground in 1962, the whole town of Beatty would get up to watch.
"They set them off at two, three o'clock in the morning. It would light up the sky just like daylight. It was very exhilarating, to say the least," Revert says.
Beatty is upwind. "The (fallout) clouds usually blew toward Utah," Revert recalls, "and we said 'hey, let it have Utah.' "
But Revert knew, in his heart, that radiation wasn't exactly harmless. He has a friend, Little Joe Fellini, who still owns a big ranch near the Utah border. Bomb fallout blew right over his spread.
"He had a 6-year-old girl die of cancer," Revert says quietly. "The animals died, people died. One hundred head of sheep all died in one night. Natural causes, they said. Little Joe's cattle lost their hair."
Revert stops, takes a drag from his cigarette, looks his listener straight in the eye.
"You've never seen anything till you've seen a bald cow," he says.
 Load-Date: July 27, 1996

 

End of Document
