

Calculating the time left for investigation threatening the Clintons
The Associated Press
April 3, 1998, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 860 words
Byline: By PETE YOST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




With Paula Jones' lawsuit gone and the grand jury pressing ahead, Monica Lewinsky's lawyer today made a public plea for Whitewater prosecutors to end their criminal investigation. "The American people want this matter to end," William Ginsburg said.
Seeking to capitalize on the dramatic dismissal earlier this week of Mrs. Jones' sexual harassment lawsuit, Ginsburg said that Whitewater prosecutor Kenneth Starr needs to consider the will of the country along with the facts and law.
To make his point, he scoffed at Starr's allusion at a news conference Thursday to the fictional detective Joe Friday, played by actor Jack Webb, in the 1960s television show Dragnet.
"Mr. Starr, Jack Webb cared about not 'only the facts ma'am,' but he also cared about the will of the people he was serving," Ginsburg said.
Ginsburg said that the judge in the Jones case "has ruled twice now that there was no perjury." He was referring to the fact that the judge ruled out any information on Ms. Lewinsky and then dismised the entire case. "Mr. Starr, have you no shame? Facts and law are always subordinated to the will of the American people."
Starr has said the Jones matter won't affect his criminal investigation. But the White House plans to step up its attacks of his probe. And Republicans, who would decide whether to launch an impeachment inquiry against President Clinton, paid deference to the magnitude of the Jones ruling.
"Unless there is an open and shut case, the kind which would result in a resignation, as happened with President Nixon, I do not think there ought be an impeachment proceeding," said Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa.
In an unrelated development, White House aide Marsha Scott was told last summer by Ms. Lewinsky that she did not have a sexual relationship with the president, according to an individual familiar with the account of Scott. Scott is a recent grand jury witness. USA Today first reported what Ms. Lewinsky had told Scott.
Clinton even got some kind words Thursday from House Speaker Newt Gingrich. "Bill Clinton has plenty of courage," Gingrich said in an interview taped by CNBC. "Anyone who's taken the beating he has and stood up every morning has a lot of courage."
But Gingrich said he thought the Jones case dismissal would not affect House preparations for possible impeachment. "Everything depends on what Judge Starr decides," Gingrich said.
The dismissal put Starr on the defensive. He went public to say that part of the reason his investigation was taking so long was that witnesses in some instances were refusing to answer questions, resulting in lengthy court battles.
"We don't control the clock," Starr said. "We're doing everything that we can to move very, very quickly."
Starr referred to delays by saying, "It would be very helpful if all witnesses who were summoned before the grand jury would simply answer the questions."
Clinton has invoked the doctrine of executive privilege to keep some aides from answering questions, and the dispute has been before U.S. District Judge Norma Holloway Johnson.
Starr said that while invoking various privileges may be justified in some cases, in others the prosecutors and lawyers for the witnesses disagree and the issue must go to the judge to resolve.
Democrats tried to keep the pressure on Starr to end the probe.
"Clearly Ken Starr is going to have to enter into an exit strategy," said Sen. Robert Torricelli of New Jersey.
Returning from a 12-day trip to Africa, the president basked in the absence of a sexual harassment lawsuit that has plagued him since 1994. As he stepped off a helicopter late Thursday and walked up the South Lawn toward the White House, Clinton said, "This old place looks good. I'm glad to be home."
He declined to elaborate on the Jones ruling during a Rose Garden appearance this morning. "I'm going to try to do what the Supreme Court said I should do, which is not to be in any way deterred by this and I'm going on with my business. others will comment on this."
But Starr did not give Clinton much of a welcome, calling the president's top aide in for questioning at the U.S. Courthouse earlier in the day. Clinton's chief of staff, Erskine Bowles, said many of the prosecutors' questions in his grand jury appearance focused on "what goes on at the White House."
Starr has been investigating an alleged presidential affair and cover-up involving Ms. Lewinsky.
Starr also said the part of his investigation in Arkansas was "coming to a very important juncture." The grand jury that has been meeting for two years expires next month. Starr could seek to impanel a new one, but that would entail prolonging the Arkansas part of his investigation.
Prosecutors have been looking into possible obstruction of justice in their investigation of Mrs. Clinton's actions at the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock, Ark., in the 1980s on behalf of a failing savings and loan owned by her business partner, Jim McDougal.
One of her law partners at the time, former Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell, also has been under investigation regarding payments he received from the president's friends in 1994 when he faced possible indictment in the Whitewater inquiry.
 
 Load-Date: April 3, 1998

 

End of Document
