

Can the Bush economy match the Clinton boom?
December 21, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1101 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Whatever else is said about Bill Clinton's stewardship over the last eight years, one fact is indisputable: he presided over one of the most remarkable periods of prosperity in the nation's history.
For George W. Bush, another historic footnote may be of more pressing interest: Can he become the first Republican president since Abraham Lincoln to avoid a recession in his first term in office?
All the major indicators of the economy's status reached levels during the Clinton years not seen in more than a generation. The country over the past four years has enjoyed the strongest economic growth since the mid-1960s, growth that has helped to push the unemployment rate down to the lowest level in 30 years.
And at nearly 10 years and counting, the current economic expansion is the longest lasting in history. Clinton is the first president since Lyndon Johnson to escape a recession during his time in office.
Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, looking at signs that the economy is slowing, have warned that the country may be, in Cheney's words, "on the front edge of a recession."
Gene Sperling, Clinton's chief economist, said the incoming Republicans needed to be more judicious in their comments, lest their words become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
But the GOP comments serve two purposes. They lay the groundwork for blaming Democrats if the economy does go sour. And they build a case for the centerpiece of Bush's election platform - a 10-year, $1.3 trillion tax cut.
Bush's big tax cut idea harkens back to another Republican - Ronald Reagan, who railed against the economic malaise of the Jimmy Carter years and promised to slash income taxes and shrink the size of the federal government.
Republicans point to that "supply side" revolution as the roots of the Clinton prosperity. They credit Reagan, not Clinton, for unleashing free-market forces through less government regulations and lowering taxes on investors and businesses.
Balderdash, say Democrats, who give credit for the good times to Clinton - for courageously pursuing a deficit-reduction package in his first year in office that passed Congress without a single Republican vote and in the face of GOP warnings that its tax increases invited a recession.
That package laid the ground work for the budget surpluses, Clinton's supporters say, and kept interest rates low, which powered a surge in business investment that has propelled productivity growth, the key ingredient of rising living standards, to the best rates since the golden years of the 1950s and 1960s.
Asked to apportion credit, private economists mostly say that the forces at play in a $10 trillion economy are far too diverse to point to a single factor supporting the current boom.
On the government side, they are more inclined to credit Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan and his steady hand on interest-rate policies, knowing when to raise rates to keep the economy from overheating and when to cut rates to give a weakening economy a boost.
Greenspan is a proponent of the "New Economy" theory for the cause of prosperity. He contends that the emergence of the computer, the Internet and other high-tech tools has triggered a surge in productivity akin to the boom spurred by electricity and the invention of the telephone and automobile.
Added to all this has been the good fortune the country has enjoyed during Clinton's watch. The Asian currency crisis of 1997-98, which plunged 40 percent of the world into a downturn, turned out to be a blessing here, holding down inflation as foreign suppliers sold their products at bargain prices in the United States.
"Some times it's better to be lucky than to be good and President Clinton certainly enjoyed a fair amount of luck when it came to the economy," said David Wyss, chief economist at Standard & Poor's in New York. "But he also knew what to do with his luck, especially when it came to promoting good relations with the Fed."
Robert Reischauer, president of the Urban Institute and former head of the Congressional Budget Office, credits a convergence of forces including the end of the Cold War, which allowed sharp cuts in defense spending, and the 1990s stock market boom, which swelled the government's tax revenues. But he said at least 40 percent of the credit should go to Clinton's economic decisions, including his support for free trade and a free hand for the Fed.
Reischauer noted that when Clinton was running in 1992, the government racked up its biggest budget deficit in history - $290 billion. During the next eight years, Clinton was able not only to shrink the deficits but to put the country on course for recurring surpluses for the first time since the 1920s.
"A tremendous record," Reischauer marvels.
Will Bush build on Clinton's successes or will he suffer the same fate as his father, who watched the economy sink into a recession for which he was punished at the polls in 1992?
"It is going to be tough. The last four years have been truly exceptional, perhaps the best in our history. The next four years are not going to be as strong," said Mark Zandi of Economy.com, a West Chester, Pa., forecasting firm.
Many economists are forecasting that economic growth in 2001 will measure around 3 percent, puny compared to a string of 4 percent-plus increases over the past four years.
While Bush hopes to the slowdown will spur Congress to enact his tax package, others are warning that a slowing economy, by cutting into projected surpluses, will limit the money available for tax relief.
Republican leaders are already cautioning the incoming administration to opt for selective tax cuts rather than Bush's across-the-board approach.
And economists fret that a slowing economy could be vulnerable to unforseen forces, such as a spike in oil prices that has helped trigger the last three U.S. recessions.
But Greenspan, who recently took note of unexpected threats, still believes he can bring about a soft landing. The Fed at its December meeting signaled it was prepared to start cutting interest rates, perhaps as soon as January, to offset the drag caused by its six earlier rate increases.
The expansion has survived as long as it has because Greenspan was able to achieve a soft landing in 1994-95, first raising rates and then cutting them to guide the economy in for an easy landing.
While the Fed has never brought about two soft landings in a row, economists say the central bank under Greenspan has become much more adept at fine tuning the economy.
"We expect to see growth slowing down but not falling apart. The energizer bunny expansion should keep going," said Wyss.
End Advance
 
 Load-Date: December 26, 2000

 

End of Document
