

Castro at 70: The Beard Is Gray But The Comandante Still Strong
August 10, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 800 words
Byline: By ANITA SNOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HOLGUIN, Cuba
Body




Fidel Castro's beard is gray and his voice has a slight tremor, but the man who built a Communist state just 90 miles from America's shores seems as strong and defiant as ever as he turns 70.
"Fidel will not die!" shouted an elderly man, wearing scores of Communist medals on his "guayabera" tropical dress shirt, shortly before Castro delivered his annual July 26 Revolution Day address - the last major speech before Tuesday's birthday.
Despite numerous predictions to the contrary, the Cuban leader who has outlasted nine successive American presidents doesn't seem to be going anywhere anytime soon.
He remains firmly entrenched after 37 years of defying American attempts to oust him with trade sanctions, political threats, armed invasion, radio propaganda and harebrained assassination plots dating to the early 1960s.
Although the revolution that triumphed in 1959 has been battered, security forces forces have kept a tight lid on internal dissent. Opponents abroad have been held at bay.
Physically, Castro appears robust. He gave up his trademark cigars years ago for health reasons, is said to exercise regularly and has a team of physicians watching over him.
"He looks pretty good," said Nelson Valdes, a Cuba expert from the University of New Mexico who travels to the island several times a year. "I think he is going to last a while."
Continuing to declare "Socialism or death" in a world now covered by mostly Western-style democracies, Castro presides as "maximum leader" over one of the last remaining communist societies on Earth.
He no longer seems to try to actively shape Cuba's society as he once did, and the economic crisis brought on by the collapse of the Soviet bloc has Cubans grumbling about job cutbacks, food shortages and low salaries.
But the crisis appears to be easing. Economic figures issued last month show Cuba's gross domestic product grew 9.6 percent in the first half of 1996. Reforms allowing Cubans to own small businesses and hold once-forbidden dollars have created more economic options.
"The country is recovering slowly," Castro told tens of thousands gathered for last month's address. "The 9.6 (percent) is a salute, a message to Mr. Helms and Mr. Burton," he added, referring to the authors of the bill President Clinton signed in March to tighten the 34-year-old trade embargo.
The Helms-Burton law, backed by anti-Castro Cuban exiles, is aimed at toppling Castro's government. It was rushed through after the Cuban air force shot down two civilian planes in February that anti-Castro exiles had piloted off this coast.
Although Castro's advancing age could be heard in his voice, the "comandante" in olive green stood tall during his two-hour speech at Revolution Plaza in Holguin, 430 miles southeast of Havana.
Castro jabbed his fingers in the air, waved his arms energetically and praised the men who died 43 years ago in the first revolutionary attack, a disastrous assault on the Moncada army barracks in the eastern city of Santiago.
He seemed to gain strength as the speech wore on. "Homeland or Death!" he shouted in his traditional closing.
Castro's most fervent admirers are middle-aged Cubans, who remember when dictator Fulgencio Batista fled Cuba on New Year's Day 1959 and the "barbudos" - bearded rebels fighting Batista's army - marched triumphantly into Havana.
It is the younger generation, born after socialism took hold, that tends to criticize. They dream of new clothes and freedom to do whatever they like in the United States.
"If a plebiscite were held today, he wouldn't win," whispered Jose Antonio, 23, who wants to go to Miami and get a blonde American girlfriend.
But even Jose Antonio, who refused to give his full name during a Havana street interview, said he did not back the kind of violent overthrow espoused by many Cuban-American exiles.
While the Castro government admits dissidents exist, it rightly points out that they are not organized. Most seem more inclined to leave the country than stay and fight the system.
In a rare display of unrest two years ago, thousands of youths rioted in Havana, smashing windows and fighting with police and Communist Party militants.
An enraged Castro threw open Cuba's borders, and at least 30,000 refugees left on boats and homemade rafts during August and September 1994, overwhelming U.S. authorities.
There has been no exodus since.
"Most of the young people want to be out there in a boat, heading toward Florida," Miguel Soler Prendes, 57, said looking out over the Havana sea wall as he repaired a battered, Russian-made Lada sedan.
"The children of the revolution don't understand what we went through," said the mechanic, who grew up in a poor family. "They don't want to work.
"If they want to go, let them go, we don't want them," said Soler. "We'll stay here with the comandante."
 Load-Date: August 11, 1996

 

End of Document
