

Champ realizes it's the swing, not the driver
The Associated Press
June 2, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 586 words
Byline: By ARNIE STAPLETON, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: CHASKA, Minn.
Body




James McLean got his second break of the week, and this time it was a lucky one, although it took awhile to realize it.
McLean, the University of Minnesota's sophomore sensation whose driver was accidentally snapped by a fellow golfer on Monday, got a replacement just in time to begin defense of his NCAA title at Hazeltine National Golf Club.
He drove his first six tee shots to the left and it took a ricochet off a treetop on No. 6 for him to finally hit a fairway Wednesday.
McLean said he realized it wasn't his new club but nerves and a tentative swing when he hooked the ball on the par-3 fourth hole - with a 7-iron.
"As my coach told me, that was a good sign because it proved that it wasn't my driver that was making me hit it left, it was my swing," said McLean, who finished at 4-over 76, eight shots behind leader Chris Wisler, a sophomore from East Tennessee State.
"That definitely made it a lot easier," McLean said. "The back side I just put my normal swing on the ball and I hit it pretty much almost perfect."
McLean wasn't the only one who had trouble on the first day of the 72-hole tournament. Even though the greens were softened by overnight drizzle and the wind was calm, none of the 30 teams came in under par. Oklahoma State was the first-day leader at plus-1 289, three shots ahead of second-place Georgia.
Georgia Tech's Matt Kuchar, who won the U.S. Amateur two years ago and sparkled in the Masters and U.S. Open, had a dismal day along with his teammates, shooting an 11-over 83 on the 7,196-yard layout that puts a premium on long, accurate drives and makes it difficult to atone for mistakes.
On Monday, McLean's favorite club was accidentally broken by fellow Australian and UNLV freshman Adam Scott, who leaned on it as he teed up a ball on the driving range.
By the time a manufacturer's representative arrived Wednesday morning with two replacement shafts, McLean was already swinging an identical Biggest Big Bertha 7-degree Callaway driver in the hotel lobby.
Chip Glaser, a real estate developer and friend of Gophers coach John Means, knew he held the solution in his hands when he read a newspaper article about McLean's driver dilemma.
"James and I played last week and I noticed we played the same driver," Glaser said. "The amazing thing is it's a special order club, but it was exactly the same specifications."
Glaser's new club had never been used. He bought the $ 400 driver to take to Arizona, where he's working on a project, so he wouldn't have to lug his clubs back and forth.
"It had never been hit with. I even had to take the sticker off it," said Glaser, who sold the club to Means.
McLean, who tied the record of 17-under-par in winning the title as a freshman at Albuquerque, N.M., last year, tried the three new drivers and chose the one Glaser had provided.
He began to question that decision on the front nine when he hooked six consecutive tee shots, something he couldn't recall ever doing before.
"It was a combination of the new driver and I just didn't have the feel for it and then being nervous at the same time," McLean said. "I was in a bit of trouble early on.
"On the back side I don't think I missed a fairway with it."
Wisler, the first-round leader by two strokes over five golfers, including teammates Don Hill and Max Harris of North Carolina, also had a sour start. He bogeyed his first hole before collecting five birdies over the next six holes.
"If you're going to bogey, I like to bogey the first because I know I've got 17 to get it back," Wisler said.
 Load-Date: June 3, 1999

 

End of Document
