

Changes dateline from Middletown, R.I.; And the sole 'Survivor' is … Rich; and the winner is … CBS
The Associated Press
August 24, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1026 words
Byline: By FRAZIER MOORE, RACHEL ZOLL, Associated Press Writers
Body




And the sole survivor was … Rich. But the big winner was CBS.
An estimated 51 million viewers watched the two-hour "Survivor" finale, making it the most-watched TV program this season except for the Super Bowl, according to preliminary Nielsen ratings released by CBS.
According to "fast national" figures, the broadcast won a huge 28.2 household rating and 44 percent share of those watching TV during that period. This compares to the 43.3 household rating and 63 share for this year's National Football League championship.
In addition, some 36.7 million stayed tuned for the live reunion special after the show.
Final figures, to be released by Nielsen later Thursday, may change the picture slightly.
In any case, two things are certain. The audience exceeded all expectations. But it didn't approach the record-breaking numbers for the last "M*A*S*H*" episode (the all-time champ with a 60.2 rating and 77 share), or even 1980's "Who Shot J.R.?" revelation on "Dallas" (a 53.3 rating and 76 share), with which Wednesday's Who won "Survivor" episode has been often compared.
All summer, viewers had debated which castaway would outlast the others. Finally, the secret was revealed.
Richard Hatch, who had been taunted for his penchant for nudity, stood out as the only openly gay contestant and condemned as a snake by a fellow castaway, emerged with another label: millionaire.
The 39-year-old corporate trainer took home the cash prize and a new car, confounding those certain his scheming would cost him in the end.
"I didn't think he'd win it," said Andrew Gold, co-owner of Golds Wood Fired Grill & Cafe, where Hatch ate almost daily while he trained for the show. "He wasn't worried if people liked him or didn't like him. You can hate him for that or call him arrogant. Obviously, it worked."
Outlasting Susan Hawk, Rudy Boesch and Kelly Wiglesworth, Hatch became the sole survivor from the original 16 who marooned themselves on the remote tropical island Pulau Tiga at the series' launch in May.
The final choice - between Hatch and Wiglesworth - was handed down by a jury of seven former tribe-mates. Their vote - some complete with personal vitriol - was a squeaker: 4 to 3.
"I wouldn't change anything that I did," Rich told the jury in a final statement.
Then, waiting for the ballots to be tallied, he admitted, "I can't breathe."
When host Jeff Probst finally called out his name, there was a sprinkling of applause from his fellow castaways. Rich looked stunned.
At the Sportsticket bar in Middletown, R.I., his sister Sue Hatch leapt out of her chair. "Good for him," she said. "He played the game well and he deserves it."
The scene in Kernville, Calif., was different: A chorus of boos and hisses followed news that Wiglesworth, the 23-year-old runner-up, would be taking home the second-place prize of $100,000.
"I'm so disappointed, but I'm proud of her at the same time," said Amanda Szecsei, 25, who works with Wiglesworth as a river guide.
On the CBS "The Early Show" Thursday, Hatch said he wasn't bothered by so many people thinking he was manipulative.
"There was so much that I couldn't control but there was much that I could, so I tried to," Hatch said.
Hatch said he had no trouble keeping the secret of his victory from family and friends. "I didn't want them to know. I had no interest in spoiling what turned out to be incredible fun for the people I know and everybody else."
But one of his sisters, Kristin Hatch, told NBC's "Today" that Hatch had lied to her, swearing her to secrecy and telling her he came in fourth. "He wanted to surprise me," she said.
When "Survivor" premiered three months ago, critics called it "Gilligan's Island" meets "Lord of the Flies."
But it was more directly comparable was "Dallas." Since that drama's "Who Shot J.R.?" stunt in 1980, nothing on television had gripped the nation in quite the same way - until "Survivor."
Fans threw "Survivor" parties, complete with tropical costumes and the ever-present threat of getting voted out of the bash.
At the Newport Athletic Club, where Hatch trained before going on the show and still works out, the crowd of 40 people erupted in cheers.
The club was decorated with balloon parrots and mini-torches with the names of the final contestants. The bartender snuffed out the torches one by one as the finalists were eliminated.
Like his relatives, Hatch's friends said he gave no hint he was the winner - even though it had been several months since he returned from the island. The only sign of his new wealth: major renovations on his house.
"He walked in, I saw him, and I said, 'What happened?' and he would only say 'What do you think? How do you think I did?"' said Karen Massaro, a fitness director. "Believe me, I tried to get it out of him."
Jumping on the reality-TV bandwagon, CBS launched the 13-week "Survivor" show May 31 to breathe life into a prime-time schedule largely filled with reruns. The show had been taped during 39 days last spring.
Hatch quickly became the contestant everyone loved to hate. In his professional life, he specializes in team building and conflict resolution. On the island off Borneo, he used lies and subversion to form an alliance that helped him win.
The victor began reaping the spoils of fame even before Wednesday. Hatch will spend next week as host of a morning talk show on a local radio station and he's featured with the final four in a "Got Milk?" mustache advertisement. He's been hounded by autograph seekers and has been inundated with marriage proposals - from men and women.
When Hatch returned home last April he faced an unforeseen challenge: He was charged with second-degree child abuse.
His then 9-year-old son told police Hatch pulled him by the ear and wrapped his hands around his neck when the youngster grew fatigued while jogging. The case is pending. Hatch is suing police and state child welfare officials for false imprisonment and defamation and is seeking more than $1 million in damages.
Hatch said Thursday the charges were "absurd." He said he and his son were out for a run and "he didn't do what he was supposed to do … and created a stir."
On the Net:
http://www.cbs.com 
http://www.survivorsucks.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos RICY102, NY134, XKSD106; AP Graphic SURVIVOR
 Load-Date: August 25, 2000

 

End of Document
