

Claiming the Middle From Both Ends of the Political Scale
January 20, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 685 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




On tour for Republican conservativism, the first-term GOP senator said that while it's difficult to say no to things people want, it has to be done to move America "back toward the middle of the road."
It's an example of the way politicians use their own terms to define the middle, which is where voters tend to see themselves.
That philosophical territory has been called the mainstream, the middle way, the vital center, compassionate conservatism, the sensible center, or even the radical center.
Charting it depends upon who is drawing the map. Conservatives are now, and their dominance in the Republican Congress probably will be heightened by the record-rate retirements depleting the roster of moderates after this year.
The people who define the debate are effectively writing the rules of the process, as Ronald Reagan did when he came to the White House 15 years ago. In this sequence, since the Republican takeover of Congress, President Clinton has accentuated the centrist Democratic tenets of his campaign. He had shifted to what seemed to be old-style liberal answers earlier in his administration.
His four-draft transition to a balanced budget proposal displays that turn.
He won the White House as a New Democrat, promising a more conservative approach than had marked the party's past. "As Bill Clinton proved in 1992, albeit dishonestly, many Americans are open to a progressive message that combines concern for the poor with a strong advocacy of limited, responsive, and efficient government," Joel Kotkin of the Pacific Research Institute writes in "The American Enterprise."
The emphasis is on the latter as he seeks a second term while accusing Republicans of extremist answers.
They insist not. It is a tag no politician wants, none, at least, since Barry Goldwater defiantly declared in accepting the 1964 GOP presidential nomination that extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice.
He was swamped. Lyndon Johnson's landslide swept Democrats to total congressional dominance and they defined the middle of the road the liberal way.
Later on, Richard Nixon said the working formula for a Republican in a presidential bid was to cater to the right to win the nomination, then move back to the center because that's where the voters are. In 1988, Democratic nominee Michael Dukakis tried to avoid "the L word," for liberal, although he finally accepted the label.
Those efforts to define and claim the middle echo now, with a record 13 Senate retirements and with 35 in the House eroding the moderate to progressive wings of both parties, particularly among GOP senators.
"The center is depleted," said Sen. John Chafee, the fourth-term Rhode Island Republican whose relatively liberal philosophy once prompted activists on the right to say he ought to leave the party.
Democrat Paul Tsongas, the former Massachusetts senator and presidential candidate, had lamented a vacuum in the center of national politics. Warren Rudman of New Hampshire, a former GOP senator, said that some people now identified with the conservative wing probably will move toward the middle "because that's where the country is."
Republicans in power insist that despite the labeling, their version of conservatism is headed there now.
When the touring GOP Senate freshmen held a televised forum in Knoxville last Tuesday, Sen. Fred Thompson of Tennessee said that saying no to well-meaning people is the hard part of the job.
"But we have really gotten out of kilter in this country, and what we are about is trying to move things back toward the middle of the road," he said.
That's the mainstream map Republicans want, and it is not a new one.
"There is in our affairs at home a middle way between untrammeled freedom of the individual and the demands for the welfare of the whole nation, Dwight D. Eisenhower said in his first State of the Union address in 1953. "This way must avoid government by bureaucracy as carefully as it avoids neglect of the helpless."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: January 20, 1996

 

End of Document
