

Clinton Tax Package Bashes the Big Guy, Helps the Little Guy
March 19, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 807 words
Byline: By DAVE SKIDMORE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton's election-year tax proposals would help the little guy and bash the big guy.
Middle-class families with children, college tuition payers, small businesses and some small savers would get a tax cut.
But multinational corporations, sophisticated Wall Street investors, luxury car buyers and millionaires who renounce their citizenship to avoid taxes would pay more.
The roughly $ 100-billion tax cut outlined in the fiscal 1997 budget revives the "Middle Class Bill of Rights" that Clinton crafted just after Republicans' sweeping 1994 election victory.
Its centerpiece, a tax credit for parents of children younger than 13, accounts for about half the money. The next-biggest piece would go to taxpayers who pay college tuition and fees for themselves, their spouse or their children.
Most of the rest would be divvied up among improvements in Individual Retirement Accounts, estate-tax and other relief for small businesses and farms and incentives to clean up abandoned industrial sites.
Rep. Bill Archer, R-Texas, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, criticized the president's package. It is about half the size of the cut Republicans want, takes years to phase in many of the cuts and has a provision for ending the cuts in 2001 if the economy underperforms the White House's expectations.
"In reality, his tax cuts are a Cheshire tax cut. They vanish before your eyes and all that's left is the president's smile," Archer said.
On the spending side of Clinton's budget, there's a new $ 1,000 scholarship for high school students graduating in the top 5 percent of their class, a 3 percent pay increase for military personnel and an expansion of the Head Start program to accommodate 40,000 more disadvantaged children.
At the same time, Clinton proposed raising $ 43.6 billion over seven years by eliminating what the budget labels unwarranted tax benefits, mostly for corporations.
Some are revivals of old proposals - such as a hefty exit tax on rich people who renounce their citizenship and flee to overseas tax havens.
Others are new to this budget. Clinton would collect $ 4.9 billion from multinational corporations by restricting their ability to reduce their U.S. taxes with taxes paid to foreign governments. He'd tighten a similar but separate break for multinational oil companies.
And he would impose on big investors the same rules for calculating capital gains that most mutual fund shareholders already live by. Investors who sell stocks, bonds and other securities would be required to figure the gain on an average cost basis.
That means, for instance, an investor who acquired 10,000 shares of XYZ Corp. stock over a three-year period at different prices and then sells 1,000 shares would figure the profit as the difference between the sales price of the 1,000 shares and average cost of all the XYZ Corp. shares in the investor's portfolio.
Currently, investors can specify the shares they are selling. So, an investor looking to minimize capital gains would choose to sell the shares that had been purchased at the highest price.
It already is the standard practice of the mutual fund industry - the vehicle for most small stock owners - to use the average-cost method.
Another revenue-raiser is the permanent extension of the luxury tax on automobiles priced at more than $ 34,000. It's scheduled to expire in 1999. Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., had proposed phasing it out.
The budget also would renew a 10-percent excise tax on airline tickets, which lapsed at the end of last year after Clinton vetoed the GOP's balanced budget plan.
Previously known revenue-raising proposals would increase taxes on manufacturing companies operating in Puerto Rico and corporations that use insurance on their employees' lives as a tax shelter.
Here are some details of the tax cuts:
-The per-child credit would start at $ 300 this year and increase to $ 500 in 1999 and subsequent years. Eligibility would be phased out for families with incomes between $ 60,000 and $ 75,000.
-The deduction for post-secondary education expenses would start at $ 5,000 this year and increase to $ 10,000 starting in 1999. Eligibility would be phased out for couples earning between $ 100,000 and $ 120,000 and for single taxpayers earning between $ 70,000 and $ 90,000.
-By 1999, the current income limits for determining eligibility for deductible IRA contributions would double. The current phaseout is $ 40,000 to $ 50,000 for couples and $ 25,000 to $ 35,000 for singles covered by employer retirement plans. Also withdrawals would be permitted for first-time home purchases, post-secondary education, nursing home and catastrophic medical expenses and during protracted unemployment - not just for retirement.
-The health insurance deduction for the self-employed would rise from 30 percent currently to 50 percent by 2000.
 Load-Date: March 19, 1996

 

End of Document
