

Clinton speech: For many, topic was the state of the presidency
The Associated Press
January 19, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 606 words
Byline: MICHELLE BOORSTEIN, Associated Press Writer
Body




Many Americans watching President Clinton's speech to Congress on Tuesday said it told them more about the state of the presidency than the state of the union.
Michael O. Norton of Boston didn't much like what he saw, but Joe Tarin in El Paso, Texas, was proud of Clinton for sticking to his agenda.
"He's sitting here as if everything's going OK. I think it's just a facade," said Norton, a 40-year-old salesman who watched President Clinton's State of the Union speech Tuesday night from the Boston Athletic Club. "He's talking about all the safe issues. This is like a last-ditch effort to save himself."
Others saw a different Clinton - one unswayed by his impeachment trial, one who has stayed true to his agenda despite the political turmoil around him.
"He's more confident - it's like he's not even thinking about the other issues. He's really saying, 'The sky's the limit,"' said Tarin, one of about 20 people who fell silent at L & J Cafe, a bar and Democratic hangout east of downtown El Paso. "I think he's putting the stamp on his administration. He's saying, 'I'm not going to let history judge me by the impeachment trial."
Clinton's words were received with smiles, cheers and heads nodding in agreement at the Mambi Restaurant, a neighborhood bar and chicken takeout spot in northern Manhattan frequented primarily by Dominican immigrants. People stopping in for a drink or dinner were glued to the television, which broadcast the speech dubbed in Spanish.
As Clinton talked about a proposed retirement savings plan, Pedro Dominguez, a 31-year-old pharmacist from nearby Bergen, N.J., said the president had not allowed the trial to cripple his work.
"He looks like a little confused, but he's doing a good job for the people - a great job," he said. "He's doing something for the people. He tried to make a better life for the people of the United States."
Jean Joseph, who watched Clinton from a barber shop called Chicago's in the largely black, working-class San Francisco neighborhood of Western Addition, agreed that the president looked confident. However, he said, the confidence was probably coming from Clinton's belief that the public is fed up with his enemies.
"Unfortunately, it's not confidence for the right reason," said Joseph, a 25-year-old finance analyst. "He's not drawing confidence from the quality of his job so much as for the disdain for politics and the political games that are being played."
To Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary student Don Brown, hearing Clinton talk about the need for "discipline" in creating academic standards was just too much.
"Discipline?" Brown, 25, scoffed at the television set. "That's something he ought to apply to himself."
Fellow students who watched the speech with Brown at an apartment in Wake Forest, N.C. agreed, laughing at the mixed responses of attendees in the House chamber.
"The Supreme Court is not even clapping," said Chris Thompson, 30, of Durham. "He's subverting the whole judicial system - that's why."
Others rebuffed the suggestion made by some legislators that Clinton should have postponed the speech because it came at such an awkward time during the trial.
"That's not Bill Clinton. The Bill Clinton I know is going forward," said Robert Harlin, owner of Chicago's barber shop. "He's said all this stuff before but the more times he says it, it gives people hope that there's a future, that there's a tomorrow."
It was the second year in a row that Clinton delivered his State of the Union speech against a backdrop of personal scandal. Last year's speech came just a week after initial reports of his sexual relationship with Monica Lewinsky.
 
 Load-Date: January 20, 1999

 

End of Document
