

Clinton Says Election Moved the Country Back Toward the Center
November 6, 1996, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 1179 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Body




Savoring another political comeback, President Clinton said today his second-term 31-state sweep shows Americans have "moved back toward the vital center." But as a result of America's vote, he confronts a Republican Congress strong enough to check his dreams and investigate his dealings.
For his part, House Speaker Newt Gingrich, also restored to power, promised "to reach out and find a common ground" with Clinton.
In a vote for the status quo - and the legislative gridlock it sometimes produces - the country rebuffed Bob Dole and Ross Perot's attacks on Clinton's character in the election.
Instead, Americans endorsed both Clinton's handling of the economy and the Republican Congress' ability to temper his proposals.
The second-term transition began with a bang today with word that Defense Secretary William Perry, Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Commerce Secretary Mickey Kantor and Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary have decided to resign.
White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta has acknowledged that he will leave the administration, too, and a substantial number of other resignations is expected - not unusual in a second term. Sen. Chris Dodd, D-Conn., said he will give up his other job as general secretary of the Democratic National Committee.
Clinton was relaxed as he discussed his victory en route to Washington from Little Rock, Ark. aboard Air Force One, one arm resting on the shoulder of aide George Stephanopoulos.
Clinton said that be believes he lost a percentage point or two from his national totals because of his decision to campaign in small states in the final days to help congressional candidates instead of focusing his efforts on presidential battleground states in the Midwest.
Without elaborating, he also said Republicans "were doing everything they could to drive the turnout down."
"I feel good about it," Clinton said of the election. "I'm just elated. It's a more balanced vote across the country."
In a statement today, Nelson Warfield, Dole's press secretary, said Republican control in the House "is a vindication of Senator Dole's candidacy."
The result of the election was a new round of divided government. The people marginally strengthened the GOP's hand in the Senate but weakened it in the House.
Republicans will hold all the chairmanships, assuring Clinton of a new round of investigations of him, his wife and his administration on a range of ethics issues, the latest being foreign donations to the Democratic Party.
"Obviously there's going to have to be some questions asked," Republican Senate Leader Trent Lott told The Associated Press.
And Gingrich, one of the nation's most divisive politicians, retains his speakership of the House.
"I think you'll see us try to reach out and find a common ground with President Clinton," Gingrich said in an interview on CBS.
He cited legislation passed by the Republican Congress this year and signed by Clinton and said, "We don't have to live in a world of confrontation. I think we can find common ground to work on things."
Rep. Bill Paxon of New York, chairman of the Republican Congressional Campaign Committee, noted that the last time the GOP twice consecutively won control of the House was 1930.
"We cemented our gains in the House and set the foundation for a long-term House majority," he said.
Divided government over the past two years has led sometimes to stalemate, sometimes to compromise.
Panetta said that the people showed they did not want a resumption of partisan warfare.
Lott, in another interview, said Congress could work with Clinton "if he's really sincere about the positions he took in the campaign.' He called them "Republican positions."
Everything about Tuesday's election spoke of a public uninspired by its choices.
"To be honest," said one Clinton voter, Mike Morris of Fishers, Ind., "he was the best of the three, but I'm not happy with any of them. It was a tough decision."
The turnout at the polls was down sharply. A projection by Voter News Service suggested that only 49 percent of the voting age population cast ballots. That would be the lowest in 72 years.
When the results became known, Clinton appealed for bipartisanship, Dole acknowledged the sting of defeat and Perot hinted he would not quietly fade away.
Said Clinton to cheering supporters: "The challenges we face, they're not Democratic or Republican challenges. They're American challenges."
Dole, in a voice that reflected his emotions, said, "It's a lot more fun winning. It hurts to lose an election."
And Perot told his followers: "Take a little break and then we'll climb back in the ring."
Today, Dole was driven from his Watergate apartment to his campaign headquarters in Washington. He smiled and gave onlookers the "thumbs up" sign.
Remarkably, the country that re-elected Clinton by landslide proportions - making him the first Democrat to achieve that status since Franklin Roosevelt - also said it did not trust him.
In polls taken after they'd left the voting booths, nearly six of 10 voters said they believed Clinton had not told the truth about Whitewater and other matters under investigation.
Nearly as many - 55 percent - said they did not consider the president "honest and trustworthy."
With the national count almost complete:
-Clinton won 31 states and the District of Columbia for 379 electoral votes, well above the required 270 and surpassing by nine his 1992 total. Dole won 19 states with 159 electoral votes.
-In 34 Senate races, Republicans won 20 and were leading in Oregon. Democrats won 13. Republicans were assured of increasing their Senate majority to 54 seats - 55 if Oregon falls in the GOP column. Democrats' strength would fall by two, to 45, if Oregon goes Republican.
-Republicans entered the election with 236 House seats. They won 224 and led for three more - a potential loss of nine seats but still enough for a slim majority. Democrats won 202 seats and led for five more. Independent Bernard Sanders of Vermont also was re-elected.
Clinton, who won office in 1992 with only 43 percent of the vote in a three-way race, appears to have been denied the clean majority he wanted.
With 99 percent of the national vote counted, Clinton was at 49 percent to Dole's 41 percent and 8 percent for Perot, less than half of what the Texas billionaire won in 1992. The rest was scattered among minor candidates.
As in 1992, it was "the economy, stupid." The economic upturn - and the turnout of women voters - turned the trick for Clinton.
Women voters outnumbered men and gave him 55 percent of their vote, exit polls said. Dole tried to convince America the economic recovery was weak, poorly shared and couldn't last - but he didn't get through.
John Jackson, a 30-year-old Republican voting in a New Jersey suburb, chose Clinton and spoke for many: "The country's in the best economic shape it's been in a long, long time," he said. "He's turned it around."
Taking a political curtain call after 35 years of public service, Dole wished Clinton well. He would take a vacation, he said. And for the first time in many years, he would wake up with nothing to do.
 Load-Date: November 6, 1996

 

End of Document
