

Clinton speech: For many, topic was the state of the presidency
The Associated Press
January 20, 1999, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 968 words
Byline: By MICHELLE BOORSTEIN, Associated Press Writer
Body




Some saw a president giving a speech about education, Social Security and Medicare. Others saw only a liar and a fraud.
Americans watching Tuesday night as President Clinton delivered his second consecutive State of the Union speech amid a political firestorm and a backdrop of scandal found many ways to view the performance. A sampling:
---
It got to be a little much for J.J. Barrintoss when President Clinton said he honored the first lady.
"He loves her so much he cheats on her - that's love?" Barrintoss said.
There were jeers as well as cheers for Clinton as Barrintoss and eight other firefighters watched at Station One in downtown Wichita, Kan., as the president delivered the State of the Union address.
Scott Brown said the impeachment process has made Clinton ineffective as a president, but "he may have shored up some of his stability tonight."
"He gave a good speech," Brown said. "I think he still shows he has not lost control."
The firefighters said Clinton should not have canceled or delayed the speech because of the impeachment trial because that would have affected his job.
"The way he runs the government is one issue, the scandal is another," said Chad Winton.
Capt. Rich Harris said Clinton could have given his speech without having a "celebrity circus," a reference to the various people the president acknowledged throughout the address.
"He is a performer, and that is all this was - a performance," Barrintoss said. "The only thing he didn't have was the applause signs."
---
At the Mambi Restaurant in New York City, President Clinton got rave reviews before he even opened his mouth.
Marisol Alcantna, 40, is a cook at the neighborhood bar and chicken takeaway spot where the speech was tuned in on television and dubbed in Spanish. She declared Clinton a "very good presidente."
Many of the patrons Tuesday night were Dominican, and were particularly thrilled to see fellow countryman and baseball slugger Sammy Sosa welcomed to Congress as a guest of Clinton.
There was a consensus that Clinton was correct to make his speech, and they liked what they heard.
"He's doing something for the people. He try to make a better life for all the people of the United States," said Pedro Dominguez, a 31-year-old pharmacist who stopped in on the way home to North Bergen, N.J. "He's the man, oh yes."
---
Applause crackled for President Clinton on the TV set inside the Woodland Terrace lobby, but the residents watching in the Tulsa, Okla., senior apartment home didn't move, didn't speak.
A dozen residents sat, many with arms folded, as Clinton outlined plans to save Social Security, improve education and health care.
"I thought he was a brave man," 80-year-old Thelma Ferguson said afterward. "I think he is a president that will go down in history as one of our finest."
Others disagreed. Some found the 77-minute speech too long. Some didn't believe him.
"He took care of the old people. He took care of children. He took care of the world - all under that surplus! This is bull!" said Phyllis Atkinson, 80, who left in mid-speech, saying she'd had enough.
Others were impressed with the president's resilience.
"Frankly, I think it's amazing he can go ahead and deliver a speech like that under the circumstances," said Howard Emmert, 88.
As the clock passed 9 p.m., several residents began to yawn and check their watches. Some finally stood up, saying it was past their bedtime.
It was a good speech, Emmert said.
"But," he added, "he should have quit while he was ahead."
---
The verdict on President Clinton at the Boston Athletic Club: Business as usual.
People in the bar and on the treadmills watched the speech and said Clinton seemed to be successfully keeping separate his impeachment trial and his presidential duties.
"He separates himself. He always rises to the occasion," said Judy Hershberg, a 42-year-old physical therapist who watched Clinton from her treadmill. "He made some good points. Medicare, Social Security, long-term care .. He talked as if (the trial) didn't even exist."
Tricia Gugler, a 27-year-old Boston certified public accountant who was taking a break in her workout, said Clinton "looks fine."
"I think he's trying to conduct his actions tonight as if the impeachment process is not going on. I think he's going on to run the country and let the impeachment process go forward, but not affect his plans," she said.
Salesman Michael O. Norton, 40, called the speech "a facade."
"He's talking all about the safe issues. But he's not addressing the predicament he's in. He's sitting here as if everything's going OK," he said. "The guy's a character. He should have canceled. I just don't think you can take him for real."
---
Democrats who migrated to the L&J in El Paso, Texas, on Tuesday night got what they were looking for: affirmation from Bill Clinton.
"I think he's saying, 'I'm not going to let history judge me by the impeachment trial - I want to be remembered for what I did,"' said Joe Tarin, 48, a management consultant. "It's like he's not even thinking about the other issues."
Tarin was one of about 20 people at the smoky bar and cafe, most of whom fell silent when Clinton began his speech and stayed more or less quiet until the end.
Margo Lowder said the president didn't seem gun-shy from his impeachment and wasn't pandering in his speech to anyone.
"I think these have always been Bill Clinton's issues," she said. "Schools always have been one of his issues. Social Security has always been one of his issues, and I think he's sticking to his guns."
Bill Levey, 43, said Clinton seemed animated - but possibly because of his predicament rather than his confidence.
"It's really encouraging, but in the back of my mind, I keep thinking a lot of this energy is because of what's happening outside the chamber," said Levey, a probation department supervisor.
 Load-Date: January 20, 1999

 

End of Document
