

Clinton's overnight guests: the rich, the famous, the home folks
February 25, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 591 words
Byline: By CONNIE CASS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Who were those 938 lucky folks who spent a night at the White House courtesy of President Clinton? They were the corporate elite - computer magnate Steven Jobs. The famous - Barbra Streisand. The spiritual - Billy Graham. And the big givers, with no other obvious cachet.
The list is long enough to have provided a house guest for the Lincoln Bedroom two nights out of every three in Clinton's first term. But the overnighters often came in bunches, and many stayed in other rooms.
One night in April 1995, the guests included two former governors - Richard Lamm of Colorado and Ned Ray McWherter of Tennessee - as well as Jean Houston, a New Age adviser of Hillary Rodham Clinton's.
As Lamm remembers it, they stayed after a reception for about 60 people. Lamm and his wife slept in the room where Abraham Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation.
"It's a pretty heady experience," said Lamm, who had been to the White House 20 or so times before and didn't expect to be impressed. "We're not used to being awed. But we were awed."
In releasing a list of the overnight guests through last year, the White House divided them into seven categories - Arkansas friends; longtime friends from elsewhere; friends and supporters from the 1992 campaign or later; public officials and dignitaries; artists, entertainers and writers; Clinton relatives, and Chelsea's friends. The 107 relatives and friends of Chelsea weren't named.
Key financial donors or fund-raisers show up on page after page, in every category.
Among the Hollywood elite are director Stephen Spielberg, who gave $ 200,000 to the Democratic National Committee for the 1996 election, producer David Geffen, who donated $ 200,000, and Streisand, who gave $ 60,000.
Other entertainment names on the list, not necessarily contributors: Jane Fonda, Tom Hanks, Candice Bergen, Richard Dreyfuss, Kathleen Battle, Neil Simon.
The list is rich with corporate executives and entrepreneurs, some famous some not, who gave generously to the party. Computer magnate Jobs, was a $ 150,000 donor. Former MCA head Lew Wasserman contributed $ 225,000. Photography executive Olan Mills II gave $ 60,000. So did Sacramento developer Angelo Tsakopoulos - he's not a big name outside of California, but he gave the national party $ 165,000 and shelled out much more for Democrats in his home state.
Among the friends from Arkansas were Victor and Susan Fleming of Little Rock, who visited twice - once to babysit Chelsea while the Clintons were overseas. They brought along their own daughter, Elizabeth.
"It beats the heck out of the Holiday Inn," said Victor Fleming, a Little Rock municipal judge.
The White House "is very similar to a first-class hotel operation," he said, including telephones set up for "something similar to room service."
Other longtime friends on the list were Carolyn Staley, who grew up next to Bill Clinton in Hot Springs, Ark., and Patty Criner, another of the president's childhood friends.
But many guests were businessmen or lobbyists who not only gave but raised money for the Clinton campaign or the party, including Washington lobbyist Daniel Dutko and Florida lobbyist Dick Batchelor.
Other guests were mayors, lawmakers and other Democratic allies whose political support of Clinton was critical even though their pockets weren't deep.
Among the dignitaries were two presidential daughters - Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg and Margaret Truman Daniels. Then there were King Harald and Queen Sonja of Norway, the Rev. Billy Graham, and even a well-known Republican - former President Bush.
 Load-Date: February 25, 1997

 

End of Document
