

Clinton sweats out the speech as Democrats remember the macarena
January 18, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 899 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton worked with pen, pad and tape recorder Saturday, searching for an inaugural address theme that will catch in the nation's memory. Supporters swarmed into a frigid capital to celebrate the advent of term two with lots of fireworks and even some leftover macarena.
The three-day observation of the 53rd inauguration in U.S. history began with Washington and its visitors in a festive but tempered mood.
Democrats had reason to celebrate the first re-election of a Democratic president since Franklin D. Roosevelt and polls putting Clinton's popularity at its highest level since his first inauguration.
But the newness and unchecked promise of four years ago were absent, and between Clinton and his goals stood a Republican Congress with ideas of its own.
Still, for the moment, partisanship was set aside. The capital looked glorious. Banners and bunting flicked in the breezes. Monday's swearing-in of Clinton and Vice President Al Gore promised to occur in weather that's crisp, clear and free of snow - better than usual.
"It's freezing cold," shivered an inaugural visitor from San Francisco, Jeanne Bierhart, a school teacher. That didn't keep her from trooping to Pennsylvania Avenue to take photos of the White House. "I'm just happy to be here," she exulted.
As workers hoisted the presidential seal over the inaugural parade reviewing stand in front of the White House, two dozen anti-abortion activists marched past carrying giant color posters of aborted fetuses and a banner calling them "the children of Hillary's village." Next Wednesday marks the 24th anniversary of Roe v. Wade, the Supreme Court decision that ruled American women have a right to abortion.
Four years ago, Clinton led a bus motorcade from Thomas Jefferson's Monticello in Virginia and walked across a bridge over the Potomac into Washington. His fellow Arkansans galloped through the corridors of the Mayflower Hotel crying out, "woo, pig, sooie!"
This time, Arkansans were back at the Mayflower - but more restrained. They named their big social event "the Blue Jeans Ball."
Clinton was described as upbeat and happy to have visiting time with old friends. He and Mrs. Clinton fed 500 friends, family and former college and law school classmates at brunch and lunch in the White House.
But the first order of business was Monday's speech. Clinton worked on it late Friday night, then was up again early Saturday to write a new beginning. He worked sometimes with speech writers, sometimes alone. Spokesman Mike McCurry said he wants it to be memorable.
For ideas, Clinton dipped into an anthology of great oratory and, for cadence, read some poetry.
Most inaugural addresses are forgotten upon delivery. Clinton's speech four years ago fell into that category.
A handful are recalled for lines that resonate - Lincoln's "with malice towards none;" Roosevelt's "the only thing we have to fear is fear itself;" Kennedy's "Ask not what your country can do for you" - and that's what Clinton was said to be striving for.
The president used his weekly radio address to give a seven-months progress report against a rash of church arsons - 48 convictions in 43 fires, a higher than normal rate.
He saluted Americans of all faiths who helped rebuild scorched houses of worship. He quoted scripture: "You meant evil against me, but God meant it for good."
Republicans designated a freshman, Rep. Kay Granger of Texas, to deliver their weekly radio reply. She plugged for a balanced budget, but for the moment, she said, Americans are united, celebrating their democracy as a "model of freedom and self-government for people the world over."
The inaugural calendar brimmed. Festivities got under way at nightfall with a fireworks display said to rival that of the 1976 Bicentennial.
Clinton planned a brief break from his speech writing to catch the display from a White House balcony. So preoccupied was he on polishing his speech that he called off tentative plans to drop by some of the Saturday-night parties.
A record 14 inaugural balls were laid out, and the macarena, the dance that enlivened dull moments during last summer's Democratic convention in Chicago, was heard once again.
On Sunday night, big name celebrities will entertain at an extravaganza from the USAir Arena in a Maryland suburb. The first family planned to drop by all the inaugural balls and as many other events as they could work in.
On the National Mall were the free events - music, oratory and entertainment. Big tents housing the shows were supposed to be heated, but no one could tell.
"Better Than Ezra," an alternative rock band, was booked into "Harmony Hall" tent. Television's historian, Ken Burns, was to speak at the "American Journey" tent. Eighteen companies were displaying new gadgetry in the "Technology Playground" tent, where visitors could send e-mail to Clinton and Gore. The "Millennium Schoolhouse" offered entertainment for children, including the Science Guy.
Inevitably on the Mall was "The Bridge to the 21st Century," a structure composed of painted panels depicting different visions of "an American Journey."
Among other parties were the Black Tie and Boots Ball, the Black Entertainment Jam, the Women's Ball and the Gay and Lesbian Victory Fund dance.
For those unable to be on hand, a computer site promised the next best thing: the first ever Internet inaugural broadcast. The site is http://www.inaugural97.org. 
 Load-Date: January 18, 1997

 

End of Document
