

Comparing the Candidates' Words to the Facts
October 17, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 836 words
Byline: By JOHN SOLOMON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton and Republican challenger Bob Dole tussled over government ethics, the future of Medicare and student loans in their final debate. How their claims measure up to the facts:
 
 Economic Growth: Dole declared that "we have the worst economy in a century." Not even close, according to the Commerce Department. Economic growth in Clinton's presidency has averaged 2.7 percent, nearly double that under President Bush and nearly as strong as the average during President Reagan's eight years, when the economy grew about 3 percent.
The single worst year for the economy since Commerce began keeping records was 1982, during the recession of the early Reagan years when the economy shrunk by 2.1 percent. However, the government didn't keep such figures during the Great Depression.
Under Clinton, the economy has created 10.5 million new jobs, according to a Labor Department survey of 390,000 employers. A different Labor Department survey of 50,000 households, which is used to calculate unemployment, found slightly fewer new jobs: about 8.8 million.
 
 Medicare: Clinton claimed that the American Hospital Association had predicted the GOP congressional budget "could have closed 700 hospitals." But the AHA said Wednesday night the president was not accurately representing its position.
"We never said 700 hospitals would close," said AHA senior vice president Rick Wade.
Wade said his group identified about 700 U.S. hospitals that rely on Medicare and Medicaid for two-thirds of their revenue and could have been more seriously affected by some plans the GOP discussed.
The group told Congress that if revenues were reduced too severely in those programs, "a variety of things could happen" to those 700 hospitals including reducing services, cutting costs and "some ultimately might have to consider closing their doors," Wade said.
The group told the White House a week ago that it wanted the president to correctly quote its position, Wade said.
Clinton-Gore spokesman Don Foley said "we stand by what the president said tonight at the debate."
 
 Bankruptcies: Dole blamed the Clinton administration for a record number of bankruptcies, which are on track to surpass 1 million this year for the first time.
However, bankruptcy filings had their single-largest gains during the Reagan and Bush years. Between 1985 and 1993, bankruptcy filings tripled to more than 900,000.
The increase toward the million mark since then is due not so much to worsening economic conditions but to a law Clinton signed and Republicans overwhelmingly supported in 1994 that made it easier to declare bankruptcy.
 
 Pardons: Dole also jumped on Clinton for refusing to say he's "not going to pardon anybody he was involved in business with" in the Whitewater investigation. But Dole hasn't always been an opponent of pardons.
He successfully urged President Bush at the end of his term to pardon several former Reagan administration officials in the Iran-Contra investigation.
One of those pardoned was former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, who was just two weeks away from beginning trial on charges brought by the Iran-Contra prosecutor.
Earlier this week, former Iran-Contra prosecutor Lawrence Walsh, a Republican, accused Dole of hypocrisy for criticizing Clinton on pardons after his advocacy of such pardons in Iran-Contra.
 
 Student Loans: Clinton charged that only his veto stopped the Republican-controlled Congress under Dole and Newt Gingrich from assailing student loan programs.
It is true that GOP budget writers considered cutting spending on - but not the availability of - student loans during the early fiscal 1996 budget plans. Under one House plan, students would have paid slightly more for loans.
However, the final plan the GOP Congress sent to Clinton in 1995 had banks and the agencies that run the program - not students - bear the costs of any spending cuts. That plan would have cut $ 4.9 billion over seven years. Clinton vetoed it.
Since then, Republicans proposed no cuts in student loans for 1997.
And, Clinton's own advisers once considered increasing student loan costs for students as a way to balance the budget. A 1994 memo from White House budget director Alice Rivlin proposed eliminating the government subsidy on loans' interest for students still in school.
Congressional Republicans also can take credit for increasing the maximum Pell grant for college students to $ 2,700, its highest level ever.
 
 FBI Files: Dole made a reference to the FBI files scandal. The Clinton administration gathered confidential FBI files on hundreds of former workers of a Republican administration. Dole charged "nobody knows who hired" the temporary White House aide who gathered the files.
In fact, congressional hearings established that temporary detailee Anthony Marceca was hired by Craig Livingstone, a friend of several years who was chief of the White House office of personnel security. Livingstone was hired by then-associate White House counsel William Kennedy, a former law partner of Mrs. Clinton.
 Load-Date: October 17, 1996

 

End of Document
