

Comparing the Candidates' Words to the Facts
October 17, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 711 words
Byline: By JOHN SOLOMON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The worst economy in a century? Bob Dole said it during his final debate with President Clinton. But the figures don't support it.
Economic growth during Clinton's presidency has averaged 2.7 percent, nearly double the 1.3 percent growth rate under President Bush. During President Reagan's eight years, the economy grew about 3 percent, according to Commerce Department statistics.
The single-worst year for the economy since Commerce began keeping records was 1982, during the recession of the early Reagan years when the economy shrunk by 2.1 percent. However, the department didn't keep such figures during the Great Depression.
Clinton said that the economy has created 10.5 million new jobs during his presidency. That figure is based on the Labor Department's survey of 390,000 employers.
A different Labor Department survey of 50,000 households, which is used to calculate unemployment, also found strong job growth - about 8.8 million more Americans with jobs since Clinton took office.
How some of the candidates' other statements Wednesday night compared to the facts:
Medicare: Clinton claimed that the American Hospital Association had predicted the GOP congressional budget "could have closed 700 hospitals." But the AHA said Wednesday night the president was not accurately representing its position.
"We never said 700 hospitals would close," said AHA senior vice president Rick Wade.
Wade said his group identified about 700 U.S. hospitals that rely on Medicare and Medicaid for two-thirds of their revenue and could have been more seriously affected by some plans the GOP discussed.
The group told Congress that if revenues were reduced too severely in those programs, "a variety of things could happen" to those 700 hospitals including reducing services, cutting costs and "some ultimately might have to consider closing their doors," Wade said.
The group told the White House a week ago that it wanted the president to correctly quote its position, Wade said.
Clinton-Gore spokesman Don Foley said "we stand by what the president said tonight at the debate."
 
 Bankruptcies: Dole blamed the Clinton administration for a record number of bankruptcies, which are on track to surpass 1 million this year for the first time.
However, bankruptcy filings had their single-largest gains during the Reagan and Bush years. Between 1985 and 1993, bankruptcy filings tripled to more than 900,000.
The increase toward the million mark since then is due not so much to worsening economic conditions but to a law Clinton signed and Republicans supported in 1994 that made it easier to declare bankruptcy.
 
 Pardons: Dole also jumped on Clinton for refusing to say he's "not going to pardon anybody he was involved in business with" in the Whitewater investigation. But Dole hasn't always been an opponent of pardons.
He successfully urged President Bush at the end of his term to pardon several former Reagan administration officials in the Iran-Contra investigation.
One of those pardoned was former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, who was just two weeks away from trial on charges brought by the Iran-Contra prosecutor.
Earlier this week, former Iran-Contra prosecutor Lawrence Walsh, a Republican, accused Dole of hypocrisy for criticizing Clinton on pardons after his advocacy of such pardons in Iran-Contra.
 
 Student Loans: Clinton charged that only his veto stopped the Republican-controlled Congress under Dole and Newt Gingrich from assailing student loan programs.
It is true that GOP budget writers considered cutting spending on - but not the availability of - student loans during the early fiscal 1996 budget plans. Under one House plan, students would have paid slightly more for loans.
However, the final plan the GOP Congress sent to Clinton in 1995 had banks and the agencies that run the program - not students - bear the costs of spending cuts. That plan would have cut $ 4.9 billion over seven years. Clinton vetoed it.
Since then, Republicans proposed no cuts in student loans for 1997.
And, Clinton's own advisers once considered increasing student loan costs for students as a way to balance the budget. A 1994 memo from White House budget director Alice Rivlin suggested eliminating the government subsidy on loans' interest for students still in school.
 Load-Date: October 17, 1996

 

End of Document
