

Conventions - the pinnacle of the political money mountain
The Associated Press
July 29, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 782 words
Byline: By JOHN SOLOMON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




Attention donors: Your luxury skyboxes, yacht cruise with senators and shrimp-and-wine receptions are ready for delivery at the Republican National Convention.
But don't expect to leave town without thoughts of opening that wallet again this fall.
No single event in the record-setting fund-raising race of 2000 has done more than the quadrennial nominating conventions to draw fresh dollars into Republican and Democratic party coffers.
On the eve of an event that will propel George W. Bush toward the fall election, the Republican Party has already collected more than a quarter billion dollars for its political arsenal.
Democrats, who convene next month in Los Angeles, trail only a little behind in the furious, insatiable chase for money that has obliterated the donor restraints put in place after the Watergate scandal a quarter century ago.
The corporations, wealthy executives and political action committee lobbyists who have fueled the quest will be front and center at the conventions with the best floor seats, posh skyboxes, and golf or tennis with senators that money can buy.
There's even a Union Pacific train where donors to House Whip Tom DeLay's political action committee can have breakfast or dinner and drinks in a double-decker car.
All are rewards for donors' largesse so far - and a step toward priming them to give again this fall when control of the White House and Congress is at stake.
"This is the biggest concentration of political wealth in the country," says Larry Makinson, head of the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics who has studied fund raising for two decades.
"Within the city of Philadelphia and within the halls of the convention are going to be the core and secondary core of the fund-raising effort for the 2000 election," he said.
Giving money to get VIP treatment here is only part of the convention fund-raising equation:
-The Republican National Committee and many lawmakers have slated their own fund-raising events, from a black-tie gala to a party at the old Naval Shipyard where defense contractors now work;
-Congressional wannabes will hit cocktail receptions to meet major national donors who can help them in the fall;
-Special interests will be saluting GOP leaders at ritzy events - from a martini-and-cigar reception to cruises, a concert with rock group Earth, Wind and Fire and barbecues -designed to spread goodwill among those who can affect their interests.
Fund-raisers for both parties months ago began lining up and advertising perks for big donors in hopes of luring corporations, wealthy executives or unions to fork over $15,000, $100,000 and even $250,000.
Those who obliged are granted lofty titles - some GOP catch names are executive chairman, Eagle and Inner Circle member - and VIP pampering.
Republican Team 100 members, who donated at least $100,000, will be treated to no fewer than 15 events that offer casual face time with the party's stars - including dinner with Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott and House Speaker Dennis Hastert, breakfast with former presidents and a reception with governors.
Such VIP glitz lured donors to give big. How big?
"It's pretty safe to say that our donations went up at least 20 percent because of the convention and the people who want to attend the convention," said Stuart Roy of the National Republican Senatorial Committee. The NRSC has raised more than $30 million for GOP Senate candidates this election.
The Republican fund-raising arm for House candidates has raked in $90 million. And the Republican National Committee has raised $140 million - $36 million in the month before the convention alone.
Post-Watergate reforms were designed to take big money out of the conventions by funding them with taxpayers dollars. The Republican convention in Philadelphia and the Democratic counterpart in Los Angeles are to receive $13.5 million each in federal dollars.
But that covers only the activities inside the convention hall. A loophole opened the door for corporations to give millions more to special committees created to pay for transportation, parties and fanfare outside the hall.
Each convention has secured donations of $1 million or more from at least 10 companies - including AT&T, United Parcel Service, Microsoft and General Motors.
While lobbyists and executives mingle with Washington figures who can affect regulations, contracts and policies key to their businesses, the GOP luminaries will be encouraging more largesse.
"Conventions are not only about nominating a president," said John Feehery, Hastert's spokesman. "They're also to build support for the party. And getting to support the party financially is vitally important, and that's what these events are about."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo, Graphic
 Load-Date: July 30, 2000

 

End of Document
