

Cross the street the wrong way and you'll cross the mayor of New York
December 30, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 483 words
Byline: By VERENA DOBNIK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




A young city employee learned a costly lesson this week: Don't cross Mayor Rudolph Giuliani when you're crossing the street.
David Vidal, 24-year-old college intern with the mayor's Juvenile Justice commissioner, was forced to resign when he flouted Giuliani's plan to keep pedestrians from blocking midtown Manhattan traffic during the holidays.
"Nonsensical laws mean nothing to me," the student bragged to a newspaper reporter after he walked around a police barrier to get across a street. The next thing he knew, he was out of a job.
Under Giuliani's plan, launched last week to ease holiday gridlock in a tourist-packed city, police barriers and signs bar pedestrians from using crosswalks at some of the city's busiest street corners.
The goal is to control the crowds filling the sidewalks near Radio City Music Hall, the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree, Saks Fifth Avenue and the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel and keep vehicles moving on the street.
But many New Yorkers, being New Yorkers, don't like being told what to do.
Vidal told the New York Post he didn't feel guilty about ignoring the new barriers because "historically, I have not been a great follower of laws."
Deputy Mayor Randy Mastro read the comments in Monday's paper and called Vidal's boss, acting Juvenile Justice Commissioner Alfred Reno. On Monday, the fine arts student at La Guardia College was asked to resign from his $ 5.50-an-hour internship, which started in September.
Giuliani said Tuesday that Vidal lost his job because of "the arrogance he showed about respect for the law."
After losing his job, Vidal explained that he and his brother had nearly been hit by a car while waiting to cross under the new plan and were pushed by the crowds into the street.
He said that being forced out of his job was unfair because he was not representing his city department but expressing his personal opinion. "Isn't that my First Amendment right?" he said.
On Tuesday, meanwhile, about 30 people dressed like black-and-white cows held a noontime protest on Fifth Avenue to complain about the Giuliani plan, which they say herds people like cattle.
They yelled "Moo! Moo!" as they crossed the street, ringing huge cow bells that vied with the bells of St. Patrick's Cathedral, and held signs that read, "Pedestrians are not cattle" and "Remoooove the barriers."
"Mayor Giuliani should not make it harder for us pedestrians," said Ken Coughlin, a member of Transportation Alternatives, which organized the protest. "This is a city of walkers. They should keep the cars out."
Under the plan, police officers are stationed at every corner at 10 intersections, between Lexington Avenue and Sixth Avenue and between 49th and 51st streets. Most pedestrians seem to obeying the rules.
Lynn Saunders, visiting from Toronto with her husband and children, ended up on Fifth Avenue amid the "cows."
"I'm overwhelmed," she said. "Kids, this is New York!"
 
 Load-Date: December 30, 1997

 

End of Document
