

Darkness visible: Fervor and mysticism fuel eclipse fever --- "… And the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light … and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken ..." -Matthew 24:29 ---
The Associated Press
August 9, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 741 words
Byline: By LAURA KING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




In a city where omens, portents and apocalyptic visions are practically a local industry, Wednesday's solar eclipse is capturing the imagination of mystics of all stripes.
Even though Israel and the Palestinian lands do not lie directly in the eclipse path, the expected partial darkening of the heavens is viewed by many - Christians, Jews and Muslims alike - as an awesome display of divine power.
And for a few, those moonshadow moments offer a foretaste of millennial doom.
In the realm of the secular, the eclipse offers a rare opportunity for scientists. Naturalists will be able to observe the behavior of Israel's rare vultures and night-blooming plants, and monitor endangered sea turtles whose normal night-hatching habits might be thrown off by the eclipse.
Israel's Science Museum will play host to hundreds of school children, offering daylong education programs, a viewing area protected by special filters and eclipse-viewing glasses, on sale for $ 4 a pair.
But the eclipse, like so many daily events here, will be pervaded by religious overtones.
At Islam's third-holiest shrine, the Al Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem, Muslims will offer a special eclipse-linked prayer, dating back 15 centuries, which appeals for God's mercy. The mosque will be shuttered and darkened for the occasion, religious officials said.
Jerusalem's highest Islamic authority, Mufti Ekrimeh Sabri, said worshippers also can offer the eclipse prayer at home - where Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority is urging people to stay during the eclipse.
Wednesday is a national holiday in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, with businesses and government offices shut down. Mothers are being urged to keep their children indoors rather than risking eye damage by allowing them outside.
For apocalyptic Christians who have been flocking to Jerusalem in anticipation of the millennium, Wednesday's celestial display offers fresh confirmation that the end of the world is nigh.
"The eclipse goes together with everything else in the sky. … To me, it means that something is coming about," said a 27-year-old Seattle man who gave only his first name, Raymond. He came to Jerusalem two years ago because "God woke me up and told me there was no more time to mess around, he was going to come back."
"The Bible says there will be signs in the heavens," said Sharon, a fiftyish woman from Sacramento, Calif., one of a group of several dozen Christian pilgrims who have settled on the Mount of Olives to await the second coming of Christ.
"All together, with all the other signs … this is leading up to the Rapture," she said of the eclipse.
Mainstream Christian theology attaches no special significance to eclipses, but biblical references to them abound. Eclipses also appear in Jewish folklore, often as a symbol of introspection and repentance, said Rabbi David Rosen, an educator and anti-defamation activist.
He cited a Jewish blessing that applies to natural phenomena such as thunder and lightning, praising a God who "performs the wonders of the universe."
"Saying this particular blessing during an eclipse would certainly not be out of place," he said.
This being the Middle East, the eclipse is also providing a forum for political argument.
A group of politicians from Israel's opposition Likud party is preparing to watch the eclipse from strategic Mount Hermon, at the northern tip of the Golan Heights - and then launch a campaign against any Israeli withdrawal from the Golan as part of a peace pact with Syria, said Israel's Yediot Ahronot newspaper.
The eclipse also became a matter for brief consideration at a weekend meeting of Israel's Cabinet. Minister without portfolio Haim Ramon, an astronomy buff, plans to travel to Romania, where the eclipse will be visible for longer than anywhere else in the world. Under Israeli law, ministers need permission to leave the country - which the Cabinet granted.
But eclipse fever isn't universal.
National police spokeswoman Linda Menuhin said no particular problems were anticipated and police would not be out in any larger numbers than usual. And tourism officials said any visitor interest in the eclipse was dwarfed by millennial pilgrimages.
Many Israelis displayed a matter-of-factness in the face of the eclipse.
"I'll watch it if I have time, but it's no big deal," said retired printer Yosef Shemesh, carrying sacks of vegetables from a crowded open-air market in the center of Jerusalem. "It's just the nature of the universe."
 Load-Date: August 9, 1999

 

End of Document
