

De la Renta gets nod for the gown, but what about the hat?
January 14, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 670 words
Byline: By JAMES ROWLEY, Associated Press Writer
Body




WASHINGTON - This time, Hillary Rodham Clinton chose established couturier Oscar de la Renta to outfit her inaugural wardrobe. But she's still pondering a hat - the item of her attire that raised fashion critics' eyebrows in 1993.
Four years after the first lady wore dresses from a relatively unknown creator, she will showcase the work of one of the fashion world's most celebrated designers.
Mrs. Clinton will wear a wool suit and matching coat to her husband's swearing in at the Capitol on Monday. She will appear at inaugural balls that evening in a long embroidered, tulle gown with matching satin cape, which is also designed by de la Renta, the White House said.
De la Renta's fashion house declined to give specifics about the color or design of the garments. "Mr. de la Renta felt it's always nice to have a little element of surprise," said Chris Tully, a spokeswoman for the Dominican-born designer.
But fashion experts said they saw a gold-beaded dress at the designer's spring show in October that is apparently the inspiration for Mrs. Clinton's gown.
"It's just as simple as a long-sleeves T-shirt made out of the most beautiful gold lace imaginable," said fashion consultant David Wolfe.
Women's Wear Daily carried a cover photograph of de la Renta and models wearing similar dresses at the show and reported that one of them had been altered for Mrs. Clinton.
By picking de la Renta instead of the newcomer who designed her 1993 inauguration wardrobe, Mrs. Clinton shows she has learned fashion sophistication in her four years in the White House, the experts said.
Mrs. Clinton's 1993 inaugural outfitter, Sarah Phillips, "had no real history, whatsoever," sniffed Stan Herman, president of the Council of Fashion Designers of America.
"You will be shocked to see the difference between what she looked like four years ago," said Herman. "It will be more polished, more professional. She won't just have come out of Arkansas into Washington."
"In the beginning, she looked intellectual, slightly backwoods," Herman said. "But I think she has learned how to be an elegant understated fashionable person."
Mrs. Clinton wore an aquamarine dress designed by de la Renta when she addressed delegates to the Democratic National Convention.
Picking de la Renta is "a real smart move fashionwise," Wolfe said. "Because Oscar de la Renta is traditional and has a real, real long track record of dressing important women for important occasions."
"We will have to wait and see what the hair looks like, that will be the deciding factor. The dress will be great," said Wolfe, creative director of The Doneger Group, which advises retail stores on the latest fashion trends. He estimated the gown would cost $ 4,000 to $ 5,000.
Mrs. Clinton has not yet settled on what hat she will wear to the inauguration - and the experts urged her to steer clear of the one item of apparel that got her into trouble with fashion critics four years ago.
The blue-brimmed velour chapeau she wore to the 1993 inauguration was panned by critics.
"That could spell disaster, the only good hat a first lady ever wore was Jackie Kennedy's pill box," Wolfe said. "Fashionwise, hats are just out of sync with modern women."
Not to be outdone by the first lady, Tipper Gore, wife of the vice president, and her designers announced her inaugural wardrobe as well. Mrs. Gore will wear an American blue double-faced wool jacket and dress with a long sapphire, blue alpaca overcoat to the swearing-in ceremony, the White House said.
Designer Jennifer George created the outfit, along with the empire-cut gown with a garnet and gold-beaded lace bodice that Mrs. Gore will wear to the inaugural balls. Mrs. Gore will also wear a floor-length opera coat embroidered with the names of the 50 states and names special to the Gore family.
Designer Kay Unger has designed a dress for Mrs. Gore to wear to Sunday night's Presidential Gala that her publicity people described as "softly constructed of lustrous bordeaux silk velvet … with a flirtatious trumpet skirt."
 Load-Date: January 14, 1997

 

End of Document
