

Decisions on medication can hinge on the sex of the patient
The Associated Press
May 15, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 966 words
Byline: By LAURAN NEERGAARD, AP Medical Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When the young woman arrived in the emergency room complaining of lethargy and heart palpitations, Dr. David Flockhart suspected a dangerous side effect of her antidepressant.
So he proposed a test: Patient and doctor both would take a dose to compare how quickly the woman metabolized the antidepressant. Sure enough, it took four times too long for the woman's body to clear the drug, meaning it had time to build up and threaten her heart.
But Flockhart had a weird reaction, too. "I take it and am completely knocked out," the Georgetown University doctor recalled. Once the sedation wore off, he remained disoriented. "I go to the parking lot … and drive off with all the car doors open."
The experience illustrates a concept scientists only now are investigating: Men and women may have dramatically different reactions to medications, yet very few drugs have been studied to determine the proper dose - and safety warnings - according to sex.
"Until this point, it has been assumed that one drug, one dose was right for all individuals," said Dr. Marietta Anthony of the National Institutes of Health.
But new research is uncovering startling - even life-threatening - differences that show "physicians better start prescribing drugs based on gender," said Georgetown medication expert Dr. Raymond Woosley.
Among early findings:
- Woosley examined 40 drugs that sometimes cause irregular heartbeats. For almost a dozen of the drugs, women have twice the risk of developing this potentially life-threatening side effect.
- Morphine controls pain much better in women than in men. But another study suggested the over-the-counter painkiller ibuprofen is more effective for men than for women.
- Aspirin seems to thin men's blood much better than women's, an important finding for heart patients.
- Women reject heart transplants more often than men, and the reason may be that anti-rejection drugs like cyclosporine clear out of their bodies faster.
Scientists only recently began studying medication sex differences, spurred by the discovery that side effects from the antihistamine Seldane - pulled off the market last year - killed more women than men.
Then researchers began discovering dozens of enzymes responsible for metabolizing medicines, and found that some predominate according to gender. In fact, women can metabolize numerous drugs, from the antibiotic erythromycin to the blood pressure drug verapamil, 20 percent to 50 percent faster than men.
So are these drugs staying in their bodies long enough to work, or do they need higher doses?
Nobody yet knows, said scientists at a meeting called by NIH's Office of Research on Women's Health last week to boost this research - and to get the message about sex differences to everyday doctors.
"You've got to look at each medication," stressed Mary Berg, a University of Iowa pharmacy professor.
Of course, drug effects vary widely from person to person. Flockhart's sedation, for example, merely showed his body was not used to antidepressants. But his female patient lacked an enzyme vital to properly process certain antidepressants.
When such reactions prove more common in one sex, doctors could prescribe alternate drugs or at least watch more carefully for early side effects, Woosley explained.
Furiously taking notes during the two-day meeting were scientists at the Food and Drug Administration who are responsible for approving new medicines. Only last August did the FDA begin requiring drug manufacturers to analyze how the different sexes respond to experimental therapies.
Scientists are watching to see how strictly the FDA will regard the issue of gender and medication. An experimental stroke treatment called tirilazad may be a key test.
Initial studies suggested the drug offered a small benefit to men but not women, so manufacturer Pharmacia & UpJohn then studied higher doses for women, but got uncertain results, said William Jusko of the State University of New York, Buffalo.
"Will (the FDA) approve a drug with successful efficacy in men and questionable efficacy in women? We don't know," Jusko said.
Hormones, of course, play a big role.
Male hormones called androgens seem to protect men from that irregular heartbeat side effect that Woosley uncovered in about a dozen drugs, including Seldane.
Women's hormones fluctuate according to their menstrual cycle. Women with asthma seem to metabolize theophylline much more slowly during ovulation, and consequently have improved lung function during that time each month.
Other research found that starting a few days before the menstrual period, women with epilepsy often report more seizures, because their bodies temporarily eliminate the epilepsy drug phenytoin faster than usual.
To complicate matters, proteins that help certain drugs get inside the body's cells play a role, too, and scientists are just now discovering which ones seem more important according to sex.
One reason scientists have so few answers about sex differences is that it was not until the early 1990s that the FDA forced drug manufacturers even to allow women of childbearing age into drug studies. Companies were reluctant for fear an experimental drug would cause fetal harm if the women became pregnant.
In fact, no one knows how most drugs behave during pregnancy, when hormones greatly fluctuate, because studying pregnant women is so seldom done. Companies fear liability if a drug proves risky, but women's experts note that some women, such as epileptics, must take medicine during pregnancy.
Sex is even an obstacle when scientists turn to animals to study drug safety. Drugs usually are tested exclusively in male rats - to avoid hormone fluctuation - or exclusively in female mice - because male mice attack each other too much, explained University of Georgia pharmacologist Catherine White.
 Load-Date: May 15, 1999

 

End of Document
