

Dennis Hastert: From the back benches to the shadows
The Associated Press
June 13, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 700 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Sam Rayburn was Mr. Speaker, the legendary leader a congressman crossed at his own risk. To get along, go along, was his firm advice.
Joe Cannon ruled as speaker with the power to give and take committee chairmanships and personally block legislation, until the House rebelled in 1910.
Tip O'Neill was a nationally known face, his leadership as speaker shaped by long-practiced skills as a bargainer and vote-counter.
Newt Gingrich was a fierce politician, leader and symbol of the Republican rise to House control after 40 years, then undone by his, and their, errors.
J. Dennis Hastert is none of the above.
He is not the first low-profile speaker of the House; there have been many more little-known than famed ones. But none of them vaulted from the ranks to the No. 1 job as suddenly as he. A GOP House poll shows that among Republicans beyond the Beltway, Hastert's deputies are better known than he is.
The problems Hastert faces would strain even a speaker with powers beyond the persuasion he is using to try to make the GOP majority work like one.
Republicans outnumber Democrats 223-211 in the House, and the one independent usually votes with the Democrats. Since just six GOP defections can deadlock the House, Hastert's agenda of challenges includes sometimes rebellious conservatives, moderates worried about their budget priorities, spending limits that would compel politically unpopular cuts, and a commitment to reduce taxes in the bargain.
And that's to deal with the budget, the 13 appropriations bills that are the only ones Congress is legally required to pass each year. It doesn't always happen; undone bills get lumped into resolutions to keep the government financed. In 1998, President Clinton was able to force some of his spending priorities onto the Republican Congress in those circumstances.
This year's Republicans don't want last year's outcome. So Hastert and GOP floor leaders tried to begin passing appropriations bills early, planning to have two done before Memorial Day. Instead, they ran into a slowdown by conservatives demanding spending cuts and had to shelve both.
That led to Hastert's unity lecture to House Republicans on Tuesday. The speaker told them that they needed to get behind the agenda set by their leaders or risk losing control of the House for lack of a GOP record on which to campaign.
"Some days you have to give your leadership the benefit of the doubt and just follow," Hastert said. "That is the difference between a majority mentality and a minority mentality."
Gingrich might have yelled at them. He once dismissed his GOP detractors as "unruly children," and stupid. Hastert said at the start that wasn't his style.
"I always try to talk with reason and straightforward, as honest as possible," the Illinois congressman said when he was asked whether he'd laid down the law at the GOP conference.
He said Republicans emerged united. But details are yet to come on just how to handle appropriations within a $ 538 billion ceiling for spending set by the appropriations bills. That does not include Social Security, other guaranteed benefit programs and interest on the national debt.
Hastert's plan is said to involve shifting about $ 7 billion in spending among appropriations bills to make them all palatable enough to pass. "We're standing together and we're united," the speaker said, to stay within the spending limits, present spending that would dip into Social Security funds, and try to cut taxes.
It may not work, but if it doesn't, and Republicans can hold their lines, they could do better politically than in earlier budget disputes with Clinton, who has vetoed appropriations bills that didn't meet his priorities and succeeded in forcing compromise.
Still, party unity is more easily pledged than held, when the issues move from goals to specifics, on spending and on other measures. The House is to debate gun control legislation this week. Hastert favors a version Democrats and GOP moderates say is too weak, and some other Republican leaders oppose outright.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and special correspondent for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: June 13, 1999

 

End of Document
