

Disoriented pilot 'flew the plane into the ground,' investigator says
The Associated Press
March 31, 2000, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 528 words
Byline: By TOM PARSONS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JACKSONVILLE, Ark.
Body




The deaths of three U.S. servicemen during the aborted landing of a C-130 transport in Kuwait last year stemmed from pilot and crew error, the Air Force said Friday.
After failing to follow procedures and making an improper approach to a runway, the air crew didn't keep an eye on instruments and became disoriented, not realizing how close the plane was to the ground or how far it was from the runway at Al Jaber Air Base southwest of Kuwait City, according to Col. Frank Laras.
"Basically, yes, he flew the plane into the ground," said Laras, who headed the Air Force investigation of the crash.
The plane hit the ground, breaking its landing gear, then flew back into the air and made an emergency landing without landing gear on a foam-covered runway at nearby Kuwait International Airport, Laras said.
The pilot, Capt. Darren A. Haughn, and three other crew members - the co-pilot, 1st Lt. Karrina M. Coleman; the navigator, Capt. Russell A. Hedden III; and the flight engineer, Tech. Sgt. Jeffrey W. Morgan - could face disciplinary action by the Air Force, according to Col. Joseph Heimann, a lawyer with the Air Mobility Command. No decision on that has been made, he added
The flight engineer has been cleared to resume flying, Laras said, but the other three remain grounded, performing other duties at Little Rock Air Force, officials said, pending a decision on disciplinary action. Options range from a court-martial to no action, Heimann said.
The plane, assigned to the 61st Airlift Squadron at the air base here, was ferrying 86 military passengers the 23 miles from Kuwait International Airport to Al Jaber before dawn on Dec. 10. Three passengers were killed when shafts that raise and lower the plane's main landing gear - four wheels in the middle of the fuselage - broke from the impact with the ground and penetrated the plane's metal skin, according to Laras' report. Also penetrating the plane's skin, Laras said, were structural beams to which the landing gear assemblies were attached.
The three were seated with their backs to the plane's exterior wall, the report said. Laras said it couldn't be determined exactly what struck the three men, but they died from "multiple blunt force injuries."
Seven other passengers were injured, two of them critically, the report said. The two badly injured airmen are expected to recover completely, the report said.
Laras said the errors were the result of a lack of leadership and discipline by the pilot, as well as his failure to follow Air Force directives on landings at Al Jaber.
Laras also said co-pilot Coleman failed to monitor instruments as she was required to do; Hedden failed to assist the pilot in keeping the aircraft clear of terrain; and both "lost situational awareness," as did the pilot. Morgan spotted a fog bank that the plane entered before hitting the ground, but failed to tell other crew members about it, Laras said, assuming the plane would fly over it.
Haughn was a relatively inexperienced pilot, Laras said, but squadron leadership had paired him with an experienced crew.
"It's difficult to understand how four professionals all fell into the same trap at the same time," Laras said.
 Load-Date: April 1, 2000

 

End of Document
