

Divers arrive at the site of the Kursk's sinking for recovery effort
The Associated Press
October 20, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 562 words
Byline: By VLADIMIR ISACHENKOV, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




British, Scandinavian and Russian divers arrived Friday at the site where the Kursk nuclear submarine sank, and began preparations for recovering the remains of its 118 crewmen, officials said.
Top Russian military officials, however, warned that safety concerns might force the Navy to call off the complex underwater work.
The divers sailed from the Norwegian port of Hammerfest on the mother ship Regalia. They have found calm seas in the Barents Sea area where the Kursk exploded and sank on Aug. 12, said a Russian naval spokesman, Capt. Igor Dygalo.
But meteorologists warned that the seas could grow rough next week, complicating the salvage effort.
Russian Deputy Prime Minister Ilya Klebanov said Friday it would take until Monday to conclude preparations for the rescue work, with the operation likely to start Tuesday or Wednesday.
The Norwegian subsidiary of Halliburton, the Dallas-based oil services company, is working with Russia's Rubin military design bureau to organize the recovery. Spokesman Birger Haraldseid told the Norwegian news agency NTB on Friday the rescue team would inspect the Kursk with remote-controlled vehicles and divers would go down later to make an initial assessment of the situation.
However, Russian Navy chief Adm. Vladimir Kuroyedov said Thursday the salvage effort may be canceled if experts decide the operation would risk deep divers' lives.
Many naval experts have pointed out that the divers, clad in bulky pressure suits, would face mortal danger while trying to squeeze inside the cramped submarine's interior, likely a mess of jagged pieces of metal and other debris.
Klebanov confirmed Friday that divers would cut holes in the submarine's double hull to pull bodies or body parts out into the ocean to bring to the surface.
Some marine experts have cautioned that the holes could weaken the submarine's structure and jeopardize the safety of the Kursk's nuclear reactors, which automatically shut down after the explosion.
The Norwegian Radiation Protection Authority said it took water samples from the crash site Friday and found no trace of contamination. "Further measurements will also be made both outside and inside the submarine," it said.
If Kuroyedov sanctions the rescue effort, divers will descend in teams of three to the Kursk, which is lying at a depth of about 330 feet. A foreign diver will direct the recovery work from inside a diving bell, while one Russian enters the submarine and another remains near the hatch, the Navy has said.
The Kursk exploded and sank during naval exercises in the Barents Sea. Russian officials have not determined the cause of the accident. They are considering an internal malfunction, a collision with a Western submarine or collision with a World War II-era mine.
Russian newspapers and television stations have focused on the dangers of the recovery effort and questioned its wisdom, setting the stage for possible cancellation of the work. Many experts have warned that most bodies were destroyed in the powerful blast that hit the submarine and that the few remaining corpses would likely be consumed by plankton and corroded by sea water.
Some commentators have speculated that the government is actually interested in retrieving weapons, secret equipment and naval codes inside the Kursk, and will order that the seamen's remains be left behind. Kuroyedov has denied the claims.
 Load-Date: October 21, 2000

 

End of Document
