

Dole Talks Himself Back Into the Middle of the Abortion Maelstrom
June 15, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 685 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Whether Republicans use a preamble, a plank or even a postscript to acknowledge room for party dissenters to their anti-abortion orthodoxy, it isn't going to make any real difference. There's no prospect of a constitutional amendment to ban abortion.
No platform declaration is going to change that.
So the argument over how and where to put the "declaration of tolerance" Bob Dole wants in the 1996 GOP platform is one of form and symbolism, rather like the doctrinal debates of medieval theologians.
That makes it all the more baffling that having charted a way out of the abortion dispute for now, Dole talked himself back into the middle of it. As the nominee-to-be, he said it was his decision to put language recognizing differing GOP views in the anti-abortion plank, not in a more general statement prefacing the platform.
While that sounds like a fine-print distinction, this is an issue on which almost any words are fighting words to one side or the other. That was Dole's dilemma. He is opposed to abortion, promised to keep the platform call for a constitutional amendment to undo the 1974 Supreme Court ruling that legalized it, but wants also to reach out for the women's vote, which accounts for a big share of President Clinton's lead in the public opinion polls.
Dole seemed to have managed a major step past GOP strife on the issue with his statement 10 days ago, promising no retreat on the platform call for an amendment, but calling also for a declaration of tolerance toward Republicans who disagree and support abortion rights.
"This is not compromise, it is civility," he said at the time. Dole told House Republicans Monday in one of his congressional farewells that he'd spent his life in the party trying to bring people together.
"And I hope I made a big step forward last week in reaching out to everybody on the abortion issue," he said. Not that he satisfied everybody: Gov. Pete Wilson of California said it wasn't enough to accept other views. He wants the abortion plank erased from the platform.
That isn't going to happen, either. Not with the nominee and a delegate majority opposed to it. Under the rules, it would take majorities of six state delegations at the San Diego convention even to raise the issue on the floor. Dole's settlement seemed to preclude that.
Until he undid it by saying in a CNN interview Monday that he wanted the dissent line to be part to be written into the abortion plank itself, not made part of the preamble, where it would apply to other disputed issues as well.
He'd been vague about that in the initial statement, although aides had said he meant for the recognition of differing views to be in the preface.
Indeed, he'd said at one point that he didn't care where it was attached to the platform. "What's the difference?" he'd said in one TV interview.
Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois, the platform chairman, had thought it was to go in the preamble, where he wanted it, so that the recognition of differing views would apply to other issues as well. That would cover term limits, which the platform likely will endorse and which he opposes.
But in his Monday interview, Dole said he wanted the abortion plank to include the tolerance language, saying it was his decision and not negotiable. That was praised by abortion rights supporters, denounced by conservative activists who vowed a convention battle to keep it separate.
That would produce single-issue strife Dole doesn't want. And it would not alter the basic difference between candidates on the issue. Clinton supports abortion rights. Dole opposes abortion except in cases of rape or incest, or to protect the life of the mother.
Dole had tried earlier to turn the issue against Clinton, focusing on his veto of a bill to ban certain late-term abortions. Instead, it is again an argument among Republicans.
"I'm trying to bring people together," Dole said amid the revived GOP dispute. "That's what I do best."
He'll need to try again.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: June 15, 1996

 

End of Document
