

Dole Used the Senate to Launch His Race for the White House
October 31, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 849 words
Byline: By SANDRA SOBIERAJ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Before the stump speeches and bus tours, there was the Senate - where Bob Dole first trained his sights down Pennsylvania Avenue and, through parliamentary maneuvers, launched his challenge to President Clinton.
"If Bill Clinton has a mandate, then so do I," Dole declared on election night 1992, when Clinton won the White House with just 43 percent of the popular vote. Dole took the role of "watchdog and defender" of those who didn't vote for Clinton, and as Senate Republican leader, called off the president's honeymoon less than 24 hours after his inauguration.
Campaign 1996 had begun.
On Day Two of the 103rd Congress, Dole threw down a slew of legislative markers signaling a rough road for Clinton and laying the base of his own presidential platform, including a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution and a line-item veto for the president.
Congressional scholar Norman Ornstein characterized Dole's strategy in those first two years of Clinton's term in this way: "Vote against everything and tell the Democrats it's all on their hands."
When controversy swirled over Clinton's call to lift a ban against gays in the military, Dole was out front in opposition, taking the opportunity to highlight his own military credentials by staging a news conference surrounded by veterans. He called on Clinton to heed their counsel because "these are men who have had the experience, unlike the experience President Clinton did not have, in the military."
That ban effectively safeguarded, Dole moved to strangle what was to have been the crown jewel of Clinton's first 100 days in office: $ 16.3 billion in job-training, construction and other spending that Clinton contended would revive the economy. Countering that it was mere budget-busting pork, Dole led Republicans in filibustering the package to its death.
Months later, Dole held Republicans united in opposition to Clinton's deficit package and its $ 241 billion tax increase, which passed the Senate by a single vote. Dole has since wrapped that package in hyperbole, calling it the "largest tax increase in the history of the world," although his own 1982 tax bill surpassed Clinton's tax increase in 1993 dollars.
Another issue closely tailing Dole on the campaign trail is family and medical leave, the Democrats' law guaranteeing workers up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for family medical emergencies or to care for new children. Dole was one of 27 senators to vote against it as a "one-size-fits-all" mandate. He instead proposed refundable tax credits to business with such leave policies.
His stubborn opposition to the bill, which was especially popular among working baby-boomer moms, together with his consistent anti-abortion voting record, are two of the most frequently cited policy reasons for his gaping deficit among women voters today.
But playing the role of obstructionist during Clinton's first two years in the White House did not well suit Dole, who thrived on making deals and maneuvering legislation during his 35-year House and Senate career.
The Republican takeover of Congress in 1994 put him back in the deal maker's seat as Rep. Newt Gingrich, the new House Speaker, and a freshman class of GOP conservatives tugged Dole's older guard to the right.
Following the House lead on the Republicans' "Contract With America," Dole hoped the 104th Congress would be remembered as the "do-too-much Congress." As such, he pushed for votes on many of his legislative markers from 1993.
With an eye on the conservative voters who would dominate this year's Republican primaries, Dole moved to sharpen contrasts with Clinton by pushing strict new limits on immigration and reversing himself on affirmative action. In 1995, Dole, who once cajoled President Reagan into signing the Voting Rights Act, introduced a bill to repeal federal affirmative action programs.
Late that year, he deferred to Gingrich's hard line in budget negotiations with Clinton and allowed their stalemate to shut down the government for more than two weeks.
In the end, Dole, always a deficit hawk at heart, braved fire from conservatives to express a willingness to concede on some Republican tax cuts. "If you have to have everything you're not going to have a negotiation," he reasoned then.
It was the latest episode in Dole's long history of placing deficit-reduction ahead of tax cutting - a record that has dented the credibility of his election-year pledge to halve capital gains taxes and cut income taxes by 15 percent across the board.
In his rightward lean, Dole also was the first senator to add his name to legislation effectively outlawing gay marriages. And, trying to court supporters of third-party maverick Ross Perot, Dole put his name to congressional term limits and pushed in his last two months in the Senate for a losing vote on the measure.
"There were a lot of issues he picked up and really pushed to show he's a bona fide new-style conservative," said UCLA congressional scholar Barbara Sinclair. "He would be a much more persuasive candidate now, though, if he could have instead exploited the issues he really believes in."
 Load-Date: October 31, 1996

 

End of Document
