

Emmycast Gets the Job Done: Gives Out the Awards
September 9, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 699 words
Byline: By FRAZIER MOORE, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




To reverse the sort of comparison being made a month ago, "The 48th Annual Prime-Time Emmy Awards" was the Republican National Convention of awards telecasts.
That is, Sunday's Emmy show was sleek, fast-moving, mostly glitch-free, even more surprise-free, and timed down to the minute - some 180 of them.
The winners, uniformly gracious, got on and off with the split-second efficiency of - well, the speakers at the G.O.P. convention.
For their part, the awards presenters dutifully read what was written for them and made it work. (Although the scripted banter between "NYPD Blue's" Dennis Franz and Jimmy Smits flopped so badly they couldn't help sharing a grin and a groan at the writers' folly. "We TOLD 'em," Franz reminded Smits.)
Aired live by ABC from the Pasadena Civic Auditorium, the Emmy telecast sported a particularly handsome set - modern and majestic - complete with onstage orchestra.
There viewers saw their favorite stars behaving nicely, and found out who won. They were subjected to no song-and-dance numbers. No teeth-grinding comedy sketches. No interminable tributes.
The biggest gaffe was when presenter Christine Lahti mispronounced winner Greta Scacchi's name. (Hint: It's not "SKAT-chee.")
And perhaps the evening's most brazen display was an unavoidable one: Emmy herself, that tacky trophy that host Paul Reiser accurately described as "a nickel-plated bird-woman holding up a whiffle ball."
Otherwise, under executive producer Dick Clark, the program was free of pretension and attitude. It was downright tasteful.
Also a mite bland?
Maybe what was missing was what made the Republican Convention crackle: a Colin Powell or Elizabeth Dole sort of interlude. (Even Oprah Winfrey, on-hand as an Emmy assistant host, didn't do it "Oprah-style" as Liddy Dole did in San Diego.)
A lump-in-the-throat finish would have found Angela Lansbury, at long last, winning Best Actress Emmy for her final season of "Murder, She Wrote." But she didn't.
Nor did anything else happen to make the evening, and the show, an event.
The program's stated theme was to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences.
But things started out less than auspiciously when Winfrey introduced the first of the evening's film montages. This turned out to be a pedestrian clip-job of some two dozen classic TV series with accompanying theme music - "50 years of the sights and sounds of our lives," Oprah said.
Yeah, so how come these "unforgettable friends" were meticulously labeled (thanks for specifying THAT'S the cast and theme of "The Brady Bunch").
More successful was a fancifully edited montage of actors' entrances and exits through decades of shows. As Reiser noted, "You've got to have a door."
As host, Reiser, star of NBC's sitcom "Mad About You," supplied the right touch of brisk impertinence.
In his opening monologue, he cautioned that with his jokes, as with the evening's awards nominees, only one out of five would be a winner.
Of course, he had a far better average.
For instance, while unsure whether it takes a village to raise a child, he pointed out "it takes a village to get cable. They will not come out for just your house."
The evening's most colorless presenters: "Chicago Hope's" Hector Elizondo and "The X-File's" Gillian Anderson. Brrrrrrrr.
Tied with Oprah for most shimmeringly gowned: "Cybill's" Christine Baranski and "NYPD Blue's" Sharon Lawrence.
In what must have been a first, Louis J. Horvitz got his Emmy for directing "The Kennedy Center Honors" while sitting at his control-room console directing the Emmy telecast. He delivered his thanks to an on-site camera, then called the cue for the next presenters back in the auditorium.
The best (and only) wisecrack about former presidential adviser Dick Morris came from presenter Garry Shandling: "I ran all these jokes past Dick Morris' hooker last night," he began, "and she said they're hilarious."
And Milton Berle, on hand to congratulate the Academy, recycled perhaps the world's oldest television joke. Yes, agreed Mr. Television, a lot of televisions were sold in the beginning thanks to him: "When I was on, my uncle sold his, my aunt sold hers ...."
Even Uncle Miltie was held to 90 seconds.
 Load-Date: September 9, 1996

 

End of Document
