

Energy policy: A priority in crisis and ignored the rest of the time
The Associated Press
September 30, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 933 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Whatever campaign headway Al Gore gains from President Clinton's use of oil reserves to prod down home heating prices, the real energy issue is going to be waiting for him or George W. Bush next year.
The 30-million barrel release from the strategic petroleum reserve, which the vice president called for, Clinton called prudent and Bush called politics, is another attempt at a one-season fix in the long cycle of U.S. energy crises.
The heating season involved includes the Nov. 7 presidential election, and Republicans accuse Clinton of improperly tapping emergency reserves to help the vice president in northeastern states heavily dependent on oil heat, at prices that had in some cases doubled. Gore said the situation is a crisis warranting the use of oil from the 571-million barrel strategic reserve, to be replenished when prices ease.
Either way, it will be up to the new president to decide whether energy policy belongs at the top of his agenda in 2001 or whether it can wait, as has been the case after prior energy crunches.
With each crisis have come demands for action to make the United States less dependent on foreign oil and on decisions it cannot control but OPEC can. Over the past 25 years those crisis-spurred programs have made the nation more energy efficient, by 30 percent according to government estimates.
Nevertheless, increasing demand and decreasing U.S. production have led to a steady increase in dependence on imports, and thus vulnerability to the OPEC cartel.
In 1973, when the Arab oil embargo led to an energy crisis that pushed prices up, motorists into gasoline lines, and the economy into a slump, the United States depended on imports for 37 percent of its oil consumption. That now is pushing 60 percent.
After the embargo, President Richard M. Nixon proposed what he called Project Independence, saying that with increased production and conservation, the United States could become independent of foreign oil by 1980. The fallout of the energy crisis outlasted Nixon, and Gerald R. Ford tried to deal with it in 1975, with a program he said should end U.S. vulnerability within a decade.
When Jimmy Carter came to the White House, he declared the moral equivalent of war on energy woes, with measures to promote conservation, efficiency and the development of alternative fuels, along with steps to make better use of U.S. resources.
The strategic petroleum reserve was set up in 1975, and stockpiling began in 1977.
But another energy crisis dogged Carter, prices surging, gasoline lines returning, a liability he carried into his losing campaign for a second term.
Gasoline for the car, and oil or natural gas to heat the house, become high-octane political issues when supplies are short and prices are up. A sharp increase in gasoline prices, especially in the midwest, became a campaign topic earlier this year, but the problem eased and so did the pressure for action.
Bush accuses the administration of eight years of inaction on energy, although Clinton says "we have made headway" over Republican opposition in Congress.
Gore proposed a $75-billion, 10-year energy plan earlier in the campaign, saying his objective is to free the nation from the dominance of "big oil and foreign oil."
The vice president concentrates on tax incentives and other measures to promote energy efficiency, transportation alternatives to the automobile, and investment in new energy technology.
He said easing home heating prices, a sensitive point in Northeastern states crucial to his campaign, wasn't his only motive in urging the use of the strategic reserve. Gore said that he also intends to use the issue to seek backing for his long-term energy proposals.
"I want to put this on the front burner in the midst of this campaign in part to seek a mandate to get the Congress to act," Gore said.
Bush said he would have a policy to "empower producers to develop U.S. energy supplies."
He advocates offshore and Alaskan oil drilling Gore opposes. He wants more refineries and new natural gas pipelines built. Bush says he would deal more effectively with foreign oil producers to avoid supply disruptions - while he also has said that "dependence upon foreign crude puts the nation at risk."
Bush and Gore argued the issue at a distance on Friday.
Bush, in Saginaw, Mich., said administration inaction has left the nation "at the mercy more than ever of foreign governments and cartels, at the mercy of big foreign oil." He proposed a $7.1 billion, 10-year plan for increased domestic production, with tax incentives and spending on alternative energy sources and clean fuel technology, and an expanded program of energy assistance for the poor.
Gore went to the Audubon Naturalist Society in Chevy Chase, Md., to accuse Bush of catering to the oil industry by advocating drilling in environmentally sensitive areas. He defended the administration's decision to release oil from the reserve - which has led to lower prices in oil trading and which Bush had called a last-minute ploy. He said his programs would cut dependence on oil, "a fuel source that is distant, uncertain and too easily manipulated."
Those rival programs are an obvious topic for the presidential campaign debates that begin Tuesday in Boston. What isn't obvious, and won't be until next year, is whether this is more than another round in the cycle in which energy becomes a priority when the pressure is on, and slides down the agenda when the crisis, or the price crunch, is over.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears has reported on Washington and national politics for The Associated Press for more than 35 years.
 Load-Date: October 1, 2000

 

End of Document
