

Excerpts from the House managers' presentation to the Senate
The Associated Press
January 14, 1999, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 862 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Excerpts from House managers' presentation to the Senate in the impeachment trial of President Clinton, as transcribed by the Federal Document Clearing House:
"We are here today because President William Jefferson Clinton decided to put himself above the law - not once, not twice, but repeatedly. He put himself above the law when he engaged in a multifaceted scheme to obstruct justice during the federal civil rights case of Paula Corbin Jones v. William Jefferson Clinton, et al.
"He put himself above the law when he made perjurious, false and misleading statements under oath during his grand jury testimony on Aug. 17, 1998. In both instances, he unlawfully attempted to prevent the judicial branch of government - a co-equal branch from performing its constitutional duty to administer equal justice under law." - Rep. James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis.
"Should the Senate conduct a fair and impartial trial which allows each side to present its best case, then the American public can be confident that justice has been served regardless of the outcome." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "We hear much about how important the rule of law is to our nation and our system of government. Some have commented this expression is trite. But whether expressed by these three words or others, the primacy of law over the rule of individuals is what distinguishes the United States from most other countries and why our Constitution is as alive today as it was 210 years ago." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "The framers of the Constitution devised an elaborate system of checks and balances to ensure our liberties by making sure that no person, institution or branch of government became so powerful that a tyranny could ever be established in the United States of America.
"We are the trustees of that sacred legacy, and whether the rule of law and faith in our nation emerges stronger than ever or are diminished irreparably depends upon the collective decision of the message each senator chooses to send forth in the days ahead." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Mr. Clinton has recognized that this relationship was wrong. I give him credit for that. But he has not owned up to the false testimony, the stonewalling, and legal hairsplitting and obstructing the courts from finding the truth.
"In doing so, he has turned his affair into a public wrong, and for these actions he must be held accountable through the only constitutional means the country has available: the difficult and painful process of impeachment." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "The process is long. It is difficult. It is unpleasant. But above all, it is necessary to maintain the public's trust in the conduct of their elected officials - elected officials such as myself and yourselves, who through our oaths of office have a duty to follow the law, fulfill our constitutional responsibilities and protect our republic from public wrongdoing." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "The House managers submit witnesses are essential to give heightened credence to whatever judgment the Senate chooses to make on each of the articles of impeachment against President Clinton. The matter of how this proceeding will be conducted remains somewhat unsettled. Senate impeachment precedent has been to hold a trial, and in every impeachment case, the Senate has heard from live witnesses.
"Should the president's counsel dispute the facts as laid out by the House of Representatives, the Senate will need to hear from live witnesses in order to reach a proper and fair judgment as to the truthful facts of this case.
"The House concluded the president made perjurious, false and misleading statements before the grand jury, which the House believes constitutes a high crime and misdemeanor. Our entire legal system is based upon the court's being able to find the truth. That's why witnesses must raise their right hand and swear to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Perjury is the twin brother of bribery. By making the penalty for perjury the same as that for bribery, Congress has acknowledged that both crimes are equally serious." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "If the Senate is convinced that President Clinton lied under oath and does not remove him from office, the wrong message is given to our courts, those who have business before them and to the country as a whole." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Your decision in this proceeding will answer these questions and set the standard of conduct of public officials in town halls and courtrooms everywhere and the Oval Office for generations.
"Justice is never served by the placing of any public official above the law." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Mr. Chief Justice, we are here today because William Jefferson Clinton decided to use all means possible, both legal and illegal, to subvert the truth about his conduct relevant to the federal civil rights suit brought against him by Mrs. Paula Jones." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "When someone lies about an affair and tries to hide the facts, they violate the trust their spouse and their family put in them. But when they lie about it during legal proceedings and obstruct the parties from obtaining evidence, they prevent the courts from administering justice." - Sensenbrenner.
 Load-Date: January 14, 1999

 

End of Document
