

Excerpts from the House managers' presentation to the Senate
The Associated Press
January 15, 1999, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 3329 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Excerpts from House managers' presentation to the Senate in the impeachment trial of President Clinton, as transcribed by the Federal Document Clearing House:
"We are here today because President William Jefferson Clinton decided to put himself above the law - not once, not twice, but repeatedly. He put himself above the law when he engaged in a multifaceted scheme to obstruct justice during the federal civil rights case of Paula Corbin Jones v. William Jefferson Clinton, et al.
"He put himself above the law when he made perjurious, false and misleading statements under oath during his grand jury testimony on Aug. 17, 1998. In both instances, he unlawfully attempted to prevent the judicial branch of government - a co-equal branch from performing its constitutional duty to administer equal justice under law." - Rep. James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis.
 
 "Should the Senate conduct a fair and impartial trial which allows each side to present its best case, then the American public can be confident that justice has been served regardless of the outcome." - Sensenbrenner.
"We hear much about how important the rule of law is to our nation and our system of government. Some have commented this expression is trite. But whether expressed by these three words or others, the primacy of law over the rule of individuals is what distinguishes the United States from most other countries and why our Constitution is as alive today as it was 210 years ago." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "The framers of the Constitution devised an elaborate system of checks and balances to ensure our liberties by making sure that no person, institution or branch of government became so powerful that a tyranny could ever be established in the United States of America.
"We are the trustees of that sacred legacy, and whether the rule of law and faith in our nation emerges stronger than ever or are diminished irreparably depends upon the collective decision of the message each senator chooses to send forth in the days ahead." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Mr. Clinton has recognized that this relationship was wrong. I give him credit for that. But he has not owned up to the false testimony, the stonewalling, and legal hairsplitting and obstructing the courts from finding the truth.
"In doing so, he has turned his affair into a public wrong, and for these actions he must be held accountable through the only constitutional means the country has available: the difficult and painful process of impeachment." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "The process is long. It is difficult. It is unpleasant. But above all, it is necessary to maintain the public's trust in the conduct of their elected officials - elected officials such as myself and yourselves, who through our oaths of office have a duty to follow the law, fulfill our constitutional responsibilities and protect our republic from public wrongdoing." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "The House managers submit witnesses are essential to give heightened credence to whatever judgment the Senate chooses to make on each of the articles of impeachment against President Clinton. The matter of how this proceeding will be conducted remains somewhat unsettled. Senate impeachment precedent has been to hold a trial, and in every impeachment case, the Senate has heard from live witnesses.
"Should the president's counsel dispute the facts as laid out by the House of Representatives, the Senate will need to hear from live witnesses in order to reach a proper and fair judgment as to the truthful facts of this case.
"The House concluded the president made perjurious, false and misleading statements before the grand jury, which the House believes constitutes a high crime and misdemeanor. Our entire legal system is based upon the court's being able to find the truth. That's why witnesses must raise their right hand and swear to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Perjury is the twin brother of bribery. By making the penalty for perjury the same as that for bribery, Congress has acknowledged that both crimes are equally serious." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "If the Senate is convinced that President Clinton lied under oath and does not remove him from office, the wrong message is given to our courts, those who have business before them and to the country as a whole." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Your decision in this proceeding will answer these questions and set the standard of conduct of public officials in town halls and courtrooms everywhere and the Oval Office for generations.
"Justice is never served by the placing of any public official above the law." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Mr. Chief Justice, we are here today because William Jefferson Clinton decided to use all means possible, both legal and illegal, to subvert the truth about his conduct relevant to the federal civil rights suit brought against him by Mrs. Paula Jones." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "When someone lies about an affair and tries to hide the facts, they violate the trust their spouse and their family put in them. But when they lie about it during legal proceedings and obstruct the parties from obtaining evidence, they prevent the courts from administering justice." - Sensenbrenner.
"To set a different standard in this trial is to say that the standard for judicial truthfulness during grand jury testimony is higher than that of presidential truthfulness. That result would be absurd. The truth is the truth, and a lie is a lie. There cannot be different levels of truth for judges than for presidents." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "If you find the president made perjurious, false and misleading statements under oath to the grand jury, I respectfully submit that your duty will be to find William Jefferson Clinton guilty with respect to Article I and to remove him from office." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "President Clinton also admitted that he knew those aides might be called before the grand jury as witnesses. The evidence will show they were called, they related the president's false statements to the grand jury, and that by the time the president made his admission to the grand jury, the damage had already been done." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Complying with the law is the duty of all parties to lawsuits and those who are required to give truthful testimony. A defendant in a federal civil rights action does not have the luxury to choose what evidence the court may consider." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Had he told the truth last January, there would have been no independent counsel investigation of this matter, no grand jury appearance, no impeachment inquiry and no House approval of articles of impeachment, and we would not be here today fulfilling a painful and essential constitutional duty.
"Instead, he chose lies and deception despite warnings from friends, aides and members of the House and Senate that failure to tell the truth would have grave consequences." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "During his presentation to the House Judiciary Committee, the president's very able lawyer, Charles Ruff, was asked directly: Did the president lie during his sworn grand jury testimony?
"Mr. Ruff could have answered that question directly, but he did not. And his failure to do so speaks a thousand words. Is there not something sacred when a witness in a judicial proceeding raises his or her right hand and swears before God and the public to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?" - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Do we want to tell the country that its leader gets a pass when he's required to give testimony under oath? Should we not be concerned about the effect of allowing perjurious, false and misleading statements by the president to go unpunished on the truthfulness of anyone's testimony in future judicial and legislative proceedings?" - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "What is on trial here is the truth and the rule of law. Failure to bring President Clinton to account for his serial lying under oath and preventing the courts from administering equal justice under law will cause a cancer to be present in our society for generations.
"Those parents who have asked the question should be able to tell their children that even if you are the president of the United States, if you lie when sworn to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, you will face the consequences of that action even when you will not accept the responsibility for it." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "America is a place where government exists by the consent of the governed, and that means our nation's leaders must earn and re-earn the trust of the people with everything they do.
"Whenever an elected official stumbles, that trust is eroded and public cynicism goes up. The more cynicism that exists about government, its institutions and those chosen to serve in them, the more difficult the job is for those who are serving.
"And that's why it's important - yes, vital - that when a cancer exists in the body politic, our job, our duty, is to excise it. If we fail in our duty, I fear that difficult and dedicated work done by thousands of honorable men and women elected to serve, not just here in Washington, but in our state capitals, city halls, courthouses and school board rooms, will be swept away in a sea of public cynicism." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Within the walls of the capitol and throughout this great country, there rages an impassioned and divisive debate over the future of this presidency." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "The president engaged in a conspiracy of crimes to prevent justice from being served. These are impeachable offenses for which the president should be convicted. Over the course of the days and weeks to come, we, the House managers, will endeavor to make this case." - Sensenbrenner.
 
 "Our legacy now must be not to lose the trust the people should have in our nation's leaders. Our legacy now must be not to cheapen the legacies left by our forebears. Our legacy must be to do the right thing based upon the evidence. And for the sake of our country, the Senate must not fail." - Sensenbrenner.
"By voting these articles of impeachment, the House is not attempting to raise the standard of conduct to perfection for our political leadership. Such a person does not walk the world today. Everyone falls short of this mark every day. But political life is not so much about how an individual fails but rather how that person reacts to that failure.
"For example, a person campaigning for a political office admits wrongdoing in the past and says he will not do that again.
"Most people accept that commitment.
"He is elected. Thereafter, he repeats this wrongdoing and he confronted again. What does he do? He takes steps to cover up this wrongdoing by using his workers and his friends. He lies under oath in a lawsuit which is very important to the person he is alleged to have harmed." - Rep. Ed Bryant, R-Tenn.
 
 "Let it be said that we are electing people who are imperfect and who have made mistakes in life, but who are willing to so respect this country and the office of the president that he or she will now lay aside their own personal shortcomings and have the inner strength to discipline themselves sufficiently that they do not break the law which they themselves are sworn to uphold." - Bryant
 
 "Shame or embarrassment cannot justify concealment of truth. Linguistic contortions with the words used cannot legitimately conceal a lie, or if under oath, perjury." - Bryant
 
 "Truth-telling is the single most important judicial precept underpinning this great system of justice we have - a system which permits the courthouse doors to be opened to all people from the most powerful man in America to a young woman from Arkansas." - Bryant
 
 "Events and words that may seem innocent or even exculpatory in a vacuum may well take on a sinister or even criminal connotation when observed in the context of the whole plot.
"For example, when we all agree that Ms. Lewinsky testified, 'No one ever told me to lie.' When considered alone, this statement would seem exculpatory.
"In the context of other evidence, however, we see that this one statement gives a misleading inference. Of course no one said, 'Now Monica, you go down there and lie.'
"They didn't have to. Based upon their previous spoken and even unspoken words, Ms. Lewinsky knew what was expected of her." - Bryant
 
 "Subordinates and friends alike are drawn into this web of deceit. The president is insulated. Crimes are committed. Justice is denied. The rule of law is suspended. And this president is the beneficiary." - Bryant
 
 "It is anticipated that the attorneys for the president will present arguments which will contest much of the relationship with Monica Lewinsky. The president has maintained throughout the last several months that while there was no sexual relationship or sexual affair, in fact there was some type of inappropriate intimate contact with her.
"What has now been dubbed as legal gymnastics on the part of the president has made its appearance. Other examples followed." - Bryant
 
 "This is the very same president who is renowned for his intelligence and his ability to compartmentalize, to concentrate, to focus on whatever matter is at hand.
"And now, he comes before this Senate to each one of you in his answer, by and through his attorneys and pleads that he simply wasn't paying attention at this very important part, during his own deposition." - Bryant
 
 "A reasonable and impartial review of this record, as it presently exists, demands nothing less than a guilty verdict. And while it's been the consistent defense of the White House to be inconsistent, it still comes as something of a surprise that the president has not made a stronger case for calling witnesses." - Bryant
 
 "To excuse a party who lied or concealed evidence on the ground that the evidence covered only personal or private behavior would frustrate the goals that Congress and the courts have sought to achieve in enacting and interpreting the nation's sexual harassment laws." - Bryant
 
 "The presidency is more than an executive responsibility. It is the inspiring symbol of all that is highest in America in purpose and ideals. As the head of the executive branch, the president has the constitutional duty to take care that the laws are faithfully enforced and executed." - Bryant
 
 "Perjury and acts that obstruct justice by any citizen, whether in a criminal case, a grand jury investigation, a congressional hearing, a civil trial, a civil discovery proceeding, are profoundly serious matters. When such acts are committed by the president of the United States, those acts are grounds for conviction and removal from office." - Bryant
"In every case heard in every courtroom across this great country, it is the truth, it is justice, it is the law that are at stake. In this journey on earth, there is nothing of greater consequence for us to devote our energies than to search for the truth, to pursue equal justice and to uphold the law." - Rep. Asa Hutchinson, R-Ark.
 
 "The obstruction of justice is of great consequence and significance to the integrity of our nation when committed by anyone, but particularly by the chief executive of our land, the president of the United States." - Hutchinson.
 
 "The White House knew that Monica was on the witness list. The president knew that it was likely that she would be subpoenaed as a witness and that her truthful testimony would hurt his case. What did the president do? What he had to do was he made sure that Monica Lewinsky was on his team and under control." - Hutchinson.
 
 "The question here is not why did the president do a favor for an ex-intern? But why did he use the influence of his office to make sure it happened?
"The answer is, that he was willing to obstruct, impede justice by improperly influencing a witness in order to protect himself in a civil rights case." - Hutchinson.
 
 "He (Clinton) did not say specifically: 'Go in and lie.' And this is something that you will hear, and Monica Lewinsky testified in her grand jury testimony, 'The president never told me to lie.' Well, how do you tell people to lie? You can tell them the facts that they can use that would in substance be a false statement. Or you can say go in and lie and make up your own false testimony.
"The president chose to give her the ideas as to what she could testify to that would be false, but he never said the words: 'You need to go in and lie.' And so, what he did say to her was, quote, 'You know, you can always say you were coming to see Betty, or that you were bringing me letters."' - Hutchinson.
 
 "I have faith in the Constitution of the United States, but the checks and balances of the Constitution are carried out by individuals, individuals who are entrusted under oath with upholding the trust given to us by the people of this great land. If I believe in the Constitution, that it will work, then I must believe in you.
"Ladies and gentlemen of the Senate, I trust the Constitution of the United States, but today it is most important that I believe in you. I have faith in the United States Senate.
"You have earned the trust of the American people, and I trust each of you to make the right decision for our country." - Hutchinson.
 
 "In a judicial proceeding, a witness has a very solemn obligation to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. Perjury is a serious crime because our judicial system can only succeed if citizens are required to tell the truth in court proceedings. If witnesses may lie with impunity for personal or political reasons, justice is no longer the product of the court system, and we descend into chaos." - Rep. James Rogan, R-Calif.
 
 "The key to understanding the facts of this case is to understand why the president was asked under oath questions about his private life in the first place.
"Despite the popular spin, it wasn't because members of Congress or lawyers from the Office of Independent Counsel or a gaggle of reporters suddenly decided to invade the president's privacy.
"No. This all came about because of a claim against the president from when he was the governor of Arkansas." - Rogan.
 
 "When the president made that solemn pledge, he was not obliging himself to tell the grand jury the partial truth. He was not obliging himself to tell the 'I didn't want to be particularly helpful' truth. He was not obliging himself to tell the 'this is embarrassing so I think I'll fudge on it a little bit' truth. He was required to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, and he made that pledge in the name of God." - Rogan.
 
 "The president was asked: 'You have a privilege against self-incrimination. If a truthful answer to any question would tend to incriminate you, you can invoke the privilege, and that invocation will not be used against you. Do you understand?'
"The president's response was: 'I do.'
"The president knew he had the right to refuse to answer any incriminating questions and that no legal harm would come to him for doing so.
"But he rejected that option, just as he rejected the option of telling the truth.
"Instead, he selected a third path. He continued to lie about corrupt efforts to destroy Paula Jones' sexual harassment case against him." - Rogan.
 
 "Paula Jones had a legal and constitutional right to learn if the president, while as president or governor, used his position of power and influence to get sexual favors from subordinate female employees in the workplace, or to reward subordinate female employees for granting such favors to him." - Rogan.
 
 "The president's perjurious legal hairsplitting, used to bypass the requirement of telling the complete truth, denied Paula Jones her constitutional right to have her day in court and an orderly disposition of her claim in the sexual harassment case against the president.
"To dismiss this conduct with a shrug because it is just about sex is to say that the sexual harassment laws protecting women in the workplace do not apply to powerful employers or others in high places of privilege." - Rogan.
 Load-Date: January 15, 1999

 

End of Document
