

Exclusionary Rule: Protecting the Innocent or Hampering the Cops?
February 1, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 672 words
Byline: By RICK HAMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




One judge threw out the seizure of $ 4 million in heroin and cocaine, saying police shouldn't have suspected a crime was underway just because four men ran away after officers saw them stuffing duffel bags into a car.
Another rejected rape evidence - a blanket and a stick used to beat the victim - because police, armed with a warrant good for "any time of the day," chose to search the suspect's apartment after business hours.
"Rule of law," civil libertarians said. "JUNK JUSTICE!" cried the city's tabloids and politicians.
The cases this week revived an old debate over what to do with what one jurist called "the fruit of the poison tree" - evidence obtained unconstitutionally by police.
In the first case, a federal judge threw out the drug seizure and the confession of a woman who admitted she repeatedly drove drugs and cash between New York and Detroit. Police lacked "reasonable suspicion" to detain her, the judge said.
The crime went down last April 15, when police saw Carol Bayless driving slowly through Washington Heights, an area of upper Manhattan with a thriving drug trade and a history of racial tension between police and residents.
Plainclothes officers watched as she pulled up to a curb and four men, without speaking to her, put two duffel bags in her trunk. After the men ran, police pulled over Bayless and got a confession.
Case closed?
Not after Judge Harold Baer - who had served on a commission investigating police corruption - threw gasoline on a political bonfire. "Residents in this neighborhood tended to regard police officers as corrupt, abusive and violent," he wrote. "Had the men not run when the cops began to stare at them, it would have been unusual."
In the second case, a state judge threw out evidence against an alleged rapist after a defense lawyer said police searched his house at night. The warrant said they could enter "at any time of the day."
The search took place Sept. 10, after police said Melvin Gardner dragged a woman into his Brooklyn apartment, beat her with a stick and raped her. Officers searched his house and found a stick and a blanket.
State Judge David Friedman said they could have waited until the next morning. "It is well established that a nighttime intrusion into a private residence constitutes a severe invasion of privacy," Friedman said.
"This is not a technicality," defense lawyer Adam Freedman said. "The law makes a distinction between day and night searches. Night is when people tend to be home, children are home. It's a public safety question."
After the judge's opinion was released Thursday, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Police Commissioner William Bratton criticized the judge for taking the defense lawyer's word. They said a police log book indicated the search was completed by 6:30 p.m.
Both cases center on the exclusionary rule, which forbids use of evidence improperly obtained by police. As Judge Benjamin Cardozo put it 70 years ago before he was elevated to the U.S. Supreme Court, "The criminal is to go free because the constable has blundered."
The rule is under attack by critics who say it confuses judges and lawyers, let alone cops on the beat. Critics say even tainted evidence should be admitted as long as police act in good faith.
The two rulings elevated a contentious legal debate into a political shouting match.
Bratton said Baer was "living in a fantasy land." Democratic Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan said he never would have recommended Baer for the bench in 1994 if he'd known of his "appalling" views on police.
The Guardian Angels picketed the judge's sleek, modern apartment building in midtown Manhattan. "Look at the ivory tower," crowed their leader, Curtis Sliwa. "This is about as far away from Washington Heights as you can get."
David Lewis, a prominent defense lawyer, came to the judges' defense.
"We've forgotten what progress this country has made in protecting individual rights. We fought a revolution in large part because people didn't like King George's troops executing search warrants whenever they wanted."
 Load-Date: February 1, 1996

 

End of Document
