

Facing the end of an era, coal town banks for the long years ahead
The Associated Press
December 25, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 806 words
Byline: By NIKI KAPSAMBELIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WIND RIDGE, Pa.
Body




One of the time-tested truths of living in a town where coal is king is this: When the coal is gone, so is the kingdom.
In Greene County, one of Pennsylvania's poorest corners, people make a lot of sacrifices for King Coal, allowing mines to be dug under and around their houses in the hills left to them by their great-grandparents.
If they're lucky enough to land a job in the mines, they work 10- and 12-hour days, seven days a week, in service to an industry that will leave them with little but deep holes in the ground and the memory of days when things were better.
Coal companies pay 47 percent of Greene County's budget, a figure that dwindles every year as more seams are mined, because the property is worth less once coal is removed and so is taxed at a lower rate.
According to county Commissioner Farley Toothman, the value of coal taken off the tax rolls this year is the equivalent of tearing down 3,000 houses worth $ 50,000. Put a different way, for every dollar that was added to the tax rolls, two were subtracted, said Commissioner John R. Gardner.
"We can't bail water fast enough," Toothman said. "The rippling effect of that is instability in our school districts, townships and county for any kind of funding stream."
Greene County, population 40,000, last year provided 46 percent of the coal produced in the state, or 34 million tons. It is the second-most productive coal county in the nation.
At the same time, the county - situated along the West Virginia and Ohio state lines in Pennsylvania's southwestern corner - has one of the highest unemployment rates in the state: 7.6 percent in June, compared with a statewide 4.3 percent. One-fifth of its residents live in poverty. And the median household income is $ 19,903, compared with a state median of $ 29,069.
It is the only Pennsylvania county that still qualifies as distressed under the criteria of the Appalachian Regional Commission, an agency founded by President Lyndon Johnson in the 1960s to send aid to 13 states.
Nowhere is the situation better defined than in Richhill Township, currently King Coal's most favored subject and home to the nation's two largest underground coal mines: Enlow Fork and Bailey, both operated by Consol Coal Group companies.
The mines opened in the early 1980s and are expected to continue operating for about 13 more years, said Consol spokesman Thomas Hoffman.
"When they're gone … if we haven't properly managed our money, you're going to see a big tax increase in the township," said Township Supervisor Harry Gillespie. "It's a non-renewable resource. Once it's taken, it's gone. And once we get that money we get, once that coal company's gone, we're not going to have that large income coming into the town."
In anticipation of the mines' closing, the township of 1,200 people has built a new recreational complex, replaced some bridges and bought new dump trucks, backhoes and other heavy equipment that will probably be out of the community's financial grasp once the coal money disappears.
What worries Gillespie is that few of the township's residents seem particularly concerned about the end of the coal era.
"Coal is king and has been for years in Greene County. The fact of the matter is, they figure coal's going to be here forever," he said.
Also, most of the residents are older, and few believe they will be around to pay the higher property taxes expected when Consol leaves.
"I won't be here," said Jim Faddis, 76.
Rick Rohm, at 43 a member of the younger generation, works backbreaking hours in the Bailey Mine, making enough money to have a well-kept double-wide trailer home. He figures that no matter what Consol says, "there's enough coal around here to do us a lifetime."
Even if he's wrong, he figures there's nothing he can do about it. He has lived in Richhill Township all his life, and mining is all he knows.
"What am I going to do? I make $ 20 an hour," Rohm said. "There's one thing about us here, we're survivors."
Pennsylvania is rife with towns that were built - and ultimately deserted - by coal companies. People in Richhill Township need look no farther than western Greene County to see what lies ahead for them.
Fifteen years ago, Dunkard Township had some of the top-producing mines in the country, and Richhill Township was just farmland.
"They were the peasants of Greene County back then," recalled Dunkard Township supervisor Marvin "Bud" Moody. "Now they're in pretty good shape, and we're the peasants."
One mine closed in 1992; another followed suit four or five years later. To make up for the lost revenue, taxes were raised - in the case of the Southeast Greene School District, 400 percent in 15 years.
"I've been in the tax collector's office where people come in and pay their taxes with Social Security checks," Moody said. "I don't see things getting better here, that's for sure."
 Load-Date: December 25, 1998

 

End of Document
