

Far from the Beltway, the Clinton debate sounds like the same old song
The Associated Press
January 15, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 589 words
Byline: JIM CLARKE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASILLA, Alaska
Body




Out here in the continent's frozen corner, far from the nation's slick urban dwellers and their citified ways, talk of President Clinton's predicament is … startlingly similar to the rest of the nation's impeachment conversation.
That may be surprising, because Alaskans consider themselves a people apart. "The Last Frontier" may be Alaska's license-plate motto, but "We don't care how they do it Outside" qualifies as its political mantra.
And yet, Alaskans are as conflicted about the president's troubles as folks in just about any other place.
Take Bill Weith. Retired state trooper. Last summer he built a new saloon out of spruce logs, nearly single-handedly, because he thought this town needed a quiet place to drink tasty Alaska microbrews.
Weith fits the Wasilla profile. He's white and conservative, and this suburb an hour's drive north of Anchorage is known as one of the most conservative places in a state that gave Clinton just 33 percent of its votes in 1996.
Surefire Clinton-hater, right?
"As far as I'm concerned, Clinton is no different than JFK or Dwight Eisenhower, and he's doing a heck of a job," Weith said while parked on a stool in his new bar, the Schwabenhof, which opened for business Monday. It still smells more like fresh wood than stale beer.
"In the first place, they never should have investigated him for it," he said, referring to Clinton's relationship with Monica Lewinsky. "And I say that as a person who's been a Republican all my life."
With its boomtown, strip-malls-and-fast-food ambiance, Wasilla is the punch line for most of the redneck jokes told in Anchorage. In return, Wasilla's 5,100 residents tend to think Anchorage folks are a little too citified.
But in both places these days, people are relieved that they're so far outside the Beltway. Wasilla, 3,346 miles from the nation's capital, is about as far away from Clinton's troubles as an American can get while still being on the continent's road system.
Another former cop, parked on a bar stool across town at the Veteran of Foreign Wars, Susitna Post, used this analogy to explain why the effort to oust the president is a colossal waste of money: It's like a young officer going out on his first domestic violence call, Bill Sullivan said. You quickly learn that even though the wife may have two black eyes, she's probably not without sin herself. Not that Sullivan condones hitting a woman for any reason.
His point, delivered beneath the wary eye of his wife, Cherlon, one stool over, is that every cheating-heart story has two sides, and the smart cop learns to avoid getting in the middle of a couple's troubles. Same goes for Congress.
"Sex is a different thing," the Korean War veteran said. "I'd feel worse about Clinton if he was lying about taking $ 20 from the U.S. Treasury rather than about an extramarital affair."
Then there's Anita Wells, helping her husband close up his knife shop in the Cottonwood Creek Mall on a snowy Thursday evening. Saying the words "Clinton" and "impeachment" to the 39-year-old teacher fires her up like a well-tuned snowblower.
"What do I tell my 11- and 13-year-old kids? He doesn't have to follow the law because he's president?" she asked. "What do I tell my students? If you want to break the law get a powerful job?"
The shop's decor, a collection of broad swords, rapiers, crossbows, spears, hunting knives, blow guns and other weapons, seemed to add weight to her opinion.
"He's got a predatory pattern toward women, toward lying, toward shaping the truth to fit his own needs," she said.
 Load-Date: January 15, 1999

 

End of Document
