

FBI shadowed the Montana Freemen 18 months - from the inside
The Associated Press
March 18, 1998, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 526 words
Byline: By TOM LACEKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BILLINGS, Mont.
Body




The FBI monitored the Freemen well before an 81-day standoff began in 1996, but agents could do little to stop the heavily armed anti-government group from digging in at its "Justus Township" compound, a former agent told a federal jury.
Tommie Canady, who headed the FBI investigation, was the first witness in the trial of six men charged with helping federal fugitives avoid arrest during the standoff that ended June 13, 1996.
Testimony in the trial began Tuesday. It was scheduled to resume today.
Canady was the No. 2 FBI agent in Montana when he began the investigation of the Freemen in August 1994.
The FBI shadowed the group for 18 months but was reluctant to risk a shootout until it could safely capture Freemen leader LeRoy Schweitzer, even though Canady secured indictments in May 1995, Canady testified.
The FBI watched as the group moved on the night of Sept. 26, 1995, traveling in an armed caravan to the farm compound outside Jordan, in rural east central Montana, Canady said.
"They discussed very specifically that they would not allow law enforcement to interfere with the caravan," he said. "They said a shootout would ensue. We did not have the resources to arrest them safely."
Canady took the stand after jurors heard a prosecutor say in opening statements that the Freemen would have had no qualms about defending to the death their two goals - making money and attacking financial institutions.
"The evidence will make it clear they were ready, willing and able to shoot FBI agents and other law enforcement officers to prevent them from arresting their friends," Assistant U.S. Attorney James Seykora said.
That opportunity came early on the morning of March 25, 1996, when a sting operation nabbed Schweitzer and the No. 2 leader, Daniel Peterson. Each man carried two pistols and there was an assault rifle in their vehicle, Canady said.
Their uneventful captures unleashed a huge force that the FBI had secretly moved by into Jordan. The force included more than 100 agents, a command staff and a medical evacuation plane.
The standoff followed, ending 81 days later without a shot being fired as the remaining two dozen people in the remote farm compound surrendered.
After the siege, FBI agents found armor-piercing ammunition among the Freemen's supplies, along with 101 rifles and pistols.
The leaders are scheduled for trial in May.
Only two of the six on trial - Elwin Ward, 57, of Salt Lake City, and Edwin Clark, 47, of Brusett, Mont. - were in court Tuesday.
The other four defendants continued to watch the proceedings on closed-circuit television from a holding cell. U.S. District Judge John C. Coughenour banished them from the courtroom Monday after they disrupted the trial opening with shouting and cursing.
They are Steven C. Hance, 48, and his sons, James E. Hance, 25, and John Richard Hance, 21, all of Charlotte, N.C.; and Jon Barry Nelson, 42, of Marion, Kan.
Defense attorneys described their clients as followers.
Joseph Massman, who is representing Steven Hance said his client was "not acting with knowledge or purpose." Lisa Swanson, who is representing James Hance, said Hance was simply following his father's lead.
 Load-Date: March 18, 1998

 

End of Document
