

Feds Comb The World - And The Net - For Clues
July 20, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 486 words
Byline: By TOM HAYS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The tips are arriving via phone and even the Internet. Most are anonymous. Some sound preposterous.
Even so, the FBI agents investigating the downing of TWA Flight 800 as a possible terrorist attack are paying attention. Their interest is another sign that the search for clues about potential suspects is sweeping - and wide open.
"We'll listen to everything and anything," FBI spokesman Joe Valiquette said.
As of Saturday afternoon, the agency had received 149 e-mail messages and 750 phone calls about the disaster. A handful generated worthwhile leads, Valiquette said. "Of course, we're getting crank calls, too."
The FBI's home page offers a brief description of the TWA disaster atop a list of high-profile cases. "UNABOM Information" and "OKBOMB Information" are among the other entries.
The page asks for "help in determining the cause of the crash." And, as with its telephone hotline, it promises tipsters "the strictest confidence."
"We're getting tons of information," said James Kallstrom, who heads the FBI's New York field office. "But there is no gold nugget like 'This is the reason they did it, this is who did it."'
Vincent Cannistrano, former CIA chief of counterterrorism operations, cautions that hotlines rarely break cases. "Historically, it's been worthless," he said Saturday. "But you have to start somewhere."
Indeed, the appeal for public assistance is only a small facet of what is quickly evolving into an international effort. After the explosion, FBI agents were quickly dispatched to Athens, the jetliner's last stop before New York City.
Should the investigation uncover evidence of a bombing, the CIA - with its experience in infiltrating terrorist groups outside the United States - and the lesser-know National Security Agency will provide high-tech intelligence on potential attackers. Both agencies were active in the investigation of the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103.
Already, "We're working with all our partners in criminal investigations throughout the world," Kallstrom said. "They're certainly putting their ears to the ground."
Another likely step is the offering of a sizable reward. During the investigation of the World Trade Center bombing, the State Department plastered the Middle East with matchbooks depicting their prime suspect, Ramzi Yousef. The tiny wanted posters of Yousef included information about a $ 2 million bounty.
FBI officials have refused to comment on specific theories about what - or who - may have blown up the TWA aircraft.
"We really need to get to that aircraft and when we do, we will know what happened," Kallstrom said.
The FBI's forensic experts were eager to examine the Boeing 747's still-submerged fuselage. A bomb stashed in luggage would have left behind telltale residue, both on wreckage from the cargo hold and on the bodies of victims seated over it.
When and if that evidence is uncovered, "then the real work starts," Cannistrano said.
 Load-Date: July 20, 1996

 

End of Document
