

Fighting for the president on the facts, law, the Constitution
The Associated Press
January 18, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 683 words
Byline: By PETE YOST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Resigned that some witnesses may be summoned, President Clinton's lawyers will use past testimony, federal laws and the Founding Fathers' own words to dispute that House prosecutors have made a lies-and-obstruction case worthy of ousting the president.
A senior White House adviser said Monday that "we can't worry about" the repercussions of delving into the facts of the Monica Lewinsky case to aggressively highlight inconsistencies among various accounts of witnesses, including some House prosecutors want to question.
Witnesses "seem to us to be a foregone conclusion," said the adviser, speaking on condition of anonymity. "We plan to make the most forceful case we can against the evidence."
Another source in the Clinton camp said that by focusing on the facts of the case, the president's legal team has made a "major shift in strategy" which will look at contradictions in evidence even if it hands House managers a reason to request witnesses.
This source, who also spoke on condition of anonymity, said presidential lawyers believe "witnesses will help our case."
Among the witness testimony that could come up in a protracted Senate trial:
-Ms. Lewinsky says that she got a call from Clinton's secretary Betty Currie arranging to pick up presidential gifts, a few hours after Ms. Lewinsky told Clinton of her concern that she'd have to turn over the presents he'd given her to Paula Jones's lawyers.
Mrs. Currie says she thinks it was Ms. Lewinsky who initiated the gift return and Mrs. Currie has testified that she has no recollection of ever talking to Clinton about returning the gifts, before or after she picked them up. The Clinton legal team credits Mrs. Currie's account, while noting that both witnesses testify that the president did not ask Ms. Lewinsky to surrender the gifts.
-In rebutting the obstruction charge, Clinton's lawyers in a Senate filing last week highlighted Mrs. Currie's testimony that she didn't feel any pressure "whatsoever" when Clinton asked questions like "I was never really alone with Monica, right?" In another part of her testimony, however, Mrs. Currie said she felt as though Clinton wanted her to agree with his statements.
"We are actually looking forward to turning the lights on for the American people on how little evidence there is to back up the smoke and innuendo of the House Republican case," former White House special counsel Lanny Davis said.
Beyond challenging the evidence, the White House is expected to make several political points as well:
-The charges against Clinton, even if proven, don't meet the "high crimes and misdemeanors" standard for impeachment. In a Senate filing last week, the Clinton team highlighted the views of one of the framers of the Constitution that impeachment refers to "great and dangerous offenses" or "attempts to subvert the Constitution."
-The evidence doesn't meet the standard that a federal prosecutor would use to bring perjury or obstruction charges against an average citizen and therefore shouldn't be used to reverse the will of Americans expressed in two elections.
-The differences between Clinton's and Ms. Lewinsky's testimony on the details of their relationship - when it began and what sort of intimate contacts it involved - are insignificant, not criminal, and are nothing more than honest differences of recollection.
-Clinton isn't on trial for denying his affair with Ms. Lewinsky, something he did in the Jones case, but which the House rejected as an article of impeachment.
"Most polls show that a majority of the American people think President Clinton lied about his relationship with Monica Lewinsky before the grand jury," said Davis. "The American people are going to be amazed when they learn that the president told the truth before the grand jury about his relationship."
The perjury Clinton is accused of delves with such issues as when the affair began. He says it was in February 1996 and Ms. Lewinsky says it began three months earlier when she was still an unpaid White House intern. She says he touched her in a sexual manner in nine intimate encounters. He denies doing so.
 Load-Date: January 18, 1999

 

End of Document
