

Finding the perfect symbol for the Salt Lake Games
November 17, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 425 words
Dateline: SALT LAKE CITY
Body




Olympic chief Mitt Romney would like the Mormon Temple to be the signature shot for TV coverage of the 2002 Winter Games.
Salt Lake City Mayor Rocky Anderson thinks that would send the wrong message to Utah residents who are not members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
He would rather have the focus on a more neutral landmark - the Salt Lake City-County Building.
"Symbolism and iconography are going to be important," he said. "If the only icon for Salt Lake City is the backdrop for the medals plaza, there will be some real resentment from a large segment of our community. It's a matter of avoiding divisiveness."
In August 1999, Romney picked a Salt Lake street corner for the Olympic medals plaza. Church leaders chipped in $5 million to dress up the plaza, which has the Mormon Temple as a backdrop.
Romney apparently said he wants the temple to be the icon for the games.
In an October e-mail, obtained by The Salt Lake Tribune through the Government Records Access and Management Act, SLOC board member Ken Bullock wrote to Romney: "As you shared with me some months ago, I know that ultimately your goal is to have the LDS Temple serve for the Salt Lake Games the role that the Buddhist Temple served for the Nagano Games, namely the structure the world remembers."
Romney doesn't deny saying it, but he says the temple will be just one of a number of images - athletes, mountain peaks, SLOC's logo, City Hall, the state Capitol and the Cathedral of the Madeleine.
"There will be many icons," he said. "We'll just see what the world picks to remember our city by."
But TV executives probably will have the last word.
NBC Senior Olympic Producer Jim Bell has been scouting Utah for "beautycam" shots. Bell figures NBC will focus on nature and athletes more than buildings.
"With a Winter Olympics, the signature images are generally the mountains and the athletes," he said Thursday. "The winter wonderland - that's your first icon."
At the same time, NBC will sign off with video of the city's skyline.
"You frame those buildings against the Wasatch Mountains. The sun's going down. It's perfect," Bell said. "The temple will be there, sure."
Church leaders say they're staying out of it.
"The church is not in the business of dictating camera angles and perspectives," spokesman Dale Bills said. "TV producers, directors and camera operators will make whatever decisions are to be made in ways they feel best serve their worldwide audiences, whether those views are of the city skyline, the mountains, the state Capitol or whatever."
 Load-Date: November 18, 2000

 

End of Document
