

FIRST LADIES LIBRARY: Celebrating the works of the wives of presidents
The Associated Press
March 8, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel
Length: 943 words
Byline: AMY SANCETTA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CANTON, Ohio
Body




Martha Washington was an expert equestrian who rode alone from camp to camp delivering messages to the troops during the American Revolution.
Mary Todd Lincoln was a rabid abolitionist who brought the evils of slavery to the attention of her husband by taking him to a local slave auction.
An avid suffragette, Florence Harding was the first American woman to vote for her own husband for president.
Throughout history, America's first ladies have been involved with more than just gowns and gloves and tea parties, and Mary Regula wants to make sure people know it.
Last June, with Rosalynn Carter present for the ceremonies, Regula and company christened the First Ladies Library in the Ida Saxton McKinley House in Canton. The restored Victorian house, built in the mid-1800s, was the home of President and Mrs. McKinley during his 14 years in the U.S. Senate.
It's now the country's only educational facility concerning the life and works of America's 43 first ladies and hostesses.
The three-story house is ornately decorated with historically reproduced wallpaper. The first floor parlor and library alone boast 23 patterns of wallpaper all hand cut and pieced together on the walls and ceilings like a jigsaw puzzle.
Entering the foyer, visitors are met by the stunning black walnut staircase which wraps up and around all three stories and is the home's centerpiece. At its base hangs a charming photograph of Florence Kling Harding dressed in her Girl Scout uniform accompanied by her dog, Laddie Boy.
The home was passed down through Ida's family until it was eventually sold. It once housed a tavern and a brothel, and eventually was condemned to the wrecking ball. It was saved by Ida's grandnephew Marsh Belden Sr., who remembered sliding down the impressive banister as a child and could not bear to see it all destroyed.
Most of the home's artifacts are antique pieces collected from the turn of the century. Ida's own writing desk sits in the parlor and a painting of her daughter Katie, who died at the age of 4, hangs above the sitting room fireplace.
Belden poured $ 1.5 million into the restoration of the house's exterior, including the tearing away of a brick facade which covered the entire front of the glorious structure.
He eventually sold the house to the National Park Service under the care of the Stark Community Foundation, a philanthropic endowment organization.
But it was Regula and her committee of the First Ladies Library that raised the funds for the restoration of the interior. The facility is totally privately funded and currently boast all six living first ladies as honorary chairpersons.
Throughout the house are display cases with books, letters, photographs, campaign buttons and other memorabilia sent to the museum by first ladies Johnson, Nixon, Ford, Carter, Reagan, Bush and Clinton.
The walls of the expansive third-floor ballroom are covered with the only complete collection of reproductions paintings and photographs of every woman who ever acted as first lady.
The First Ladies Library also will honor women who have made a great impact on American society, not just those who have resided in the White House. On March 16, the inaugural awards dinner of The First Ladies Salute First Women will be held in Washington with Hillary Clinton as an honored guest.
Secretary of State Madeline Albright, poet Dr. Gwendolyn Brooks, Washington D.C. public television station founder Elizabeth Campbell, former U.S. Congresswoman Shirley Chisholm, and Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Conner will be the recipients of the first awards.
First ladies include more than just the wives of the presidents. Taft's daughter Helen took over the duties while his wife recovered from a stroke. Grover Cleveland' sister Rose held the position until the bachelor president married Francis Folsom midway through his term.
Visitors are met at the door by a volunteer guide dressed as one of the presidents' wives. The tour begins with a short film from the Smithsonian's current First Ladies exhibit in Washington and proceeds with a walking tour of the three-story house. There is an elevator for the handicapped.
Distressed that for decades the Smithonian's only tribute to first ladies was a collection of inaugural gowns, and unable to find a reading list for a talk she was to give on Mary Todd Lincoln, Regula, wife of Ohio congressman Ralph Regula, decided that there must be a complete bibliography on all the women who have served in the White House.
She assembled a group of 13 influential women from north-central Ohio and pitched them the idea for the library. They could not have been more enthused.
Together they raised the $ 100,000 needed to hire noted historian Carl Sferrazza Anthony to assemble the only complete bibliography of all the books, writings, articles and manuscripts written by and about America's first ladies.
That bibliography is the heart of the project.
"We will never be about gowns and gloves," Regula says. "We are an educational and resource facility."
The Library is working now to collect every book ever written by or about first ladies and assemble them on Amish-crafted walnut bookcases in the house. The start of the collection can be found in the first floor parlor.
The next goal is to collect reproductions of all articles and documents and store those there as well.
They are also working to expand their already impressive Web site to be a top-notch educational site. It can be found at www.firstladies.org 
A seven-story former bank building a block from the house has been donated to the library and will be used for storage, a library, study rooms and lecture and exhibit space for traveling shows.
 Load-Date: March 8, 1999

 

End of Document
