

First the Waiting Game, then the Orange Bowl
The Associated Press
January 1, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 681 words
Byline: By BEN WALKER, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




There is only one key to the Orange Bowl, and it has nothing to do with Tom Osborne's retirement or Peyton Manning's knee.
It's the Rose Bowl.
Both No. 2 Nebraska and No. 3 Tennessee will know the score, so to speak, even before they take the field Friday night. Because who wins the national championship will come down to what plays out in Pasadena on Thursday.
"You kind of wish you were all playing at the same time," Osborne said Thursday morning.
Instead, the Nebraska coach could do nothing while No. 1 Michigan took on No. 8 Washington State. The Cornhuskers were perfect in the regular season, just like the Wolverines, but are far behind them in the polls.
"Whether Michigan wins or loses, hopefully it will not have a major effect on how we play the game," Osborne said.
In the meantime, there was not much for either team to do except wait and watch.
Nebraska (12-0) and Tennessee (11-1) were both scheduled for one-hour walk-through practices at Pro Player Stadium, with both sessions to take place during the first half of the Rose Bowl.
"We were told it was non-negotiable," Osborne said. "We tried to negotiate it."
Osborne was told there was no other option, however, because the elaborate halftime show at the Orange Bowl, sponsored by FedEx, needed the field for preparation. So the Huskers will scramble for the TV sets whenever possible.
"The plan is to try to watch as much as we can," he said. "We'll probably miss quite a bit of the game. As I've told the players, it doesn't matter."
The Cornhuskers want to see for themselves, though. Osborne said he offered his players a choice of going to three or four movies, but "85-90 percent wanted to watch the Rose Bowl, so that's what we'll do."
As for what poll voters should keep their eyes on, Osborne had just one wish.
"My only hope is that people will watch the games - at least through January 2," he said. "However it falls, it falls."
While Nebraska tries to give Osborne a strong sendoff with its third national championship in four seasons, Tennessee also had a rooting interest in the Rose Bowl. A loss by Michigan would give the Volunteers a shot at their first national title since 1951.
Tennessee's practice was scheduled to start as the Rose Bowl was to begin. Coach Phillip Fulmer said his team would go to dinner after the workout, and he envisioned having television sets near the tables.
No matter what happens, Fulmer said he now favors a playoff to see who's really No. 1.
"I've changed in the last couple, three years," he said. "I always thought the bowl system was the way to go. But after being left out of the bowl alliance the last two or three seasons, I think we should play it off."
For the moment, his focus was on Tennessee's first game against Nebraska. Stopping the Cornhuskers' offense, which leads the nation with 47 points a game, is one big problem and protecting Manning is another.
At least Fulmer was not fretting about Manning's gimpy right knee. The All-America quarterback was mobile in practice, giving the Volunteers hope they could exploit Nebraska's inexperienced secondary.
"He's about as close to 100 percent as you could be," Fulmer said. "It's up to us to make sure we help him as much as we can."
One facet Fulmer cannot control is Nebraska's resolve to send Osborne out with a win. The oddsmakers believe Osborne's impending retirement will help the Huskers - the point spread increased from 7 to 13 after his announcement.
"I would think from an emotional standpoint it would excite and motivate their players," Fulmer said. "But I think once the game starts, that's not such a big factor."
Osborne, true to his nature, has played down talk about his departure after 25 years.
"I really don't think a whole lot about it being my last game," he said. "Obviously, I'm aware of the fact that it's the last one. But it won't trigger any special emotion. Nobody has sat around and reminisced or shed any tears."
"It's the final game for a lot of guys," he added. "For both sides, there are probably 20-30 seniors playing their last game. The fact that it's mine is no different than those guys."
 Load-Date: January 1, 1998

 

End of Document
