

First the Soviet Union, Now the San Fernando Valley?
May 29, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 618 words
Byline: By DENNIS ANDERSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Amid the century-end turmoil that's seen the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia break apart, Balkanization is under way in the nation's second-largest city with a move toward secession by the San Fernando Valley, the very symbol of American postwar suburban sprawl.
Twenty miles long by 15 miles wide, the expanse of tract homes and strip malls that gave the world "Valley Girls" and the phrase "Gag me with a spoon" is pressing for independence from Los Angeles.
A breakaway would create a city of more than 1.2 million people, ranking sixth in population, between Philadelphia and San Diego. The remaining city of Los Angeles would lose its No. 2 ranking to Chicago.
The first step is a bill before the state Legislature that would take away the City Council's power to veto secession if Valley residents vote for it.
"It's about democracy," said state Assemblywoman Paula Boland, San Fernando Valley sponsor of the no-veto bill. It won passage May 9 in the Assembly, which is controlled by Boland's fellow Republicans, but faces a fight for approval in the Democrat-led Senate. Republican Gov. Pete Wilson has not said whether he would sign it.
Active on and off for the past 20 years, secessionists contend their neighborhoods fail to get enough municipal services for the taxes paid. They resent a City Hall establishment 30 miles away that seems as distant as the Kremlin to a Cossack.
The sudden success of Boland's bill in the Assembly was a shot heard 'round the Golden State.
"These are soundbite solutions to complex problems," said Assemblyman Richard Katz, a San Fernando Valley Democrat. "No one asks how much it's going to cost if you have to suddenly lease a police department and a fire department. Who do the roads belong to?"
When the Soviet Union broke up, Russia and Ukraine squabbled over who got the nuclear weapons and the Black Sea fleet. Los Angeles and the Valley would also wrestle over assets.
"Who controls the water rights?" asked City Councilman Richard Alarcon, the first Hispanic elected to represent a Valley district in what were once nearly all-white suburbs. "Seventy percent of the water for the city of Los Angeles comes through the Valley. How do you divide up the rights?"
Like Mayor Richard Riordan, Alarcon opposes a breakup of the city. But he sympathizes with the forces shaping the Valley secession movement.
"It's about historical neglect," Alarcon said. "What people in the Valley want is respect. There should be more police visible, more firefighters, more street sweepers."
Alarcon recently voted with two other Valley colleagues on the City Council to support Boland's bill giving residents the right to choose their destiny.
It was because of water that the city annexed the huge expanse of the then-rural Valley in the early part of the century. In the prosperity that followed World War II, the Valley's suburbs spread like dichondra lawns, fertilized by G.I. loans and Cold War defense contractors.
At Mel's Drive-In Diner, with "the best shakes in town" a neon oasis where the broad boulevards of Ventura and Van Nuys meet, Vince Anderson, 38, pondered his burger and recalled that he got his engineering career started at Rocketdyne, where the space shuttle engines were built.
These days, he's a contractor and building inspector.
"I think it could be a city, but right now it's too expensive," he lamented. "Right now, the Valley's a shell. It's not like the early '80s when Rocketdyne and Lockheed were at high tide. The Valley probably lost 150,000 jobs."
And what would the Valley call itself if it seceded?
Anderson suggested "Metro Van Nuys" and groaned. Boland offered "Miracleville" as an unlikely possibility.
"I think they should call it Los Angeles," Alarcon said.
 Load-Date: May 29, 1996

 

End of Document
