

Fleeting recount fame - the vote machine inventor, the truck driver and the judge
December 14, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 463 words
Byline: By BRIGITTE GREENBERG, Associated Press Writer
Body




During the monthlong TV miniseries known as the Florida recount, the limelight shone on a whole cast of memorable supporting characters who, thrust into the midst of the election saga, seized their 15 minutes of fame.
Take, for instance, Tony Enos, the driver of the Ryder truck that carried 462,000 ballots into the waiting arms of Judge N. Sander Sauls. Enos' drive from Palm Beach County to Tallahassee, Fla., riveted a national TV audience. And when he stopped at the side of the road to buy some orange juice, news reporters clamored for interviews.
"It's going good - keeping two hands on the wheel," he reported dutifully in an aw-shucks, Jimmy Stewart style.
Judge Sauls drew his own admirers for his down-home wit, folksy style and Southern drawl. At one point, he said the vote recount case was, "a little bit like getting nibbled to death by a duck."
Craig Waters, the soft-spoken Florida Supreme Court spokesman, time and again appeared on the courthouse steps to dutifully read the decisions of the state's highest court. His monotone voice belied the lofty implications of each ruling.
And Florida Secretary of State Katherine Harris, a Republican whose office is due to be abolished when her term ends, garnered plenty of unexpected attention when she was cast in the role of certifying George W. Bush the winner of Florida's election.
The courtrooms and the cavernous chambers of the Legislature produced their own memorable figures.
William Rouverol, 82, a retired mechanical engineering professor who invented the Votomatic Voting System, provided one of the rare "Perry Mason" moments of the re-count saga. Someone unearthed his 40-some-odd-year-old patent application, in which he admitted his machine wasn't always accurate and that hand recounts might be required.
Tom Feeney, the curly haired conservative Florida House speaker, became a star of the Florida recount with his eager advocacy of awarding the state's 25 electoral votes to Bush by legislative fiat.
Before he came to national prominence, he was known in Florida for his proposal that the state secede from the Union. He also was Jeb Bush's running mate in Bush's first, unsuccessful campaign for governor.
At least one character was never unmasked - the Democratic operative accused of eating chads, the little pieces of paper or cardboard punched out of a ballot when someone votes. Republicans argued that hand counts presented too great an opportunity for fraud, and to prove it, one GOP recount observer told a story of the Democrat who ate a stack of chads in Broward County, gobbled them up like Halloween candy corn.
"He licked his finger and put it in the pile. I said, 'Sir! No! Don't do that!' But he put it in his mouth and then he swept the rest up and put some in his pocket," the observer said.
 Load-Date: December 15, 2000

 

End of Document
