

Florida's Interstate 4 could be the road to the White House
The Associated Press
October 14, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 776 words
Byline: By MIKE SCHNEIDER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ORLANDO, Fla.
Body




Interstate 4, the busy central Florida highway that links Tampa and Daytona Beach, could be the road to the White House for either Al Gore or George W. Bush.
Both candidates see Florida's 25 electoral votes as crucial to their chances of winning and Gore goes as far as saying that "central Florida is the key to this state."
"The I-4 corridor historically has been up for grabs," says Al Cardenas, chairman of the Florida Republican Party. "We need to make sure we give it special attention so we come out on top."
In just the past 10 days, Gore and running mate Joseph Lieberman visited Orlando, Bush visited St. Petersburg and Melbourne along the Space Coast, Tipper Gore made a stop in Melbourne and Lynne Cheney, wife of Bush running mate Dick Cheney, held a town-hall forum in Daytona Beach.
What defines the voters in the long strip across the state? In a way, their importance is defined by who they're not.
South Florida is heavily Democratic due to large numbers of Jewish voters and retirees from the urban Northeast, though the mostly Republican Cuban exile community flexes its political muscle there, too. Republican retirees from the Midwest are found in large numbers along the Gulf Coast. North Florida, notwithstanding pockets of black voters, is politically akin to Georgia and Alabama, and typically votes for Republican presidential candidates.
By contrast, the diverse I-4 corridor has historically been a toss-up when it comes to presidential races.
In 1996, the Tampa-St. Petersburg area went narrowly for President Clinton. The Orlando area, traditionally more Republican and a center for Christian conservative groups, went narrowly for Bob Dole.
Republican Gov. Jeb Bush, the presidential candidate's brother, carried both the Tampa and Orlando metro areas in 1998.
Just recently, however, Democrats surpassed Republicans on Orange County's voter rolls in the Orlando area. That was a result, in part, of a growing Puerto Rican population and an effort by Democrats to register low-wage service workers employed by the tourism industry.
"This kind of leaves us as the tipping point," said Aubrey Jewett, a political science professor at the University of Central Florida in Orlando. "We're in the middle of the seesaw."
A Mason-Dixon Opinion Research survey published this week showed the presidential race in Florida very close, with Bush at 47 percent, Gore at 44 and 7 percent undecided. Bush has visited the state 14 times, Gore 12.
Both sides hope those visits will affect voters like Dan Mills, a 53-year-old manager for a security firm in Orlando. Mills, a self-described "Reagan Democrat," is undecided and says he doesn't trust Gore but doesn't like Bush's position on abortion and Social Security.
"It may come down to a coin toss," he said.
Both sides are also pouring money into TV ads here, spending more than $1 million per week between the campaigns and the parties. Democrats are criticizing Bush on the environment in an ad made just for Florida, and Republicans are hitting back with an environmental ad of their own.
The I-4 corridor stretches from the placid waters of the Gulf of Mexico through Polk County's citrus country and Orlando's theme park tourist region to the Atlantic Coast's spring break and biker haven at Daytona Beach. The area also encompasses the Space Coast where space shuttles and satellites are launched.
With 5.1 million residents, the I-4 corridor holds a third of the state's population and about three-eighth's of the state's voters. The main industries are tourism, hospitality, theme parks, defense, space and citrus.
The I-4 corridor is slightly whiter than the rest of the state, which is almost 80 percent white. Households in metro Tampa, Orlando and the Space Coast have a higher median income than the state average of almost $30,000, although households in the more rural areas of Polk County and the Daytona Beach area have lower median household incomes.
Likewise, residents in the more cosmopolitan areas of the metro Tampa, Orlando and the Space Coast are better educated than residents in other parts of Florida, where only 18.3 percent of the population is college educated. Significantly less residents in Polk and the Daytona Beach area have gone to college than the rest of the state.
Said Ed Turanchik, CEO and president of the organizing committee for central Florida's effort to land the 2012 Olympics: "This is the battleground. All of the cities are different and the constituencies are different."
"How the I-4 corridor goes, so goes Florida. How Florida goes, so goes the nation," Bob Poe, chairman of the Florida Democratic Party, said recently in Orlando. "This is ground zero."
 Load-Date: October 15, 2000

 

End of Document
