

For the Children: A Warrior on the Page - and in the Courtroom
July 20, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1042 words
Byline: By NANCY SHULINS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Fictional warriors rarely get hurt. Not so in life. The human body is fragile. Flesh tears. Bones break.
In the 30 years since he declared war on the evils that prey upon children, Andrew Vachss has had his jaw broken twice. The malaria he brought back from Biafra still flares up on occasion. The wrist he smashed in courtroom combat still aches.
Vachss battles child abuse both as a lawyer who represents children exclusively and as a writer whose fiction brings his case before a bigger jury.
Not only his work but his life is defined by the battle. His family. His friends. Even his pets, the guard dogs that protect him and his wife, Alice, from enemies amassed over the years.
Hundreds of children are safe because of Andrew Vachss. A national registry of sex offenders is being developed based on legislation he drafted. He established the meaning of corroboration in child sex abuse cases. He's at the forefront of efforts to bring more science and less art to the handling of these cases.
In Vachss' war, there are no cease-fires. He takes no vacations. He doesn't do lunch. At 53, he has no time for social niceties. Not even for the leader of the free world.
When President Clinton, attempting to engage Vachss in small talk, noted his slim build and asked if he were a runner, he got the standard response, delivered in Vachss' trademark growl.
Here it is, in its entirety: "No."
Vachss's next novel, "False Allegations," is due out in November. Like most of his tales, it features Burke, a career criminal inured to all evil except that which preys upon children.
In "False Allegations," Burke stands in the crossfire between those who insist children never lie in sex abuse cases and those who compare the cases to witch hunts. Vachss hopes the gold standard it portrays, based on the pioneering research at CIVITAS ChildTrauma Programs in Houston, will become routine in the investigation of sex abuse cases."
Like all his fiction, "False Allegations" is not only raw and rich, but also thinly disguised propaganda, another chance to say in 20 languages what Vachss has been saying for much of his life:
That today's victim may be tomorrow's predator.
That there's no such thing as evil DNA.
That society's monsters aren't born. They're made.
Just like its warriors.
To anyone who's ever glanced at Vachss' book jacket photo, it's an instantly recognizable face: angry and angular, with a black eyepatch due to a childhood injury, and a one-eyed, seen-it-all squint.
He wears a similar expression at his office in lower Manhattan, where he greets a reporter with an utter and absolute lack of warmth. But if he fails to discourage you with his perfunctory answers and his laser-beam glare, his natural instinct starts to surface: the instinct to protect.
He waits with you by the elevator; he escorts you down the hall to the bathroom. And you start to see how this could be the same man the most fragile, damaged children entrust with their secrets.
Vachs was 22 when he discovered the evil he calls "The Beast," and at the same time found his life's work. He encountered an infant who'd been raped.
"I knew people did horrible things," he says, "but I never really understood that people had sex with babies."
In 1969, in an African nation called Biafra, a generation of children was disappearing from the earth. This despite massive influxes of American money. Vachss entered the war zone and find out where the money was going.
He barely escaped with his life, wasting away from 160 pounds to 89 from malaria and malnutrition.
Back home, he worked as a juvenile probation officer. Then, in 1972, he took over ANDROS II, a maximum security facility for Massachusetts' most dangerous juvenile offenders, a jungle plagued by assaults and escapes.
To Dr. Yitzhak Bakal, who hired him, Vachss was "sent from heaven. He had both the toughness, the street smarts and the knowledge about how to be tough yet compassionate with kids. … His approach became the cornerstone of treatment of the violent juvenile offender."
ANDROS II was where Vachss finally determined that no one is born bad, that "no biogenetic code exists that says 'go be a rapist, a serial killer, an arsonist.' "
He began asking kids if they'd been abused. Kids whose bodies were mapped with evidence answered no. He remembers one in particular, who'd had half his teeth knocked out, whose back bore scars from the heated coat hangers he'd been beaten with. No.
"At that point," he says, "I realized the 'data' wasn't all that accurate."
By 1973, Vachss knew he needed to intervene earlier, before kids wound up in prison. He left ANDROS II for the New England School of Law. Without him, the perfect experiment fell apart.
He opened his practice in 1976 with children his primary clients.
In the early '80s, he represented the plaintiffs in three suits against the Fresh Air Fund for sending New York City kids on vacations in the country where they were abused. The Fund, one of New York's most venerable charities, not only settled the cases, but publicly credited Vachss with opening their eyes.
Such was his advocacy on behalf of his clients that when one guilty party turned up dead at the bottom of a Vermont marble quarry, Vachss was among the first questioned.
Would he care to make a statement?
Yeah. "I hope his eyes were open on the way down."
Vachss' zealousness hasn't diminished with time, says Yonkers Family Court reporter Bruce Winkelman, who remembers the day in 1984 when Vachss punched the wall, dislocating his right wrist and chipping the bone while demonstrating how a single blow could have broken a baby's pelvis in two places.
Since the 1980s, six-figure advances for his books have allowed Vachss to limit his law practice to children. But his sucess makes him a visible target. Deranged phone calls, threatening letters and stalkers have necessitated elaborate security measures, resulting in a reclusive livestyle similar to Burke's.
One day, Vachss says, he may "retire" from his law practice to track child abusers on the Internet. But not yet. The Beast is still out there. Children still die.
To a warrior, the future looks much like the past.
"You punch the wall. You punch the wall. You punch the wall."
And if you break your wrist in the process, what then?
"Then you kick it."
 Load-Date: July 20, 1996

 

End of Document
