

For Dole, Primaries No Longer The Worry; Solving The GOP 'Funk'
April 24, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 769 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, AP Political Writer
Body




Bob Dole easily won Pennsylvania's presidential primary Tuesday but it was of little solace to a campaign trying to calm some early Republican jitters about the party's standard-bearer and broader election strategy.
Dole clinched the GOP nomination by winning 25 consecutive primaries in March, leaving little drama for Pennsylvania - or the 11 states with presidential contests still to come. Any chance for fireworks in Pennsylvania ended with Pat Buchanan's decision not to campaign there, even though he remains an active candidate.
Pennsylvania's 73 GOP convention delegates officially run uncommitted, but many were Dole backers and most, if not all, were expected to back him at the August GOP convention. Dole entered the day with 1,202 delegates, more than enough to clinch nomination.
Dole handily beat Buchanan. With 97 percent of the vote counted, the Kansas senator had 63 percent to 18 percent for Buchanan. President Clinton, who long ago clinched renomination, had no major opposition and coasted in the Democratic primary.
Dole didn't bother with a celebration, instead thanking Pennsylvania Republicans in a statement that ignored recent GOP turmoil over Dole's skills as a candidate and the party's strategy for dealing with Clinton and aggressive congressional Democrats.
"You showed that the Republican Party is unified, it is focused and it is ready to take its message of positive, conservative change directly to the American people," Dole said.
That upbeat assessment ran counter to this view of the GOP mood delivered Monday night by House Speaker Newt Gingrich: "We are going through a Republican period of being in a funk."
There is no disputing that Dole and his party have had a rough stretch.
For starters, Dole's early clinching of the Republican nomination hasn't translated into momentum: Recent national polls show Clinton with as much as an 18-point lead over Dole in a head-to-head matchup, and a comfortable lead in a three-way race with Ross Perot.
Surveys also show persistent doubts about the Republican Congress and high negative ratings for Gingrich, whom Democrats try to link to Dole at every opportunity.
And Dole's plan to use his post as Senate majority leader to make his case against Clinton has had more snarls than successes so far, as Democrats have put Dole and fellow Republicans on the defensive by demanding a vote on raising the minimum wage.
That is just one example of GOP struggles in developing a coherent election-year legislative strategy. Nervous about the pounding the party took from Clinton in last year's budget fight, some Republicans are decidedly more cautious this year.
The GOP blunders on the minimum wage, and problems developing a broader legislative strategy, have renewed debate within the party over whether Dole should step down as majority leader, or at least turn over day-to-day management of the Senate to Republican Whip Trent Lott. Dole has steadfastly resisted such advice.
On Monday, William Bennett, the author and former education secretary, said Dole's Senate post was "a trap" and that within the party, "there's very little enthusiasm about Bob Dole."
Dole campaign manager Scott Reed attributed the criticism to "some inside the Beltway people trying to get their names in the paper."
But many state GOP leaders share Bennett's concerns about Dole's skills as a candidate and communicator, though they are reluctant to be so blunt publicly.
Republican National Committee Chairman Haley Barbour said it was too soon to worry, but left little doubt he believes the GOP has lost the political initiative to Democrats.
"Our people may be a little frustrated because they want to get going, get on offense," Barbour said in an interview. "The party, Senator Dole, and other candidates need to make clear what is at issue, and the differences we have with Clinton, in the months between now and the conventions if we are to reach equilibrium by then."
Reed identified Dole's major challenges as unifying Republicans and finding opportunities to "expose the huge gap between Clinton's rhetoric and his liberal record."
Dole's recent attacks on Clinton's judicial appointments are part of this strategy. For the second consecutive day, Dole took to the Senate floor Tuesday to press that theme, taking issue with a Tennessee federal appeals court judge he said too often sided with suspects over police in search and seizure cases.
Next month, the RNC plans its first major anti-Clinton advertising effort, and the spots under discussion mesh with the Dole strategy of framing Clinton as a liberal on issues ranging from taxes and spending to crime.
 Load-Date: April 24, 1996

 

End of Document
