

Forget the coach: fire the owner
The Associated Press
October 26, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1092 words
Byline: By DAVE GOLDBERG, AP Football Writer
Body




It surprised no one when the Cardinals fired Vince Tobin this week.
Nor was it a surprise when Bruce Coslet quit the Bengals.
For the first two (and perhaps the last two) in-season coaching changes this year took place on arguably the two worst-run franchises of the last decade and beyond. And for that, you don't blame the coach, you blame the owner.
In Arizona, that's Bill Bidwill, who has run the Cardinals through three cities in the last 40 years and may be headed to San Antonio (Los Angeles is a long shot) if voters turn down the referendum for a new stadium Nov. 7.
Bidwill actually has a good personnel man, Bob Ferguson, but he's quirky and turns off players and fans.
When the Cardinals moved to Arizona, there was a waiting list of 30,000 for season tickets. Now, that's the number they sell for each game unless they play the Cowboys, who have a large fan base in Arizona. Teams like the Bears, Eagles, Vikings and Giants have many fans who retired to Arizona and show up to root for the visitors.
In Cincinnati, Mike Brown runs the Bengals for a group of investors. As a football executive, he's not close to level of his father, Paul Brown, who founded the team and after whom the new stadium is named.
Both Bidwill and Brown have two problems: They really don't have enough football knowledge to do things themselves and they don't want to spend money - although Bidwill is learning.
Odds are good that both will stick with their "interim" coaches after the season because:
a, No coach in demand elsewhere wants to go to the Bengals or Cards.
b, Both Dave McGinnis, who succeeded Tobin, and Dick LeBeau, Coslet's replacement, are high-energy coaches who either have improved morale or will improve it.
c, Both come relatively cheap.
Cincinnati got its first win against Denver last week and a few more are in the offing against a weak schedule. Arizona undboutedly will play with more fire after a 48-7 drubbing in Dallas.
But the bottom line is the bottom line.
Even with LeBeau and three, four or five wins, is Brown going to meet the salary demands of Corey Dillon, who broke Walter Payton's single-game rushing record last week?
Already, Brown's people are putting out the word that Dillon is one-dimensional - he doesn't block or catch and therefore is not worth the $90 million over nine years that Stephen Davis got from Washington. Note to Brown: Davis isn't the best blocker or receiver and Jim Brown never blocked - that's not what premier running backs do, unless they're named Emmitt Smith.
Dillon is also upset he was given an ultimatum that forced him into camp this year, and is being paid half of what top-rate running backs get.
As for the Cardinals, they looked like they were making a move when they made the playoffs in 1998 for the first time in 17 seasons, then beat the Cowboys. But they've been killed by injuries and Jake Plummer has regressed at quarterback.
Maybe they'll be happier in San Antonio.
---
MORE COACHES: This may be one of the few seasons with a limited number of coaching vacancies.
People like Al Groh, Dave Wannstedt, Mike Martz and Jim Haslett are all doing well in their first year, Andy Reid is doing a wonderful job in his second, and Jim Fassel, who was on the bubble entering the season, might be headed to the playoffs with the Giants.
Even unsuccessful coaches are being given a long leash. Dick Jauron wouldn't have gone this far with Cade McNown, now injured, if he thought his job in Chicago was on the line. Mike Riley deserves another year in San Diego based on what he did as a rookie.
Cleveland's Chris Palmer could have problems. With Tim Couch out, a 2-1 start might turn into a 2-14 finish. The examples of Jacksonville and Carolina, both of which made it to conference title games in their second seasons, doesn't help. Palmer and Jauron, plus Jacksonville's Tom Coughlin, who trained both of them, are now a combined 5-19.
There also are reports that Norv Turner, fed up with the dictatorial ways of 35-year-old Redskins owner Daniel Snyder, would love to win the Super Bowl and then tell Snyder to take his job and shove it.
They're probably accurate, but that still won't make for many coaching openings..
 
SCHONIE: Steve Schoenfeld was killed this week by a hit-and-run driver, creating a void in coverage of the NFL and a huge loss for the people who write about it for a living.
Steve ("Schonie" to those of us who knew him) was a rare bird in an ego-driven business - eager to share information, to spread it, to help his colleagues. He covered the Cardinals and the NFL for the last dozen years for the Arizona Republic before moving on to CBS SportsLine this summer.
One writer, new to the NFL and Cardinals last year, was amazed when Steve, presumably a competitor, helped him learn everything he could about the team. During Schonie's two years as president of the Pro Football Writers Association, he fought tirelessly for better access to players and practice - which translates directly to fighting for the best interest of fans.
He was the best of both worlds: consumed with doing his job well, consumed with helping others do theirs.
"For the older players who have been around, Schonie was that little gnat who was flying around telling you all the information," Cardinals quarterback Jake Plummer said. "It became a nuisance sometimes, but you looked forward to it.
"For the vets who know what he brought to this organization, what he brought to his job and what he brought to the writers not only around the state but the country, it's a definite big loss. As players, we're going to miss him."
When a player talks about a writer that way, you know he was something special.
 
DIRTY DOZEN: The top six and bottom six teams in the NFL on current level of play:
1, Tennessee (6-1). Gritty, not pretty.
2, Oakland (6-1). Legitimate contender.
3, Minnesota (7-0). As long as Culpepper and Moss keep making plays.
4, St. Louis. (6-1). Can Bud Carson do anything about the defense?
5, Washington (6-2). Why does Daniel Snyder think he needs noise? His team is good enough to win without it.
6, New York Jets (6-1). Don't touch that remote, even if they're down big.
 
26, Cincinnati (1-6). Might win a few more.
27, Jacksonville (2-5). Tom Coughlin seems to be blaming everyone but Tom Coughlin.
28, Atlanta (2-6). A lot of injuries, but just not very good.
29, Arizona (2-5). Dave McGinnis can't upgrade the talent.
30, Chicago (1-7). Cade McNown's education set back by injury.
31, Cleveland and San Diego (tie). The Browns may go from 2-1 to 2-14. The Chargers will win some day.
End Advance for Oct. 28-29
 Load-Date: October 30, 2000

 

End of Document
