

Former judge on the lam: 'I want to die on the side of the law'
September 13, 1997, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 386 words
Byline: By WOODY BAIRD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEMPHIS, Tenn.
Body




A former judge on the run after being convicted of sexually assaulting five women is begging a federal court to keep him out of jail. But authorities still don't know where he is.
David Lanier of Dyersburg included his plea in a petition mailed to the U.S. 6th Circuit Court of Appeals: "If you do not reconsider your order to put me back in prison, my blood will be on your hands."
As he has since before his conviction in Memphis five years ago, Lanier claimed he is the victim of political enemies, vengeful women and overzealous prosecutors.
"At 62 years of age, I may have only a few months or years to live … I want to die on the side of law and order and not as a fugitive," said Lanier, asking the court to reduce his sentence.
The appeals court set Lanier free in 1995 after he had served two years of a 25-year sentence. But the the U.S. Supreme Court said the appeals court ruling was a mistake and ordered the case reconsidered.
The appeals court ordered Lanier to return to prison on Aug. 22, but he missed the deadline and a warrant was issued for his arrest.
Since then, the 6th Circuit has dismissed an appeal filed by Lanier, saying the case can be reopened only if he proves it was not his fault for failing to meet the arrest deadline.
Tommy Thompson, a deputy U.S. marshal, said Lanier's petition was mailed in Dallas. A post office box in Dyersburg, 80 miles north of Memphis, was listed as the return address.
"He either just drove to Dallas to mail it or somebody who we probably don't know about, he had them mail it," Thompson said Friday. "He's definitely on the run."
In his petition, Lanier said federal agents "coached, rehearsed, paid, wined and drugged, had sex with" women who gave evidence against him.
The women had legal matters before Lanier or worked at his courthouse. They said he fondled them and repeatedly pressured them for sex. One victim with a child custody case before Lanier was twice forced to perform oral sex on the judge.
Lanier was convicted under an 1874 civil rights law generally used against police officers, prison guards or others who have direct custody of their victims. Lanier was the first judge convicted under that law.
He has argued that he had no official control over his accusers, so his acts could not have occurred "under color of law" as the statute requires.
 Load-Date: September 13, 1997

 

End of Document
