

From the Mekong to the Potomac, the rise of a Green Beret
July 18, 1997, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 748 words
Byline: By JOHN DIAMOND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




His first combat assignment as a young first lieutenant took Henry H. Shelton into the swamps of the Mekong River Delta, where land mines, poison-tipped pikes and ambushes kept a patrol of Green Berets on alert.
Now Shelton, a four-star Army general, moves to another river basin - the Potomac - as President Clinton's choice for the nation's highest-ranking military officer, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Old comrades and defense experts say his Vietnam experiences will serve him well in Washington as Clinton's top military adviser.
There are no poison-tipped pikes at the Pentagon. But there are plenty of other hazards ahead, not the least of which is Senate confirmation. There are also such touchy issues as women in the military, the always-delicate relationship with members of Congress, and the problem of dealing with the ever-increasing number of small-scale trouble spots such as Haiti, Bosnia and Somalia.
"One of his strong suits in being named chairman may well have been the fact that he indeed comes from a branch of the Army that was created in the 1960s precisely with the idea of low-intensity conflict," said retired Army Col. Kenneth Allard, a defense consultant with Washington's Center for Strategic and International Studies.
It might not seem so to look at Shelton's combat record, his craggy face or his six-foot-five frame, but low-intensity might well describe his leadership style dating back to his first days as one of the Army's elite Green Berets.
"I never, in all the time at Fort Lewis or Fort Drum, never saw him lose his temper, lose his cool," said retired Army Gen. Bill Carpenter, who was Shelton's superior in several key command assignments during the 1980s.
Similar words come from Sgt. Maj. Johnny Kitchens, who worked under Shelton at Fort Bragg, N.C., when Shelton commanded the 18th Airborne Corps: "He would say things and things would happen, and they would happen very quickly," Kitchens said. "I never heard him raise his voice, and he didn't have to."
As a patrol leader with the newly formed Green Berets in Vietnam, Shelton quickly developed a reputation as a commander who remained calm under fire, including the day in 1967 when, assaulting a Viet Cong position, Shelton stepped on a booby trap and had his leg pierced by one of those poison-tipped "pungee sticks."
Shelton spent more than a year in the Mekong, much of it so far behind enemy lines that friendly artillery support was out of reach.
In 1969 he was back as a company commander, patrolling contested territory in Vietnam's Central Highlands, this time seeking to gain political support from local village elders - the kind of negotiating skills he may find useful in Washington.
"We went out into the local villages that were primarily controlled by the Viet Cong," Shelton told the Fayetteville Observer-Times in a 1992 interview. "You attempted to sway them, persuade them that they should be loyal to the South Vietnamese government, and convince them that the Americans were in fact there to assist and help in any way they could as well as provide security for their villages."
By the early 1990s, as commander of the 82nd Airborne Division, Shelton ushered the first woman into a battalion commander's position. Later he oversaw barracks renovations to help ease the transition to a male-female force.
In 1991, Shelton led the largest airborne helicopter assault in Army history during the Persian Gulf War.
He was in charge of the U.S. military operation in Haiti in 1994, and at the end of 1995 Clinton tapped Shelton for the four-star post of Special Operations Commander, a multi-service position that put him in charge of Green Berets, Black Berets, Navy SEALS and an array of other elite forces.
"He is what we commonly referred to as a rucksack-carrying guy," said retired Gen. Michael Healy, a fellow Green Beret in Vietnam. "We're lucky to have him."
The final mission order came Thursday in the White House Rose Garden, where Clinton praised Shelton as a soldier's soldier, and Shelton, who grew up in North Carolina's tobacco country, the son of a farmer and a school teacher, accepted the president's nomination - the first Green Beret so honored.
"With this honor comes the awesome responsibility of ensuring that our armed forces remain trained, ready and equipped to deal with the threats and dangers of today, as well as an uncertain future," the 55-year-old Shelton said. "This is a responsibility that I accept without hesitation or reservation."
 Load-Date: July 18, 1997

 

End of Document
