

George Carlin, Nihilist, Rooting for the End of the World
March 29, 1996, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1156 words
Byline: By DOUGLAS J. ROWE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




To hear George Carlin talk, it sounds as if he's going by the book. Yeah, the book titled "Being and Nothingness."
Sartre aside, Carlin matter-of-factly discusses how his "being" feeds on the world staggering, as he sees it, toward its end.
And he begins with topical humor. "Which I don't do. And never have," he says. "I don't do anything about Clinton or those kind of people."
Instead, he likes to focus on topics that "have a certain timeliness." So on his ninth HBO special that airs 10 p.m. Saturday, Carlin opens with nine minutes on abortion, then he segues into the sanctity of life, capital punishment and prison farms.
"I don't like wasting the effort it takes to write good material to throw something away six months or six weeks or six DAYS later," says Carlin, who thinks topical humor can sound strained.
"This is my art; this is what I do to be in the world. … I have huge files of ideas and notes," says Carlin, wearing a blue cableknit sweater, blue jeans and New Balance 1600 running shoes during an interview in a midtown Manhattan hotel suite. "It's just that I take it all very seriously and, you know, I work hard on these things. And I like them to really represent my point of view and my attitude.
"Which is pretty nihilistic."
And what exactly does he believe in? Not much.
"I don't believe in this species. I don't believe in this culture or this nation. I have no religion. I'm not a joiner. I don't believe in groups," he says. But, he adds, "I think individuals are wonderful. I have great respect for every person I meet. Each one shows me some new part of the universe. But as soon they get into groups, they begin to lose their beauty; they surrender it for the sake of the groups.
"So I root for the end of civilization. … I root for the end of everything and I enjoy watching it decline. So now that I have that freedom - I only discovered this five years ago - and now that I have that distance, that emotional distance from the process, I really am free to see it from a different angle."
To longtime fans, the 58-year-old Carlin may sound as though he's naturally progressing from his early 1970s transformation, when he grew the ponytail and beard and turned to anti-Establishment routines about drugs and dirty words.
His "Seven Words You Can Never Use on Television" got him arrested in Milwaukee in 1972 and led to a landmark Supreme Court ruling upholding an FCC ban on "offensive" material during hours children might be listening.
It also may seem like a natural progression from a decade earlier. Carlin - then teamed with Jack Burns - drew the interest and encouragement of Lenny Bruce, a mentor whom Carlin remembers as "the immortal enemy of cant and hypocrisy and pseudoliberalism, which is just another form of hypocrisy."
In between, Carlin had a buttoned-down stand-up persona that got him on shows like Ed Sullivan's.
And through it all he's managed to keep a foothold in the mainstream. Two of his comedy albums have won Grammys (1972's "FM & AM" and 1992's "Jammin' in New York") and several others have been nominated. He served as host of the first "Saturday Night Live," subbed on "The Tonight Show" when Johnny Carson was host, and appeared in the movies "Outrageous Fortune," "Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventure" and "The Prince of Tides." In 1991, he even joined the cast of the PBS children's show "Shining Time Station."
Of course, the diminutive Mr. Conductor isn't what comes immediately to mind when you think of Carlin. It's the counterculture comic who's so deft at anything-goes assaults on political and personal smugness.
"I think a lot of political comics that you hear sound like they think there's a solution out there," he says during the interview. "I think if you think there's a solution, you're part of the problem. They really think that something can be done.
"You can hear it in what they say. There's an implicit tone. There's something that says, 'If only we did this; if only we did that … things would be better ...'
"I think every time you try to fix something, you make three things worse. Not only politicians. I mean social engineers. Real engineers. Everybody. They dam up a river and they create five other problems.
"It's funny to me. It's amusing. It's a circus. It's fun. I love watching it disintegrate."
So how can such a nattering, nihilistic nabob be so appealing?
"I'm presold to my audience," he says. Few people venture into his shows without knowing who he is or how he sees things.
"Anyway, I think what people do for comedians is to suspend their loyalties while they're watching the person," he says.
Even at that, a few people walk out during his abortion routine.
"Which I'm glad of," he says. "That means I'm doing it correctly."
Still, he sees what he does as pretty harmless. "It doesn't really injure the target. It just sort of bruises it a little bit," he says.
"I'd rather attack something than advocate something. I think a comedian has an obligation to find out where the line is drawn and deliberately step across it. And then make the audience happy that you did. You have to drag them over the line with you and make them glad to be there. Then you're really doing your job."
Carlin still does observational humor, including the squishiness of the English language.
"No one one is happy calling something what it is anymore," he says. "They seem minor. They don't seem very important. But taken as a whole, they indicate to me that people aren't very happy with reality and they have to distance themselves with this soft language from harshness."
And with lot of it, he says, especially involving big business or bureaucracies, "the intention is to mislead - which, of course, means to lie. Mislead is another euphemism."
And it's even worse now than it was two or three decades ago, he says.
"This whole thing of 'downsizing.' There are probably 20 different euphemisms now for 'fired' or 'laid off.' What an emotionally neutral word! And that's why they use it. They use it to detach from feelings."
Carlin, who still does about 150 shows a year, is aiming to do 10 HBO specials, which he hopes to achieve by doing one in 1998. Then in 2000 he thinks he'll be ready for a Broadway show, which will not only include standup but also some characters, and it will be somewhat autobiographical.
"Comedy was always my way of being in the world. As a kid. On the stoop. I used to stand and do routines, 10- 15- 20-minute routines about my neighborhood, about people who lived in my neighborhood for the other guys," says Carlin, who grew up in upper Manhattan's Morningside Heights section.
Carlin was 2 when his father died. His mother then went to work as an executive secretary to support him and his older brother, Pat.
He dropped out in sophomore year, and while in school, he was, as one of his albums is titled, the "Class Clown."
"I always felt as long as I'm not going to get an education, well, I may as well interfere with these other people."
 Load-Date: March 29, 1996

 

End of Document
