

Glickman says Forest Service chief the chief, but he's the boss
March 20, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 467 words
Byline: By SCOTT SONNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman butted heads Thursday with congressional Republicans who have been accusing the Clinton administration of playing politics with logging policies.
In what was billed as the first such appearance in a quarter-century, Glickman went before the House Appropriations subcommittee on the interior and rejected charges that high-level administrators like himself are inappropriately meddling in the Forest Service's day-to-day decision making.
"This is not some separate organization," he said of the Forest Service, largest of the USDA agencies under the authority of the secretary. "To some extent the last 40 to 50 years it has tended to operate as a separate entity.
"The chief is the head of the Forest Service, not the secretary of agriculture," Glickman told the panel. But while the chief makes day-to-day decisions, Glickman said he is the one responsible for administering policy.
"That's why you have elections. That's why you have administrations," Glickman said, adding that he would continue to carry out policies that emphasize protection of wildlife habitat as well as timber production on national forests.
The agriculture secretary routinely appears before the House Agriculture Committee and House Appropriations subcommittee on agriculture.
But Rep. Ralph Regula, R-Ohio, chairman of the interior subcommittee, which sets budgets for the Interior Department and Forest Service, said it was the first time in his 23 years on the panel that an agriculture secretary had testified there.
Glickman said much of the recent disagreement over logging policy centers around the "salvage timber rider" that Congress approved and President Clinton signed into law two years ago.
Industry backers said the temporary measure was necessary to cull fire-prone forests of dead and dying trees, waiving the usual wildlife protections so as to accelerate harvests. Environmentalists said it was an attempt to log live green trees under the guise of improving forest health.
"We've been through a very tough period of time," Glickman told the panel. He said publicity over the salvage operations turned the public against the Forest Service.
"It actually turned the words 'forest health' into dirty words," he said.
Rep. Charles Taylor, R-N.C., a chief author of the salvage rider, said it was only because of the legislation that the Forest Service had made any significant attempt to reduce the threat of catastrophic fires.
"It was the first time this administration has stopped pandering to the politically correct set and did something about forest health," he said.
Taylor said the administration was guilty of "falsifying statements to this committee" when officials committed to carrying out the salvage rider, then stopped it weeks short of the termination date of Dec. 31, 1996.
 Load-Date: March 20, 1997

 

End of Document
