

Gore and Kemp: The Understudies Make the Case
October 25, 1996, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 909 words
Byline: By JEANNINE AVERSA and DARLENE SUPERVILLE, Associated Press Writers
Body




They're the understudies - one trying to help his boss keep the presidency, one trying to help his man take it away. And both have an eye on the top job in 2000.
Here's what it's like on the campaign trail with Al Gore and Jack Kemp as the 1996 race nears its climax.
 
 On a late-night ride home after a tony charity event in New York City, Al Gore strides to the back of his campaign plane in white tie and tails. Using a makeshift baton of aluminium foil, he pretends to conduct a symphony.
Away from the camera's glare, the vice president is not the stuffy figure seen on television.
In public, Gore relishes his rigidness, consistently winning hearty applause every time he delivers one of his self-effacing jokes: How can you tell Al Gore from a room of Secret Service agents? He's the stiff one.
The stiff jokes, his stock-still version of the Macarena - "Want to see me do it again?" - win him the most applause. But his description of President Clinton's second-term educational policies, including tax credits and wiring the nation's schools to the Internet, draw loud approval, too.
Gore echoes, or reinforces, the president through both his campaign speeches and through his travel. The president and the vice president often use many of the same phrases to talk about key issues, including the economy, education, environmental protection, health care and crime.
Clinton and Gore also travel to many of the same places, at different times.
If there's an attack to be made, it's more likely to come from Gore than the president. In Wisconsin on Thursday, he won applause from a teachers union by telling them that Clinton wanted to keep tobacco ads away from kids while Dole was waffling about whether nicotine was addictive.
It doesn't always go that well. In the Watts neighborhood of Los Angeles this week, the crowd made up mostly of high school students talked through much of his stump speech. They were disappointed that Magic Johnson and Kareem Abdul Jabbar didn't show up. Gore didn't pick up on the fact that he'd lost his audience and just plowed through his speech.
But he's grown as a political speaker. He shows a sense of humor and uses his voice - though not much of his body - to convey emotion.
Talking to a Hispanic crowd, he'll call up the Spanish he learned as a young man who lived a semester with a family in Mexico. "Promisa hecha, promisa completa" - a promise made, a promise kept - he said of Clinton's pledge to turn around the economy and speed up U.S. citizenship applications.
He sometimes shows a softer side of himself. In Orlando, Fla., two school children read to him from a book. But one of them had trouble pronouncing the word "peculiar." Gore helped her to sound it, seeming more like the father he is than a vice president and political candidate.
In a rope line, he playfully squeezed a baby's unbooted foot.
On a recent plane ride, Gore helped a TV sound man make a 40th wedding anniversary video as a present for his parents.
 
Jack Kemp's job is to sell the nation on Bob Dole and on Dole's 15 percent tax-cut proposal. The first part is new; the second is something he's been doing for a political lifetime.
With a passion for tax cuts rarely seen in other candidates, Kemp tirelessly explains his message that cutting tax rates is good for the economy because it encourages growth, which in turn increases revenue.
Kemp reacts strongly to Democrats' arguments that the $ 548 billion tax plan is "risky" by accusing them of caring little about the poor and downtrodden who have depended on their party for decades.
"They've abandoned the people who don't have any ownership, who don't own stock in America, who've yet to have their shot at the American dream," Kemp said at a recent rally in Cincinnati.
Indeed, he gives the same speech everywhere - whether at a soul-food restaurant in Harlem or a beverage distributorship in Billings, Mont.
He sprinkles in references and quotations from the Bible and Martin Luther King Jr., from Abraham Lincoln, Jesse Jackson and Winston Churchill.
His best applause lines are almost always about President Clinton. A favorite since the vice presidential debate, repeated Thursday at a rally in Las Cruces, N.M., concerns an Al Gore quotation about the president.
"Al Gore said Bill Clinton is doing the best he can. That's the trouble. It's not good enough."
Despite his billing as the Republican who would attract blacks to the party, just a handful of his campaign events over the past two months have been geared toward predominantly minority audiences.
The crowds who come to his events are mostly white. They have become larger and more enthusiastic in recent weeks, with the biggest a crowd of about 2,000 at one stop along a Tennessee bus tour.
He has visited a mix of big cities and out-of-the-way towns, staying in hotels ranging from the luxurious Don Cesar Hotel in St. Petersburg, Fla., to the Budgetel in Bowling Green, Ky.
Kemp often stands in the middle of his audience, in his dress shirt, with a wireless microphone attached to his tie.
The former quarterback always gets a laugh with a line about his move into politics.
"In 13 years in the NFL and the AFL, I broke both ankles, both shoulders, my right knee, my right passing hand and had 11 concussions," he says. "Nothing left to do but run for Congress."
When crowds begin to boo at the mention of Clinton or the media, Kemp also prompts laughter by raising his arms and saying, "No booing. This is not a football game."
 Load-Date: October 25, 1996

 

End of Document
