

Gore: GOP is for the powerful, Democrats are for the people
The Associated Press
August 4, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 828 words
Byline: By SANDRA SOBIERAJ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




Al Gore bounded back onto the campaign trail Friday and, in the unconditional embrace of 3,400 union firefighters, mocked the Republican National Convention as a special-interests-sponsored sham. "This is Day One of the fight for working families," he declared.
With his debut of a retooled stump speech before the first union that endorsed him, the Democratic presidential candidate ended a vacation week in the shadow of rival George W. Bush and his just-finished GOP convention.
The new speech, a mix of biting criticism and warm biography, emphasized his Army service in Vietnam and his family. "I also want the American people to know me for who I am," Gore said.
Bush, who did not serve in Vietnam and whose father is the former President Bush, represents "the faded days and rusted ways of the old guard," Gore said.
The vice president derided the confetti and fireworks of the GOP convention that concluded Thursday night, saying they could not mask Bush's allegiance to "special interests."
"Behind the flashing video wall is an agenda of rising gas prices and smog-filled skies that is of Big Oil, by Big Oil, and for Big Oil," Gore said.
"They're for the powerful and we're for the people," Gore said, trying out a new refrain. He said his priorities are a "patient's bill of rights," public schools, universal health coverage for children and a prescription-drug Medicare benefit.
Gore, who continued to dangle the possibility of a "wild card" running mate, was trying to create some drama and deflate any bounce in the polls that Bush might gain from his convention.
Already, the bipartisan Voter.com-Battleground poll found that Bush had, during the GOP gathering in Philadelphia, surged to 18 points ahead of Al Gore among independents and 6 points ahead among women - two groups that had previously been about evenly split between the two candidates.
Through careful stagecraft, the Gore campaign tried to assure Friday that his return to the trail after his North Carolina beach hiatus played well for news cameras.
The International Association of Fire Fighters, which endorsed Gore in January 1999 and has since plumped up his campaign crowds, provided an enthusiastic backdrop.
The city of Chicago, run by Democratic Mayor Richard Daley, who is also the brother of Gore campaign chairman William Daley, shut down Columbus Drive so that Gore, wife Tipper, daughter Sarah and some 250 yellow-shirted firefighters could march like a conquering army over a downtown bridge.
A fire department boat in the Chicago River below blasted four water cannons to complete the scene. No crowds lined the shut-down sidewalks - only two dozen reporters. The candidate knelt to pose with a Dalmatian before a red fire engine.
Meanwhile, Gore kept up the guessing game on who his running mate will be. The list of contenders is "six, plus an out-of-the-box possibility" who has, he assured reporters, been thoroughly vetted.
Of those six, a knowledgeable Democrat said the leading prospects are all from the Senate: Evan Bayh of Indiana, John Edwards of North Carolina, John Kerry of Massachusetts and Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut.
House Democratic leader Dick Gephardt and New Hampshire Gov. Jeanne Shaheen are also on Gore's short list.
The Democrats will give Gore the nomination at their Aug. 14-17 convention in Los Angeles. In a gesture of party unity, aides to Gore's primary opponent, Bill Bradley, said the former senator has invited Gore campaign chairman Daley to speak at a convention rally of the 300-plus delegates that Bradley won in the primaries.
Noting Los Angeles was also "where President John F. Kennedy was nominated," Gore said he would use his acceptance speech to talk about "eight great years of prosperity and progress" during his tenure with President Clinton.
In addition, Gore said, "I'll be talking about the new heights America can reach if we stay on the right track and make the right choices today."
He flung back at GOP running mate Dick Cheney his "It's time for them to go" convention refrain - the same line Gore used against the elder George Bush in 1992.
"Let me tell you what time it's not," Gore said. "It is not recession time in America like it was back in 1992."
Bush spokesman Dan Bartlett accused Gore of "resorting to focusing on what he's against in Governor Bush."
After giving a similar pitch to the National Association of Letter Carriers, also convened in Chicago, Gore returned to Washington on Friday night for two Democratic National Committee fund-raisers.
At the first event, at a private home in the Washington suburb of Alexandria, Va., Gore drew a sharp contrast with Bush over abortion, saying he was concerned that Bush might have the opportunity to name as many as four Supreme Court justices, who in turn might seek to overturn the Roe vs. Wade decision legalizing abortion.
"I will defend a woman's right to choose," he declared.
On Saturday, he launches a three-week tour that will take him to the convention and beyond.
 Load-Date: August 5, 2000

 

End of Document
