

Gore, his life's work on the line, tells voters 'you have the power'
November 5, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 905 words
Byline: By SANDRA SOBIERAJ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




Al Gore, preparing for this moment for most of his years, placed his life's work on the line - two decades in government, passion for the environment, fight-to-win tenacity - and surrendered his future Sunday to the voters.
"You have the votes, you have the power," the Democratic vice president told worshippers.
Gore, a worker bee whose approach to problem-solving amounts to study and attack and attack and attack, appeared exhausted as he scrambled to two Philadelphia church services and two diners all before noon.
"I'm asking not only for your vote but for your enthusiasm," Gore said at the Morris Brown A.M.E. Church, reflecting a worry that he hasn't excited Democrats the way President Clinton does.
"I won't always be the most exciting politician," Gore conceded beneath the browning trees outside Philadelphia's Memorial Hall, " … but I will work hard for you every day and I will never let you down and I'll fight for you with all my heart."
Even as Gore tried to outwork Republican George W. Bush by announcing a nonstop 30-hour finish - "after my opponent's gone to bed," he boasted - Gore sounded resigned to the fact that he had reached a point where he could no longer control his fate through superior smarts and stubbornly hard work.
"For everything there is a season, and this is the season for voting," said the senator's son who ran for president and lost once before.
Gore's self-test of endurance in a marathon finish that will concentrate on Florida, Michigan and Missouri matched his most passionate campaign promise:
"I'll work my heart out to give your children a healthier, safer, more prosperous world … we will protect this Earth God gave us and create the America of our highest ideals."
Gore, 52, has been here before.
At the age of 39, just three years after the 8-year Tennessee congressman followed his father's path into the U.S. Senate, Gore made a bid for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination. His inexperience showed and, after bowing out, he undertook a systematic study of his mistakes.
In 1992, he settled for second best, accepting Bill Clinton's invitation to be running mate. Over eight years, Gore proved one of the nation's most influential vice presidents in history. He shepherded environmental policy, U.S.-Russia relations and government downsizing. White House insiders have long credited his tenacity and fiscal conservatism with pushing Clinton into balancing the federal budget.
Clinton's anointed successor, Gore had early - if not energized - backing from the Democratic Party establishment. Still, former senator and pro-basketball hero Bill Bradley mounted a vigorous challenge for the nomination, asking the same questions about Gore's truthfulness that Bush asks today.
Gore gambled his political future when he stood by Clinton through the Monica Lewinsky scandal. That, Gore's tendency to overplay his importance, and his questionable campaign fund raising in 1996 shadow Gore still. He says he learned his lesson on corruption in campaign finance and will make stricter regulation the first domestic legislation he sends to Congress.
Not given much credit for the economy's current strength, Gore told voters this weekend he can do even better:
"We've had some success creating new jobs, but we've got a long way to go."
"Yeah, the era of big government is over, but the era of smaller, smarter government is about to begin."
Speaking to crowds in Dearborn, Mich. and later in a Milwaukee airport hangar Sunday night, Gore said Tuesday offers a choice. "We can head toward more prosperity and include everyone," or, with Bush's proposed $1.3 trillion tax cut, "go back to the kinds of policies that we had during the Bush-Quayle era."
"But you know as I do that back in those years, we had record deficits and record debt."
After months of playing down his resume under the "Washington insider" label given him by Bush, Gore wore experience in these final days as his most compelling qualification for the Oval Office.
"The presidency is not a personality contest. It is a day-by-day fight" against special interests, he told one Wisconsin crowd. Laying out his priorities - universal child health insurance, public school improvements, pollution reduction and a Medicare benefit for prescription drugs - Gore, added:
"Makes a difference if you have somebody who has the experience to win those battles for you."
Though Gore grew up straddling Washington's power circle and the middle Tennessee farm his mother still calls home, he was not blessed with Clinton's - or his own late father's - natural gift for political theater.
Again, Gore compensated with doggedness. Calling the race a "job interview," he held dozens of open meetings with undecided primary and general-election voters. He has promised to continue such forums if elected.
As one family member put it Sunday, Gore is "ready and chomping at the bit" to do the nation's top job. The senator's son and Clinton understudy hinted as much late last week, when he accepted a specially made jersey from the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
"I used to get all these jerseys with No. 2 on them," he said with a laugh. "It's nice to get No. 1."
Asked at the start of his homestretch blur whether this was his last shot, Gore, who previously said he would probably be a writer "of some sort" if he loses, would not give in to sentimentality.
"Well," he deadpanned, "I haven't made a decision on whether or not to run for re-election in 2004."
 Load-Date: November 6, 2000

 

End of Document
