

Hail to the chief of 'The West Wing' - Martin Sheen
The Associated Press
May 5, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 928 words
Byline: By FRAZIER MOORE, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Martin Sheen got the hang of being president pretty quick.
A year ago, he was shooting the final scene for the pilot episode of "The West Wing," NBC's White House drama in which he stars as President Josiah Bartlet. The president is in the Oval Office on a grueling day that seems to be nearing its end. But then he calls out to his always-within-earshot secretary, "Mrs. Landingham! What's next?"
"The first take I said it with a kind of dread," Sheen recalls. "Like, 'Omigod, I can't imagine what's going to fall out of her face now."'
Aaron Sorkin, who created the series and wrote the script, dashed up to Sheen.
"He said, 'No, no, no! Bartlet LOVES being president! He LOVES the pain! He hates to go to bed, he can't wait to get up in the morning! You've got to ENJOY every part of this job!'
"And I thought, 'Omigod, yes!' And that was it. That was when I found it."
Ever since, the presidency has been in very good hands, at least where "The West Wing" is concerned. With Sheen presiding over a splendid ensemble that includes Richard Schiff, Rob Lowe, John Spencer and Allison Janney, the Bartlet administration resonates with heart, drive and brainy banter.
"It's about a group of people who serve a president and believe in his agenda," says Sheen during a recent visit to Manhattan. "But it's not a bully pulpit. The opposition voice is always, always heard.
"And we don't always win. Most of the time," he says with a knowing smile, "we get our butts kicked."
In the Bartlet White House, setbacks and missteps are a way of life. Even supporters of this liberal Democrat (a New Hampshire-bred hybrid of Bill Clinton and John Kennedy, Jimmy Carter and Harry Truman) are on his case, complaining that his "Practical Idealism" agenda isn't liberal and Democratic enough. His approval rating, low since he squeaked into office, has now sunk to 42 percent.
On the other hand, "The West Wing" (which airs Wednesday at 9 p.m. Eastern) is a solid Nielsen winner, a critical favorite and, in just its first season, it captured a prestigious Peabody Award.
What's more, its star LOVES his job.
"He's having more fun than a kid with a refrigerator carton," says Aaron Sorkin, speaking from the series' Los Angeles home base.
Sorkin needs only to point to the night Sheen delivered a rousing speech to a banquet room filled with gussied-up extras - for 11 heady takes. "He kept saying, 'Let's do it one more time."'
"I am the acting president," Sheen declares, his ain't-it-grand grin fully deployed. "I'm having the time of my life, if the truth be known."
It could give a guy notions. In an era when actors and politicos thrive as members of a single super-race, Sheen could be forgiven if he pondered being president for real. Arrested dozens of times during political protests, he clearly has feelings about social reform.
"I'm a pacifist!" he scoffs. "There's no chance in hell that I would ever be in the White House. The Republic is safe.
"Besides, I'm not interested in politics per se. I'm very interested in social justice. I don't really believe that many politicians are changing the world. Civil rights, labor unions, the peace movement: private citizens taking personal responsibility and going public. That's when things happen."
So it's a bit ironic (is it not?) that Sheen is playing the world's preeminent pol.
"Yeah," Sheen agrees. "But 'play' is the key word."
Nonetheless, he admits to chafing when Bartlet makes a choice he disagrees with. For instance, in one powerful episode, the president came face-to-face with the death penalty and refused to commute an execution.
"He had the chance to save a guy's life," says Sheen almost accusingly. "He knew it was sinful - to kill anyone is sinful - and out of political expedience, he chose not to save him."
But not without remorse. In the final scene, Bartlet receives his boyhood priest in the Oval Office, who gives him a stern talking to, then hears his confession.
"Our president on 'The West Wing' is not Catholic by accident," says Sheen. "We added that (element) so that he would have a moral frame of reference, and take personal responsibility for sin."
Whatever his failings, then, Bartlet is a righteous man. For a show that prides itself on authenticity, this might strike some viewers as a fanciful break with Bartlet's real-life counterpart.
The Clinton White House has been a source of inspiration for Sorkin and "The West Wing," which even hired former press secretary Dee Dee Myers as one of its consultants. Sheen calls the president "a hero of mine" and freely admits to modeling some facets of his performance on Clinton.
Even so, Bartlet keeps his mitts off the interns. And he, unlike a former chief executive, would certainly frown on bugging the opposing party's headquarters, then lying about it. Without the prospect of impeachment as a story line, just how authentic can a White House drama be?
Authentic enough, say real West Wing staffers. "They love the show," Sheen reports. "The only thing they complain about is our wardrobe. On their salaries, they could never afford those clothes."
Elsewhere in television …
OHH-LA-LA: In France, to live well is to eat well. But how do the French, who eat more fat and drink more wine than almost any other people in the world, manage to have lower rates of obesity and heart disease? Correspondent Dr. Bob Arnot investigates this intriguing French paradox, and reports on new research that shows Americans might be worrying themselves fat. It airs on "Dateline NBC" Tuesday at 10 p.m. Eastern.
EDITOR'S NOTE - Frazier Moore can be reached at fmoore "at" ap.org
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY384 of May 5
 Load-Date: May 9, 2000

 

End of Document
