

Hard times in the Delta; "Kissing the devil to survive"
December 14, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 871 words
Byline: By PAISLEY DODDS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WATSON, Ark.
Body




Sitting on a couch draped with a soiled American flag, 82-year-old Jeanie Branch clutched a green fly swatter in one hand and a stack of unpaid bills in the other.
"This ain't no living," he said, looking through the window at his crops wilting in the heat. "Poor people in the Delta kiss the devil to survive."
His tiny house in Desha County, in the heart of Arkansas farm country along the Mississippi, has one 60-watt light bulb and no indoor plumbing. It is littered with cans of Spam and boxes of saltines. It has been more than four years since the county laid gravel on his road. On rainy days, Branch has to wait until the dirt dries before he can take his wife to the doctor. It has been more than four years since the county laid gravel on it.
Here in President Clinton's state, the poorest after neighboring Mississippi, Branch ekes out a living from 73 acres of soybean and cotton crops. He inherited most of the land from his sister, but he sharecrops about 13 acres to boost his yields. He clears less than $ 8,000 in a good year, an average income in many parts of the Delta.
The Delta, defined as a cultural and geographic region of white farmers and poor blacks, stretches along both sides of the Mississippi River from Tennessee and Arkansas to Mississippi and Louisiana.
Covering roughly one-third of Arkansas, it once had sprawling plantations and abundant farm jobs. It was where blues greats such as Luther Allison, Billy Lee Riley and Sonny Boy Williamson got their start.
But floods, mechanization and the Depression combined to force a mass exodus of blacks to the North in the 1920s.
Now the Delta is an area of shacks and rutted roads, trapped in a cultural vacuum and a bleak economic outlook. Many farm jobs have dried up. Few companies want to invest here. And for some people, the solution is to follow their ancestors north to places like Chicago and Detroit. Desha County's population is down 7.6 percent since 1990. Mississippi County's is down 12 percent.
"Everybody always talks about the Delta, but no one does anything about it," Gov. Mike Huckabee says. "To a large degree, it's a forgotten place. It's still a lucrative agricultural hub, but the key to turning things around has got to be in getting businesses to invest there."
Some companies, like Frito-Lay, have come in, but few have offered the jackpot of jobs found in the rest of the state.
Northwest Arkansas is home to a number of international companies. Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and Tyson Foods set up headquarters in an area that now has good roads, an airport, high property values and a growing population. Others, like Hudson Foods and the J.B. Hunt and Jones trucking lines, followed, the Arkansas Economic Development Commission said.
But the Delta lacks what big companies need: an interstate, an airport and quality workers, commission spokeswoman Kay Stebbins says.
For Darlene Blackman, 28, getting by is difficult in Desha (pronounced de-SHAY) where only about 57 percent of the county's residents finish high school, and about 10 percent have college degrees, according to state figures. In metropolitan Pulaski County, by contrast, 79 percent have high school diplomas and more than 23 percent have a bachelor's degree or higher.
"Things are getting worse here," Blackman says. "There aren't any jobs, there's nothing to do and there are no stores."
Blackman works part-time at a glove factory, making $ 125 a week for herself and four children.
The unemployment in her county is 8.5 percent, compared with the state average of 5.8 percent, state figures show. In Benton County, where Wal-Mart and Hudson are based, unemployment is just 3 percent.
June Grundy, 30, an Army veteran, plans to leave the Delta and look for work elsewhere. Even with his experience as an Army cook, he is unemployed, except for odd jobs he does for his uncle.
"I don't like what I see here anymore. The roads are potholed, we pay for them to spray for mosquitoes but they never do, and the government just doesn't do anything about it," he says.
The state sees two ways to tackle the problem: attract investment and revamp welfare.
Last year, Arkansas spent nearly $ 16 million on welfare for 10,000 families in the Delta - more than anywhere else in the state.
But with the federal welfare reforms, recipients will have to find a job, be in job training within two years or lose their benefits.
In some parts of the Delta, a large portion of the economy is public assistance, such as service jobs that support government relief programs, according to Tom Dalton, the state's new head of welfare reform.
"That's a very dangerous trap that's hard to come out of," he says.
A woman with three children on welfare can collect $ 204 a month and another $ 294 in food stamps, according to Dalton.
"The gamble with the new system is that eventually she could make more than what she gets on welfare," he says. "She just has to try."
However, more working mothers means greater demand for child care, which is scarce in the Delta.
"In a way, what we are doing is forcing the family breakdown," says Dalton.
Churches and businesses can help, he says. "But in some cases, workers may be forced to leave the Delta and move to other parts of the state."
End Adv for Sunday Dec. 14
 Load-Date: December 14, 1997

 

End of Document
