

Hard times for the tobacco settlement and the tax code, and a boost for the yen
The Associated Press
June 21, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 829 words
Byline: By KAREN SCHWARTZ, AP Business Writer
Body




Lawmakers voted to dump the tobacco bill and the tax code, and the Clinton administration propped up the Japanese yen.
A look at what happened in business in a week where Washington stole the headlines:
---
 
 JAPAN ECONOMY:
The United States decided to bolster the Japanese yen by selling dollars in a move intended to ease the deepening financial crisis in Asia.
The coordinated intervention Tuesday by the United States and Japan gave an immediate lift to Japan's currency and the U.S. stock market.
Economists and the Clinton administration had been worried that Japan's falling yen could force China to devalue its currency and set off a chain reaction that could seriously destabilize the global economy.
A top U.S. financial official says the United States is ready to help the yen again if need be, but that Japan must move quickly to clean up its banking system and spur its economy out of its deepest recession in 50 years.
---
 
 UP IN SMOKE:
What a difference a year makes. The landmark tobacco settlement that was reached with state attorneys general last June to curb teen smoking and bring nicotine under FDA regulation was effectively killed by the Senate.
After four weeks of debate, supporters failed on two successive votes to gain the 60 votes needed to keep the bill alive. The first effort fell three votes shy; the second seven.
The bill sponsored by Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., would have charged tobacco companies at least $ 516 billion over 25 years, in part by raising cigarette prices $ 1.10 a pack. It also would have severely curbed the industry's ability to advertise and it would have levied $ 7 billion a year in penalties on the industry if youth smoking did not drop enough to meet targets.
A lot happened since the deal was first proposed June 20, 1997. For one thing, the tobacco industry said Congress went too far in forcing concessions to the original deal. It waged a $ 40 million advertising campaign against the bill.
Republican leaders who derailed the bill predict they will pass a smaller measure to curb teen smoking and drug use this election year.
President Clinton isn't giving up on the larger measure. He has pledged to keep the issue alive in Congress and in this fall's election campaign.
---
 
 TAX TALK:
The House voted 219-209 to eliminate much of the current tax code by 2003, as long as Congress passes a simplified system by July 4, 2002. Social Security payroll taxes would continue.
Republicans viewed the bill as critical leverage toward breaking the long-held gridlock on the debate over overhauling the tax code.
The Clinton administration and Democrats denounced the measure as an irresponsible election-year gimmick that taps into the public's anger with the IRS.
Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin predicted the bill, if it becomes law, would have drastic consequences for the economy. Homebuyers wouldn't know how much to pay for a house because of questions about the future of the mortgage interest deduction. Businesses wouldn't know if they could deduct depreciation for new capital investment.
The two leading GOP tax reform proposals are a 17 percent flat tax, sponsored by House Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas, and a 15 percent national sales tax, sponsored by Rep. Bill Tauzin, R-La.
---
 
 TICKER:
The HMOs Kaiser Permanente, and Aetna U.S. Healthcare say they won't cover patients' costs for Pfizer Inc.'s impotence-treatment drug Viagra because it would be too expensive.
 
 Walt Disney Co.  agreed to pay $ 70 million cash plus its interest in a Web development company for a 43 percent stake in
 
 Infoseek Corp., the nation's seventh-largest search and directory service. … Northern Telcom Ltd.  of Canada is buying Silicon Valley-based Bay Networks for $ 7.1 billion, the first merger joining major producers of voice and data network technology in a single company.
Investor Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Inc.  is buying
 
 General Re for $ 22 billion worth of stock, adding one of the world's leading insurers of insurance companies to its portfolio … Excel Communications Inc.  of Dallas agreed to be acquired for $ 3 billion by Teleglobe Inc.  of Montreal in a deal that would create the fourth-largest provider of long-distance phone service in the United States. … The Justice Department approved Alcoa's $ 3.8 billion acquisition of Alumax Inc.  after Alcoa agreed to sell its aluminum cast plate operations.
The board of Sunbeam Corp.  voted to remove chairman "chain saw" Al Dunlap because of lagging sales and poor stock performance. … McDonald's Corp.  says it will slash 525 jobs, or 23 percent of its headquarters staff, in its first layoffs ever. … Texas Instruments is eliminating 3,500 jobs, nearly 8 percent of its payroll.  … Two strikes at General Motors Corp.  parts plants in Michigan idled or slowed production on 22 GM assembly lines in North America.
 
 Goldman, Sachs & Co.  is ending its 129-year partnership by selling as much as 15 percent of itself to the public.
 
 End advance for weekend editions
 Load-Date: June 21, 1998

 

End of Document
