

Hawaii governor's race: Is the budget in the red or in the black?
The Associated Press
October 23, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: National Political
Length: 655 words
Byline: By BRUCE DUNFORD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WAILUKU, Hawaii
Body




The Democratic governor sees black ink. His Republican challenger sees red.
The disagreement between Gov. Ben Cayetano and Maui Mayor Linda Lingle over Hawaii's bottom line - $ 300 million surplus or $ 500 million deficit? - is at the center of a fight that could represent the GOP's best chance of victory in this state in 36 years.
While the 1990s saw an economic boom across the nation, Hawaii's economy languished, largely a victim of reduced military spending and the Asian financial crisis that curbed tourism, the islands' No. 1 industry with 6 million visitors a year.
Hawaii has seen a record number of bankruptcies through the third quarter of this year, a September unemployment rate of 6.2 percent compared with 4.4 percent nationally and an August visitor total that was 4 percent lower than a year ago.
Voter discontent with the sluggish economy shows in the polls. The latest one gives Lingle a 15-point lead over Cayetano.
One key to Lingle's campaign is what her supporters tout as the "Maui Miracle": The county she governed for nearly eight years remained somewhat immune to the state's economic malaise.
"We created jobs," the 45-year-old Lingle says in a campaign ad.
A walk through this Maui County seat finds mixed evidence. Several storefronts along East Main Street are vacant, their windows grimy and cracked. But less than two miles out of downtown, thousands of shoppers fill the new Kaahumanu Center mall and its 105 stores.
"When you look at Maui County when compared with other counties, we have not suffered like the others," says the Rev. Kenneth Grimes, who operates a marriage company on the island. The lifelong Democrat says he will vote for Lingle.
Lingle says the number of jobs in Maui County increased in five of the last six years - a total of more than 5,000 in all - while the state lost jobs overall. Maui County also kept its tourism strong by spending $ 3 million on promotion, something other counties did not do, she says.
But the Cayetano campaign says a lot of credit for Maui's good fortune goes to Democratic Sen. Daniel Inouye for securing federal funding for a high-technology center and supercomputer and to state House Speaker Joseph Souki and other Maui Democrats for state pork projects.
"What happened on Maui, the so-called 'Maui Miracle,' wasn't totally her effort," Cayetano says.
The 58-year-old Cayetano, the nation's first governor of Filipino ancestry, is seeking his second four-year term. He says there are signs Hawaii's economy is turning around, with the state headed for a $ 300 million surplus.
Lingle counters that the state faces a $ 500 million deficit once all its bills are paid, including pay raises, an infusion into the state pension fund and the debt service on $ 1 billion in construction projects.
"We have a surplus, but you won't admit it. The reason you won't admit it, Mayor Lingle, is because if there is no budget deficit, you have no campaign," Cayetano said during a recent debate.
Lingle turned to the viewers and said: "If you believe like my opponent that the economy is getting better, if you feel your family is better off now than they were before, then your choice is clear."
If the polls are on target, Nov. 3 could bring a big GOP win. Hawaii's last Republican governor left office in 1962.
"My gut instinct at this point, even though my intellect says 'No," is that this may be a real landslide," says Ira Rohter, a political science professor at the University of Hawaii. "I just think we're seeing a sinking ship."
At times, the campaign has been brutal.
Last week, prosecutors were asked to look into a Democratic Party complaint that Lingle exceeded her voluntary $ 1.36 million campaign spending limit. Lingle blamed a volunteer and immediately returned $ 136,000 in matching public funds.
And during the primary campaign, the twice-divorced Lingle accused the Cayetano camp of spreading false rumors that she is a lesbian. Cayetano denied it.
 Load-Date: October 23, 1998

 

End of Document
