

Hear Nixon's voice on the airwaves, in the classroom, living room
The Associated Press
January 20, 2000, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 730 words
Byline: By DEB RIECHMANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Hear Richard Nixon like you've never heard him before.
The National Archives on Friday begins distributing cassettes of the president's once-secret tapes - at $18 a pop. Warning: The government has determined that these tapes contain language some people might find offensive.
For years, Americans have read transcripts of the Nixon tapes - salty language and all.
But unless they traveled to the archives in College Park, Md., they couldn't listen to the tapes. Copying was prohibited. So, besides a few bootleg tapes illegally broadcast years ago and snippets of recordings played in court, the Nixon tapes have not been publicly aired.
Now, 26 years after Nixon resigned, the public will hear Nixon's baritone voice on television and radio. Students will listen to him in class. Historians, Nixon buffs, journalists and writers around the nation will play and replay their own Nixon tapes at home, or maybe in the car.
They'll hear the famous "smoking gun" conversation about Watergate that led to Nixon's resignation. They'll listen to the infamous tape erasure - a full 18 1/2 minutes of buzzes and clicks. They'll hear the chat between Nixon and former White House counsel John Dean, who tells the president: "We have a cancer - within - close to the presidency that's growing."
"I certainly think the American public has a right to hear this material. Those tapes are what resulted in Richard Nixon resigning from office. And while they know the content, they really sound much different than they read," said Dean, now an investment banker in Beverly Hills, Calif.
"Nixon kinda growls," he said.
Dean's voice also can be heard on tape.
"Obviously, there's some stuff on there that I find embarrassing with hindsight," said Dean, who was in his 30s during Watergate. "I was young, awed by the presidency for a long time and I would approach it much differently today than I did back then."
Nixon secretly recorded 3,700 hours of tape. So far, 264 hours of Watergate and so-called "abuse of government power" tapes can be purchased. These contain conversations about the break-in and bugging of the Democratic National Committee headquarters in the Watergate in 1972, subsequent cover-up and wrongdoing by the White House.
The archives began taking orders late last year. On Friday, the government is distributing the first batch - 12 1/2 hours of tapes played in court in the mid-1970s. The entire set of trial tapes costs $702.
Segments of the tapes cost $18 for each 30-minute recording. Prices are set to cover the cost of copying and packaging tapes. The archives will not profit from the sale.
ABC News bought a complete set and plans to begin airing them Friday on "Nightline," said producer Jon Ebinger. C-SPAN, which in February 1998 began airing President Johnson's White House tapes on the radio and its web site, is waiting to assess the quality of the Nixon tapes before deciding how to use them, said history producer Maura Pierce.
"Nixon spoke in a low monotone which makes him hard to understand," said Christopher Beam, director of the Edmund S. Muskie Archives at Bates College in Maine who plans to play segments of the tapes for students in a history class he's teaching at the University of Southern Maine.
Sale of copies of the recordings is governed by a 1996 legal settlement reached by the archives, Stanley Kutler and the Nixon estate that requires the government to make these tapes publicly available this month.
"While the tapes are not the whole of the Nixon record, they are the most readily identifiable part of it by the general public," said Kutler, a historian and author of a book of Nixon tape transcripts. "In fairness to Nixon, they have to be heard in totality - for a more complete public record."
The Nixon estate has often criticized the government for releasing Watergate tapes before making all the conversations available in chronological order. Ultimately, there should be less focus on Watergate and more on the Democratic Congress' decisions during the communist takeover of South Vietnam, said John Taylor, director of the Richard Nixon Library & Birthplace Foundation in Yorba Linda, Calif.
"That is the real scandal of the Vietnam and Watergate era," he said. "When the (baby) boomers move on and stop celebrating their great antiwar achievements, history will look anew at the era and it won't matter what order the materials were released."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo WX111
 Load-Date: January 21, 2000

 

End of Document
