

Hillary Clinton, the candidate, takes the national stage
The Associated Press
August 15, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 848 words
Byline: By MARC HUMBERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




With the band booming out "New York, New York," thunderous cheers cascaded down on the first family's new candidate, Hillary Rodham Clinton, as she took the stage at the Democratic National Convention.
While the Clintons talked about passing the torch to Vice President Al Gore, the first lady-turned-Senate candidate used a highly personal, prime-time address Monday night to burnish her political star.
"Bill and I are closing one chapter of our lives and soon we'll be starting a new one. For me, it will be up to the people of New York to decide whether I'll have the privilege of serving them in the United States Senate," she said.
Adoring delegates cheered amid a sea of "Hillary" signs.
"It's the beginning of a great career, a great mission," Michigan delegate Lupe Ramos Montigny said after the first lady's 15-minute speech. "It's the beginning of the beginning."
"I think that she's dynamite," said Philip Reed, a New York City councilman.
In her speech, she hailed her husband's administration and called for voters to elect Gore and Joseph Lieberman - "leaders who don't just talk the talk, but walk the walk" - to carry it on.
She elicited the strongest applause when she spoke of the need for abortion rights, gun control, tax cuts for the neediest and when she reprised her oft-repeated contention that "it takes a village."
"It takes as senator," read a sign waved by New York Sen. Charles Schumer, a fellow Democrat.
Her mother, husband and daughter, Chelsea, watched the speech from a holding room behind the podium, the president waiting to take the stage to offer his political farewell.
When he took his turn, the president claimed a moment of "personal privilege" to speak warmly of his wife-turned-candidate. "She's always been there for our family, and she'll be there for the families of New York and America," he said to raucous cheers. She grinned from a VIP skybox, nephew Zachary Rodham in her arms, Chelsea at her side.
Her thank you to the nation came at the end of her speech, and seemed an oblique reference to President Clinton's infidelity and impeachment.
"Thank you for your faith and support in good times - and in bad," she said. "Thank you, from the bottom of my heart, for the honor and privilege of a lifetime."
The first lady's starring role was in sharp contrast to the role her Republican opponent played at the GOP convention in Philadelphia two weeks ago. Rick Lazio, a little-known congressman from Long Island, stopped at his party's convention for only one day and didn't speak before the gathering.
For the first lady, her four-day visit to Los Angeles was a nonstop celebrity affair. She appeared on "The Tonight Show" with Jay Leno on Friday and picked up $1 million for her campaign at a star-studded Hollywood tribute to her husband on Saturday night. Before her convention speech Monday, she had interviews with the three major television networks.
In one pre-convention interview, CNN's Larry King asked her how she was doing emotionally in the wake of her husband's affair with Monica Lewinsky. As she has in the past, Clinton refused to talk about that.
"You know that's my business, and I don't talk about my personal business and I feel strongly that what goes on in a marriage or a family should remain in that marriage and in that family," she said.
Republican critics long have maintained that her Senate run is really meant to be a stepping stone to one day becoming the nation's first female president. Clinton denies any such ambition.
"I have seen this up close and personal," she said on NBC. "You know, I think that it's a big price that anybody has to pay to do this. And right now, for me, the most important job we face is electing Al Gore and Joe Lieberman."
Meanwhile, with the first lady in Hollywood raising money from celebrities at the Democratic National Convention, Lazio made a campaign stop at Planet Hollywood in Manhattan.
During his news conference, the Republican pointed the finger at Clinton for raising unregulated "soft" money in her campaign against him for the U.S. Senate.
"Right now, my opponent Mrs. Clinton, is out on the West Coast, raising millions of dollars out in Hollywood," said Lazio, standing in front of cardboard cutouts of actors Bruce Willis and Arnold Schwarzenegger, who are major investors in the eatery, as well as prominent Republicans.
Although each candidate says they are strong supporters of campaign finance reform, they have not been able to reach agreement. Clinton has raised about $1.2 million in soft money and Lazio says he has not raised any.
The first lady and the Long Island congressman have challenged each other to forgo the use of such funds several times before - but only if the other pledges to do so as well.
"We are pleased to hear that Mr. Lazio is now willing to address the issue of campaign finance reform," Clinton campaign manager Bill de Blasio said. "However, recent events give us reason to insist that any agreement reached between our campaigns come with an ironclad, verifiable method of accountability to ensure that it is honored over the course of this race."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: August 16, 2000

 

End of Document
