

Homestead: the battered town the Indians left behind
October 22, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 431 words
Byline: By DAVID ROYSE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HOMESTEAD, Fla.
Body




After this city was devastated by mighty Hurricane Andrew, most people stayed on to help rebuild.
Not the Cleveland Indians.
The Indians, set to start their spring training in a spanking-new stadium a few months later in 1993, struck out for another town.
There was no joy in Homestead.
Lots of people in south Florida are rooting against the Indians in the World Series. But none more so than the spurned people of Homestead.
"The Indians organization could have been national heroes, and stepped up to the plate and said we're going to help this community," said Homestead Mayor Tad DeMilly. "They said, 'We're leaving."'
Honoring the commitment to play in this agricultural community 40 miles south of Miami would have been more than just a game, said DeMilly. It would have buoyed the devastated town and brought badly needed business back.
The Indians, training instead in Winter Haven, about 300 miles to the north, did come to the facility they had agreed to play in - for two spring training games.
They played the Marlins.
"The thing I resent the most, and I think the community resents, was the whipsaw of emotions we went through," DeMilly said. "The Indians and the Marlins came through and we had a fabulous weekend - we took our minds off of the hurt - and really saw something really good for the morale. And two weeks later, they kicked us right in the butt again and sent us back to our knees."
The Indians' two-year agreement to play in Homestead was off.
"The official comment from the Indians is no comment," team spokesman Bob DiBiasio said Tuesday.
Said DeMilly: "Management took a look at the community and saw a place that had a 280 mph wind blow through it, and they determined that this was not the environment that they wanted to bring their ball players to."
Many others packed up and left, too. But many rebuilt.
These days, sun shines on the pink two-tiered stadium, repaired and ready for play. But it stands waiting for another team to come to town. The grass is still cut, the scoreboard works, there's a fresh coat of blue paint on the seats.
And the people are cheering, not just for the Marlins, but against the Indians.
"When the Indians played the Braves in the Series (two years ago), there were a heck of a lot of Braves fans here," DeMilly said. "And you can be sure there are hundreds of times that many Marlins fans."
And that first game between the Marlins and Indians, back in March 1993? The Marlins won.
Residents still remember that March when they looked up from the ruin and destruction long enough to see the Indians abandoning them.
Many haven't forgiven.
 Load-Date: October 22, 1997

 

End of Document
