

Home for the weekend, Judiciary Committee members mull the task ahead
The Associated Press
September 13, 1998, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 742 words
Byline: By TED ANTHONY, AP National Writer
Body




Like most everyone else in America, they are reading, digesting, trying to make sense of 445 extraordinary, explicit pages. But members of the House Judiciary Committee face a truly daunting task: They must decide whether to start a process that could cost a sitting president his job.
As they mulled it over during the weekend, caution was the buzzword. Still, there was a wide sense of the duty that awaits them. The sense of shock and duty was clear in members' word choices: "Disturbing evidence." "Very serious offense." "Public reprimand." "Be fair."
"It's clear we need to do something so that we have a president with some strength," said Rep. Chris Cannon, R-Utah.
"I'm not going to make my decision about whether to impeach the president from newspaper accounts of documents," said Rep. Steve Rothman, D-N.J. "I'm going to read the documents myself."
The committee itself does not actually decide whether to impeach (which, contrary to popular misconception, means essentially "to accuse," not "to remove from office"). Committee members simply act as the House's advance team; they determine whether sufficient grounds exist for the House to conduct a full impeachment inquiry.
In the days ahead, the committee of 21 Republicans and 16 Democrats will be reviewing the 2,600 documents that accompany Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr's report and deciding what should be made public. It must report to the House Rules Committee on its progress by Sept. 28.
Though there was evidence of bipartisan distaste for the actions documented in the report between President Clinton and former White House intern Monica Lewinsky, Democrats on the committee seemed more reluctant than Republicans to launch into unfettered condemnation.
Rep. Charles Schumer agreed Sunday that Clinton's actions were "wrong and irresponsible" but warned against rushed judgment. "All the facts have not come out," said Schumer, D-N.Y. "Those, particularly on the Republican side, who are calling for impeachment, I think are rushing to judgment."
Rep. Mel Watt, D-N.C., said the release of the report violated Clinton's right to be presumed innocent. He called the report a "legal, constitutional" document being used for "political purposes" but emphasized he was neither condemning nor condoning the president's actions.
"I am not defending the president," Watt said. "What I am defending is the process. Because once we do not have the principles to protect us, then we have nowhere to go. There is nothing to protect any of us."
The committee's chairman, Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., said he personally believes impeachment hearings are warranted but "I want to hear from everyone on the committee." Other committee members tread cautiously on issues of substance and procedure but made their feelings clear:
-"The allegations are more serious than I expected and the response is weaker than I expected," said Rep. Lamar Smith, R-Texas.
-"This is a sad chapter of our national experience," said Rep. Charles Canady, R-Fla. "We need to conduct our review of these matters in a thoughtful, deliberative manner, and on a nonpartisan basis."
-"The President's reaction to this report makes it abundantly clear that he will continue to embarrass our country, lie to the American people, and refuse to faithfully execute the laws to protect himself and remain in office," said Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga.
- "It's not a comfortable position being on the Judiciary Committee in this decision," said Asa Hutchinson, R-Ark. "Arkansas is a small state. Relationships are intertwined regardless of which side of the political fence you're on."
The Judiciary Committee has several options. It could throw out the case, vote on a "resolution of inquiry," which essentially means passing the matter onto the House for a vote that could lead to a full impeachment inquiry.
If a majority of the full House approved a subsequent "bills of impeachment," the matter would go to the Senate, where it would be tried with Chief Justice William Rehnquist as the judge - and Judiciary Committee members as prosecutors.
One, Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass., said Starr didn't have enough "to get the president, so he's seeking to discredit him."
But Frank, too, was piqued at Clinton.
"He lies by being technically accurate. I wish he would stop it," Frank said on WSAR-AM of New Bedford, Mass. " 'I didn't inhale' … is just not worthy of him and everybody sees through it. He's not 14 anymore trying to outsmart the principal."
 Load-Date: September 14, 1998

 

End of Document
