

Homes 11-6; EDITOR'S NOTE: Please substitute the "at" symbol for (at) in the e-mail address at the bottom of this column; EDITORS: On the House is now available to you on the AP Web Graphics site at http://graphics.ap.org; How to Counter Rising Winter Heating Bills
November 6, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 775 words
Byline: By JAMES AND MORRIS CAREY, For AP Special Features
Body




In a few short months you probably will hear a news report that goes something like this: "As temperatures begin to soar downward to zero or below, and as the wind-chill factor adds to the problem, residents are becoming more and more concerned about fuel costs - costs that are so high it will make it hard for some Americans to keep their furnaces running this winter."
Higher fall and winter heating bills are anticipated. In some areas heating prices are expected to rise as much as 50 percent.
According to the Department of Energy, no matter what kind of heating, ventilating or air conditioning system you have in your home, you can save money and increase personal comfort by properly maintaining or upgrading your equipment. To determine the condition of your furnace you might be able to rely on your local utility company. Often they offer free inspections that will help you determine whether your next step needs to be cleaning and oiling or replacement. You might also check with your local building department to see if they have a program. Heating and cooling contractors often offer year-round maintenance programs that will ensure smooth, cost-efficient operation.
The person who looks at your furnace will check for carbon monoxide leaks and signs of wear and tear. Part of the inspection will include a check of the flue system. Rust, corrosion, holes, gaps and blockages can prevent proper operation of the flue and trap dangerous combustion gasses in your home.
All safety circuits must be checked as well. During the winter, when your storm windows are in place and all doors are closed, there is more fresh air outside than inside. That's why it is important to change your filter. Changing your furnace filter will cost $3 or $4, but can reduce your heating bill between 1 percent and 4 percent. A clogged filter can reduce airflow and reduce the efficiency of the furnace. Changing your filter is not a major contributor to energy savings, but the filter change results in increased furnace life as a result of reduced stress on the blower motor.
Modern American homes are required to have setback thermostats, but some are complicated and difficult to operate. A setback thermostat can switch the furnace on when heat is needed and then turn it down to a lower temperature when everyone is snuggled in bed for the night. The same thermostat can also be programmed to shut the furnace off completely when no one is home and back on again before everyone gets home.
Turning the temperature down just 1 degree can reduce your heating bill by 2 percent to 3 percent. Turning the thermostat down from 72 F to 68 F can reduce your heating bill by up to 12 percent. And lower temperatures don't have to be uncomfortable. December is not the time to tool around the house in lightweight cotton pajamas or a flimsy T-shirt. A long-sleeved, loose-fitting jogging outfit can keep you warm and comfortable. If you are in good health, you can save more than $100 a year with the flick of a wrist at your thermostat.
If your furnace is more than 15 years old, you will probably want to look carefully at replacement. Modern appliances are far more energy-efficient than older ones. Older gas furnaces waste 50 percent or more. Modern furnaces burn fuel at a rate of 70 percent to 96 percent. Replacing a furnace can save you 20 percent to nearly 50 percent on your heating bill. Something to think about.
According to a recent survey by a major heating equipment retailer, 70 percent of those polled are aware that heating costs will increase as much as 50 percent in some areas of the country.
Sixty-three percent of those aware are planning to do something to make their home more energy-efficient.
Thirty-five percent are planning to check their home-heating system.
Twenty percent are planning to upgrade their system.
Thirty-five percent are not planning to do anything to make their home more energy-efficient.
Twenty-seven percent of homeowners in the Northeast have furnaces that are over 15 years old.
Sixty-six percent of homeowners in the South have furnaces less than 10 years old.
We leave you with this thought: According to the Department of Energy, home heating makes up about 44 percent of home energy use.
---
Readers can mail questions to: On the House, APNewsfeatures, 50 Rockefeller Plaza, New York, NY 10020, or e-mail Careybro(at)onthehouse.com. To receive a copy of On the House: Plumbing or On the House: Painting, send a check or money order payable to The Associated Press for $6.95 per booklet and mail to: On the House, PO Box 1562, New York, NY 10016-1562, or through these online sites: www.onthehouse.com or apbookstore.com.
 Load-Date: November 7, 2000

 

End of Document
