

House freshmen arrive to learn the ways of the Capitol
November 13, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 759 words
Byline: By CURT ANDERSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Amid presidential uncertainty and a wafer-thin Republican majority, the House freshman class for the 107th Congress began learning the ways of the Capitol on Monday. Members of both parties said the close election results could signal improved cooperation during the next two years.
"The American people stood up and said, 'We can't make up our minds,' " said Rep.-elect Mike Rogers, R-Mich., who won by just 152 votes. "It's all right if we disagree, but on the way, we've got to get things done."
Added Democratic Rep.-elect Jim Langevin of Rhode Island: "I am optimistic because we have a block of 40 new members of Congress that maybe aren't familiar with the old system."
As of Monday, there were 41 House newcomers - 28 Republicans and 13 Democrats - with unsettled races in New Jersey and Florida.
In New Jersey's 12th District, GOP former Rep. Dick Zimmer was still battling Democratic Rep. Rush Holt amid a state review of the ballots. The apparent 586-vote victory by veteran Republican Rep. Clay Shaw over Democrat Elaine Bloom in Florida's 22nd District was caught up in the same Palm Beach County dispute enveloping the presidential race.
Besides that, Republicans now hold 220 seats in the incoming House and the Democrats have 211. There are two independents, one aligned with each party, giving the GOP an effective edge of 221-212 at the moment.
The freshmen are spending the week on such mundane tasks as picking offices and touring buildings and on weightier matters such as choosing leaders. House Republicans are expected Tuesday to return their top four: Speaker Dennis Hastert, Majority Leader Dick Armey, Majority Whip Tom DeLay and GOP Conference Chairman J.C. Watts.
At a dinner Sunday night, GOP leaders reminded the new members of their rank-and-file that they are "part of an effective team," said Rep. Roy Blunt, R-Mo., a top DeLay lieutenant.
"We told them we understand that on some issues, you have to do what you have to do," Blunt said. "But we have also created a great sense of team - and they're a part of that team."
Similarly, Democrats appear likely to keep Minority Leader Dick Gephardt, Minority Whip David Bonior and Caucus Chairman Martin Frost in a vote set for Wednesday. Over the past two years, the unsuccessful Democratic drive to regain House control gave cooperation little chance.
"I'm hopeful we are going to find ways we can work together," said Rep.-elect Hilda Solis, D-Calif. "Since we are not in the majority as Democrats, it's going to be an uphill battle."
The organizational meetings are taking place as the outgoing 106th Congress struggles to finish the long-overdue budget and the nation is held rapt by the Florida recount, which could finally settle the race for president and have a significant effect on next year's legislative agenda.
"We all have the sense that we're here at a historic moment," said Rep.-elect Adam Schiff, a California Democrat who unseated one of the managers in President Clinton's impeachment trial, GOP Rep. Jim Rogan. "What we don't know is how it's going to turn out."
The makeup of the incoming freshman class is heavily weighted toward public service, with 22 state legislators, two lieutenant governors, a secretary of state and several current or former congressional or White House staffers. Unlike past years, only 11 are attorneys, and 12 from business - including Republican Felix Grucci of New York, whose family runs a major fireworks firm, and Republican Darrell Issa of California, who operates a car alarm company.
There is one famous former college football coach: Republican Tom Osborne of Nebraska.
If Zimmer wins in New Jersey, he will join Democrat Jane Harman of California as former House members reclaiming their old seats. Rep.-elect William Clay Jr. takes the family baton from veteran Rep. William Clay Sr. in a Democratic Missouri district.
There are two offspring of ex-governors: Republican Shelley Moore Capito is the daughter of former West Virginia Gov. Arch Moore and Democrat Jim Matheson's father is former Utah Gov. Scott Matheson.
Rogers, of Michigan, is a former FBI agent. The CIA is represented as well: Republican Rob Simmons, who ousted veteran Democrat Sam Gejdenson in Connecticut, earned two Bronze Stars in Vietnam with the Army before joining the CIA and serving five additional years in East Asia.
Rep.-elect Mike Honda, D-Calif., is a Japanese-American whose family was held in a U.S. internment camp during World War II.
That was long before the youngest member of the new class was born: Rep.-elect Adam Putnam, R-Fla., is just 26.
 Load-Date: November 14, 2000

 

End of Document
