

Humble N.J. farm: The birthplace of the blueberry
The Associated Press
July 14, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 516 words
Byline: By BRENDAN SCHURR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WHITESBOG, N.J.
Body




You can thank Elizabeth White for your blueberry pancakes. And your blueberry pie, and scones and muffins and jam.
It was White, the daughter of a cranberry farmer, who 90 years ago led an effort in partnership with a government scientist to cultivate the tiny huckleberries that grew wild in the sandy soil of New Jersey's Pinelands.
From their uncertain beginning on the White farm here, blueberries have grown into a multimillion dollar, worldwide crop. Last year North America, which harvests 90 percent of the world's blueberries, produced more than 342 million pounds of blueberries, worth $251.6 million.
New Jersey is No. 2 in the nation behind Michigan in blueberry production.
The crop this season, which began in mid-June and lasts through August, looks pretty good so far, said Al Galletta, co-owner of Atlantic Blueberry Co. in Hammonton, the largest blueberry grower in the nation.
Though others had tried before and failed, White figured there had to be a way to cultivate the tart little berries, which could improve the family business and extend the growing season.
"We used to go around sampling these fruits and one would be too sour and one would be too flat," White said in a tape-recorded interview in 1953, the year before she died. "At that time, it was said among the farmers of New Jersey that blueberries could not be cultivated."
But after reading that Dr. Frederick V. Coville, a scientist with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, was beginning research on cultivated blueberries, she convinced her father to volunteer their farm, Whites Bog, for the experiments.
The young woman organized local farmers who did the leg work to find huckleberry bushes with the biggest, best tasting fruit.
"If she approved of the berries, they dug up the bush, brought it to Whitesbog, took cuttings and started propagating the bushes," Janet Robbins, a board member of the Whitesbog Preservation Trust, said in a recent visit to the farm. The trust is a nonprofit organization that is restoring and preserving the village where the Whites and their workers lived.
The locals were paid $2 for each bush that was accepted.
Five years after the government accepted the Whites' proposal, the first crop of berries was ready for the market. The cultivated variety was named blueberries, Robbins said.
Blueberry bushes from Whites Bog were sold across the country and in Canada. They have since become a major crop for several states and are grown in countries around the world.
Despite the passage of time, harvesting blueberries remains hard work.
Hundreds of pickers at Atlantic Blueberry work row by row, hunching over a bush, nudging berries off with their thumbs and letting them drop into their cupped hands. After they finish a field, they start at the beginning again.
"It's backbreaking work," said Robbins, who grew up picking berries on her grandfather's farm in Pemberton. "You got up early and you worked in the fields all day, but I never got tired of blueberries."
On the Net: National Blueberry Council: http://www.webcom.com/bberry 
Whitesbog Preservation Trust: http://www.whitesbog.org/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos CRA2, CRA103-104
 Load-Date: July 15, 2000

 

End of Document
