

Ice in the north, flooding in the south as storm pounds large region
The Associated Press
January 8, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1019 words
Byline: By POLLY ANDERSON, Associated Press Writer
Body




An ice storm that cracked tree limbs and glazed roads knocked out power to millions of people in the Northeast and Canada on Thursday, while the same huge system brought violent weather and flooding to the South. At least 16 people died.
"I'd rather be buried in 10 feet of snow!" Tricia Rollins hollered over the roar of a chain saw that removed part of a huge tree that crashed onto her front lawn in Augusta, Maine.
The slow-moving system, which hit the southern Plains earlier in the week, brought high wind, at least one tornado, lightning, thick coastal fog and snow as well as ice and rain. Nine people died in flooding on Wednesday and Thursday in the Southeast, including five in one Tennessee county. A weather-related traffic accident killed a North Carolina man, and in Canada, the ice storm was blamed for six deaths.
The power outage numbers told the story: At least 220,000 customers lost electricity in Maine, 800,000 in eastern Canada, nearly 100,000 in upstate New York, 43,000 in New Hampshire and 10,000 in Vermont. The number of people affected easily translates into millions - an estimated 3 million in Canada alone.
Central Maine Power spokesman Mark Ishkanian called it "major, hurricane-type damage."
"And with continued bad weather forecast for the region, it's likely things will get worse before they get better," he said.
A 38-year-old Vermont man was critically injured Thursday when a falling tree struck his pickup.
In Augusta, Maine, the state capital, residents were awakened shortly before dawn by the crack of ice-laden tree limbs that plummeted to the ground with a roar. At times, the sky lit up with the flash of electrical transformers shorting out.
Gov. Angus King declared a state of emergency and told nonessential government workers to stay home.
Late Thursday afternoon, New York Gov. George Pataki directed state prisons in two upstate counties to open their activity centers to residents left without power. They were among dozens of shelters opened throughout the area.
The shelters were housing 350 people late Thursday and that number was expected to increase through the night, officials said.
Some 1,500 National Guardsmen were on their way to the region late Thursday with 375 emergency vehicles to assist in evacuation, medical care and road clearing.
Janice Bailey, owner of the Settlement restaurant and grocery store in hard-hit Sabattus, Maine, said doughnuts, cigarettes, bottled water and batteries sold quickly, though the store had no electrical power.
"They all came down here and sat and drank coffee until it was gone, and then they went home," she said.
New London, N.H., a picturesque college town of 3,300, banned all travel except for emergencies, a situation rare in the winter-wise state.
In southern Quebec, including the Montreal area, the provincial power company said many of the blacked-out homes and businesses won't have electricity until next week.
The city's parks were littered with branches; an estimated 16,000 trees were damaged. About 600 soldiers were sent to help clear branches from power lines and roads.
"The streets here look like bombs hit them," said Marjorie Northrup, whose senior citizens home in Montreal lost power.
About 5,000 people were without phone service in upstate New York and 1,400 in Maine.
In the South, the rain tapered off by midday, but the effects of all the water that the storm had dumped since Tuesday were still there. Schools were closed, roads were blocked by mudslides, and rivers were over their banks from Mississippi to Virginia.
The dead included a motorist whose car was swept into a creek after he got out of his stranded car, and a 5-year-old girl who wandered into a flooded ditch, both in Alabama; and a 62-year-old woman in Kentucky who drowned when she fell off a foot bridge into a creek.
In Carter County in far eastern Tennessee, five bodies were found in flooded streams Thursday. Helicopters were used to rescue people from trees and rooftops, and some 500 people were forced to evacuate their homes.
Louisiana Gov. Mike Foster declared a state of emergency Thursday for seven parishes that flooded during heavy rain earlier this week. A 72-year-old man died in Louisiana on Thursday of injuries he received after driving his car around flood barricades. The car stalled and he fell into floodwaters while trying to walk back to the barricades.
A Siler City, N.C., man was killed as heavy rains fell on the Piedmont Thursday morning. Charles Bailey Beal, 63, died about 6:30 a.m. when his car hydroplaned on old U.S. 421, the state Highway Patrol said.
Bad news awaited some who returned home when the storm let up.
"One family went back and found their house in two halves," said Jane Harris, a spokeswoman for the American Red Cross, which opened three shelters.
Carter County Executive Truman Clark put the damage in the millions of dollars.
In southern Ohio, heavy rains made so many roads impassable that several schools closed Thursday.
The storms cap a week that has seen temperatures well above normal along much of the East Coast. El Nino, the warming of water in the eastern Pacific Ocean, gets some of the blame.
The warmer water pushes a southern jet stream - a high-level wind that usually crosses the Gulf of Mexico - into a more northerly path. It brings warm, moist air up the East Coast and keeps cold Canadian air from going as far south as usual.
In Easley, S.C., four people were treated at hospitals late Wednesday after a tornado destroyed several mobile homes. Thunderstorm winds knocked down trees and power lines in Camden, S.C.
Winds near 60 mph flipped a tractor-trailer in Wilmington, N.C., Thursday, and western parts of the state reported as much as 13 inches of rain in 24 hours. Two North Carolina homes caught fire - one when it was hit by lightning, the other when a downed tree caused a power line to spark.
Near Marion, N.C., flea market manager Ted McKinney was philosophical about the floodwaters that washed his trailer, tables and a van into the Catawba River.
"The guy upstairs gave it to us. He'll take it away," McKinney said. "We hope to be back in business tomorrow."
 Load-Date: January 9, 1998

 

End of Document
