

Illinois governor the darling of the anti-death penalty movement
December 7, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 651 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER WILLS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD, Ill.
Body




Death penalty opponents around the country have found an unlikely champion to bolster the credibility of their movement - tough-on-crime Republican Gov. George Ryan of Illinois.
Ryan did the unexpected early this year by halting all executions in Illinois, saying he could not be sure the system can keep innocent people from being put to death.
Illinois has executed 12 people since 1977 but released 13 others from death row after they were exonerated or found to have gotten unfair trials - a "shameful record," Ryan said in announcing the moratorium in January.
His decision thrilled death penalty opponents. They greet Ryan with standing ovations, give him awards and praise him as the premier example of a leader supporting the death penalty but questioning how it is applied.
"I'd say it's probably been the largest energizing event in the last 20 years," said Robert Jones, spokesman for the anti-death penalty group Moratorium 2000.
Ryan has helped sustain interest by crisscrossing the country to discuss his moratorium. He has testified before Congress and delivered frequent speeches, including three in the past week.
He may be more popular around the country than in his home state, thanks to a federal corruption investigation into the secretary of state office's Ryan held before becoming governor. An exit poll of Illinois voters on Election Day found only one-third approve of Ryan's performance. Ryan, who faces re-election in two years, has not been accused of any wrongdoing in the scandal, which involves the selling of driver's licenses.
The gruff political veteran last drew national attention - and the anger of liberals - in 1982, when he used his power as speaker of the Illinois House to help defeat the Equal Rights Amendment.
In his two years as governor, Ryan, 66, has pushed through tougher sentences for criminals who use guns, increased the number of state police and added prisons. He has long supported the death penalty and let one man be executed before imposing the moratorium.
"I was a part of the great American body who saw a nation in the grip of increasing crime rates, inner cities becoming armed camps and ever-growing violence in our streets, in our schools, and sometimes even in our places of worship," Ryan told a New York bar association group on Wednesday. "Since those days, a lot has happened to shake my faith in the death penalty system."
Having a Republican admit such doubts helps reach people who might ordinarily dismiss critics of the death penalty, activists say. Ryan's stand has made it easier for others to discuss the importance of DNA testing or flaws in the legal process.
Ryan acknowledges he has found common ground with some unlikely groups.
"Gay and lesbians against the death penalty, devil worshippers against the death penalty, ACLU against the death penalty - these weren't really my type of people. Now they're giving me awards," Ryan said during an appearance at Harvard University.
Ryan has been careful not to criticize other governors, saying his concerns apply to Illinois and not necessarily to other states. Ryan served as Illinois campaign chairman for Gov. George W. Bush, who has overseen more than 100 executions in Texas.
His stand comes at a time when opinion polls suggest support for the death penalty is softening.
A Harris poll in July found 64 percent of people supported the death penalty, down from 75 percent in 1997. An NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll in July found that only 42 percent of the public believed the death penalty is applied fairly; another 42 percent said it is not and 16 percent said it depends or were undecided.
"I have a very strong belief that the openness of the public to thinking about the issue has been greatly helped by Gov. Ryan's action," said Evan Davis, president of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York.
On the Net:
http://www.moratorium2000.org 
http://www.prodeathpenalty.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NYR107
 Load-Date: December 8, 2000

 

End of Document
