

Impeachment: The real vote might be the one on Nov. 3
The Associated Press
October 8, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 729 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Historic yes, but Thursday's vote was no surprise. The real suspense comes Nov. 3 when Americans elect a new Congress - in effect picking the jurors who will hear President Clinton's case and render a verdict.
The outcome of that election could draw a road map for the House's impeachment hearings and Clinton's future.
If Republicans pick up a lot of seats, say 15 or more in the House and five or more in the Senate, the GOP could be emboldened to push ahead aggressively with hearings delving deeply into Clinton's behavior, not only with Monica Lewinsky but on Whitewater, fund raising and missile technology transfers.
But if Republican gains are modest and public opinion remains in the president's corner, Clinton's prospects for a plea bargain grow brighter, perhaps along the lines of the public rebuke suggested by former President Ford.
"This election is crucially important in determining what the next phase of this inquiry looks like," said Thomas Mann, director of governmental studies at the Brookings Institution.
The impeachment fight will not be a driving force in many campaigns, Mann said. Nevertheless, "the election results will be interpreted as a referendum on impeachment."
The House voted 258 to 176 Thursday to launch the impeachment review against Clinton, only the third time in history that lawmakers have taken such a step. If the House decides to impeach Clinton, the case will move to the Senate for a trial where a two-thirds vote would be required to remove the president.
The White House professed delight that only 31 Democrats - fewer than expected - joined in the impeachment vote. "You got a vote that was along party, partisan lines because they don't think the process is going to be fair, fast or focused," said presidential counselor Rahm Emanuel. That has been - and will be - the White House mantra about impeachment.
In contrast to Thursday's numbers, the vote to open impeachment proceedings against Richard Nixon a quarter century ago was 410 to four - with 98 percent of Nixon's fellow Republicans voting for the inquiry.
"This looks like a highly partisan inquiry at this stage," Mann said. "It's getting off to a very different start than the Watergate inquiry did. And given the public sentiment out there among the broad public, it suggests to me, absent additional devastating referrals, that the president is certainly likely to survive all this."
"What we can't say until after the election is how long the agony will go on."
Boston University historian Robert Dallek said Clinton should take little comfort from Thursday's vote because only five lawmakers voted against both the Republican impeachment measure and the Democratic alternative.
With most "voting for some kind of impeachment proceeding, that's a kick in the head," Dallek said. If the election does not produce big surprises, Dallek said, "They'll probably impeach him. He'll be let off the hook in the Senate. They won't convict him."
Certain of Thursday's outcome, the White House did not lean too hard on Democrats to vote against impeachment proceedings. Clinton's wife, Hillary, personally gave Democrats a pass for voting against the president, declaring there would not be any retribution.
"We don't want anybody bleeding, dying or falling on their sword," a senior administration official said. "The vote (Thursday) is not as important as the vote Nov. 3."
White House officials recognized there were conservative and moderate Democrats in mostly Republican districts districts who needed to vote for the inquiry for the sake of political survival.
To Democrats in tough races in swing districts, the White House argued they could boost their election chances by supporting the Democratic alternative for a limited investigation and prescribed time limits.
Michigan State University political scientist David Rhode said Republicans leaders are in the difficult position of struggling to reconcile the public's disgust with the Lewinsky affair with the desires of the GOP's core constituency to charge ahead.
"If in the wake of the elections the Republican membership is not convinced that to vote for impeachment will significantly endanger their political future, they will vote for impeachment." But in the Senate, he said, "It's difficult to imagine 67 votes for conviction."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Terence Hunt has covered the Reagan, Bush and Clinton presidencies.
 Load-Date: October 8, 1998

 

End of Document
