

In Florida, the catch of the day is marlin
October 15, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 686 words
Byline: By WILL LESTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




Jubilant cries of "Los Marlins" rang out in the streets Wednesday, orders poured in for Blue Marlin Beer and businesses across town rushed to cash in on the Florida Marlins' surprise visit to the World Series.
"This is like finding a new gold vein in an old mine," said Mayco Villafana, a spokesman for the Greater Miami Convention and Visitors Bureau. "We're looking to see how we can quickly capitalize on this."
The short-term economic impact for the economy was estimated at more than $ 20 million over two weekends as hoteliers scrambled to fill up during a traditionally slow period before the winter season. And long-term publicity for south Florida could be far more valuable.
"You cannot buy that kind of publicity," Villafana said.
This is what owner Wayne Huizenga had in mind when he spent $ 89 million in the offseason on a free-agent shopping spree to make the Marlins a contender.
"This is going to pull the community together," said Huizenga, who announced earlier this year he would sell the team.
For some, the timing of the Marlins' success couldn't be better.
Dennis Valdez, president of Blue Marlin Beer, launched his new product just two weeks ago, though he said it's been in the planning stages for seven years.
"It's a stroke of luck and destiny. My beeper is buzzing off the wall," Valdez said. "We just ran out of beer."
At Future Creations, a sportswear maker just north of town, almost 200 employees burst into cheers when the Marlins sealed the game with a three-run sixth inning. Then they frantically worked all night to produce the National League Champion T-shirts that were shipped out to retail outlets by 9 a.m.
About 50 people jockeyed for World Series T-shirts at the Marlins' ticket office in Little Havana, right after the shirts were delivered Wednesday.
"This is history," said Esteban Diaz, who bought three Marlins shirts. "I want a piece of it."
Sea Escape Cruises planned a special Marlin gambling cruise Tuesday night so customers can watch the game, gamble and buy special drinks called "Marlin Mamas."
Baseball tradition has been slow to build in south Florida, where attendance this year grew to almost 2.4 million after the infusion of talent.
But early Wednesday, the streets of nearby Hialeah were jammed with cars honking horns and occupants screaming "Los Marlins, ganamos (we won)."
Almost 500 miles to the north in Tallahassee, Gov. Lawton Chiles predicted a quick Series win for the home team.
"It probably won't go more than four games," he said.
In Washington, Attorney General Janet Reno broke the tension at the campaign finance hearings when she told them that even if she didn't have her job, she could go home to her native Miami where she now has a World Series team.
The Marlins already have sold out all four games at Pro Player Stadium, including the "limited vision" seats behind left field usually covered by a blue tarp - close to 66,000 fans a game.
At the Marina Marriott in Fort Lauderdale, more than 500 requests for rooms have already been refused, said hotel spokesman Mark Vaughan.
"If the Marlins hadn't won, we would be at 50 percent," he said, noting the hotel has long been a favorite for visiting major league teams.
Baseball hasn't been an easy sell in busy south Florida, said Lou DePaoli of the Marlins ticket office.
"In New York and Boston, you can get 30,000 per game even in a bad year," he said. "It's a tradition up there."
He said in the Miami area "they didn't understand what baseball was all about, the ambience, a nice relaxing time out. Everybody here has that football mentality."
Across town, bars and restaurants planned to throw Series parties and at Thee Dollhouse, a local strip joint, customers wearing official Marlins T-shirts could get drink discounts.
In Little Havana, fans like Alfredo Gonzalez, 70, said he knew "from the start they would win. They are our Marlins."
But how long will the adoration last.
Just ask the Miami Dolphins' Dan Marino, the most productive passer in NFL history, who has been on the hot seat with some fans after a slow start this year.
His advice for the Marlins?
"Win," he said. "That's all that matters."
 Load-Date: October 15, 1997

 

End of Document
