

In Republican primaries, the middle of the road goes nowhere
The Associated Press
May 16, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: National Political
Length: 752 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




To amend a political line from the conservative past, moderation in the pursuit of a Republican presidential nomination is no virtue.
At least it never has been.
When Barry Goldwater made his caustic comment on moderation 35 years ago, he'd just been nominated. He defiantly declared that extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice, moderation in the pursuit of justice, no virtue.
It was a jab in the eye of the centrist Republicans who had tried to block his conservative campaign, a break from the conventional course of the winner placating the losers in order to enlist them for the fall campaign. In Goldwater's case, GOP moderates weren't going to rally to his ticket anyhow, so the slap at them didn't make much difference.
But in the normal course of campaign events, presumably including 2000, political peacemaking with defeated rivals and their factions is priority business.
Giving rise to another piece of Republican lore, Richard M. Nixon's formula for winning: Move to the right to win GOP nominating votes, move to the center for the general election campaign.
That bears retelling at this point as the 2000 Republicans maneuver for support in 1999, on issues as inflammatory as gun control and abortion, and as practical as education, social services, taxes, the scope of government.
At the moment, the topic is gun control, driven by the April 20 high school shootings in Littleton, Colo., committed with weapons purchased at unchecked gun shows. Despite that, the Republican-controlled Senate initially rejected a measure for mandatory background checks on buyers at gun shows. Then, worried about a backlash, they reconsidered on Friday and approved a gun show provision, 48 to 47. President Clinton said it was still riddled with loopholes, and there may be more changes later.
Elizabeth Dole has been speaking on gun regulation to begin defining her differences with Texas Gov. George W. Bush, the leader of the Republican field for 2000.
"I won't shy away from the tough issues, even if some in my party don't like it," she said at a women's conference in Washington Tuesday. "That includes issues like allowing people to carry concealed weapons."
She wouldn't bar it with national legislation, saying it is up to the states to decide. Texas did. Bush signed concealed weapons legislation in 1995.
Mrs. Dole favors, and Bush opposes, mandatory child safety locks on guns. The other nine GOP prospects all oppose mandatory locks and concealed weapons bans.
When she raised the gun issue in general, and gun locks in particular, at a candidate forum in New Hampshire, the Republican audience was not impressed, judging by the scant applause.
Her campaign aides said that was OK because she was trying to reach out to moderate voters to expand the GOP, not just target the party regulars.
But it is party regulars who settle presidential primary elections and caucuses. And the Republican base is a conservative one. On guns, add the power of the National Rifle Association, as a lobby and an outfit that can turn out activists in a campaign.
The clout of that conservative base is magnified when there is a crowd on a primary ballot, and a plurality wins. It wasn't a moderate who embarrassed 1996 nominee Bob Dole in the New Hampshire primary; it was Pat Buchanan.
There are early hints that conservative insistence on point-by-point orthodoxy from GOP candidates may be yielding to a more pragmatic outlook, after two Democratic terms in the White House. That could spare a Bush, or perhaps another Dole, the sniping from the right that hurt his father and her husband, the last two GOP nominees.
There also are polls suggesting that Americans are increasingly concerned about values, public ethics and the state of society, and that this could move the 2000 debate toward the center, since neither the moralizing of the right nor the paternalism of the left has delivered answers.
A poll conducted for the Democratic Leadership Council indicated that 57 percent of Americans feel the fabric of civil life is weakening, and want more accountability in government as one way to deal with it.
That's not new business, of course.
In the 1968 campaign, for example, Michigan Gov. George Romney put up giant billboards in New Hampshire:
"Romney's right: We must stop moral decay."
Nixon ran him out of the campaign before the first primary.
----
EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and special correspondent for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: May 16, 1999

 

End of Document
