

In the election battlegrounds, it's still about the economy
The Associated Press
September 27, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 802 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, AP Political Writer
Dateline: ECONOMY, Pa.
Body




For people squeezing out a living in this aptly named farming community, Bill Clinton's 1992 campaign slogan echoes eight years hence. It is still about the economy in Economy.
"I'm 70 years old and I can't stop working," said Bill Zaccagnini, a mine-safety equipment maker headed to his afternoon shift. "I'm glad there's jobs out there, but I wish I didn't have to work so hard to make ends meet."
So it goes for many people in three Great Lakes states that will help determine who wins the presidency: Pennsylvania, Ohio and Michigan, where interviews with dozens of undecided voters reveal conflicting sentiments about the longest economic expansion in U.S. history.
While most voters say their financial lives are better than eight years ago - when Clinton's aides made "It's the economy, Stupid" their campaign mantra - many are working harder to stay ahead and are increasingly worried about their financial futures. With feelings so mixed, both George W. Bush and Al Gore have reason to hope they can capitalize on economic issues - albeit with different messages.
The vice president is portraying himself as the natural steward of the economy as well as a populist leader who can protect voters from economic boogymen: oil producers, drug companies, HMOs and other corporate giants.
The message is just starting to take hold among voters in this region, who for months sided with Bush over Gore on the economy.
"He stands up for the little guy," said Joe Polidori of Parma, Ohio, who until recently didn't think Gore deserved any political benefit from the economic expansion.
Bush hopes to take advantage of lingering anxieties - promising tax cuts, health care benefits, retirement security and education improvements that Democrats failed to deliver as the economy grew. He blames Gore for a national "education recession," a poll-tested phrase that simultaneously attacks the Democratic education record and sounds alarms about the underlying strength of the economy.
Jim Armstrong, a 52-year-old Pennsylvania steelworker, is concerned enough to consider Bush for president.
"There's been pretty steady employment the last few years," he said outside a gas station charging $1.65 per gallon. "But things have slowed down some and I'm not sure what's around the corner."
A recent Pew Research Center poll found that voters have more confidence in Gore than Bush to manage the economy, a reverse of previous surveys. A majority of voters are satisfied with the state of the nation and Gore leads among those voters by 2-to-1.
Yet nearly two-thirds of voters nationwide said they were concerned about health care costs and more than half are worried about saving for retirement. A recent poll of voters in Illinois, Ohio, Michigan and Pennsylvania found that more of them are worried than not about retirement.
"The most precious commodity the economy can yield to people is time and peace of mind," said Michigan Gov. John Engler, a Bush ally arguing that the Texas governor's proposals - if sold correctly - will strike a chord with an electorate that he believes is still concerned about the economy.
Karen Hope, a homemaker here, is primed for Bush's arguments. She and her husband don't have health insurance and he has a low-paying job.
"My kids go to school with children who have everything they want but their parents work two jobs," she said. "I'd rather stay home with my kids. I don't want anybody else raising them."
Still, Republicans concede that a strong economy gives Gore an edge.
"Sooner or later this race was going to come down to the fundamental basics of any campaign. Sooner or later Al Gore was going to benefit from that fact that he's running with a majority of the people thinking the country is on the right track and the best economy in 35 years," said GOP pollster Bill McInturff.
Cindy Lohmar is a case in point. When interviewed by the AP in April, the Bloomsburg, Pa., woman said she was favoring Bush because he "seemed like a nice guy" and "was talking about important issues like education."
Now, she's leaning toward Gore. "I'd like to think he had a hand in this economy with Clinton," she said.
Emily Meyer, 53 of West Middlesex, Pa., turned away from Democrats because of the Monica Lewinsky affair but is suddenly giving Gore a long look.
"I can't knock the Clinton administration, because we've had all these opportunities. Our house is appraised at the highest it's ever been. We purchased our own business. Our daughter is in college. But at what price? For me, it's looking the other way after (Clinton) embarrassed the nation."
Jenny Goodger, a nurse's assistant in Roseville, Mich., said she doesn't know who deserves credit for the economy but doesn't want to take a chance by throwing out Gore. "If he's been keeping the economy humming for us, I'd like to keep it that way."
 Graphic



 
AP Graphic ELN SWING STATES; AP Photos WXS2002-2005
 Load-Date: September 28, 2000

 

End of Document
