

In the next Behind the Wheel: 1996 Acura 2.2CL
June 16, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 791 words
Byline: By ANN M. JOB
Body




They're not pretty. They're not sleek. They're not plush. But Hummers have a following, and sales are climbing.
Hummers initially were designed back in the 1970s as High Mobility Multi-Purpose Wheeled Vehicles - Humvees - for the U.S. Army. Thus, they're designed to do things that other sport utilities can't do: Climb 18-inch walls, ford 2 feet of water, and haul more than 2 tons of cargo, for example.
Hummers - their commercial name - have distinctive options, too, such as a winch with a 12,000-pound capacity and a tire inflation system that automatically adjusts to terrain and driver needs.
Standard equipment is far from standard: 3-inch-thick radiator, big hooks protruding from the hood, and an aluminum body that's assembled more like an airplane than an automobile. There are coolers for the engine oil and for the power steering system, transmission and transfer case.
More than 100,000 military Humvees have been built, and their widespread use in the Persian Gulf War helped spur interest in a commercial Hummer.
The manufacturer, AM General in South Bend, Ind., began retail sales in the summer of 1992, and since then more than 3,000 have been sold, company spokeswoman Susan Carney said. Projected sales for this model year, she said, are about 2,000.
There are six models, with prices starting at $ 43,256. Among Hummer buyers, best known is actor Arnold Schwarzenegger, who reportedly has five.
Notable for 1996 is a 190-horsepower, 6.5-liter turbo diesel V-8 that boosts the Hummer torque to 385 foot-pounds at 1,800 revolutions per minute.
The Hummer's regular, 170-horse diesel engine, also with 6.5-liter displacement, has 290 foot-pounds of torque at 1,700 rpm, while the 190-horsepower, 5.7-liter gasoline engine has a maximum torque of 300 foot-pounds at 2,400 rpm.
With the turbo diesel, the Hummer's 0-to-60 mph sprint is 18 seconds, compared with 19.5 seconds with the other power plants. It's still no racer. Compare that 18 seconds in a Hummer that weighs more than 6,000 pounds with the 4.4 seconds of a 3,307-pound Porsche 911 Turbo with 3.6-liter turbocharged six.
The test Hummer, a four-passenger soft-top with removable hard doors, struggled to get up to speed on the freeway and topped out at just over 80 mph. Worse was the racket from the turbo diesel and the substantial road noise. My riders had to shout to be heard, and I kept adjusting the volume of the AM/FM radio - more volume when I was accelerating, less when I came to a stop with the radio blaring.
As you'd expect, the Hummer gulps fuel, though two fuel tanks are standard and help cut the number of trips to the gas station.
All Hummers come with four-speed automatic transmissions and full-time four-wheel-drive. A gearshift lever next to the automatic transmission lever lets the driver go from the normal high gear to a high-lock mode for muddy trails and snowy roads. A low-lock mode provides a gear reduction for added torque in the worst terrain.
The Hummer's transfer case and differential are pulled inside to allow for 16 inches of ground clearance underneath. That leaves a big, awkward hump between front- and rear-seat riders.
As a result, in the test four-passenger Hummer it was fairly difficult to reach over to the person in the adjacent seat and impossible to reach riders in back or in front of you if you're belted in.
There was good head room, but it takes some time to read the 10 pages or so of instructions and get the hang of taking the soft top off and putting it on.
The test Hummer had a luxury option group that added power windows and remote keyless entry. But there were plenty of exposed screw heads inside the Hummer that you don't see in even base model cars and trucks. There also is no air bag.
At 86.5 inches wide and with its squat stance, the Hummer looks unwieldy. I feared taking it to work, thinking it wouldn't fit through the gate at the parking deck. But it did. I worried about putting it in my carport, but it was no problem. I even took it to a fast-food drive-through; it was a cinch.
The biggest problem was the attention the Hummer got. Construction workers saluted when I drove by. Men stopped and gawked as I pulled up to parking meters. People on the highway pulled alongside so they could gape at the huge tires.
Company spokeswoman Jennifer Petts said buyers typically buy a Hummer without a trade-in. Usually, it's their third, fourth or fifth vehicle.
Ninety percent of Hummer buyers are men, with household incomes of more than $ 250,000 a year, she said. They are between 35 and 50 years of age and usually are business owners.
The base Hummer price of $ 43,256 compares with $ 40,258 for a Toyota Land Cruiser and $ 55,000 for a Range Rover 4.0 SE.
Consumer Reports does not list owner trouble complaints.
 Load-Date: June 16, 1996

 

End of Document
