

In the next Behind the Wheel: GMC Yukon Denali
The Associated Press
April 18, 1998, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 798 words
Byline: By ANN M. JOB
Body




Baby boomers stood in the rain, asking me all sorts of questions. Moms and Dads followed me home. Vacationers gave thumbs up and big smiles on the highways. One teen-ager stopped traffic on a busy six-lane avenue, hooting and howling at the site of my sunny yellow test car.
Volkswagen's New Beetle evokes response. I even had my reaction, too. I seemed to like looking at it more than driving it. Not that it isn't fun to drive, but it almost seems as if the magic is in gazing at it and caressing its rounded body that is so unlike anything else on the road.
It doesn't hurt the New Beetle's appeal to know that this bulbous little fella is within reach, price-wise, of most everyone. The base price plus destination charge is $ 15,700, but supplies are tight and likely will be for a year or more. So count on plunking down a deposit and waiting.
Truth be told, driving this modern incarnation is reminiscent of driving a small VW, with the same firm ride as in a VW Jetta. Forget the loose, jaunty feel you might remember in the old Beetle. The new one sticks to the pavement with the zeal of a modern day VW.
In fact, this Beetle is based on today's VW Golf and uses the Golf chassis. Like the Golf, the New Beetle is front-wheel drive and has its engine up front, not in back.
The two current Beetle engines - a 2-liter, inline four-cylinder gasoline engine and a 1.9-liter, four-cylinder turbo direct injection diesel - are also found in the VW Jetta.
For my money, the diesel is the one to get, though it adds more than $ 1,200 to the price and is rated at just 90 horsepower. The gasoline four has 115 horses, but its maximum torque is less impressive: 122 at 2,600 rpm vs. 149 at 1,900 rpm for the diesel.
The diesel also sounds right, with a bit of raucousness that's reminiscent of the old Beetle. You'll love the diesel for fuel economy, too. It is rated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency at 41 miles per gallon in the city and 48 mpg on the highway. The gasoline engine, at 23 and 29 mpg, is more in line with today's other four-cylinders.
Get the five-speed manual transmission for maximum performance. It's a cute shifter, with a brushed silver handle. While it has a bit to go in its movements, it works well to pull as much as possible from the power plant
The New Beetle is quite solid around corners, in a VW way. It transmits a few of the rougher bumps on the road, but it's nothing like the punishing ride of Beetles of old.
Tires are big 16-inchers, not normally standard equipment on subcompact cars. You hardly notice they're that big, since they're framed by the Beetle's prominent wheel arches.
But these big tires are integral to the look of the New Beetle, and even with them the car sits low to the ground. Maybe that's one reason this "low-rider" has such appeal with the younger set whose only recall is Herbie the Lovebug in the movies.
The interior is no longer is bare-bones and tinny. The standard stereo system with cassette player provides good sound quality. The side windows are large, giving the interior a more spacious feel than you'd expect.
In addition to the required two front air bags, the Beetle is one of the few small cars with side air bags. And they are standard equipment, not optional as they are on the Chevrolet Prizm and Toyota Corolla.
The seats, front and rear, are firm, supportive and well-cushioned. Unlike lesser cars in this price range, these seats are ready to ease your way on long trips. VW even designed them at the same time it engineered the suspension system.
The centered, half-rounded dials on the dash recall the earlier Beetles, but the bright blue lighting at night seems a tad much.
Nothing in the outer styling of this little car quite prepares you for the dashboard that stretches from the front edge of the windshield way back toward the front bucket seats. The distraction is exaggerated, it seems, by a mix of smooth and beaded plastic surfaces.
The back seat is all but impossible for anyone near 6 feet tall. There simply isn't enough headroom to sit upright and comfortably back there. Even at 5-feet-4-inches, I brushed up against the rear-seat ceiling.
But the hatchback configuration, where the rear seat backs fold down for a flat cargo space, is a godsend for unwieldy items.
No discussion of the New Beetle would be complete without a mention of the bud vase on the dashboard. A throwback to the "Flower Power" days of the 1960s, it's a perfect conversation piece. Just make sure you keep the stem short. Otherwise, the petals will tickle your fingers on the steering wheel.
VW says it is overwhelmed by buyer demand for the New Beetle and figures it can sell every one of the 50,000 it plans to build in 1998.
Because the New Beetle is a new vehicle, Consumer Reports does not list owner trouble complaints.
 Load-Date: April 18, 1998

 

End of Document
