

In the next Behind the Wheel: 1999 Land Rover Discovery
The Associated Press
October 3, 1998, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 852 words
Byline: By ANN M. JOB, For The Associated Press
Body




Safety, safety, safety. Expect to hear a lot about it this fall when Ford Motor Co.'s redesigned Windstar minivan arrives in showrooms.
Because even as Ford finally catches up with competitors by making available a second sliding side door on the Windstar and adds power to both side doors, it also raises the bar on safety features.
The 1999 Windstar wagon, which has a starting manufacturer's suggested retail price of $ 20,800 including destination charge, even offers some safety firsts, such as a reverse-sensing system to help drivers back up safely.
"We know what matters most to our customers," said Mary Ellen Heyde, Windstar vehicle line director. "We built in safety first, then added the comfort and convenience features that people enjoy in a vehicle."
The new Windstar is the first minivan to offer side airbags for front-seat riders that are designed to cushion both the head and torso in a side crash. They are separate from the two front airbags, which provide protection in a frontal crash.
Chrysler Corp.'s popular minivans don't have side airbags, and General Motors Corp.'s minivans - the Chevrolet Venture, Pontiac Montana and Oldsmobile Silhouette - have side airbags that are designed to protect the torso but not necessarily the head.
The catch - and one Ford isn't likely to trumpet in ads - is its new side airbags cost an extra $ 390, while the GM side airbags are standard. Both systems are for front-seat riders only.
The Windstar's reverse-sensing system also is novel, and works impressively when you're trying to parallel park the minivan.
A series of beeps start when the Windstar's bumper is 5.9 feet away from an obstacle, and increase in rate as the van gets closer to it, becoming nearly a single, unending beep when the bumper is on top of the obstacle.
The system uses ultrasonic sensors positioned in various spots on the back bumper. Don't worry that your Windstar will sound like the neighborhood garbage truck whenever it backs up, however. The beeping is heard only inside the minivan, not outside.
But, like the side airbags, this system is an option, costing $ 245.
The Windstar also gets new, standard foam and cushioning in the ceiling and window pillars to help reduce head injuries in a crash.
All of these safety improvements are on top of the Windstar's considerable accomplishment, set in 1995, as the first minivan to receive the top ranking - five stars - from the U.S. government in crash test ratings.
Those five stars are awarded by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, which conducts laboratory tests on new vehicles and compares them with other vehicles in the same market segment. The only other minivan to receive five stars is the 1998 Toyota Sienna.
It's too early to tell if the 1999 Windstar will score five. The government has not yet crash-tested it. But Heyde said Ford did everything it could to ensure the minivan doesn't lose the coveted rating.
Of course, the other big news in the Windstar is, finally, that second sliding door. In conjunction with the new door, Ford also introduces a new feature - rear-bench seat indexing.
It means that in the Windstar, the seat anchors on the floor are located in such a way that the second-row bench can be positioned next to the passenger-side sliding door or the driver side. So, depending on your preference, you can shift the rear entry aisle.
All door panels in the Windstar are restyled, though even in the test, top-of-the-line SEL they have a decidedly plastic feel.
On the front doors, the panels keep their odd high sill that extends up above where the side windows disappear into the doors. A company official explained Ford wanted a wraparound look from the dashboard over to the doors, but this has been done more elegantly in other vehicles without the strange plastic panel positioning.
The Windstar's exterior has a more formal look now. But it also strikingly resembles Chrysler's dressy Town & Country minivan.
And the lower body cladding that's on the SEL extends a bit too far outward at the door sills. I bumped my legs on it each time I descended from the front seats.
The Windstar's 200-horsepower, 3.8-liter V-6 and four-speed automatic transmission aren't new, but have been improved. In fact, Heyde proclaimed, "The 1999 Windstar will not only be the safest vehicle on the road today, it will be the cleanest."
That's because the 3.8-liter V-6 is engineered to meet California's Ultra Low Emission Vehicle status.
And while horsepower remains at 200, torque is increased by 15 pounds-feet to 240 at 3,600 revolutions per minute. Torque also is increased in the Windstar's base 3-liter V-6.
Handling is improved a bit, thanks in part to more work on body rigidity. The suspension has some adjustments, too. Still, the Windstar has a good amount of body sway on the roads.
Competitors to the Windstar include the Dodge Grand Caravan, which has a starting manufacturer's suggested retail price, plus destination charge, of $ 21,620, and the Chevrolet Venture, which has a starting price of more than $ 20,800.
Consumer Reports lists previous Windstars as worse than average in reliability.
 Load-Date: October 3, 1998

 

End of Document
