

Institute Hopes to Change the Public's Attitudes Toward the Disabled
December 8, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 779 words
Byline: By NICOLE ZIEGLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST. LOUIS
Body




When Kevin Duecker received his degree from Arizona State University in 1981, his friends predicted he would be the first in their group to get a job.
Duecker graduated with all the tools: summa cum laude, top-notch skills and a finance degree with three minors.
He also graduated in a wheelchair.
Fifteen years later, Duecker, who was paralyzed from the neck down in a car accident, is still waiting for his first full-time job offer.
"At interviews, the moment I went through the door, people were in such shock that they just looked right through me. They didn't listen to me," Duecker says. "People just don't understand."
Helping people understand is the goal of the new Institute for Disability Studies at Saint Louis University.
The first of its scope in the nation, the institute aims to change society's views of the disabled by marrying clinical research with the real-life experiences of people with disabilities.
Dr. Ana Maria Murgueytio, co-director of the institute, says clinical research in the past has focused on helping people with disabilities overcome their physical problems. But that kind of aid goes only as far as the hospital door, she says.
"We found there were a lot of gaps in how clinical research treats people with disabilities," Murgueytio says. "They have to adapt to an environment that has been designed for other people to live in. The challenge of being accepted, being looked at as a person, is always there."
That's part of the reason Paraquad, an independent living center and advocacy group for the disabled, approached Saint Louis University with the idea for the institute.
Paraquad has helped disabled people in the St. Louis area for 25 years through counseling, public awareness programs and political lobbying. Paraquad President Max Starkloff says the institute was the next logical step.
"What we're trying to do is look at what kind of research is needed, but looking at research from a disabled person's perspective and not as disabled people being the patients," says Starkloff, who also serves as the institute's co-director.
Most of the research will focus on improving the quality of life for people with disabilities, both by shaping public policy and by making communities aware of what they can do to integrate their schools and workplaces, Murgueytio says.
In order to make that possible, Paraquad is urging people with disabilities to share their stories with university researchers. The response has been tremendous, Murgueytio says.
"We've heard from moms who have children with disabilities, people who say they want to be a part of the research, other schools, people who want to volunteer," she says.
Karen Barney, an institute director, says people with disabilities may be the largest and most overlooked minority in American society. At least one in seven Americans - or about 40 million - has a physical or mental disability, she says.
"This is not an insignificant group, and yet their voices are not typically heard," Barney says.
One of the institute's initial studies outlined how other universities can develop similar community-based programs. Once communities realize people with disabilities have specific needs, they can work to adapt to those needs, Barney says.
"There are so many disabled individuals out there that are really confined to their homes," Starkloff says. "Our society is trying to change that, but it's a very slow process."
Duecker says skills like his are underutilized simply because society looks at disabled people for their limitations and not for what they can do. Any institute that can change that is a step in the right direction, he says.
"Obviously, I can't go out and dig ditches," Duecker says. "But I spend 50 hours at the computer a week, and I can type better than most people who hunt for the keys.
Since his accident, Duecker has done a variety of odd jobs, such as preparing income tax returns and bookkeeping. He develops tailor-made computer programs for schools and businesses.
"It's always been in bits and pieces, and I've never really been able to make a living," he says.
Most recently Duecker's been putting the finishing touches on a novel about a confrontation between a railroad gang and a white supremacist group. The story draws on his own experiences working on a railroad gang before his accident.
When Duecker heard about the institute, through Paraquad, he became an enthusiastic supporter, spreading the word about the needs of the disabled by giving interviews and participating in institute events.
"I think anything, any kind of organization stepping forward to educate people is helpful. I don't expect anything great. I just want a chance like everybody else."
 Load-Date: December 8, 1996

 

End of Document
