

Insurance magnate provides some of the dollars behind the Democrats
July 13, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 711 words
Byline: By KATIE FAIRBANK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WACO, Texas
Body




Bernard Rapoport has spent decades developing his insurance company and working in the Democratic Party background. He's well-known to the people in power, but virtually unknown to the general public.
So while Vice President Al Gore calls him "a great friend," many others don't know he's the man behind the American Income Life Insurance Co. - a multi-million dollar company that operates in 49 states, Canada and New Zealand.
Rapoport, 79, is worth millions, but it is his politics that define him.
A frequent visitor at the White House and a Lincoln Bedroom regular, Rapoport's been a friend to President Clinton since 1972 when the two backed George McGovern's presidential campaign.
Rapoport's father was a Jewish Marxist who fled czarist Russia for Galveston in 1913. His parents didn't speak English, so his father set about his new life as a pushcart peddler of blankets.
"My father was so radical and we were so poor. We weren't acceptable," he said. "He really made me the liberal I am - and a proud one."
Bringing together all of the facets of his past, Rapoport decided to sell insurance to union members in 1951. He even invited the Office and Professional Employees International Union to organize his own work force of 16,000 field agents, a move that allows them to introduce themselves to their customers as a comrade in the labor movement.
The company has been bought twice. Golder, Thoma & Cressey bought the operations in 1989, but left Rapoport in charge. Then in 1994, it was sold for about $ 563 million to Torchmark, which operates the company as a wholly owned subsidiary.
Again, Rapoport remained in charge.
"My security is that nobody can run it as good as I can. They evidently think so too," he said.
The company has grown steadily under Rapoport's guidance, posting revenues of $ 36.7 million last year. He's kept the headquarters in Indianapolis, although executive offices were moved to be near his mother-in-law in Waco.
His office here is covered with pictures of more than 100 politicians - all Democrats - each signed and warmly inscribed.
Gore's face hangs somewhere near the center of the photos stacked from floor to ceiling. Above his signature, the vice president writes: "For great friend Bernard Rapoport with deep respect and thanks."
"He's one of the few people with the kind of money he has who seems to care about low-income people," said Jeff Faux, president of the labor-backed Economic Policy Institute in Washington.
With his liberal lean, Rapoport has instilled on Waco - a city with a reputation for its conservatism - his own brand of social policy.
With a gift of $ 47.4 million in 1987, Rapoport and his wife, Audre, created a foundation that has given away about $ 10 million to more than 90 organizations around the world.
Until recently chairman of the University of Texas board of regents, Rapoport has designated the school as the largest recipient of foundation dollars so far.
As the size of Rapoport's charitable donations increased over recent years, so have his political gifts. He said he and his family have donated more than $ 500,000 to the Democrats in the past two years alone.
His friendships and contacts earlier this year resulted in two-hour appearance before a Little Rock, Ark., grand jury talking about how he came to hire Whitewater figure Webster Hubbell.
Hubbell, one of the president's closest confidants, resigned from the No. 3 Justice Department job in 1994 as reports flurried about a billing dispute involving the Little Rock law firm where he and Hillary Rodham Clinton had been partners.
Blunt and always in perpetual motion, Rapoport says his appearance before the grand jury won't damper his enthusiasm for government and politics. Nor is it likely to muzzle him.
"When you don't have a sense of guilt about things, you talk loosely," he said with a smile.
Former House Speaker Jim Wright, a Democrat from Fort Worth, says Rapoport is one of the most selfless people he knows.
"He was when he was poor and he is now that he's rich," said Wright about Rapoport's philanthropy. "He regards it part of his duty as a citizen, part of the rent he pays for the space he occupies."
All the money is not idly given, there is method and a mission for Rapoport.
"In my mind I'm going to change the world," he said.
 Load-Date: July 13, 1997

 

End of Document
