

Internet privacy is debated, as is the future of the Euro
June 14, 1997, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 613 words
Byline: By KAREN SCHWARTZ, AP Business Writer
Body




Regulators look at keeping some Internet information private, the Dow Jones industrials soar as the economy seems to settle and the future of the Euro seems in doubt.
A look at what happened in business this past week:
 
 I SPY
Federal regulators took note of how much information can be collected from users of the Internet. In what looks like the beginnings of an industrywide privacy standard, Microsoft Corp.  and Netscape Communications Corp.  put their rivalry aside to announce a joint plan to help safeguard consumer data on the World Wide Web. In addition, the White House said it wants industry assurances that children will get parental permission before giving out private information to Web sites operators.
EURO SHOW
More than 300 economists urged the European Union to abandon its plans for a single currency. The 311 mostly centrist or left-leaning economists said in an open letter to EU leaders that the currency, expected to be called the euro, would hinder efforts to get 20 million jobless Europeans back to work. Meanwhile, a new report said the two biggest economies - France and Germany - wouldn't be able to meet a Dec. 31 deadline to cut their budget deficits to within 3 percent of gross domestic product - the main requirement under the 1992 treaty that lays out the plan for the single currency, due to launch in 1999.
 
 SOARING STOCKS
The Dow Jones climbed to new heights amid signs the economy is slowing. The Labor Department's Producer Price Index fell 0.3 percent in May - the first time in nearly 45 years that the wholesale inflation indicator has fallen for five months straight.
Retail sales slumped in May - the first time in 15 years that sales dropped for three months in a row.
Those reports pushed the Dow Jones industrial average to record highs. The Dow broke through 7,600 and 7,700, and pushed toward 7,800.
 
 TAX TALK
The House tax-writing committee worked on hashing out a new tax bill. The $ 85 billion tax-cut package proposed by committee chairman Rep. Bill Archer, R-Texas, and passed by the committe would eliminate the 54-cent-per-gallon subsidy on ethanol, an alcohol fuel additive derived from corn. But the committee defeated a proposed amendment by Rep. Nancy Johnson, R-Conn., that would have slapped an extra 29-cent-a-pack tax on cigarettes to help fund health insurance for poor children.
Senate Republicans, meanwhile, produced a tentative proposal of their own that broadly resembled the House bill, according to a draft obtained by The Associated Press.
But there were some differences. The Senate package included a requirement that parents of children ages 13 to 16 deposit the proposed $ 500-per-child tax credit into new Individual Retirement Accounts that would allow withdrawals for education expenses. The Clinton administration and Democratic senators have been drafting a proposal that would also link the children's tax credit to a new IRA.
The Senate proposal also would offer more generous relief from estate taxes.
 
 TICKER
Rupert Murdoch is folding most of his ASkyB satellite unit into
 
 Primestar Partners . … Microsoft Corp.  agreed to invest $ 1 billion in cable operator Comcast Corp.  in a deal that could bring high-speed online access to millions of U.S. homes.
 
 Xerox hired a longtime understudy to IBM chairman Louis Gerstner as president and chief operating officer … Polo Ralph Lauren Corp.  stock begans trading.
 
 Archer Daniels Midland Co.  announced that the European Union has launched an investigation into its pricing practices there …
 
 Boeing has won a third deal to be an airline's exclusive aircraft supplier, this time a 20-year pact with Continental Airlines.
End adv for weekend editions June 14-15
 Load-Date: June 14, 1997

 

End of Document
