

IOC members implicated in scandal have to the end of the month
The Associated Press
February 16, 1999, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1195 words
Byline: By ROBERT GEHRKE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SALT LAKE CITY
Body




Letters are on the way to IOC members implicated in Salt Lake City's bribery scandal telling them they have until the end of the month to say why they shouldn't be expelled.
Jacques Rogge, a member of a six-man IOC inquiry commission, said those implicated will be asked to reply by the last week of February. The commission will meet in late February or early March and make recommendations to the executive board, which can order further expulsions.
Any expulsions would go before the full general assembly at the March 17-18 emergency session dealing with the corruption crisis.
The Salt Lake Organizing Committee's ethics panel issued a report last week that blamed two bid committee leaders for dispensing $ 1 million in cash, scholarships, medical treatment and other favors during the successful effort to win the 2002 Winter Games.
The Salt Lake report, which was reviewed by the IOC inquiry commission during the weekend, implicated 24 IOC members - a fifth of the total roster. The report cited 10 names that were not included in the list of 14 implicated earlier during the IOC's internal investigation.
After the IOC panel sent letters demanding explanations from 13 members (one, Cameroon's Rene Essomba, has died), nine members resigned or were ousted by the executive board. Three others remain under investigation; one received a warning.
Rogge said the IOC panel, headed by vice president Dick Pound, would follow the same procedure in dealing with new names and evidence contained in the Salt Lake report.
"Everyone mentioned in the ethics report, except those who have already resigned, will receive a letter asking for a reply," he said in a telephone interview Monday from Belgium. "They have the right to respond in writing or to appear before the commission in person."
Those already investigated by the IOC will receive second letters if there is new evidence in the Salt Lake report.
In other developments Monday, the deadline passed for Olympic bid cities to report rule-breaking, and a Utah group opposed to state involvement in the Olympics launched its petition drive demanding taxpayers be protected from having to pay if the Games finish in the red.
"We think that's something the Legislature has refused to talk about and believe it's the type of question that needs to be answered," Stephen Pace, head of Utahns for Responsible Public Spending, told a news conference.
Gov. Mike Leavitt raised questions last month regarding whether the state could, under Utah's Constitution, protect the Salt Lake Organizing Committee against financial losses should the games run a deficit.
Since then, he said he believes there is a moral obligation to abide by a promise made by his predecessor, Gov. Norm Bangerter, and renewed by him to provide financial protection to the games and Salt Lake City.
If an agreement the city signed with SLOC is unconstitutional, the Legislature would have to appropriate money to cover the debt through its normal appropriations process, he said.
Pace's initiative would force an election on the indemnification issue. The ballot proposition would state: "The State of Utah shall not indemnify, guarantee or reimburse the debt or obligations incurred by an organization, public or private, to host, solicit, organize, schedule, conduct, book or operate the Olympic Winter Games."
In order to force the Legislature to consider the initiative, the group would have to collect 33,594 signatures in 20 of Utah's 29 counties. To put it directly on the ballot, twice that number of signatures is required.
The worry over the possibility of the 2002 Games going into the red comes at a time when restless corporate Olympic sponsors are demanding the IOC carry through with decisive action to deal with the crisis or face a rebellion.
Michael Payne, the IOC marketing director who felt the wrath of sponsors at a meeting in New York last Friday, said the IOC was aware of the concerns.
"The sponsors are saying, 'Are you sure you really will deliver the cleaning of the house, and the reforms, in March? If this drags on beyond March, it impacts on our marketing programs. If we miss that March window, it's a big problem,"' Payne said.
"We're telling the sponsors that cleaning the house is the first step. That's the line in the sand. Clearly there are things that are broken and need to be fixed. This is an opportunity to make changes. The IOC has the resolve to go all the way."
The sponsors have been critical of the IOC leadership, while stopping short of calling for Samaranch's resignation.
"They have understood that, for the time being, while pushing through expulsions and reforms, it would not be helpful to have a presidential election," Payne said. "It would destabilize the situation. I think that's understood by all of those who closely follow the Olympic movement."
Samsung Electronics Co. denied Monday that it was considering abandoning its $ 45 million sponsorship of the 2000 Sydney Olympics.
"We are worried the commercial values of the Olympics have suffered because of these scandals," spokeswoman Cho Sung-in said. "But we remain committed to our sponsorship."
Cho spoke in reaction to an Australian newspaper report that Samsung's sponsorship was in doubt because of vote-buying scandals and other allegations of misconduct involving members of the International Olympic Committee. Cho said The Sydney Morning Herald report Monday was "far too exaggerating."
Atlanta failed to make Monday's deadline for Olympic bidders to tell of rule-breaking behavior by IOC members or by bid cities. However, Atlanta bid officials said they did not find any wrongdoing during an internal review.
The IOC said Monday it had no word yet on how many cities had replied.
"ACOG has advised us they have no information relevant to the IOC request," USOC spokesman Mike Moran said.
He said the Atlanta response had been overshadowed by the USOC's need to get information to the other investigations into the scandal.
USOC president Bill Hybl would forward the Atlanta response to the IOC "as soon as possible. We anticipate no problem," Moran said.
Sydney 2000 Olympics bid leader John Fahey told the IOC that there is no fresh evidence of wrongdoing by IOC members during the city's successful quest for the games.
"Every director has responded in writing and all directors, with one exception, have stated that they have no evidence of any improper conduct by any IOC member with regard to the Sydney bid," Fahey said in a statement today.
Former bid member Bruce Baird previously told the IOC Executive Committee of a matter concerning an IOC member, whom Fahey said has since resigned.
USOC has been conducting its own ethics investigation, and criminal probes are under way by the U.S. Justice Department and the Utah Attorney General's Office.
Assistant Utah Attorney General Reed Richards said Monday that the state investigation might take another couple of months to wrap up.
He said SLOC's ethics investigation was a good start. "They've done quite a lot of work," he said. "There may be some of those people that we would want to talk to again - undoubtedly there will be. And there's some they did not talk to that we will want to talk to."
 Load-Date: February 16, 1999

 

End of Document
