

Iowa campaign could separate the heavies from the lightweights
The Associated Press
August 12, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: National Political
Length: 675 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, AP Political Writer
Dateline: AMES, Iowa
Body




With his soybean machine chugging away - separating good proteins from the bad at 91,000 revolutions per minute - Mark Reuber caught a glimpse of Lamar Alexander's reflection in the stainless steel centrifuge.
"This centrifuge is like the campaign here in Iowa," Reuber said out of earshot of the Republican presidential candidate touring a food research plant Wednesday that Reuber manages. "It separates the heavies from the lightweights."
And that might be the fate of Alexander and a few other GOP candidates who are at risk of being cast aside in the 2000 presidential campaign - too light for the field of "heavies."
Low in the polls and desperate for money, Alexander laid off staff and focused his energies on Iowa weeks ago. He has campaigned almost nonstop for six years, but struggles in the shadow of front-runner George W. Bush.
Former Vice President Dan Quayle is deficit-spending his way through Iowa, fighting to overcome his history as the butt of political jokes.
Pat Buchanan is running for president a third time, but has yet to recapture the edgy excitement that made him a threat to the GOP establishment in 1992 and 1996. Money is not as crucial to Buchanan's campaign because he is used to running them on the cheap. He has considered bolting to the Reform Party.
Former American Red Cross president Elizabeth Dole is also a troubled GOP candidate, but to a lesser degree. She is drawing fawning crowds of women to campaign stops, but the jury is still out on whether she can turn the fan club into a political organization. Her poll ratings ebbed after a quick start, and she is no longer the obvious alternative to Bush for moderate Republicans.
"I think Quayle, Alexander and Dole have potential as candidates, but sooner or later they have to show more than potential," said GOP consultant Mike Murphy, who advised Alexander in the 1996 campaign.
The first test of political strength will be an informal pay-to-vote poll conducted by the state party here Saturday. Bush and millionaire rival Steve Forbes are expected to finish first and second, or otherwise risk damage to their campaigns.
Their rivals with less money and momentum need a break to get off the ropes.
Alexander has gambled his entire campaign on the results, setting a third- or fourth-place finish as his goal. Anything less would likely end his campaign.
"It's a chance to move the debate from money and media to (the farm crisis), kids and standards," he told reporters after the Iowa State University tour.
He predicted he would campaign deep into 2000, but said the assessment is based "on what I expect to happen Saturday."
Quayle addressed a crowd of 50 in nearby Boone, promising tax cuts, an emphasis on values and help for family farmers. A mixture of supporters and the simply curious, the crowd repeatedly applauded.
Yet several residents said he didn't stand much of a chance. "It's too bad," said June Brown. "I'd like to see him get more money and do better."
Quayle has lower expectations for the straw vote, and long-term plans to prove doubters wrong. "It might get rocky, but my response to people is, we're here. Get over it. We're not going anywhere," said Quayle's campaign manager, Kyle McSlarrow.
Buchanan watched over feasting sows on a central Iowa farm Wednesday, stopping to tell reporters he would do well Saturday. He dismissed questions about the Reform Party.
Dole aides said she has no intention of pulling out of the race, not after raising more money in the second quarter than every GOP candidate other than Bush. They also expect her to expand a base of women donors.
"Other candidates' wells are running dry," spokesman Ari Fleischer said. "Elizabeth Dole is building new wells."
At some point, however, the centrifuge of primary politics will prevail and - like separating the soybeans - leave one candidate standing out from the rest.
And it won't be pretty.
"These are very high achievers so it takes a while to sink in," Republican operative Rich Galen said. "You see it in their eyes, the pain of realizing they'll never make the grade."
 Load-Date: August 12, 1999

 

End of Document
