

Is Key West going to the birds? The chicken reigns in Margaritaville
The Associated Press
May 31, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 484 words
Byline: By JOHN PACENTI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KEY WEST, Fla.
Body




It may mean drumsticks or fricassee to you, but the chicken reigns supreme in Margaritaville.
A tourist train full of senior citizens drives by one such creature. "There, folks, is the national bird of Key West - the chicken," the guide announces.
After generations of living on the streets, the lowly chicken is protected by city ordinance and afforded much the same respect as pelicans or great blue herons.
But the longtime pecking order has some residents squawking.
"Naughty chickens of town, I call them," said the Rev. Debra Benedict, who conducts wedding ceremonies for tourists.
"They have no natural enemies on this island. We need some hungry foxes," she said. "The cats won't touch them. The chickens are meaner than anything."
Ms. Benedict lives near a wild bird rescue center where the worst of the roost are relocated by bleary-eyed residents in the dead of night. It is often at such an hour that she bolts straight up in her bed to the sound of a rogue rooster crowing mistakenly at the moon or a street lamp.
"I actually went down so far as to get a copy of the ordinances relating to chicken harassment and realized my hands were tied," she said. "It is a plague. Forget hornets. Forget locusts. Think chicken."
The local law protecting chickens prohibits cruelty to animals and bans "luring, enticing, seizing, molesting or teasing." The law requires that owners cage their fowl, but the wild ones roam the streets with abandon, enticing sympathetic residents to feed them.
Not everybody is anti-chicken.
At the Blue Heaven eatery, the birds fan out under and on top of tables. At night, they roost in the hedges, and boat sails are used to catch their droppings.
"It's part of the charm of Key West," said Sarah Clemens, a medical illustrator eating lunch. "It's more laid back than where I live in West Palm Beach. The city would never allow chickens to roam like this."
Gary Addleman, a code enforcement officer and a resident of Key West for 39 years, said the chickens are descendants of fighting roosters brought to the island by Cuban immigrants.
Conchs - as the residents of Key West are called, in honor of the local shellfish - devise ways to deal with the pesky birds and still stay out of jail.
"Since you can't throw rocks at them, people throw ice cubes because the evidence melts," said City Hall receptionist Claire Hurd, adding she, of course, would never do such a thing.
City commissioner Jimmy Weekley said the town has an ad hoc chicken relocation program that could get busy as spring folds into summer and the birds mate.
"The way it works is somebody in the neighborhood catches one and takes it to somebody else's neighborhood," he said.
Baby chicks are everywhere. At the courthouse. At Blue Heaven. Crossing busy Duval Street behind mother hens.
"People love the little chicks," Ms. Benedict said. "They don't realize they grow up into naughty chickens who will crow all night."
 

 
 Load-Date: May 31, 1999

 

End of Document
