

Is the stock market a supertanker or the Titanic? Analysts debate
The Associated Press
March 29, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 736 words
Byline: By PATRICIA LAMIELL, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The stock market's eerie invincibility, coupled with "Titanic's" sweep on Oscar night, has kept alive on Wall Street the inevitable metaphor.
Will stocks ride Supertanker America's economy (the phrase comes from Goldman Sach's inveterate bull, Abby Joseph Cohen) to a land so full of wealth and opportunity that it could only be dreamed up in Hollywood?
Did Cohen get it right when she reiterated, in a missive this past week to investors, her longstanding view that there "is no recession in our forecast horizon"?
Or, have investors piled on to a spanking-new luxury liner, billed as having conquered all natural laws, only to be done in by the iceberg of poor corporate earnings that should have been seen ahead?
Cohen and her supertanker cohorts make the following case:
So far, U.S. economy is riding out the Asian economic storm as if it were no more than a squall. The gross domestic product grew at a brisk 3.8 percent rate last year, the strongest in nine years.
Strong income growth and a 24-year low in unemployment, coupled with low mortgage rates, have sent housing figures soaring. This past week, the National Association of Realtors said sales of existing homes climbed 8.7 percent in February, while the Commerce Department reported housing construction shot up 9.1 percent in the final three months of last year.
A glut of supply has pushed oil prices to near 10-year lows in recent weeks, trimming costs in many parts of the U.S. economy, although oil-producing countries took steps this past week to cut production.
Finally, consumers are acting like they're on a first date at the movies. The University of Michigan reported Friday that nearly three-quarters of consumers surveyed in March expected good financial times to continue, and eight in ten expected the unemployment rate to remain at 4.6 percent.
"This is about as good as it gets," said Edward Yardeni, chief economist at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell. But, he added darkly, "I'm sure that's how folks on the Titanic felt."
The stock-market-as-Titanic script reads like this:
Yes, the U.S. economy got through the first part of the Asian economic crisis, which began last summer, relatively unscathed. But that was the easy part that had to do with unfriendly currency translations - dare we say it - the tip of the iceberg.
Lurking beneath the surface is the severe drop in U.S. exports that must result from a falloff in Asian consumer demand, some analysts say. Then there is the potentially more serious problem of downward pressure on consumer goods prices here, exerted by imports from Asia rendered cheaper by depressed currencies of the East.
This has already begun to cut into U.S. corporate earnings. After-tax corporate profits slipped 2.3 percent in the fourth quarter, the first drop in more than a year, Commerce said on Friday. And as more companies send up the white flag prior to first-quarter earnings reports, analysts have sharply dropped their earnings-growth estimates to just over 1 percent from over 10 percent at the beginning of the year.
Stocks are cruising at a very rich multiple of 22 times 1998 estimated earnings. If the earnings part of the hull springs a leak, the market has big problems.
"Investors see few risks because the market seems indestructible," writes Ned Riley, chief investment officer at BankBoston. But "the unthinkable (or unsinkable) could happen."
It's possible that by the end of the week, that message was beginning to get through. On Friday, the Dow Jones industrials, which had come close to the 9,000 mark for the first time earlier in the week, put in their third consecutive loss, closing at 8,796.08, down 50.81 for the day and 110.35 for the week.
The Standard & Poor's 500-stock average fell 5.36 to 1,095.44 Friday, giving it a loss of 3.72 for the week.
The Nasdaq compostie closed at 1,823.62, off 4.92 Friday but up 34.46 over the week.
The New York Stock Exchange composite index closed at 569.80, down 2.41 Friday and 2.81 on the week. The American Stock Exchange Composite index fell 1.06 Friday to 738.33, cutting its gain for the week to 10.54.
The Russell 2000 index of smaller companies fell 0.66 Friday to 477.15 but rose 2.90 on the week.
The Wilshire Associates Equity Index - which represents the combined market value of all NYSE, American and Nasdaq issues - ended the week at $ 10.443 trillion, up $ 18.679 billion from the previous week. A year ago the index was at $ 7.377 trillion.
 Load-Date: March 29, 1998

 

End of Document
