

Is the Fed finished raising rates or is a third increase on the way?
The Associated Press
August 25, 1999, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 610 words
Byline: JEANNINE AVERSA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




By nudging up interest rates for the second time this summer, the Federal Reserve signaled that it may stay on the sidelines if there are no new signs of inflation or an overheated economy.
But some economists wonder: Is the Fed through with just two?
The answer lies with what new economic data tells central bankers about the pace of economic growth, which has been brisk, and the prospects for inflation down the road, economists said.
On Tuesday, the Fed boosted two rates by a quarter point, saying its actions "should markedly diminish the risk of rising inflation going forward."
Investors hoped that language means the Fed will stop with just two rate hikes. Some analysts said it reduces the odds of another increase this fall. But others believe a third rate hike could be in the offing this year, possibly as early as the Fed's next meeting on Oct. 5, if signs of inflation crop up.
"The Fed could easily pull the trigger again," said Paul Kasriel, chief economist for Northern Trust Co.
Allen Sinai, chief economist at Primark Global Economics, also thinks there could be a third rate hike, possibly in November.
"We think the economy will continue to do quite well and higher inflation on average will appear and push the Fed into one more dose of tightening this year, but it is a close call," said Sinai.
High on Fed chairman Alan Greenspan's radar screen is whether the tight labor market could eventually spark inflation.
With the nation's unemployment rate down to its lowest level in three decades, employers foraging for workers are wooing them with higher wages and benefits. While that's good news for workers, it's worrisome to the Fed because those increased costs could drive up prices.
Meanwhile, even though the economy has slowed in recent months, it is still expected to grow almost 4 percent this year, a robust pace.
Some analysts suggested that central bankers will wait to see whether the economy slows on its own. "I think they will move to the sidelines" and evaluate whether their actions are sufficient to cool off growth, said David Jones, chief economist at Aubrey G. Lanston & Co.
On Tuesday, the Fed increased its target for the federal funds rate, the interest that banks charge on overnight loans, by a quarter point to 5.25 percent. The rate had been boosted - by the same amount - for the first time in two years on June 30.
That triggered a quick quarter-point increase to 8.25 percent by commercial banks in their prime lending rate, the benchmark rate for millions of consumer and business loans, ranging from home equity loans to some credit card debt.
The Fed's goal is to raise rates that it directly controls and thus influence those set by financial markets, such as 30-year mortgage rates, to slow economic activity in such interest-sensitive sectors of the economy as auto and home sales.
At the same time, the Fed raised its largely symbolic discount rate, the interest it charges on direct loans to banks, by a quarter point to 4.75 percent.
The central bank left its policy directive, intended to signal future moves, at neutral.
Analysts said this doesn't mean much because the Fed had also moved to a neutral stance after its last meeting on June 30, a change that did not stop the central bank from raising rates this time around.
Fed critics said they were unhappy that the central bank felt the need to raise interest rates at all, given that consumer-level inflation is low, having risen at a moderate annual rate of 2.4 percent in the first seven months this year.
"The Federal Reserve continues to allow their inordinate fear of inflation to put America's strong economy in jeopardy," said Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa.
 Load-Date: August 25, 1999

 

End of Document
