

Is this the year for the Wizard of Maz?
The Associated Press
February 28, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 650 words
Byline: By ALAN ROBINSON, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: PITTSBURGH
Body




He is best remembered for one of baseball's most famous homers. To get into the Hall of Fame, though, Bill Mazeroski must rely on his glove.
So far, that's the problem. The Hall of Fame recognizes the great sluggers (Babe Ruth, Hank Aaron), the top hitters (Ty Cobb, Ted Williams) and the toughest pitchers (Walter Johnson, Sandy Koufax) but the premier fielders often don't get to first base.
There are exceptions: Brooks Robinson, probably the best defensive third baseman of all time, made it on the first ballot. Ozzie Smith, who transformed the workaday task of playing shortstop into an art form, probably will, too.
Yet some of the great defensive players - most notably, Mazeroski, the Pittsburgh Pirates' seven-time All-Star second baseman - have never made the Hall. Most haven't come close.
But, finally, the Hall of Fame Veterans Committee seems ready to strongly consider a player who excelled not only in producing runs, but preventing them. Mazeroski, arguably the defensive player in the game's history, is expected to receive close scrutiny Tuesday at the committee's annual meeting in Tampa, Fla.
The committee, which considers Hall of Fame candidates passed over in balloting by baseball writers, also is expected to weigh the merits of players such as Larry Doby, the AL's first black player; Gil Hodges, the Dodgers' standout first baseman; Orlando Cepeda, who missed induction by only seven votes in 1994; and Ken Boyer and Ron Santo, who had the misfortune of starring at third base during the era that Robinson dominated the position.
"Bill Mazeroski was the Babe Ruth of fielding," said John T. Bird, who wrote a book about Mazeroski and now is lobbying to get him into the Hall of Fame. "He set records that never will be broken. He should be in the Hall of Fame."
Mazeroski isn't in now because his offense (.260 career average, 2,106 hits, 136 home runs) doesn't match up with the great offensive players ever, even if his historic homer in Game 7 of the 1960 World Series beat the New York Yankees. However, Mazeroski's peak years in the 1960s also came during a period of the lowest batting averages since the dead-ball era of the early 1900s.
Defensively, Mazeroski might be beyond comparison. Total Baseball, major league baseball's official encyclopedia, rated him as the best defensive player at any position following an exhaustive study that factored in, among various equations, how many runs a player prevented. It also ranked him as the 77th best player of all time.
The youngest All-Star second baseman ever at age 21, he turned 161 double plays in 1966 - by far the most in major league history, and 51 more than last year's NL leader, Eric Young. Mazeroski was so prolific at turning double plays, he had figured in more than all but three first baseman when he retired in 1972.
"I don't think anybody turned the double play better than I did," Mazeroski said, but only after considerable prodding; exceedingly modest as a player, he is even more so in retirement.
But while Smith, known as the Wizard of Oz, played much of his career after ESPN and CNN began dispensing highlights nightly to millions of viewers, many of Mazeroski's great plays came before videotape and are gone forever.
There's also this comparison: Smith's career batting average of .261 is only one point higher than Mazeroski's.
That's why Bird doesn't want Mazeroski's accomplishments to be lost to the ages. So he assembled a professionally produced 4-minute videotape titled "It's Maz's Turn" and distributed it to the 15 committee members.
The most important of those, chairman Joe L. Brown, was the Pirates' general manager throughout the second baseman's career. But Brown must be neutral in his role, and Mazeroski's candidacy will succeed or fail on its own merits.
"I believe Maz's time will come," Brown said in an interview last season. "But he must be patient. There are many good candidates."
 Load-Date: February 28, 1998

 

End of Document
