

Is That the Scoreboard or the National Debt?
April 21, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 1116 words
Byline: By TOM WITHERS, AP Sports Writer
Body




This year, no lead appears safe.
The Kansas City Royals overcame a 10-run deficit before losing. The Seattle Mariners rallied from eight runs down to win. And the Colorado Rockies made up a 9-4 deficit to pull out an 11-9 victory - all on the same night.
Statistics through the first few weeks of the season show a marginal increase in home runs, and runs are crossing the plate at about the same rate as they did in 1995. But lately, final scores have looked more like church league than major league.
"Offense is up. Look up on that scoreboard," Colorado manager Don Baylor said. "Every night you seldom see single digits all the way across. You see a lot of double digits in both leagues. It seems the hitters are way, way ahead of the pitchers right now."
Last Monday, the five winning teams in the American League combined to score 49 runs. Three of the winners scored 11 runs each, and the other two had eight apiece. Two of the losing teams scored 10 times.
Offense has dominated since opening day, when the Milwaukee Brewers scored 15 runs and the World Series champion Atlanta Braves got 10.
Only one of the Detroit Tigers' first 16 games produced fewer than nine runs. That was a 6-1 victory over Oakland on April 6 at Las Vegas. The Tigers scored in double figures four times through Thursday.
The reasons for the glut of 11-10 and 9-8 final scores are many: poor pitching, good hitting, bad weather, shoddy fielding, expansion and smaller ballparks, to name a few.
Pitching, watered down by expansion, is still mediocre at best. Sure, there are some quality starters around the majors, but there are some scary bullpens, too.
Ask a player or a manager why scoreboards are looking like lottery toteboards and you get a variety of answers.
"It's probably a little of both" bad pitching and good hitting, San Diego's Tony Gwynn said.
"With expansion, when you go into a three-game series, chances are you're not going to face two or three dominant guys. You're going to face one dominant guy and then two good guys, or even two guys who haven't mastered it yet and who in normal years wouldn't even be in the big leagues.
"I just think the pitching is not as dominant as it used to be. Hitters are getting a chance to be a little more selective at the plate because the pitching is not as consistent as it's been. What's going to happen when they expand again in two years? That's going to deplete the pitching a little bit more."
Oakland manager Art Howe thinks the frigid weather in many parts of the country is to blame.
"Pitchers are having trouble making pitches," he said. "It has an effect on defense, also. Players are not making the plays they'd normally make during warmer weather. It's definitely a combination of the two."
Milwaukee's Kevin Seitzer hit five home runs in his first 13 games, matching his home run total in 492 at-bats last season. He started this year with a total of 59 home runs in 4,507 at-bats in the majors. Still, he thinks it's too early to put much into the run totals.
"Two weeks do not make a season," Seitzer said. "This is 162 games, it's not a month. We'll see where everything's at in September and then we'll evaluate."
 

 
 MARGE MADNESS: It seems like no matter what Cincinnati Reds owner Marge Schott does these days, it ends up being the wrong thing.
Her comments following John McSherry's tragic death on opening day were bad enough. Then, she walked onto the field last Sunday in Cincinnati to offer an apology to umpires working a doubleheader between the Reds and the Houston Astros.
"I had no idea what she was doing out there," said crew chief Harry Wendelstedt, who was puzzled by the timing of Schott's appearance. "It's a very poor place to try to make an apology, when the guy is warming up and ready to throw the first pitch," he said.
A few days earlier, Schott infuriated some Cincinnati fans by cutting off a $ 350 per month service that provided out-of-town scores for Riverfront Stadium's scoreboard.
 

 
 CAN YOU TOP THIS?: This week, the Detroit Red Wings rewrote the NHL record book by winning 62 games in a season, and the Chicago Bulls won an NBA-record 70th game. Is this the year somebody challenges the 1954 Cleveland Indians' modern-day record of 111 wins?
"Not with any team I've seen now," Reds manager Ray Knight said. "If anybody could do it, it would be Baltimore. The Orioles are the best team talent-wise. They have great pitching along with $ 6 million players at a lot of positions.
"That is a very tough record. It seemed like in 1986 the Mets won every game, but we still only had 107 wins."
The Mets actually won 108 that year.
Since the Indians won 111, only five teams have won more than 105 games in a single season. The New York Yankees won 109 in 1961, as did the 1969 Baltimore Orioles. In 1975, Cincinnati's Big Red Machine reached 108, matching the '70 Orioles.
Cleveland went 100-44 last year in a season shortened by labor problems, and Albert Belle has talked about the Tribe taking a run at 112 this year.
"I think there is a possibility it can happen," Milwaukee manager Phil Garner said. "In baseball it's extremely tough to do it, and I think divisional play's going to make it even tougher to do. You know what, though, it might not. Because once you're locked in like Cleveland last year, you're just playing for fun. You're free and easy and just letting it go.
"I don't know. Never say never. But I think it's going to be tough to beat 111 wins in 162 games. That's a lot of wins. Maybe we'll do it. Why do you laugh?"
We said ONE season, Phil.
 

 
 HELPING INNER-CITY BASEBALL: The Turnstile gallery in New York is selling baseball-related art to help benefit the Harlem chapter of RBI, Reviving Baseball in Inner Cities.
Baseball photographs by Jim Dow, photo-like paintings by Andy Jurinko, colorful paintings by Lance Richbourg and baseball card-like paintings by Mike Schacht are on sale, with prices starting at $ 300 and running upwards of $ 20,000 for a full-wall painting by Jurinko of Yankee Stadium in the 1960s.
 

 
 FEELING EJECTED: One day after his first ejection as Orioles manager, Davey Johnson still couldn't believe umpire Don Denkinger gave him the boot.
Johnson was thrown out of Tuesday's game after approaching Denkinger following a strike call against Bobby Bonilla.
"The only reason I went out there was that (Bonilla) kept going," Johnson said. "I went out there and said, 'Just don't throw my DH out. I'm not arguing or anything."'
Denkinger told Johnson he wasn't throwing Bonilla out. Rather, he was ejecting the manager.
"He said, 'You can't go out and argue.' I said, 'I'm not arguing.' I thought he was kidding, but when I realized I was thrown out, I wanted to get my money's worth," Johnson said.
 Load-Date: April 21, 1996

 

End of Document
