

Joe DiMaggio Joe DiMaggio Jr., the troubled son of the baseball Hall of Famer and a pallbearer at his father's funeral in March, died at a hospital in Antioch, Calif., apparently of natural causes, relatives and hospital officials said Saturday. He was 57.  DiMaggio was the only child of Joe DiMaggio and Dorothy Arnold, an actress whom the elder DiMaggio married in 1939 and divorced five years later. The elder DiMaggio did not have any children with his second wife, Marilyn Monro
The Associated Press
August 7, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 754 words
Dateline: LEESBURG, Va.
Body




Byron Farwell, author of military books and former Hillsboro mayor, died Tuesday after a heart attack. He was 78.
Farwell, who specialized in British warfare, wrote 13 books. Among his works are "Queen Victoria's Little Wars,' "Mr. Kipling's Army," and a biography of journalist Henry M. Stanley, "The Man Who Presumed."
His 14th book, the Encyclopedia of 19th-Century Land Warfare, will be published next year.
Farwell's interest in military history began with his Amry service during the invasion of North Africa in World War II, and in the Korean War.
A native of Manchester, Iowa, he worked for the Chrysler Corp. from 1954 to 1971 before moving to Hillsboro, a town of about 125 people. He was mayor from 1976 to 1982. He lost the election for a fourth term after a 17-17 vote. To break the tie, a name was drawn from a punch bowl.
 
 Rozelar Goode
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Rozelar Goode, a former sharecropper and laundry worker who raised seven children, including former Mayor W. Wilson Goode, died Thursday of heart failure. She was 95.
"She taught me that hard work, education and honesty will take you where you need to go," the former mayor said. "She always told me not to worry, everything was taken care of, and you know, she was right."
Mrs. Goode was born in North Carolina, where she was a sharecropper with her husband, Albert, for more than three decades.
The family moved to Philadelphia in 1954, as machines began to replace manual labor on the farms.
Mrs. Goode was very active in various churches for more than 75 years.
 
 Harry Litwack
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Retired Temple University basketball coach Harry Litwack, whose 21-year reign included the 1969 NIT championship, died Saturday of a stroke. He was 91.
Litwack, a cigar-smoking gentleman known as "The Chief," had been battling a spinal disease for three years.
He coached the Owls from 1952 until his retirement in 1973. Litwack's reign included an 89-75 victory over Boston College for the 1969 NIT title, and he was inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame in 1975.
Litwack also led the Owls to the NCAA Final Four in 1956 and 1958, where the team finished third both times.
Litwack's 373-193 record also made him the second-winningest coach in Temple University, after being surpassed by current head coach John Chaney in February.
 
 Kazuo Miyagawa
TOKYO (AP) - Kazuo Miyagawa, cinematographer for "Rashomon" and other Japanese film classics, died Saturday of kidney failure. He was 91.
Miyagawa's technique is characterized by balanced composition and unobtrusive camera handling. His hand-held camera work in "Tokyo Olympiad," directed by Kon Ichikawa in 1965, established new methods for making documentary films.
The Kyoto native joined Japan's major film production company, Nikkatsu Corp., in 1926 after graduating from Kyoto Commercial School.
In 1950, he filmed the award-winning "Rashomon," directed by the late Akira Kurosawa. Three years later, he filmed another classic, "Ugetsu," with late director Kenji Mizoguchi.
 
 Kathryn Murray
HONOLULU (AP) - Kathryn Murray, widow of famed dance instructor Arthur Murray, died Friday. She was 92.
The Murrays met at a Newark, N.J., radio station when she was 18. They married about four months later in New York.
They were co-hosts of his television show, "The Arthur Murray Dance Party," which ran from 1950 to 1960 and featured such guests as Helen Hayes and Milton Berle.
Murray sold his chain of dance studios in 1952, but remained president until 1964. The couple moved to Hawaii the following year.
Murray died in 1991 at the age of 95.
 
 Puey Ungphakorn
BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) - Puey Ungphakorn, a former central bank official and leading intellectual in postwar Thailand, died July 28 at his home in London. He was 83.
Puey was the former head of Bangkok's Thammasat University. He had lived in self-imposed exile since a 1976 coup, in which police and right-wing mobs killed scores of students staging a peaceful demonstration at the university.
Puey's three sons announced their father died after suffering abdominal pains, the ITV television network reported Friday. One of the sons, Jon Ungphakorn, told the Bangkok Post that blood vessels in his father's stomach lining burst, causing internal bleeding.
Puey was part of the Free Thai resistance movement to Japanese occupation during World War II. He joined the central bank in the 1950s as an economist, eventually becoming governor. He was credited with turning the Bank of Thailand into one of the most independent, competent financial institutions in Asia.
 Load-Date: August 8, 1999

 

End of Document
