

Kevorkian lawyer, master of the insult, hits the campaign trail
The Associated Press
October 25, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: National Political
Length: 1787 words
Byline: SHARON COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROYAL OAK, Mich.
Body




He calls Gov. John Engler a "moron," a "nincompoop" and "dumber than Dan Quayle and twice as ugly."
He mocks state lawmakers as having "eyes that roll around independently in their skulls."
He tweaks the state Democratic Party as being too full of "wimps and oatmeal."
Never mind that HE is the party's nominee.
Bombastic and brash, Geoffrey Fieger, the rich and famous lawyer who has spared assisted suicide advocate Jack Kevorkian from becoming a prison number, has a new fight on his hands: He's running afor governor of Michigan.
And rest assured, folks, Geoffrey Fieger, the candidate, has not been muzzled by political correctness. Once a pit bull, always a pit bull.
"I'm not going to bite my tongue," Fieger says, acknowledging that some advisers and friends have urged him to zip his lip. "They want me to be a politician. I can't do that. It would be a mistake. I have to be myself."
Fieger's "I gotta be me" style has worked wonders with juries - and made him a millionaire. But the courtroom isn't the campaign trail.
Political pundits have already counted him out in what would be a formidable race for anyone: challenging Engler, a popular, two-term incumbent in a state enjoying its lowest unemployment rate in more than 25 years.
One recent poll for The Detroit News showed Engler leading by more than 2-to-1. Fieger's unfavorable ratings registered a nightmarish 65 percent.
"He's the most unpopular candidate I've ever seen in 13 years of polling in 35 states," declares Steve Mitchell, who conducted the survey. "Not only don't they like him, they hate him."
Not everyone, of course. Fieger has plenty of friends and fans who point out that behind the big mouth is a big heart, a champion of the poor, a skilled lawyer and - mothers, take note - a devoted, generous son.
"Underneath all that brashness is a very gentle, caring person," June Fieger says of her eldest of three children. "Geoffrey has a lot of beliefs and commitments that he is very, very solid about."
And has Mom ever suggested that gentle Geoff turn it down a few decibels?
"Oh, God, yes!" she says with a laugh. But apparently to no avail.
Over the years, he has told appellate court judges to stop acting like "squirrels and rats and lizards and mollusks," pinned a clown nose on a picture of a prosecutor and called him a "certified, raving loon" and joked to a reporter about Kevorkian's idea for a string of suicide clinics.
"Jack in the Box," he said with a laugh. "Gas and go."
Those are the printable comments.
Two years ago, Fieger wrote a letter to a group of Orthodox rabbis who had criticized Kevorkian. He said the Jewish leaders' intolerance of individual freedoms put them "far closer to Nazis than they think." He later apologized.
And he's still trying to explain he really didn't call Jesus a "goofball" but was referring to how he was perceived by those who ordered the crucifixion.
Republicans, not surprisingly, have made sure no one forgets those comments, highlighting them in a TV commercial. Fieger calls it McCarthyism, saying his opponents have twisted his words, trying to cast him as a bigot.
Fieger's latest target is Engler. He mocks the governor's girth, vowing to kick his derri Gere - which he compares to the size of potholes on Michigan roads - across the state.
And he ridicules Engler for being an elected official since he was 22.
"If he wasn't doing this job, he wouldn't be qualified to do anything," he thunders to a group of Gray Panthers in this southeast Michigan town. "It's un-beee-lievable!!"
Engler, for his part, calls Fieger "a pretty divisive figure" but leaves most of the attacks to other Republicans.
They have played up Fieger's past legal troubles with a commercial that features a drunken-driving conviction more than a decade ago and a $ 7,500 sanction for "judge shopping" in Kevorkian cases.
Like a disc jockey without a seven-second delay, Fieger's riffs irk some and endear him to others. Conservative pundit George Will sniffed that he's "47 going on 13." But labor groups applaud his agenda, his family history of activism and his "tell it like it is" style.
"He's so transparent, you've just got to believe him," gushes Lula Odom, a state official of the Service Employees International Union, waiting to pose for a photo with Fieger after he addressed her group.
"He's always for the underdog," says Lee Hayes, president of a Michigan local of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, after a Fieger speech. "They say he shoots from the hip. If they can't accept what he's saying, shame on them."
As he campaigns, blue-collar workers swarm Fieger as if he's a Hollywood celebrity, lining up for autographs or a quick chat.
For a man who has been interviewed so often - he boasts to one audience that his name probably will pop up on the Internet 25 million times - the spotlight is his sunlight. Garbo, he's not.
Late for a speech and stalled by road construction, he playfully urges his campaign driver to pass on the shoulder of the road. "When they see who I am," he jokes, "they won't give me a ticket." And he gleefully flashes the thumbs-up sign to motorists who wave as they recognize him.
"I don't think I could rob banks successfully," he crows. "I have one of those faces people remember."
But if they know his face, they don't always know his politics.
So everywhere he goes, he ticks off his positions: Reopen closed mental hospitals. No privatization of government services. No tax dollars to private schools. And no government interference when it comes to your body.
"I'm not for abortion or for assisted suicide," says Fieger, who has given scores of speeches on the right to die. "But I support the right of people to make the decision."
He also emphasizes his political independence, saying he is not compromised by back-scratching and back-room deal-making. "Nobody owns me," he says. "Nobody controls me. Nobody pulls my strings."
Fieger won the three-way Democratic primary in August - pouring about $ 1 million of his own money into the campaign. While some party members have embraced him, others have denounced him, fearing he'll drag down the ticket.
"He's not only an albatross around the necks of the Democrats, he's an anchor," says Mitchell, the pollster. "He's going to bring down other Democrats with him."
Mitchell says Fieger could cause the Democrats to lose control of the Michigan House, where they hold a 58-52 majority, and perhaps a few congressional seats. But other polls have shown Republicans have made little headway in picking off Democratic incumbents in Congress.
So what does Geoffrey Fieger offer voters?
"I'm smart. I'm creative. I'm industrious."
Modest? Well, you can't have everything.
Still, Fieger is keenly aware, too, of other people's perceptions.
"Sometimes I talk too stridently, my words are too harsh, too personal," he told Democrats this summer. "Sometimes I have said things I wish I could take back."
But Geoffrey Nels Fieger didn't get where he is by being a wallflower.
As a personal injury and malpractice lawyer, he is a master of detail who does his homework: He has won dozens of cases with judgments of $ 1 million-plus.
"He has never been out-prepared," says his close friend, Stephen Hnat, a psychologist who is the campaign's policy director. "You could be in a room with eight people, and he will hear all eight conversations. He doesn't miss a thing."
Nor does he shy away from hardball tactics. When a hospital balked at paying a malpractice judgment, he got a court order to remove the furniture.
That attracted the eye of Kevorkian, who became his most famous client.
Together, they seem an odder couple than Felix and Oscar.
Fieger is 6 feet 2 inches tall, husky, with '70s-style shaggy hair, bankers' pinstripe suits and a perpetual tan (one of his four homes is on the Caribbean island of Anguilla). Kevorkian is small with an almost cadaverous frame, a '50s crewcut, Perry Como cardigans and a clay complexion. He once lived in a windowless apartment.
"There couldn't be a solitary confinement cell that was worse than his apartment," Fieger cracks. Kevorkian now rents one of Fieger's homes.
Appearances aside, Fieger says there's a common bond.
"He's got principles and he sticks to them," Fieger says. "We're a lot alike. We have strong determination. If we think something's right, we go and do it."
That's a Fieger tradition.
Fieger's late father, Bernie, was a labor lawyer and Freedom Rider in the South during the civil rights movement. His mother, June, was a teacher and union organizer who always carried a picket sign in her car trunk.
Fieger studied theater and speech, earning two degrees at the University of Michigan. He also dabbled in acting and music. As a teen, he played in a band with his brother, Doug, who later, as a member of The Knack, had the '70s hit "My Sharona."
But law was a magnet. "I'm an agitator," he says, his eyes lighting up. "I love things on the edge."
That comes from his father, who shared his son's "explosive, type A-plus" personality, according to June Fieger. When they practiced law together, Fieger says if he won a million dollar case in the morning, his father demanded to know what he did in the afternoon.
Friends and family describe Fieger as a perfectionist and a neatness freak who will tidy up the campaign office when he visits. He shares a home with his wife of 15 years, Keenie, who has twice filed for divorce but reconciled. They dote on their three cats.
Friends also say the private Fieger bears little resemblance to the caustic litigator.
He is intensely loyal, remembering birthdays and keeping in touch with former clients for years.
He is generous, once dashing off a check after reading about a police widow who couldn't afford to bury her husband.
And he is sentimental, naming his law library after a beloved janitor at his law firm who died of cancer. Fieger represented him in a legal case but also tended to him, bringing him lunch and shaving him in his dying days.
"If you want the best lawyer in the world, you would want him on your side," Hnat says. "The same thing is true as a friend."
Hnat says Fieger has learned that a campaign is different from the one-on-one adversarial system of law, and his words reach a wider audience.
Fieger admits, too, he has been frustrated by politics, which he calls "totally sleazy."
"In the law, I'm against skilled advocates," he says. "There's a code of ethics. In politics, there's nothing."
As Fieger enters the final stretch of his campaign, he dismisses those who say he'll never win. "I have contempt for the impossible," he says. "I wouldn't do this if I weren't confident."
And if he loses, would he consider another run?
"There'd only be one other job I'd be interested in."
Drumroll, please.
"President."
 Load-Date: October 25, 1998

 

End of Document
