

Looking Down the Barrel of the Welfare Revolution
June 3, 1996, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1603 words
Byline: By HELEN O'NEILL, Associated Press Writer
Body




Caroline Hanvelt was a nervous wreck the day Wisconsin's welfare revolution came rolling through her home in the form of a state letter ordering her to get a job.
"They told me if I didn't work I would get deducted or cut," said the 42-year-old divorced mother of six, who has slipped on and off the welfare rolls in Ellsworth, Wis. for much of the past decade.
"I was a nervous wreck. I was pretty upset," Hanvelt said. "It was pretty scary to think I might lose what I had."
It is, in fact, a new and scary world to Hanvelt and millions of other welfare recipients. Wisconsin is not the only state that is tinkering with its poor; across the country, states are shuttling the needy back into the work force and drastically curtailing their benefits.
For Hanvelt, the effect was dramatic. She said she always worked when she could, but she also depended on a government cushion - up to $ 600 a month, depending on how many of her children were eligible for assistance.
In 1993 the state launched an experimental program, imposing time limits on benefits and strict work requirements for those on assistance. Prodded by her case worker, Hanvelt went to school and eventually into the work force.
She now works full time at a home for mentally retarded people and is paying her bills without government help.
The same story is playing itself out in state after state.
In Vermont, the state demands community service from those who need assistance but don't have jobs. In Virginia, recipients must sign an "Agreement of Personal Responsibility" that stresses work and self-sufficiency before they can get a government check.
And Mississippi denies additional benefits to children born while the family is receiving support.
To a greater or lesser degree, every state in the nation is fiddling with welfare, slapping time limits on benefits and demanding performance for pay. And nowhere as aggressively as in the Midwest
Last month Gov. Tommy Thompson signed legislation ending his state's participation in Aid To Families With Dependent Children, the cornerstone of the federal welfare program. Instead of receiving a government check, welfare recipients in Wisconsin will now have to work for their money. For every hour they don't show up, they will be docked the equivalent amount in pay.
The Wisconsin proposal, which still needs federal approval, would limit participation to two consecutive years and a lifetime of five years. Most other states limit benefits temporarily but leave the door open for recipients to eventually re-apply.
"It's radical," said state Sen. Gwendolynne Moore of Wisconsin, a former welfare recipient and now an outspoken critic of her state's reform.
"Welfare is messing with a lot of peoples lives. It's creating a whole new underclass of poor women and children."
Reform comes with names like The Oregon Option, A Better Chance in Delaware and EMPOWER in Arizona. But the message is the same. For the first time since AFDC was established for needy mothers and children in 1935, people are being told the welfare well is dry.
They are being ordered to find work, no matter how many children they have to support. They are being hustled into training programs and community service and forced to pay a portion of Medicaid.
Most dramatic of all, they are being told there are limits on how long the government will provide for their families.
And the clocks are ticking around the country.
Michelle Brock of Pensacola, Fla., said her wake-up call came the day she clutched her infant daughter and listened to a grim-faced panel spell out her fate.
Shape up, seven anonymous voices warned. Get a job. Get off welfare. Baby or no baby, we're no longer going to support you.
It was 19-year-old mother's first appearance before the citizen review board that makes monthly recommendations to the state on who to cut off welfare.
"I was stupid," Brock admitted a year later, juggling soda and cigarette sales at the Pensacola convenience store where she is now the night manager.
"After I had my baby, I expected to sign up and then sit on my butt collecting my check," Brock said. "If it wasn't for the work program, I would have been on welfare for the rest of my life."
As an incentive to stay in the work force, Brock is being allowed to temporarily retain some of her benefits, in addition to her pay. Other states have adopted the same approach, disregarding "assets" - like wages or a car - that were previously taken into account in determining eligibility for assistance. Child care, transportation and extended health benefits are also being incorporated into some programs in an effort to ease the transition from welfare to work.
Michael Kharfen, spokesman for U.S. Department of Health and Human Services said the number of people collecting AFDC has dropped from 14.1 million in January 1993 to 12.8 million in February 1996 partly as a result of a newfound urgency among states to "end welfare as we know it."
That may have been Bill Clinton's call during the 1992 presidential campaign, but it has since become a rallying cry for governors across the country. The National Governor's Association, which is chaired by Thompson, is lobbying to replace the existing federal program with block grants, saying states should have more flexibility to design their own programs.
The Clinton administration has already granted limited flexibility to 37 states in the form of waivers allowing experimental programs, though Clinton has also vetoed Republican welfare proposals that he said were too harsh on children.
Bob Dole, the presumptive Republican presidential candidate, has chimed in too - calling for a "tough love" approach to welfare that would include a five-year lifetime limit on benefits and allow states to deny benefits to teen-age mothers, illegal immigrants and drug abusers.
Whatever the end result of the national debate, there is little doubt that things are changing irreversibly.
The toughest question for reformers is what will happen to the nation's welfare recipients as a result of those changes, particularly in the next year or two, when their benefits end? What sort of jobs will states provide in order to keep them employed? And who will take care of children whose parents no longer get a government check?
"We have a whole new world of hurt coming," said Kerryn Laumer of the Poverty Network Initiative in Milwaukee. "A world where you scare people. You confuse them. You threaten to take their benefits and make them scared for their children. And it's OK to do this because they are just lazy welfare moms anyway."
Researchers say it's too early to predict the consequences.
"No one really knows what will happen," said Gordon Berlin of the Manpower Demonstration Research Corp. in New York, which is tracking welfare reform in several states, including Wisconsin. "Will this provide the dominant thread that puts them into the mainstream? Or does it drive them further into poverty?"
Julie Stanley of Iowa thinks the answer lies right in her mother's Des Moines kitchen. The 28-year-old nurse was forced to move back into her parents home with her three children when her welfare check was canceled.
Now she wonders how long they can survive on her mother's social security and enduring good will.
Stanley said she supports time limits and welfare control, but not the methods used to implement them. The state cut her benefits after she refused to participate in mandatory testing program to determine her employability and skills.
"It was demeaning," Stanley said, her voice bristling. "I was sitting in a room full of women being told to count blocks and put pegs into a board to see how coordinated I was. Put me to work. Or put me in classes. Don't humiliate me by making me count blocks in order to get a state check."
But injured feelings have little place in the welfare revolution that is sweeping the country.
Nor does disbelief - a more frustrating problem for case workers.
"You try to tell them that they have only 21 months, but people don't believe they will be cut off," sighed Lori Taylor, a case worker in Pensacola, Fla.
Taylor described a 22-year-old mother of five who refused to participate in newly mandated education or job training programs. The state punished her by cutting $ 61 from her monthly $ 485 welfare check. Still, she wouldn't look for a job.
"I said, 'what will you do when your check stops completely?' " Taylor said. "She said, 'then I'll have to get a job.' "
Vermont deals with welfare truants by denying them cash. Instead, the state uses their welfare checks to pay their bills, including rent, utilities and groceries.
"One family called up and said, 'how are we supposed to buy toilet paper?' " said Craig Comstock, a district welfare director in Montpelier. "They were so miserable they went out and got jobs."
But the line between participation and punishment is not always so clear.
Sitting in his trailer home on his one-acre lot near the Canadian border, Reginald Collins of Derby, Vt., questioned the state's logic in putting him to work cleaning parks for $ 4.75 an hour. While the community service program was temporarily getting him off the welfare rolls, Collins said, it wasn't offering much long-term security for his wife and children. And it was probably taking a summer job from a student.
"Sometimes I think the people down in Washington or wherever they make all these decisions, they should visit a little town like Derby and see how we live," said Collins, 35, who lost his job as a machinist 18 months ago.
"It's hard living up here. We always have high unemployment. You can't just do away with welfare for everyone in the country."
 Load-Date: June 3, 1996

 

End of Document
