

Look For the No-Dole Union Label at the Democratic Convention
August 21, 1996, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 790 words
Byline: By KEVIN GALVIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




At the Democratic National Convention, people won't have to look far for the union label in this blue-collar bastion with more than one of every four delegates members. Labor's gaze, meanwhile, will be focused on keeping Bob Dole out of the Oval Office come the fall.
"It's going to be a great opportunity to contrast what the Clinton White House has done with what Bob Dole would like to do with the country," said Steve Rosenthal, the AFL-CIO's political director.
"This is going to be a great opportunity for the Democrats to make it clear that they stand with American working people."
With not a whiff of controversy expected at the Democratic convention next week, union leaders see the meeting as a chance to gather their forces and underscore labor's agenda for the fall elections.
Happy to have a generally sympathetic president up for a second term, labor will devote its efforts to pushing such issues as pension reform, health care and education to the center of the political debate.
Individual unions plan to run pro-labor ads in Chicago, caucus with their delegates, and mingle with party bigwigs. AFL-CIO President John Sweeney is holding an "America Needs a Raise" rally downtown on the convention's opening day, Monday, to draw attention to working families.
The National Education Association and the American Federation of Teachers want their delegates to talk up the differences between Democrats and Republicans on education reform - especially in light of GOP nominee Dole's criticism of teachers unions at the Republican convention last week.
Both groups oppose a Dole-supported plan to provide vouchers to parents who want to send their children to private or parochial schools.
"Everything he's said for the last month, and specifically in San Diego, talks about the demise and weakening of public education," said Mary Elizabeth Teasley, the NEA's head of governmental relations. "His whole vision about public education is that the answer is to strip the resources from public schools and devote them to private and parochial schools."
More than 1,200 of the 4,290 delegates to the Democratic convention will be members of AFL-CIO unions or the NEA.
The AFL-CIO plans a meeting Sunday of its 810 delegates. The focus will be beyond Chicago, on the labor federation's effort to renew its clout with a $ 35 million advertising and get-out-the-vote campaign.
"These are people who are leaders in their unions, in their communities," said Rosenthal of the AFL-CIO. "What we hope to do there is … give people a sense of where things stand, get people focused on the work following the convention."
Labor's campaign has targeted Republicans who opposed raising the minimum wage and who voted to slow the growth of Medicare. Republicans have directed withering criticism at the AFL-CIO's campaign, calling it a thinly veiled effort by "big labor bosses" to boost Democrats in congressional races.
The AFL-CIO was releasing a poll by Peter D. Hart Research Associates today that showed what rank-and-file union members think of its campaign and about broader political issues.
President Clinton angered unionists early in his administration by pushing for the North American Free Trade Agreement. But he has regained labor's confidence by opposing anti-union initiatives since the GOP took control of Capitol Hill in 1994, and by signing into law several labor priorities.
On Tuesday, he signed a hard-won 90-cent-per-hour increase in the minimum wage, and took the opportunity to praise labor for championing the issue.
"There are very few unions in America that have minimum-wage workers," Clinton noted. "Most of these unions did this because they thought it was the right thing to do."
But both the NEA and the AFL-CIO took a similar stand against the welfare reform package Clinton has said he will sign, criticizing it as harmful to needy children.
Yet labor officials have no intention of protesting in Chicago, preferring to focus on their differences with Republican policies.
The Union of Needletrades, Industrial and Textile Employees is running two television ads in Chicago next week to trumpet efforts to bring workers together and fight for change at their jobs and in their communities.
"UNITE," one spot says. "Together we're the face of change."
While labor officials celebrate the enactment of the minimum wage increase and a bill Clinton is signing today to allow workers to keep their health insurance when they change jobs, they say many issues important to everyday Americans remain unaddressed.
"We need to keep standing up for affordable health care and pensions and make it clear that the issues that are important to working families are going to be taken up in Congress," said Deborah Dion, an AFL-CIO spokeswoman.
 Load-Date: August 21, 1996

 

End of Document
