

MASSACHU.S.ETTS: Lively Boston juxtaposes the old and the new
The Associated Press
May 24, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel
Length: 1018 words
Byline: By LINDA KIM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOSTON
Body




The city known as the birthplace of the American Revolution is most often recognized for its role in U.S. history.
A slew of famous figures are indelibly associated with the Massachusetts state capital: statesman Benjamin Franklin, author Ralph Waldo Emerson and the Kennedy family political dynasty.
While Boston is one of the nation's oldest cities, it is also steeped in eclectic infusions of modern culture. The city's lure lies not only in the historic but also in its novelty, innovation, and technology.
The largest city in New England, with a population of about 550,000, Boston is the region's leading financial, governmental and transportation hub.
Founded in 1630 by English Puritans, Boston began as a tightly knit village of farmers, craftsmen and ministers. It grew rapidly, serving as the colonies' main seaport for ships bound for England and the West Indies. It became the largest British settlement on the continent.
But the colonists began to resent Britain's taxes and military occupation, crying "taxation without representation." In 1773, angry citizens disguised as Indians dumped three shiploads of taxable tea into Boston Harbor in the Boston Tea Party.
After Paul Revere's famous midnight ride to collect soldiers to fight the British, the "shot heard 'round the world" was fired in nearby Concord, Mass., sparking the beginning of the American Revolution.
Today, more than two centuries later, Boston is a bustling, modern metropolis with an influx of high-tech companies and some of the best medical institutions in the nation.
Partly fueling the city's boom is the three dozen colleges and universities - including Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology across the Charles River in nearby Cambridge.
"It's very much a college town," says Debbie Lee, 20, a junior at Boston University. "I like all the different people Boston attracts."
The educational mecca of students and graduates has created a lively music, retail and restaurant scene.
"A city whose reputation was that scrod and baked beans were staples of the restaurant scene, today it has nationally renowned chefs," says Patrick Moscaritolo, president of the Greater Boston Convention & Visitors Bureau.
Boston has also provided the setting for several movies, such as the Academy Award-winning "Good Will Hunting" and the sleeper hit "Next Stop Wonderland." The hit TV show "Ally McBeal" is also set in Boston.
The diverse city consists of 10 neighborhoods, which include downtown Boston, Back Bay, Beacon Hill, South Boston, East Boston and Charlestown.
Sanjeev Khosla, 26, says he favors the city's North End, where he manages the Freedom Trail Restaurant.
"It's safe, has friendly people and has everything old-fashioned," he says.
The North End, where many residents are of Italian ancestry, is home to several landmarks along the Freedom Trail - a marked path that leads tourists to some of Boston's most famous historic sites.
Landmarks along the 3-mile trail include Faneuil Hall, the scene of many protests by angry colonists before the revolution; the site of the Boston Massacre; the Old State House; the site of Benjamin Franklin's birth, and Paul Revere's House.
Another historic stop is the USS Constitution, better known as "Old Ironsides," the oldest commissioned warship in the U.S Navy. The ship, just over 200 years old, offers spectacular views of Boston.
Aside from the historic, many visitors are attracted to the Boston's vibrant nightlife.
"There's a lot going on from clubs to art museums," says Pamela Star, a bartender at The Times, a bar in the financial district. Star, 27, says she enjoys watching theater at the Wang Center for the Performing Arts or The Colonial Theatre.
On New Year's Eve, Bostonians congregate in full force for First Night Celebration, a day and night of outdoor and indoor concerts and festivities ending in fireworks over Boston Harbor.
Boston is also home to professional basketball, hockey and baseball. Fans can catch the Celtics and Bruins at the FleetCenter or take in a Red Sox game at Fenway Park, ending the day at the Bull & Finch pub on Beacon Street. The Bull & Finch is also known as the "Cheers" bar, named after the long-running television series of the same name.
The city's signature athletic event, the Boston Marathon, is the nation's oldest continuously run marathon and, some say, the most prestigious.
The 26.2-mile race is held every year on Patriots Day, the third Monday in April. The first marathon was run on April 19, 1897, with 15 men. In 1999, more than 12,000 runners participated in the event, which starts in Hopkinton and ends in Boston.
Other notable sites in this 52-square-mile city on the East Coast:
- The African Meeting House, the centerpiece of the historic Smith Court African-American community, is the oldest black church building still standing in the United States.
- Trinity Church in the city's Back Bay neighborhood remains the crowning centerpiece of Copley Square.
- Boston Public Library, with its impressive French and religious murals, vaulted ceilings and marble staircase, is the oldest library in the country.
- Chinatown, from the gilded dragons to the numerous pastry shops, draws a large crowd looking to sample some of the culture and many ethnic restaurants.
Tourists enjoy shopping for the latest fads along the fashion center of Newbury Street and strolling through Boston Common, the oldest public park in the United States.
The Museum of Fine Arts, New England Aquarium and the Franklin Park Zoo also offer endless activities for the tireless tourist.
Some recent transplants to the city grouse over the difficulty in driving in Boston. With numerous one-way streets and the ongoing "Big Dig" construction project, many choose public subways and buses. In the oldest parts of the city, the streets wind and curve in a bewildering tangle.
Many locals, such as Moscaritolo of the visitors bureau, prefer to walk. He invoked the observations of Emerson who commented there are no worse surveyors than those who designed Boston.
"We always tell people Boston's streets were laid out as cow paths," Moscaritolo jokes.
 Load-Date: May 24, 1999

 

End of Document
