

McCain the political reformer vs. McCain the powerful senator
The Associated Press
January 7, 2000, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 854 words
Byline: By DAVID ESPO, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




John McCain the political reformer is face to face with John McCain the power-wielding Senate committee chairman, and the fate of John McCain the Republican presidential hopeful may depend on their compatibility.
"My job is to make the bureaucrats work for the people," McCain insisted this week when pressed about a letter he wrote to the Federal Communications Commission on behalf of a political donor.
"I would do the same thing again, almost anytime," added the Arizona senator, who chairs the Senate Commerce Committee with jurisdiction over communications, transportation and other sectors of the economy.
He merely asked the FCC to issue a ruling after two years of deliberations, he said, and didn't suggest which way the agency should come down on a request for Paxson Communications to purchase a television station in Pittsburgh.
McCain's defenders say that what he did is business-as-usual in Washington, and they're right.
The FCC says it has received between 7,000 and 8,000 pieces of correspondence a year from members of Congress in the past three years. McCain's office authored 215 of them. And apart from the senator's letter about Paxson, the agency heard from nine other lawmakers interested in the same issue.
It's a form of constituent service. Members of Congress have legal jurisdiction over federal agencies, and private interests have a right to appeal to their representatives for help.
That makes the two groups natural partners in alliances that - in the current era - often are sealed with campaign cash, and lots of it.
The nonpartisan Center for Public Integrity released its quadrennial book recently on the ties between presidential hopefuls and their political donors.
"All the leading presidential candidates have a long-standing group of career patrons who have sponsored their careers and for whom they have done favors using their government offices," said Charles Lewis, executive director of the center.
"It's a mutually beneficial relationship."
Except now for McCain, who has emerged as George W. Bush's leading rival for the GOP presidential nomination on the stength of his pledge to rid the nation of what he calls the "pernicious" influence of big money.
The issue arose anew in a debate Friday night, and again McCain defended his actions. Seeking to turn the issue to his advantage, he announced in a post-debate interview that his Senate office on Saturday would be releasing numerous letters he had written to agencies and his campaign manager suggested that other presidential hopefuls do likewise.
"There's suspicion about all of us as a result of these huge amounts of money that wash around political campaigns," the senator said this week.
"With me, being the 'reformer,' obviously those stories are more relevant."
The "story" in this case is that Paxson officials made $20,000 in campaign donations, and the senator was permitted to use the company's jet. McCain vigorously denies a quid pro quo.
The senator's advocacy of campaign finance reform is especially attractive to independent voters, and in New Hampshire independents are allowed to vote in either the Republican or Democratic primary. McCain hopes thousands of them show up to support him when the Granite State holds the first presidential primary of the year on Feb. 1.
The importance of the state to his prospects couldn't be clearer.
He himself has said he needs to win or at least come in a close second to maintain his viability in a race that looks otherwise like a romp for Bush.
In private, several GOP sources said during the week that McCain was furious over the issue coming up - and wondering whether Bush had a hand in it.
In public, though, McCain has faced the first major flare-up of his campaign with equanimity. He smiled his way through Thursday night's debate, much as he kept his good humor in the Senate last fall when fellow Republicans challenged him during debate over campaign finance legislation to specify who among them had been corrupted by the power of big money.
Republican sources, speaking privately at the time, said those challenges were part of an effort to make the Arizonan lose his temper in public.
That would be unsenatorial inside the Capitol, unpresidential in the context of his current pursuit.
Bush is dealing carefully with the issue, declining to attack McCain directly, yet subtly seeking gain. "I'm not a committee chairman," he said on Thursday. "I'm an outsider."
Bush, though, opened up another front: He criticized McCain's campaign finance proposal for threatening to harm the Republican Party and the "conservative cause."
McCain never figured to win the New Hampshire primary on the strength of conservative Republicans alone, but he can scarcely afford to be viewed as an enemy of the effort to turn the Democrats out of the White House.
So now he's got to blunt that charge, at the same time taking care that the message conveyed by his senatorial letter writing doesn't drown out the one he's trying to project to the voters who have warmed to his insurgent's campaign.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - David Espo has covered presidential campaigns for The Associated Press since 1980.
 Load-Date: January 8, 2000

 

End of Document
