

MEMPHIS IN MAY: Blues and barbecue on the banks of the Mississippi
The Associated Press
March 8, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel
Length: 1335 words
Byline: WOODY BAIRD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEMPHIS, Tenn.
Body




Memphis survived the Civil War, yellow fever and racial unrest, and now this old river city may be approaching what its mayor calls "her defining moment."
As the city's leading salesman, Mayor W.W. Herenton is likely a bit biased, but his flowing exclamations aren't without foundation.
Memphis' once deteriorating downtown is looking up. Beale Street is happening, and the mighty Mississippi River swirls as majestic and mysterious as ever along its riverfront.
"This is a river, cotton, blues, jazz, gospel town with a lot of Southern charm," Herenton said recently while taking in the sights on Beale Street. "I think Memphis is approaching her defining moment."
Like any big town, Memphis has its problems with crime, drugs and other social ills, but it's drawing good reviews these days from those looking for colorful places to visit.
It was picked by American Heritage magazine last October as the Great American Place of 1998.
The city's annual Memphis in May celebration is a month-long party that includes a major music festival featuring the Delta blues and the largest pork barbecue cooking contest in the world.
Memphis is proud of its barbecue (which in these parts means pork, by the way), and restaurants throughout town offer up some of the best anywhere.
"If you come to downtown Memphis on any weekend, it's just saturated with people from all over the world," Herenton says. "They have a great time."
It wasn't always thus.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s assassination in Memphis in 1968 helped speed a suburban flight already under way by many downtown businesses and inner-city residents.
Beale Street by then was a shadow of its former self, largely due to local government meddling and the end of legal segregation that helped make it a cultural and entertainment mecca for blacks throughout the Delta.
In fact, by the late 1970s the four-block strip now known as the Beale Street Historic District was little more than a string of empty storefronts surrounded by a chain-link fence. It was then that the first successful move got under way to bring the street back to life.
Reopened in 1983, thanks to millions of dollars in government and private spending, Beale Street is now a main tourist draw and an indispensable part of downtown renewal.
Its two dozen bars, restaurants and shops draw thousands of visitors to the street made famous by W.C. Handy, B.B. King and a legion of other musicians.
A few blocks to the south, The Lorraine Motel where King was felled by an assassin's rifle slug has made a comeback, too. It's now the National Civil Rights Museum, an educational center and monument to America's struggle for racial equality.
Despite the racial turmoils of the '60s, Memphis has moved past such troubles now. Herenton, in his second term, is the city's first elected black mayor, and he was returned to office with strong support from whites and blacks alike.
Playing on Memphis' rich musical history, boosters focus heavily on the city's nightlife, which accounts for much of the $ 2 billion a year tourism means to this city of 610,000 residents.
Clubs throughout town, from big boys like Elvis Presley's Memphis on Beale to lesser-known spots such as Green's Lounge in working-class Memphis or the Young Avenue Deli in funky midtown, offer a solid and varied musical menu.
"We look at music as our most important strategic asset," says Kevin Kane, director of the city's Convention and Visitors Bureau.
Memphis, of course, is known around the world as the home of Elvis Presley, and the king of rock 'n' roll has left his tracks all over town.
His former residence, Graceland, draws more than 700,000 visitors a year and is the centerpiece of a week-long gathering of Elvis faithful each August on the anniversary of his death in 1977.
The tiny Sun Studio where rock pioneers such as Presley, Jerry Lee Lewis, and Carl Perkins got their starts, shows visitors how humble the beginnings really were.
Stax Records of the 1960s boasted artists such as Otis Redding, Isaac Hayes and Sam and Dave. Hi Records scored in the 1970s with hits by Al Green, who sings for the Lord now at his Full Gospel Tabernacle in Memphis.
But Richard Snow, editor of American Heritage, says his magazine picked Memphis because of its place in the overall American experience, not just for its music.
"For what is basically a small city, it has a tremendous history," Snow says. "I can't think of another place that has as many different strains of history flowing through it."
Memphis sits on high bluffs where Chickasaw Indians once made their homes and Spanish explorer Hernando DeSoto got his first look at the Mississippi River in 1541.
Tourist riverboats are launched from the old cobblestones at the foot of downtown where paddle wheelers once brought in their cargos of slaves and cotton.
The riverfront was also the site of the Union Army landing when the Union captured Memphis in 1862.
Union Gen. U.S. Grant set up headquarters at the Hunt-Phelan Home, now a tourist attraction a few blocks up Beale Street from the river. Built between 1828 and 1832, the grand old house is filled with original furnishings of the Hunt-Phelan family.
Confederate Gen. Nathan Bedford Forrest, one of the South's fiercest cavalrymen, is buried under an imposing statue of himself on horseback in a small park just a block east of Sun Studio.
Though Memphis offered only token resistance to the Northern occupation, which spared the city the devastation that befell much of the South, Forrest struck whenever and wherever he could.
Beside the Rendezvous, one of the city's best-known barbecue restaurants, runs Washburn's Alley, the escape route of Northern Gen. Cadwaller Washburn who fled from Forrest's raiders in his nightclothes in 1864.
Forrest later had the general's captured uniform returned to him.
In the 1870s, yellow fever epidemics killed or ran off so many Memphis residents the city lost its charter and became a taxing district of the state.
Many of those victims are buried in historic Elmwood Cemetery, 80 rolling acres of huge, old trees and elaborate stone monuments a short distance from downtown.
It's the final resting place for 20 Civil War generals, 27 mayors, governors and senators and some 70,000 other folk, from madams and riverboat gamblers to the housewife whose gravestone simply reads, "She Done What She Could."
Despite the yellow fever, Memphis was again a major business center for the region by the turn of the century and a leading national market for cotton and hardwoods.
Many of the Front Street buildings once home to traders along "Cotton Row," a block in from the river, are now business offices and apartments.
Like much of downtown, The Peabody Hotel, built in 1925, hit on hard times in the 1970s.
But now renovated to its original splendor, it is a downtown jewel with an ornate lobby attracting hotel guests and non-guests alike for drinks and a look at the ducks swimming in a large marble fountain.
The ducks are marched into and out of the lobby each day to great fanfare.
While gambling is illegal in Tennessee, many Memphis visitors make excursions to Tunica, Miss., 35 miles to the south, where nine riverboat casinos operate 24 hours a day.
Tunica, which got its first riverboat in 1992, is now the largest casino center between Atlantic City, N.J., and Las Vegas.
Like any tourist city, Memphis has the usual fare of around-town bus tours, but it also is home to smaller operators offering offbeat views of the city.
The American Dream Safari, a one-man show, makes expeditions around town or down into the Mississippi Delta in a restored 1955 Cadillac.
The Map Room, a 50-seat music and beer bar on Main Street, has walking tours to such sites as the spot where Davy Crockett washed ashore naked one night after the flatboat he was riding on sank in the Mississippi.
Later, on his way west after losing his Tennessee seat in Congress, Crockett led a group of revelers on a pub crawl of Memphis bars where he exclaimed: "I'm going to Texas. Tennessee can go to hell."
He ended up at the Alamo.
 

 
 Load-Date: March 8, 1999

 

End of Document
