

Might the 'the right to remain silent' someday disappear?
The Associated Press
July 21, 1999, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 785 words
Byline: By RICHARD CARELLI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




"You have the right to remain silent. Anything you say may be used against you in a court of law."
The Miranda warnings, familiar to generations of Americans who viewed countless arrests in the movies and on TV, are hailed by civil libertarians as "among our most widely respected and recognized manifestations of individual rights." But some conservatives say the required police warnings exact a heavy toll, seriously harming public safety.
Might the warnings someday disappear?
Police have been giving the warnings before questioning criminal suspects ever since a 1966 Supreme Court decision, Miranda vs. Arizona, said they had to. The nation's highest court, then far more liberal than today, sought to remedy the "inherently coercive" atmosphere of police interrogations by imposing procedural protections.
The court said police must tell suspects they have rights, including a lawyer's help while answering questions, and inform them that a lawyer will be appointed to represent them if they cannot afford to hire one.
The ruling flowed from the Fifth Amendment's guarantee that no one "shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself." But the court never explicitly said its decision or the police warnings were required by the Fifth Amendment.
American law enforcement authorities initially hated the ruling but eventually credited it with improving police efficiency. Opposition never disappeared entirely, however, and a case soon to reach the Supreme Court has Miranda under attack again.
At issue is what should happen when police, intentionally or not, fail to give the warnings. Such failures now routinely result in a valuable piece of evidence - a confession or some incriminating statement - being lost to prosecutors.
Worried that federal agents' errors might lead to truthful confessions being thrown out of court, Congress sought to overturn the Miranda ruling in 1968 and passed a law that said federal courts do not have to dismiss confessions made without Miranda warnings.
But the law lay largely dormant for nearly 30 years, until a surprising federal appeals court ruling last April.
The 4th U.S. Circuit Court, ruling in the case of a Maryland man accused in seven bank robberies in Maryland and Virginia, said Charles Dickerson's incriminating remarks to FBI agents should be admitted as trial evidence against him even though he may not have received a proper Miranda warning.
Neither Dickerson nor the federal prosecutors who opposed his appeal focused on the 1968 law, known as Section 3501. But University of Utah law professor Paul Cassell, representing the conservative Washington Legal Foundation as a friend of the court, argued that 3501 allowed use of the evidence regardless of any Miranda violation.
The appeals court, by an 8-5 vote, agreed. It ruled that 3501 means that failing to issue Miranda warnings no longer requires automatic exclusion of evidence in federal prosecutions.
James Hundley, the court-appointed Fairfax, Va., lawyer who plans to file Dickerson's Supreme Court appeal by July 30, thinks the appeals court "was dead wrong" but worries nevertheless for his client, free on bond while awaiting trial, and for the nation at large.
"Sure, we run the risk of having the whole country stuck with a bad Supreme Court decision, but I have to represent my client zealously," Hundley said. "If police can violate Miranda with impunity, where's the check on police power? The warnings could disappear."
The court is expected to say in October whether it will review Dickerson's case.
Paul Smith, following the case for the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, said the federal law should be invalidated.
"There's enough of a constitutional aspect to Miranda that Congress cannot take away the rights it provided," he said. "If you don't force police to give the warnings, you effectively are taking way the rights."
The American Civil Liberties Union contends the Miranda ruling "was based on constitutional ground" and that the 1968 law is blatantly unconstitutional because Congress enacted it "with the express purpose of returning to the pre-Miranda, case-by-case determination of whether a confession was voluntary."
The Clinton administration previously took the same view, with Attorney General Janet Reno calling 3501 unconstitutional.
Asked whether Justice Department lawyers will defend the federal law in the Supreme Court, Deputy Solicitor General Michael Dreeben had no comment.
Cassell professed confidence in a recent interview: "I think the Supreme Court should be very receptive to upholding 3501. If so, I'd expect to see states following Congress' lead and moving in a similar direction. The potential for expansion is there."
 Load-Date: July 21, 1999

 

End of Document
