

Mondale: The name's the same, the game is different
The Associated Press
August 8, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 501 words
Byline: By ROCHELLE OLSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROCHESTER, Minn.
Body




The name and the face are recognizable to most Minnesotans.
"A lot of people say 'How's your dad?' A lot of people say I look like him," former state Sen. Ted Mondale says to several dozen senior citizens gathered for afternoon cookies and coffee at their apartment building.
The women smile, nod and murmur that yes, yes he does look like former Vice President Walter Mondale.
But the son, seeking the gubernatorial nomination of the Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party, wants them to know that he is different.
He tells them he offers a "cut-and-invest strategy" rather than a "spend-and-spend philosophy," bucking the old-style liberalism on which his father made a political career.
Mondale has spent much of his campaign chiding the four other DFL candidates for releasing plans that lack detail.
"I'm the only candidate saying what I'm going to do and how I'm going to pay for it," he says sharply.
In fact, he wrote a book detailing his plans, included their costs and how he would cut the budget.
Among his key proposals is reducing the sales tax a half percentage point to 6 percent, which would reduce state revenue by $ 250 million a year. He proposed four-year college or two-year technical school scholarships for all Minnesota high school students who graduate with and maintain B averages. He wants to use money from the state's settlement with the tobacco industry to help older people pay for prescription drugs.
He also supports legalized abortion, current state laws that don't allow concealed weapons in most cases, and longer prison terms and less probation.
Three of his opponents also have recognizable names for Minnesota voters: Attorney General Hubert Humphrey III, son of former Vice President Hubert Humphrey; Mike Freeman, the son of former governor and U.S. Agriculture Secretary Orville Freeman; and Mark Dayton, heir to a retail store fortune based on the family's namesake department store in Minneapolis. The fourth, Doug Johnson, is chairman of the state Senate Tax Committee.
Mondale, 40, who lives in the Minneapolis suburb of St. Louis Park with his wife and three children, knows the issues cold, rattling off strategy and statistics.
He jokes between campaign stops, but when he is in front of a crowd or wandering the Olmsted County Fair shaking hands he becomes more tentative, stiffer. Rather than giving table-pounding speeches, he favors serious issues discussions.
He plans an all-out push in the final two weeks before the Sept. 15 primary. He said he has bought enough television time to saturate the airwaves for 12 days.
In the meantime, Mondale is trying to meet 5,000 people a week.
He dismisses speculation that he's really running for 2000, possibly a U.S. Senate bid, not the governor's office.
"It's not true. I intend to win this election," he said.
One supporter took a longer view. Thelma Engel asked Mondale how old he was and then started counting off years.
"I'm counting up to 2004," she told Mondale. "You understand what I mean? You'll be a good age for the presidency."
 Load-Date: August 8, 1998

 

End of Document
