

My Lai, the village at the eye of a hurricane
The Associated Press
April 25, 2000, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 756 words
Byline: By GEORGE ESPER, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: MY LAI, Vietnam
Body




They could not speak English, so they joined their palms and bowed in a traditional gesture of supplication, begging for their lives and mercy for their families.
But the American soldiers ignored their pleas, rampaging through the hamlet, raping and shooting villagers on March 16, 1968. By Vietnamese count, 504 men, women and children were killed; American estimates ranged from 175 to more than 400.
The world came to call it the My Lai massacre, a mission that would become synonymous with shame and cover-up, a storm that tilted public opinion against the war. Although the communists committed even bigger atrocities - more than 2,800 citizens of Hue were killed in a purge the same year - photos of women and children lying in the fields of My Lai repulsed Americans back home.
The story broke more than a year later after a former soldier sent letters to military and Congressional leaders. Sen. Daniel K. Inouye, a Democrat from Hawaii who lost an arm in World War II, was horrified.
"Having been in combat myself, I thought I would be hardened," he said at the time, "but I must say I am a bit sickened."
Now, the 25th anniversary of the end of the war revives memories of My Lai. The brilliant green rice fields and coconut and pine trees, one still riddled with bullet holes, mask the horrors that happened here.
While some older women survived the massacre, they barely survive the poverty that also has stunted their lives. They live in cramped quarters with only a tile roof, brick floor and wooden bed. Dry corn and sweet potatoes are mixed into their meager rice bowls.
The Vietnamese say 247 homes were destroyed in the massacre. In the rebuilt village, a museum that features stomach-churning photos attests to the bloody event, along with markers at sites where clusters of bodies were found:
"This ditch reminds that the GIs killed 170 villagers."
"From this guard tower, U.S. soldiers used M60 machine guns to shoot 102 people at the rice paddies in front of the guard tower."
"This place reminds that the GIs killed 102 villagers."
"At this silk cotton tree, U.S. soldiers shot 15 people."
"The GIs threw Mr. Truong Tho, 72 years old, into this well and shot (him)."
The massacre is well documented through the testimony of nearly 100 witnesses and hundreds of depositions, documents, maps and photographs placed in evidence during the court-martial of Lt. William L. Calley. His platoon - Charlie company, 1st Battalion, 20th Infantry Regiment, of the Americal Division's 11th Infantry Brigade - moved into My Lai firing at fleeing Vietnamese, throwing grenades into houses and bunkers, and slaughtering animals.
Calley, now a jeweler in Columbus, Ga., refuses to discuss that day. He served three years under house arrest for killing 22 villagers, the only soldier ever convicted in the massacre. But the incident and the cover-up ended numerous military careers.
Truong Thi Le, 71, said nine of the 11 people in her family were killed, including her mother and 17-year-old daughter.
Her face wrinkles with anguish and tears well in her eyes as she recalls how the soldiers burst into her home and herded the family into a field and opened fire. She and her 6-year-old son survived by hiding under the bodies of the others.
Repeating the government line, Le says she hates the soldiers who killed her relatives but not all Americans.
Ha Thi Quy, 75, and her family were having breakfast when she saw the troops. They ran out of their home, begging for their lives. The Americans forced them into a ditch and shot her mother, 3-year-old son and 21-year-old daughter. Pregnant at the time, she was wounded in the back and leg but survived.
Neither time nor age have dimmed her memories.
"I think of it every day," she says. "I couldn't understand why American people, rich and educated, can do such a bad thing."
Many of the U.S. troops did not trust the villagers because they believed they were either communist Viet Cong or sympathizers and failed to warn the Americans of mines and booby traps which took a heavy toll, sparking anger and frustration.
But Quy denied the villagers were Viet Cong.
Pham Thi Thuan, 62, recalls that six members of her family, including her father, were killed in a ditch. She, too, begged for their lives.
"I don't want to think about it anymore," she says. "Anytime I think about it, I feel hatred toward the U.S. soldiers."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - George Esper covered the Vietnam War for 10 years for The Associated Press. He remained in Saigon for five weeks after it fell to the communists 25 years ago.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos HCM111-115 April 24
 Load-Date: April 26, 2000

 

End of Document
