

NABC: Move the flag or move the tournament
The Associated Press
July 18, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 563 words
Byline: By DAN LEWERENZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: COLUMBIA, S.C.
Body




The National Association of Basketball Coaches has renewed its objection to holding an NCAA regional in Greenville in 2002 unless the state removes the Confederate flag from its current location on the Statehouse grounds.
"We do not see the situation as having been cleared up, and we think the NCAA should move the site out of Greenville," NABC director Jim Haney said Tuesday.
He said the group's NCAA Division I coaches voted Sunday at their meeting in Las Vegas to continue their opposition to South Carolina serving as a host for an NCAA tournament event while the Confederate flag remains in a prominent location.
Earlier this month, the flag was removed from the Statehouse dome and the House and Senate chambers. A similar, more historically accurate flag was then raised near a monument to Confederate war dead on the Statehouse grounds.
Haney said coaches were concerned because the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and other groups have objected to the flag's new location, saying it is too prominent a position for what they consider a reminder of slavery and a symbol of Southern oppression of blacks. Flag supporters say it represents Southern heritage and is not a symbol of racism.
"The discussion on this topic in Las Vegas centered around the fact that the NAACP once again had indicated that although the flag had come off the Statehouse … it was still not satisfactory in their eyes in terms of the new location of the flag," Haney said from the group's Overland Park, Kan., office.
In April, the NCAA said it would move championship events, including the regional scheduled for Greenville, and two cross-country events, unless the state removed the flag from the dome. After lawmakers voted in May to move the flag to the Confederate soldier monument, a statement from the NCAA said the group was "pleased that the governor and state Legislature have been able to reach agreement on the matter."
NCAA spokeswoman Jane Jankowski said Tuesday that she knew of no plans to discuss the flag at the group's Aug. 11 executive committee meeting, but that NCAA officials would consider the issue if contacted by the NABC.
"Certainly if we do indeed receive a request from the NABC, it's something that will be discussed," Jankowski said.
Officials from Furman University and the Southern Conference, co-hosts of the Greenville regional, said they would follow the NCAA's lead.
"If the NCAA tells us to move the tournament, we will move the tournament," Southern Conference spokesman Steve Shutt said.
"Just speaking for myself and not for Furman, I think it would be a shame for the people of Greenville and of South Carolina to lose out on an event like this," said John Block, Furman vice president for intercollegiate athletics.
In November, the conference asked the Legislature to remove the Confederate flag from the Statehouse dome. Shutt would not say Tuesday whether the conference thinks the flag's new location is acceptable or whether it should be moved.
The NABC first called for the regional to be moved in January, and sports figures have been among the most prominent people in the campaign to move the flag. Clemson and South Carolina's football and basketball coaches participated in a march in April aimed at bringing down the flag, and Serena Williams withdrew from the Family Circle Cup tennis tournament because of the flag controversy.
 Load-Date: July 19, 2000

 

End of Document
