

New York fears the rise of the Bloods
November 3, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 858 words
Byline: By TOM HAYS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




A woman is slashed across the neck on Park Avenue in what one attacker says is an initiation rite for the Bloods gang.
A girl is sexually assaulted in the bathroom of a New York City high school and says one of her assailants bragged about being a Blood.
An HIV-infected man terrifies New Yorkers by admitting he has had unprotected sex with dozens of young women. He, too, claims Bloods membership.
Absent on New York police blotters just a year ago, the Bloods - or their "wannabes" - are creating a citywide scare. A growing number of criminals are pledging allegiance to a version of the gang known for fighting bloody turf wars on California streets.
The outbreak has become an issue in the mayoral election and the subject of a debate over whether Gotham's Bloods - and its Crips, too - are actual gang members worthy of all the attention.
"There's nothing new about gangs in New York City," said Jeffrey Fagan of Columbia University's Center for Violence Research and Prevention. "The hysteria over this is far more intense than the problem itself."
Still, authorities - eager to preserve the city's record run of plummeting crime rates - have gone on the offensive.
In August, police arrested dozens of suspected Bloods in "Operation Red Bandana" - a reference to the gang's signature color. The sweep came in response to about 130 random slashings since January, half attributed to a blood-drawing initiation rite.
In the past week alone, police cracked down on a branch of the Crips in East Harlem called the Rollin' Thirties Crips, arresting 24 members on drug and other charges, and foiled a plot in which two Brooklyn rape suspects allegedly tried to silence their 14-year-old victim by paying a Blood $ 5,000 to kill her.
Authorities have identified about 1,000 Bloods in the city, including 500 in the jail system. Yet the gang remains a riddle.
Experts and police agree the Bloods are much less organized and fraternal than established New York City gangs like the Latin Kings, Netas and Zulu Nation. They also have no official affiliation with their murderous West Coast counterparts.
"They're alien creatures to us," said Sgt. Wes McBride, a member of a Los Angeles County sheriff's gang unit. "The slashings, we don't have that. The gangs out here don't take any pleasure in hurting people for no reason. If they have a problem, they just blow you away."
So who are the New York City Bloods?
One profile portrays them as independent crews, or "sets," of 20 or so petty criminals who identify each other with red clothing and a triangle of cigarette-burn scars on their shoulders. In some neighborhoods in Brooklyn, Queens and Manhattan the crews have been linked to assaults, subway robberies, crack dealing and random mayhem aimed at muscling out criminal competition.
"We have our own New York-style Bloods," said Queens prosecutor Mariela Palomino-Stanton. "They've borrowed traditions of the (West Coast) Bloods and put their own stamp on them. But it's not so organized that you can really get a clear picture of the extent of the problem."
Some authorities speculate that the Bloods on the street "graduated" from the city jail system, where black inmates began banding together and using the name to protect themselves from Hispanic gangs.
The school system also is rife with "gang intimidation strategies," according to a recent report by Edward Stancik, the Board of Education's chief investigator. Bloods in Brooklyn waited outside a junior high school to jump students, hold boxcutters to their throats and offer them "one way out: join the gang," the report said.
The same week the report made headlines, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani announced he was beefing up the Police Department's street gang unit. He vowed to create gang-free school zones. He also called on legislators to enact tougher anti-gang laws, boasting that his proposals are "precisely what should have been done in the 1920s with the Mafia."
Critics called the mayor's announcement election-year hyperbole. They also claimed the mayor and Stancik failed to distinguish between real Bloods and teen-agers who are using the name.
For those teens, "the Blood name works," Fagan said. "It gives you instant status as a tough guy."
Authorities suspect many incidents - like the Park Avenue slashing and the sex attack at Martin Luther King Jr. High School - are the work of wannabes.
Still, frightened parents have kept their children home - especially on Halloween, after rumors circulated that it was a Bloods initiation day. Principals have canceled late afternoon classes amid rumors that gang recruiters were lurking.
Some students act unfazed.
"The Bloods here, they're not real," said a Martin Luther King senior from the Bronx who identified himself only as Gabriel. "They're just into the image, into the initiations and all that."
But one resident of a Brooklyn shelter for former gang members nodded knowingly when asked about the scare. His warning: Trying to separate actual gang members from wannabes is folly.
"The wannabes, I don't laugh at them," said Jimmy, 31, once a member of the Los Angeles gang Varrio Norwalk. "They're dangerous because they have the most to prove."
 Load-Date: November 3, 1997

 

End of Document
