

Nixon-Ford redux: The more things change, the more they stay the same
The Associated Press
October 18, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 712 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Impeachment, the vice president complained, was being made a partisan issue with a party-line push.
Out in the country, he said, people weren't as interested in it as they were in the capital.
Some things don't change.
The vice president was Gerald R. Ford, in 1974, speaking of a preliminary impeachment vote against President Nixon.
Now Vice President Al Gore is arguing in defense of President Clinton along similar lines, saying Americans have concluded that impeachment is "not a punishment that fits the crime" in the Monica Lewinsky scandal.
"They want to move on," Gore said, campaigning in Minneapolis. "They are tired of all these people on television talking endlessly about something that everybody knows more about than they ever wanted to know."
Ford had said that out in the country, the message was different from the one he heard in Washington. "And I like it a lot better."
Like Clinton these days. "What I'd like to see is this election be about the American people and their future, not about Washington, D.C.," he said.
For all the Republican talk of following an exemplary 1974 model in the current impeachment investigation of Clinton, those proceedings were no less partisan than these, and no more limited than the inquiry the House ordered. Democrats proposed a Clinton investigation limited to this year and to the accusations already lodged against him, knowing it would be rejected.
"We're not flying by the seat of our pants," said Rep. Henry Hyde, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee. "We're riding on the shoulders of Pete Rodino. That's why we can see so far."
Rodino was the Democratic chairman of the committee when it investigated Nixon over Watergate, proceedings that were not so harmoniously bipartisan as the Republicans suggest. They were the minority then, and they disputed the Democrats on procedures, witnesses and almost everything else.
Nixon biographer Stephen Ambrose wrote that in the early going, Rodino let "the red hot Democrats on his committee investigate for the purposes of embarrassing Nixon."
That is echoed in Democratic complaints about the Clinton case.
Nixon was covering up, of course, and concealing the taped evidence he ultimately had to surrender along with the presidency. Clinton has admitted misconduct in his Lewinsky liaisons, while denying the perjury that is one of the impeachment accusations against him. And evidence against him was sent to Congress - then published and televised - at the beginning of the process, not at the end as in Watergate.
After six months of investigations and hearings, the Rodino committee recommended impeachment of Nixon with Democratic unanimity which Ford said "tends to make it a partisan issue." A half-dozen Republicans also voted for impeachment. Nonetheless, Ford complained that Nixon was a victim of "Democratic partisan politics."
Then Nixon had to yield the White House tape the proved his guilt, his fraying support vanished, and Ford announced on Aug. 5 that he would say no more about impeachment because the vice president "is a party of interest."
Four days later, Nixon resigned. Ford became president.
In this case, one of the most zealous of Clinton foes contended that the president shouldn't have gone to New York on Monday to raise campaign funds for Rep. Charles Schumer, who serves on the judiciary committee and is running for the Senate in New York. Rep. Tom DeLay, the Republican whip in the House, said Clinton's campaigning for Schumer amounted to jury tampering because the New Yorker serves on the panel that will be considering impeachment.
The White House said DeLay was trying to score political points on proceedings that should not be partisan.
It is, on both sides.
Especially in a campaign setting, with no way to tell how the Clinton scandal and impeachment issue will play. There were omens in 1974. The Republicans lost three House seats, including the one Ford resigned to become vice president, in special elections early that year.
Nixon was gone and pardoned before the fall campaign. But the issue wasn't. Republicans lost 48 seats in the House and five in the Senate.
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: October 18, 1998

 

End of Document
