

Now the focus is on the videotapers
October 9, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 598 words
Byline: By DEB RIECHMANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Familiar as the furniture, White House audio-visual crews have unobtrusively videotaped presidents since the 1960s. Now, it's the camera work of the little-known White House Communications Agency that is under the glare of hot lights, that might get hotter.
Scene: President Clinton sips coffee with selected donors before his re-election. Cut to: Videotapes of 44 of the coffee klatches are handed over to a Senate committee investigating campaign fund-raising abuses.
Investigators hope the tapes will shed light on whether the gatherings were simply a way for Clinton to talk with supporters - as the Democrats claim - or outright solicitations that stretched the boundaries of campaign finance law as Republican charge.
White House video crews have spent years shadowing every president since Lyndon B. Johnson to create a video history of each presidency.
But unlike more aggressive television cameramen, the White House audio-visual workers often blend into the background.
One crew member dispatched on Dec. 13, 1995, to videotape a coffee in the White House map room apparently wasn't exactly sure what he was recording.
"This will be coffee with - I guess - DNC (Democratic National Committee) types," the crew member whispered into the microphone to introduce the tape.
The unedited videos look more like home movies than TV news shows.
Faces are blurry. There are shots of the backs of people's heads, their ears, shoulders and jowls. Zoom shots of faces, in and out of focus, are followed by close-ups of a chandelier or wall painting. Unhappy about being taped, a woman is caught making a face at the camera.
The sound work also is unpolished. Many of Clinton's coffee conversations are inaudible because the microphone was too far way. But the mike did pick up a conversation Clinton had about one of his golf scores.
"How'd you do?" a guest asked. "Did you break 90?"
"Oh yeah, 83," Clinton replies before moving on to chat with the next guest.
The cameramen typically didn't stay for the entire coffee. Just after Clinton sits down with his guests and pours himself a cup of coffee, the last scene is shot: The rug as the cameraman backs out of the room.
"The purpose is archival - to show presidential activities - but that doesn't mean they tape everything that he says and does," says Barry Toiv, White House deputy press secretary.
Videotaping is a sideline mission of the White House Communications Agency, created in 1942 as part of the U.S. Army Signal Corps. Chiefly, the 850 technically skilled employees provide secure communications for the president, vice president, their families and staff and the Secret Service.
The agency has a $ 100 million-plus budget, also provides stenographic services and closed-circuit television and supports the White House photographers. The White House recently agreed to pay $ 9.8 million of the budget to cover the cost of videotaping and various other services not related to the agency's communications role.
Thomas Blanton of the National Security Archive, which once sued the White House Communications Agency in a quest to keep the Bush administration from destroying old computer records, says he thinks agency employees are among the least political of people who work at the executive mansion.
"These are career folks who span administrations. These are people who salute and carry out orders," he said.
Blanton, director of the private group that works to open and preserve government documents, doubts the videotape of the coffees will help congressional investigators much anyway.
"It's basically a photo opportunity on tape," he says.
 Load-Date: October 9, 1997

 

End of Document
