

Now's the time for an image makeover at the United Nations
February 3, 1997, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 802 words
Byline: By MATHIS CHAZANOV, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Cheered by his visit to Washington, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan hopes to tap a cache of goodwill that may be hidden beneath the suspicion and unpaid bills that mar relations with the United States.
Only days after charming Sen. Jesse Helms, R-N.C. - the leading U.N.-baiter in Congress - Annan came back to New York and created a new position of assistant secretary-general for external relations, naming an American to the post.
The choice of an American was not a coincidence, and the appointee, Gillian Sorensen, said she plans to concentrate on getting Annan's message across to the United States.
Although the United States is only one of the 185 member states, it plays such an important role in the United Nations that good relations with Washington are essential to the very survival of the organization.
The U.N. host country also is its biggest donor, responsible for 25 percent of the $ 1.3 billion yearly budget, and its biggest debtor, with estimates of the shortfall reaching as high as $ 1.6 billion as of Jan. 31, the deadline for paying 1997 dues.
"We have a window of opportunity and we want to make the most of it," said Sorensen, who once held the delicate job of New York City's liaison with the United Nations.
More recently, she headed commemorations for the organization's golden anniversary. While congratulations flowed in, the celebrations of 1995 also provided critics with an easy target for jabs at overstaffing and faulty management of crises like Bosnia and Somalia.
Things have changed since then, notably because of the departure of the Egyptian Boutros Boutros-Ghali as secretary-general, although criticisms of bad management and padded staff rosters remain.
Sorensen doesn't want to talk about the contrasting styles of the two men, but says Annan, of Ghana, is "an excellent communicator" who realizes that he will have to be the lead spokesman for the organization. "He intends to be very visible and to speak out often," she said.
Boutros-Ghali, by contrast, had several qualities that did him little good with the U.S. government, the public, or his own staffers, who complained about autocratic policies that emanated from a small circle of intimates.
And while Boutros-Ghali went along with U.S. demands for a high-level official to look after U.N. reforms, he did it with little enthusiasm. The United States lost confidence in him and vetoed his re-election.
Since then, former U.N. ambassador Madeleine Albright has been installed as secretary of state, and Annan - the U.S. candidate - has taken over as secretary-general.
A likely new image for the United Nations can be glimpsed in "Setting the Record Straight," a document that seeks to rebut "widespread public misunderstandings" about the United Nations.
For one thing, it notes that the budget for the United Nations' core functions - in New York; Geneva; Nairobi, Kenya; Vienna, Austria; and five regional commissions - is $ 1.3 billion year, about 4 percent of New York City's annual budget and nearly a billion dollars less than the yearly cost of Tokyo's fire department.
The document also lists achievements in disease prevention, economic development and environmental protection.
Annan now faces a classic public relations challenge: Some of the most challenging U.N. activities - peace-keeping, for instance - are carried out with the world watching every delay and mishap, while quiet progress in areas like agriculture and public health is virtually unseen.
Then, there is the persistent strain of isolationism that has been a theme of politics in some parts of the United States for decades.
"The image of the U.N. abroad is much more favorable than it is generally thought to be in the United States," said John Ruggie, a professor of international relations at Columbia University whose recent book, "Winning the Peace," deals with the U.S.-U.N. relationship. "No one anywhere is dumping on the U.N. to the extent to which U.S. policy-makers are dumping on the U.N."
Surprisingly, perhaps, opinion polls give the United Nations a steady popularity among much of the U.S. public.
To succeed, Annan will have to mobilize that support and build on it.
"The U.N. has always had a strong constituent base but they've let it go over the years. There's an awful lot that could be done," suggested Jan van Meter, a New York public relations executive whose agency has worked with the local chapter of UNICEF.
A successful public relations campaign might capitalize on Annan's affable manner by sending him on a speaking tour to help mobilize grass-roots support.
A spirited lobbying effort could help, too, or a program of inviting American opinion-makers to eyeball U.N. projects overseas or to join the 420,000 or so tourists who visit U.N. headquarters every year at the blue-green skyscraper overlooking the East River.
 Load-Date: February 3, 1997

 

End of Document
