

On the bridge to the 21st century, Butt Man does the Macarena …
The Associated Press
December 30, 1996, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 591 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




This was the year that Congress turned to V-chips, Bill Clinton turned toward the right and air bags turned dangerous.
The country saw 75,000 Bob Dole commercials, 83,000 Bill Clinton commercials and nothing changed: America wound up with Clinton in the White House and the Republicans running Congress.
Susan McDougal went to jail in a miniskirt and leg irons. Joe Waldholtz went to jail for lying about spending his wife into Congress.
Ross Perot looked for "a George Washington II" as his Reform Party's candidate and wound up with himself. Bob Dole asked Perot to drop out, and Perot called that "weird." Dole fell off a stage.
Clinton said he wanted to build a bridge to the 21st century and then said it over and over. Dole said Clinton was stealing his best lines.
Al Gore attended a fund-raiser in a Buddhist temple but said he didn't know it. Clinton crossed half the country in a train, proposing goodies at every stop. David Brinkley called Clinton a "bore" on television, apologized on television and retired on television, sort of. Ralph Nader ran for president, sort of.
The Pentagon said 20,000 soldiers might have been exposed to chemical warfare in the Persian Gulf War, but told them they weren't sick. John Huang turned out to be a frequent flyer at the White House.
Steve Forbes and his flat tax both fell flat.
The Supreme Court told the Virginia Military Institute to take women, and VMI saluted. The head of the CIA told Angelenos the agency hasn't played footsie with drug dealers, and got booed.
In conventions assembled, the Democrats dropped more balloons than the Republicans, and danced the Macarena more, too.
Rep. Susan Molanari delivered a baby and a speech.
Joe Klein admitted that he was "Anonymous," and so was anonymous no more.
Clinton gave Madeleine Albright the title "Madame Secretary" and put a Republican in his Cabinet.
Dick Morris was grounded by a fling with a prostitute and signed a contract to write a book. The Army found it had a Tailhook of its own.
"Lock and load," cried Pat Buchanan.
Clinton signed a welfare bill as "a real step forward" and Daniel Patrick Moynihan said it would throw kids into the streets. Clinton said he would have it fixed; no he won't, said the Republicans.
Fourteen percent of the Senate and 12 percent of the House voluntarily vacated the premises; the people at the polls retired one more senator and 21 more representatives. Old Senate hand Howard Baker wed old Senate hand Nancy Kassebaum.
Dole said he wanted to cut taxes 15 percent and found it meaningful that "15" was Jack Kemp's old football number.
At 50 minutes after midnight, Clinton signed a bill frowning on same-sex marriages. A Hawaiian judge recognized them anyway.
Dole said maybe cigarettes are addictive and maybe they're not, bringing forth "Butt Man." David Kessler quit the FDA. Bob Dornan lost.
After 39 years in the Senate, Strom Thurmond won another six. Bob Dole quit the Senate to be "just a man" and wore sports jackets for a while. The Senate dedicated a balcony to him.
The Democrats gave back $ 1.5 million in contributions. Newt Gingrich freed Republicans from fealty to the GOP ticket. He told them, "Do what gets elected and call home afterward." Some took his advice and disowned him.
"Where's the outrage?" Dole asked the country. "No insult ever cleaned up a toxic waste dump," retorted Clinton.
The voice of Richard Nixon was heard on tape, plotting to firebomb the Brookings Institution. Clinton lost his voice, but kept on ticking.
Since he couldn't get Air Force One, Dole made an ad for Air France.
 Load-Date: December 30, 1996

 

End of Document
