

Pass the laughs and hold the subpoenas
The Associated Press
March 21, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 958 words
Byline: By LAWRENCE L. KNUTSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton stood before a crowd of media and political elite Saturday night to make light of the controversies swirling around him - without actually mentioning any of them by name.
"Please withhold subpoenas until all the jokes are told," Clinton quipped.
The white-tie audience at the 113th annual Gridiron Club Dinner erupted in laughter and Clinton was on his way toward delivering a tongue-in-cheek monologue that never mentioned any scandal specifically.
"This is an unusual time in Washington - sort of our version of 'March Madness,"' he said, referring to the college basketball tournament also underway.
Clinton mostly poked fun at the lawyers and staff who have worked to help him deal with various investigations. At one point he read off a list of jokes his attorneys had approved for the evening, including:
"Knock-knock: Don't answer that."
He said his lawyers told him he could not mention Whitewater prosecutor Kenneth Starr, only some others with Star-like names: "Brenda, Bart and Ringo."
White House chief of staff Erkine Bowles preceded Clinton to the podium, thanking a long list of dignitaries - along with the "ladies and gentlemen of the grand jury."
First lady Hillary Rodham Clinton also attended, but she slipped in late and made no public remarks. She had remained behind at the White House to greet daughter Chelsea, who arrived late from the West Coast for a visit with her parents.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich alluded to the controversy involving whether former intern Monica Lewinsky had sex with the president and whether presidential confidant and golfing buddy Vernon Jordan helped her find a job to keep quiet about it, but without mentioning any names.
Gingrich allowed that his own presidential qualifications are lacking "because my best friend doesn't drive a golf cart and push resumes."
Gingrich also made light of Republican anxieties about criticizing Clinton too severely in the face of his high job approval ratings.
"It's sobering (to realize) that during this meal the president's job approval rating will go up six points," said Gingrich.
But as usual, the staple of the night was a rash of skits put on by reporters roasting the officials they cover.
But this year, many of the gibes, japes and sharp elbows were being directed at the Fourth Estate over the way they have covered this sex-scandale-shared year of Ms. Lewinsky and Paula Jones.
As the song says, in love and in the selling of newspapers, "Anything Goes."
"It's very chic today, to print a leak today, we feel we must today, cover lust today, and a crime today, will seem sublime today, on many T-V shows."
Conclusion: "So when reporting stuff salacious, and even outright fallacious, just hold your nose. Anything goes. … Just one scoop can be your ticket - Pulitzers and instant fame. You must find some evildoers. Press your First Amendment claim."
And the chorus: "Push it! Shove it! God, how we love it - wallowing deep in muck and slime. Lurid tales? We're not above it. - Sex sells papers ev'ry time."
At least that part of the show the Clintons may have liked.
On putting the best face on things: Septuagenarian United Press International correspondent Helen Thomas, playing the first lady in pink suit and hair band, sang this about the beleaguered White House press secretary:
"Ask poor Mike McCurry not to be forthright, watch him spin around, and spin around with all his might."
A make-believe George Stephanopoulos, the former White House aide turned television commentator, giving advice to White House intern recruits on how not to behave in front of the president: "Don't blow a kiss at him, Don't do that lovesick mope, Don't pant for him on the rope. … Ken Starr is suspecting things, people will say you're in love."
And the American people, represented by a focus group, join in "All That Jazz" to boost Bill Clinton in the polls:
"Got Dow Jones, we don't need Paula Jones, And all that jazz.
"We wanna buy Amex, but they just sell us sex, and all that jazz.
"Those reporters they're just out of touch; they thought we'd be shocked but we don't care that much, for all that nightly romp through the sleazy swamp ..."
And as in: "Mon...ica Lewinsky, what a bee-bee brain. Please … Don't let her interrupt … this gravy train."
Gridiron, played out before nearly every president since Benjamin Harrison in 1885, is an equal-opportunity frolic.
The Republicans were shown as bewailing lost opportunities on the balanced budget and tax cuts: "It's a dirty, rotten, stinkin' shame, Clinton's beat us at our game."
Ken Starr is a Republican. His character sang a solo, to the tune of "I'd Do Anything," about his pursuit of Clinton: "I'd do anything to nail him, anything."
Among the other GOPsters:
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, survivor of a parliamentary coup attempt last summer: "What do you do when you stop a coup? A long, long list of people to screw."
Former President George Bush advising his presidential hopeful son, Texas Gov. George W. Bush, to the tune of "Deep in the Heart of Texas (Taxes)."
"If you should run, a tip my son, don't make a pledge on taxes … No 'read my lips,' or sim'lar quips … or you'll be stuck in Texas."
Though neither a Republican nor a Democrat, Socks, the demoted presidential pet, got in some digs at the expense of Buddy, the new first dog. It started with a feline whine to the tune, "Memories."
"Midnight, all alone in my sandbox, I reflect on my master, and what he did to me."
And: "Bud-dy! How'd he think up that dumb name?"
The Gridiron Club Dinner, a musical review concocted by the club's 60 journalist members and a few ringers who can carry a show tune, is named for an antique iron implement used to roast fish and meat and, in the club's case, more than a century's worth of American politicians.
 Load-Date: March 22, 1998

 

End of Document
