

PBS film 'The Greeks' blows the dust off extraordinary civilization
The Associated Press
February 7, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 768 words
Byline: By LYNN ELBER, AP Television Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Capturing the glory of ancient Greece is a tough job for a documentary film. A pottery shard generally lacks the emotional wallop of a Civil War photograph.
But "The Greeks: Crucible of Civilization" pulls off an Olympian task: It turns the distant, dusty past into a story that carries the visual and dramatic impact expected by modern viewers.
The PBS program, airing 8-10:30 p.m. EST Wednesday, is a benchmark for pre-archival filmmaking, a lyrically cinematic work that draws on the latest technology to bring the world's first democracy to life.
With actor Liam Neeson as effective narrator, "The Greeks" pulls us into a time 2,500 years ago dominated by towering figures such as Socrates and Pericles, graced by astounding architecture, art, drama - and undermined by empire-building and war.
"What was amazing was how this period, a very short period, could throw up quite so many innovative people anywhere you look, in philosophy, medicine, drama," said producer Anthony Geffen.
"I hope this puts the Greek world on the syllabus in America. This world is all around in America, in buildings and in the way we think."
And in how we're governed. The miracle of democracy's birth is worth considering, especially in a presidential election season in which U.S. citizens can speak loudest (or not; in 1996, fewer than half of those eligible to vote did).
Part of a series that is to include films on the Islamic, Napoleonic, British and Roman empires, "The Greeks" took more than three years to produce and drew on contributors that included production designers from "Saving Private Ryan."
Scenes of battle and mob uprisings are deftly re-created with computer imagery and creative camerawork. Even artifacts are vital; the cups believed to have held Socrates' fatal dose of hemlock add resonance to scenes of the philosopher's final moments.
And despite a lack of portraits or statues, the documentary manages to bring us face to face with prominent Greeks of the 5th and 6th centuries B.C. who serve as focal points for history.
Cleisthenes, credited with establishing the first Athenian democracy, and Themistocles, the general who defeated the mighty Persian Empire with warships called triremes, are among those portrayed by actors as living statues.
"We had to get into the audience's mind; you had to live with those characters," said Geffen. The actors, selected by historians based on written descriptions, represent just one of the film's innovations.
"We storyboarded it like a movie. We knew, shot by shot, everything we wanted to try to achieve," said veteran filmmaker Geffen ("The Promised Land," "Jerusalem, City of Heaven"), who worked with writer-director Cassian Harrison.
"I wanted people to feel what it's like to be looking out across the bow of a ship and see hundreds of triremes coming against you. I wanted the feeling of what it would be like to have walked into the Parthenon and seen that 40-foot statue of Athena."
To show the Parthenon complete with the golden goddess it once sheltered, the filmmakers employed glass paintings, scale models, computer imagery - and a bit of luck. "There was a half-scale model of the inside of the Parthenon in Nashville, of all places," Geffen said.
Like a good movie, the result is seamlessly entertaining.
"There's a lot of complicated processes, but I don't think they look complicated," Geffen said. "In other words, I don't think people will say 'Oh, that's a special effect."'
"The Greeks," the first of the "Empires" series, is part of a mini-empire of its own, with a companion book written by historian Paul Cartledge, a Web site (www.pbs.org/empires/the greeks) that includes Greek language lessons, and a DVD version with additional content.
The additional material allowed the film the freedom to be focused, Geffen said.
"I think the documentary has moved on and we don't have to make a 15-part series. I don't think people want to sit through them," he said, since the resources exist if viewers are hungry for more information.
"This film is not the CD-ROM of ancient Greeks. I hope people will continue the journey on all the other mediums," Geffen said.
---
Elsewhere in television …
MTV VS. DRUGS: "True Life," MTV's documentary series, examines the drug "crystal meth," D-methamphetamine. Experts tell reporter Serena Altschul that meth abuse has been spreading rapidly across the country, especially in rural and small-town America, and is at epidemic levels. The program, showing 9 p.m. EST Wednesday, features interviews with addicts, manufacturers and drug enforcement agents.
EDITOR'S NOTE - Lynn Elber can be reached at lelber@ap.org  
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY321
 Load-Date: February 9, 2000

 

End of Document
