

Political Hollywood: 'Wag the Dog' was only the beginning of the satires
The Associated Press
February 27, 1998, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 933 words
Byline: By JOHN HORN, AP Entertainment Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




It's either great timing or potential overkill.
Hot on the heels of "Wag the Dog," Hollywood is set to release two more caustic Washington satires: the film adaptation of the best seller "Primary Colors" and "Bulworth," writer-director Warren Beatty's look at a brutally honest U.S. senator.
The studios behind the two projects are banking heavily that audiences are still hungry for such fare despite the saturation coverage of Monica Lewinsky and White House sex scandals.  "Primary Colors," made by hit-starved Universal Pictures, packs an all-star cast headed by John Travolta and Emma Thompson. It opens March 20. Twentieth Century Fox's "Bulworth," which also stars Beatty in the lead role, will debut Memorial Day weekend - going head-to-head with the summer's 900-pound gorilla, "Godzilla."
Both movies were filmed long before the White House intern soap opera began unfolding. But both have some grounding in the real political world.
"I've spent a lot of my time involved in politics and it's a subject I think I know something about, although I could be wrong," Beatty says. "I needed to do something about contemporary politics."
Hollywood has shown an interest in Washington and politics for years, mining both the White House and the political process for comedies, dramas and even romances. Many of the most recent entries in the genre have been comparatively lightweight: Kevin Kline's "Dave" (1993), Michael Douglas' "The American President" (1995) and Eddie Murphy's "The Distinguished Gentleman" (1992).
Not too long ago, the movies were often more serious: The 1939 movie "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington" and "Meet John Doe" in 1941 celebrated the ideals of representative government. "The Candidate" (1972), "All the President's Men" (1976) and "Advise & Consent" (1962) were interested in the abuse of power. Satire has made an occasional appearance, too, with 1992's "Bob Roberts" and 1967's "The President's Analyst" among the more noteworthy.
"Primary Colors" follows the liberal governor of a small Southern state who is running for president. A thinly veiled story of President Clinton and his advisers, the novel was published by an anonymous author who turned out to be Washington journalist Joe Klein.
"I feel there's irony and a kind of coincidence there," Travolta says of his movie about a philandering candidate and its real-life Washington parallels. "But the film is never really intended to correlate or connect with that. It was really meant to be an entertainment piece based on a book."
Of the Monica Lewinsky angle, the actor says, "I'm kind of hoping myself that it doesn't help or hinder. … I felt we were saying something different in this movie about great people who are flawed. It's more about all of us than what you think it's about. … Trying to be perfect in an imperfect world is hard to do - show me someone who is."
Billy Bob Thornton, who plays political strategist Richard Jemmons, won't be upset if moviegoers leave the film concerned about how the media pries into private lives.
"The one thing I can say is I think politicians should be left alone just like anybody else," says the "Sling Blade" star, who received as much media attention for his divorce as he did for his Academy Award-winning film.
"There's this weird idea that, 'Well, these are the people responsible for our country. So if he didn't pay his grocery bill or whatever, he's not going to pay our national debt.'
"I'm not so sure that's true. People do jobs every day. I mean there are children's show hosts who may be … horrible alcoholics. They go to the bar as soon as they get off. They may really love kids. They may really love doing the television show. As long as they're not molesting the children, who cares if they're having a gin and tonic?"
Sen. Bulworth's problems have nothing to do with alcohol. It's the California Democrat's mouth that gets him in trouble: Depressed, the senator turns dangerously candid.
"You promised us federal funding to rebuild our community. What happened?" a constituent asks Sen. Bulworth at a campaign stop.
"Well, you haven't really contributed to my campaign, have you?" Bulworth responds.
"What are you saying? Are you saying that the Democratic party don't care about the African-American community?" another voter asks incredulously.
"Isn't that obvious?" Bulworth responds. "I mean, if you don't put down that malt liquor and chicken wings and get behind somebody other than a running back who stabs his wife, you're never going to get rid of somebody like me."
Elsewhere in the movie he refers to studio executives as "the big Jews."
Beatty said he was attracted to the story, which he co-wrote with Jeremy Pikser, because it was on the edge, just as his "Bonnie and Clyde" was 30 years ago. Indeed, coming attractions trailers for "Bulworth" seem to be generating polarized responses: a fair amount of laughter, a fair amount of stunned silence.
"There are times when you do something because you feel like doing it - you don't ask what others think of your doing it. That's what happened here," Beatty said.
"I naturally think it's a timely subject or I wouldn't be working on it. But it's not really related to the recent events other than the fact that what happens in public and private and politics are interrelated."
 
 ---
TRAILERS: Sean Connery has signed a producing deal with Sony Pictures and may be planning to star in a detective drama about the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. Connery also may reprise his James Bond role for the studio, but MGM is suing Sony over the latter's plans to make new Bond films.
 Load-Date: February 27, 1998

 

End of Document
