

Pope, in the heartland, condemns the death penalty
The Associated Press
January 27, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: State and Regional
Length: 711 words
Byline: JULIA LIEBLICH, AP Religion Writer
Dateline: ST. LOUIS
Body




Winding up his six-day journey to the Americas, Pope John Paul II condemned capital punishment Wednesday in some of the strongest terms yet and told the United States that with power comes moral responsibility.
"Radical changes in world politics leave America with a heightened responsibility to be for the world an example of a genuinely free, democratic, just and humane society," he said at a prayer service at the Cathedral Basilica before leaving for Rome.
Power is "service, not privilege. Its exercise is morally justifiable when it is used for the good of all, when it is sensitive to the needs of the poor and defenseless."
A tired-looking pope walked hand-in-hand with Vice President Al Gore on the tarmac at Lambert Airport before the pontiff boarded his plane for the trip home.
Earlier in the day, he urged 100,000 worshippers at a Mass in this death-penalty state to spare even those who have "done great evil."
"Modern society has the means of protecting itself without definitively denying criminals the chance to reform," he said at the Trans World Dome, addressing the biggest crowd of his 30-hour visit to the United States.
"I renew the appeal I made most recently at Christmas for a consensus to end the death penalty, which is both cruel and unnecessary."
The message may have had particular relevance in Missouri, where the state Supreme Court, without explanation, postponed an execution that was to have taken place while the pope was in town. Papal spokesman Joaquin Navarro-Valls called the delay "a mockery." On Jan. 13, a killer was executed by injection in Missouri.
John Paul, making his fifth trip to the U.S. mainland, also called on his flock to end racism. Racism is "a plague which your bishops have called one of the most persistent and destructive evils of the nation," the stooped, 78-year-old pontiff said, his voice hoarse and his words slurred.
Late Wednesday, he met briefly with 85-year-old civil rights pioneer Rosa Parks, the black seamstress whose refusal to give up her seat on a segregated bus in 1955 led to the Montgomery, Ala., bus boycott.
During the evening prayer service, the pope welcomed Muslims and Jews who joined him in the Romanesque cathedral that houses the world's largest collection of mosaics. For the first time, a rabbi, Robert P. Jacobs, participated in a Roman Catholic papal prayer service.
"May this prayer signify our shared commitment to ever greater understanding and cooperation," the pope told the crowd of 2,000.
At the Trans World Dome, the faithful came for blessings, cures or just a glimpse of the man credited with hastening the fall of Communism and lessening religious restrictions in Cuba.
More than 100,000 people filled the seats of the football stadium and an adjacent convention center, where the pope's image was projected on giant TV screens with running captions of his homily. One thousand priests celebrated the Mass with the pontiff.
Ida Costa, a cancer-stricken 77-year-old woman from Little Rock, Ark., looked for a miracle cure from the pope: "I'll get the blessings God wants to shower upon me in his presence."
Linda Mary DeLonais of Springfield, Ill., was a forest ranger when she saw the pope in Denver in 1993. "Part of the pope's final blessing was a prayer for vocations," she recalled. She has since become a nun.
The pope's condemnation of the death penalty brought mixed reactions from those at the Mass.
"I don't know. I guess we've all got a right to live, but I don't know, especially when they take someone else's life," said William Walker of Alton, Ill.
"As a Catholic, it's easy to be against abortion," said Douglas Marshall of St. Louis. But as for sparing the life of an evil person, "that's the thing. It all boils down to a matter of forgiveness. Are you willing to forgive an evil person?"
The pope arrived in St. Louis on Tuesday after five triumphant days in Mexico. He met with President Clinton and attended a youth rally where he got rock-star treatment from the crowd of 20,000. His message: that Americans should use their freedoms responsibly and strive for a higher moral standard.
"It was exciting for the pope to go back and start his pilgrimage in Mexico, to close the gap between Mexico and the United States," Rosalia Vazquez, 21, said in St. Louis.
 
 Load-Date: January 28, 1999

 

End of Document
