

Powell Embraces the GOP and the Party Welcomes Him
August 13, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 765 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN DIEGO
Body




Making a forceful political debut, Colin Powell wrapped himself in the GOP banner Monday night, endorsing Bob Dole and his tax-cut theme. To the delight of delegates to the Republican convention, Powell embraced his new party with one unifying word: "We."
The delegates embraced him, too, with a shout of welcome.
But there were catcalls when Powell affirmed his belief in affirmative action and the right to abortion. Most delegates here oppose abortion and so does the GOP platform and its soon-to-be nominated presidential candidate.
"We are a big enough party and big enough people to disagree on individual issues and still work together for our common goal: restoring the American dream," Powell said. With that, a roar of approval - louder than the boos - went up.
In his hotel, Dole watched approvingly.
When Powell began by saying, "My fellow Americans, my fellow Republicans," Dole slapped his knee in pleasure. "That's what they want to hear," he said.
Later, while out on the town, Dole was asked about Powell's reference to abortion. "It's appropriate. We're an open party. We have diverse views. And he made it clear," he said.
Four men standing nearby shouted, "Don't forget the unborn Bob. Remember the unborn."
On the convention floor, Myrah Kirkwood of Detroit, a black delegate, welcomed Powell's message of tolerance of the ideas of others.
"That's the beauty of the party," she said. "We discuss things, we disagree, but in the end we come together."
Most of Powell's applause lines drew applause, but it was a restrained reception for the most part. When he finished, the clapping died out quickly. There was nothing like a demonstration.
The retired four-star general, sounding Republican indeed, ticked off goals he said he shares with the party: "We are the party committed to lessening the burden of taxes, cutting government spending, all for the purpose of generating the higher economic growth that will bring better jobs, wages and living standards to all our people."
These were unremarkable sentiments to this conservative assemblage, but music to them anyway, coming from the enormously popular Powell.
He also ticked off beliefs that are at odds with some in the hall: affirmative action, abortion rights and a welcome to immigrants.
"The Republican Party must always be the party of inclusion," he said. "The Hispanic immigrant who became a citizen yesterday must be as precious to us as a Mayflower descendant. The descendant of a slave or of a struggling miner in Appalachia must be as welcome - and find as much appeal - in our party as any other American."
The platform the GOP adopted earlier in the day calls for denying automatic citizenship to U.S.-born children of illegal immigrants.
Polls consistently show Powell's appeal crossing party and economic lines. He is seen as the most popular black in the country - one who might have been the GOP's nominee if he had chosen to make the fight.
Powell, soft-spoken and self-effacing, served both Presidents Bush and Clinton as chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, but it was his calm conduct during the 100-hour war after Iraq invaded Kuwait that won the nation's affection.
Here, he came out as a politician, wearing a politician's outfit - a dark suit and red tie.
He listed five reasons why "I became a Republican."
One of them: "I became a Republican because I believe the policies of our party will lead to greater economic growth, which is the only real solution to the problems of poverty that keep too many American from sharing in the wealth of this nation."
That sentiment put him in lockstep with Republican economic ideology, as enunciated by Dole and Jack Kemp, the GOP ticket that will be nominated Wednesday night and start an uphill fight for the White House.
Powell's endorsement of Dole was warm and personal.
"A man of strength, maturity and integrity," he called him.
Last November, with polls suggesting he was an overwhelming favorite for the GOP nomination, Powell closed that door. He said running would demand "a passion and commitment" he did not feel. His popular stayed high.
Later, he ruled out becoming Dole's running mate.
Monday night's speech - and its reception from the delegates - were a test of Powell's appeal to a convention whose delegates and program are decidedly more conservative than him.
Since he became a Republican, Powell has been more noticeable for his criticism of Republican dogma than his adoption of it.
He backed abortion rights, gun control and affirmative action; he opposed school prayer and aspects of the Republican-sponsored welfare bill that has passed Congress.
 Load-Date: August 13, 1996

 

End of Document
