

Q&A on the next steps for the House
The Associated Press
December 14, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 755 words
Byline: By CURT ANDERSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When the House begins debating articles of impeachment on Thursday, lawmakers will be guided by procedures set up by the Constitution and their own rules. But there are still plenty of questions.
Q: What happens before the House debate?
A: Majority Republicans on the House Judiciary Committee will circulate a detailed report to justify the reasons the panel voted for impeachment of President Clinton. Democrats will have their own minority dissent. Lawmakers will return on Wednesday for closed-door party caucuses to map out strategy.
Q: Will there be a vote on a resolution to censure, or denounce, the president?
A: Republican House leaders say they won't permit a vote on a censure resolution. However, Democrats are planning a "motion to recommit" the impeachment articles with instructions that they be replaced with censure. Republicans are likely to object that such a motion is not relevant. Democrats could then appeal, and that vote would in effect decide whether Clinton is impeached or censured by the House.
Q: What do the impeachment articles say Clinton did?
A: That he committed perjury involving his relationship with Monica Lewinsky in a deposition for the Paula Jones lawsuit and in an appearance before a grand jury, that he obstructed justice in an effort to cover up that perjury and that he abused the power of his office in responding to 81 questions about the matter posed by the Judiciary Committee.
Q: How long will the impeachment debate take?
A: Republicans are planning for several hours of debate and separate, yes-or-no votes on each of the four articles at the end of debate, which begins Thursday and could take until Friday. A simple majority of the 435-member House is required to pass each article.
Q: Can impeachment articles be amended?
A: No. They are considered "privileged" on the House floor and not subject to either amendment or debate in the Rules Committee like a normal bill.
Q: Is the president removed from office if he is impeached?
A: No. The articles of impeachment are only charges, similar to a grand jury indictment. Under the Constitution, the Senate will conduct a trial on any impeachment articles passed by the House, with Chief Justice William Rehnquist presiding. Two-thirds of the 100 senators must vote "guilty" on any or all of the articles for the president to be removed from office. They have a choice of judgments: either removal from office, or removal as well as a prohibition against the president ever holding any future office of "honor, trust or profit under the United States."
Q: Is the trial like one in a criminal court?
A: In some ways, yes. House Republicans, called "managers," will take the role of prosecutors and - with help from lawyers - lay out their case. Clinton can have his own advocates, probably his familiar team of lawyers. Witnesses can be called to testify and submit to cross-examination. But unlike a criminal court, senators can vote to halt the trial at any point or vote to overrule any of Rehnquist's decisions as presiding officer.
Q: Will the swearing-in of a new Congress in January have any effect?
A: Possibly. Although the impeachment charges will carry over to the new 106th Congress in January, the House would have to reappoint its managers for the trial. Because there will be five fewer Republicans in the new Congress, Democrats and a few GOP allies could throw the case into chaos by blocking appointment of the managers. The new Senate's party composition doesn't change: 55 Republicans and 45 Democrats.
Q: Has any president ever been impeached?
A: Yes. The House approved 11 articles of impeachment against Andrew Johnson in 1868, arising essentially from political divisions over Reconstruction following the Civil War. After a 74-day Senate trial, the Senate acquitted Johnson on three of the articles by a one-vote margin each and decided not to vote on the remaining articles.
Q: Wasn't President Nixon impeached?
A: No. The House Judiciary Committee approved three articles of impeachment in July 1974 against Nixon arising from the break-in at Democratic National Committee headquarters in the Watergate building and a subsequent cover-up. Nixon resigned on Aug. 9, 1974, before the full House took up the articles.
Q: Has any president ever been censured by Congress?
A: Yes. Andrew Jackson was rebuked by the Senate in 1834 for vetoing a bill that would have rechartered a central bank. Three years later, Jackson's allies got his record expunged by revoking the resolution, and Jackson's portrait now adorns the $ 20 bill.
 Load-Date: December 14, 1998

 

End of Document
