

Ringing off the hook: Answering the phones at the IRS
The Associated Press
December 19, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 605 words
Byline: By DAVE SKIDMORE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The 1996 tax filing season went more smoothly for the Internal Revenue Service, but taxpayers still had trouble getting the agency to answer the telephone, according to congressional auditors.
The IRS answered 20 percent of the calls placed to its toll-free help line, up from 8 percent in 1995, the General Accounting Office said Wednesday. The improvement returned the answer rate to about its 1994 level of 21 percent. As recently as 1989, it answered 58 percent of its calls.
One reason for the 8 percent answer rate in 1995 was a flood of irate calls from many of the 7 million taxpayers whose refunds were delayed by a crackdown on fraud from the earned income tax credit program. In 1996, only 350,000 refunds were delayed.
The report by the GAO, Congress' investigative arm, comes at the end of a rough year for the tax-collection agency. Republican Bob Dole and independent Ross Perot made "ending the IRS as we know it" a focus of their presidential campaigns. And the Republican-majority Congress cut its budget for two consecutive years.
By another measure - looking at callers rather than each individual call attempted - 50 percent of callers eventually got through in 1996, up from 41 percent the previous year.
And the accuracy of the answers continued to be high - 91 percent compared with 90 percent in 1995.
"We think that the '96 filing season was one of the most successful we've ever had," IRS spokesman Frank Keith said. "It saw us assisting more taxpayers than ever before and introducing new services, including telephone filing and an Internet home page."
But the GAO said no matter how it's measured, telephone "accessibility … was still not good."
And the modest improvement came while the IRS was cutting walk-in service. It closed 93 offices and reduced hours at some of the 442 remaining. That resulted in a 17 percent drop in the number of taxpayers served, to 2.8 million.
Taxpayer service is one of the areas under scrutiny by the National Commission on Restructuring the Internal Revenue Service, a 17-member bipartisan panel due to report in July.
"We should be doing so much better than this," said the commission's co-chairman, Rep. Rob Portman, R-Ohio. "If MasterCard or Visa only answered 20 percent of their calls, they'd be out of business."
Meanwhile, the GAO said a large-scale IRS experiment to have millions of taxpayers send their checks to postal lockboxes serviced by commercial banks is nearly $ 5 million too expensive this year.
In 1994 and 1995, the IRS directed participating filers who owed tax to use two envelopes - one to send their check to a bank-serviced lockbox and the other to send their return to an IRS service center. That allowed faster deposit of payments, decreasing the government's borrowing need and interest expense.
In 1996, the IRS switched to a one-envelope system and paid the banks to sort the returns and ship them to the IRS, reducing the savings from the program. It plans to use the same system in 1997.
Keith said the agency switched because taxpayers found using two envelopes burdensome, but it will continue to evaluate the system. He noted that the added expense, estimated by the GAO at $ 4.7 million during the first eight months of 1996, was in the context of an annual budget just over $ 7 billion.
The GAO said it wasn't convinced the slightly greater convenience for taxpayers of using one envelope justified the extra spending.
Robert M. Tobias, president of the National Treasury Employees Union, which represents IRS employees, said the union has been arguing the lockbox program was inefficient and costly and was pleased to see its view confirmed.
 Load-Date: December 19, 1996

 

End of Document
