

Sammy the Bull accused of giving up his new life to return to the old
The Associated Press
March 17, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1125 words
Byline: By PAULINE ARRILLAGA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PHOENIX
Body




Salvatore "Sammy the Bull" Gravano is back behind bars, and this time his family has gone down with him.
He is charged along with his ex-wife, Debra, and children, Karen and Gerard, with operating a drug ring that distributed the illegal stimulant Ecstasy in Phoenix with the help of a posse of suburban street punks.
"This was an opportunity to develop his own little crime family in a place that had no organized crime," says Phoenix police spokesman Jeff Halstead.
For some mob experts, however, the idea that Gravano would return to a life of crime is bewildering. That he would oversee a family-run drug gang is simply strange, they insist.
"He was a killer and a gangster, but he was against drugs and he always denigrated John Gotti and other gangsters who brought their own children into the life of crime that he and Gotti chose," says Jerry Capeci, author of three books on New York's Mafia.
"He seemed to be someone who was smart enough, sharp enough, savvy enough to make it without getting back into the life. And I still haven't been convinced that it's true."
This is, after all, the guy FBI agents and prosecutors had fawned over, dubbing him "the most significant witness in the history of organized crime" for testimony that led to 37 mob convictions. Even the federal judge who sentenced Gravano thought he detected a "very significant change" in him.
Author Peter Maas, who interviewed Gravano dozens of times for the bestseller "Underboss: Sammy the Bull Gravano's Story of Life in the Mafia," also believed Gravano had the tenacity and talent to make it legitimately.
He says that when he and Gravano last spoke at length, about a year and a half ago, the former Mafioso chatted proudly of the life he was creating in Arizona.
"He said he'd gotten a job as a laborer in a construction outfit. He said, 'I want to learn how they do construction out here.' That sounded like pure Gravano to me," Maas says. "My understanding was that he was doing OK."
Perhaps he was, for a time.
Gravano, 55, served just five years in prison after admitting his participation in 19 murders and testifying against Gotti, the New York City-based boss of the Gambino crime family now in jail for life. Gravano was released in 1995 and, under the alias Jimmy Moran, relocated to Arizona by the Witness Protection Program.
By early 1997, the same year his life story hit bookstores, Gravano dropped out of the program and settled into a modest apartment in Tempe, Ariz., a college town in the Phoenix metroplex. He found work in construction, a trade he'd learned during his New York Mafia days. Eventually he started his own firm, Marathon Development, and launched Creative Pools, a pool construction business.
Gravano's wife had divorced him when he entered the Witness Protection Program. "I was never part of that part of your life," she said at the time, "and I'm not going to be part of this."
Yet by 1996, Debra and daughter Karen had moved into a 4,400-square-foot house just nine miles from Gravano's apartment. Their son, Gerard, also bought a house in Tempe.
Debra, 46, opened an Italian restaurant. Gerard, 24, who shares his father's stocky frame and cropped brown hair, began working for Gravano, building and maintaining pools. Karen, 27, went to work as the pool company's office manager and her fiance, David Seabrook, also took a job there while living with her and their baby at her mom's house.
Besides the elder Gravano, only Gerard has a known criminal record - a 1999 conviction for trying to mail marijuana to a friend in New York.
It seemed the Gravano family was starting anew.
"They are hard-working people," says Gravano's lawyer, Larry Hammond. "This was a guy who was in search of - and had largely found - a life in which he could do his own work and do it well. Was he craving some kind of new underworld empire? I just think that's utter fiction."
Police call it fact, with one interesting twist.
Gravano wasn't responsible for bringing his family into the drug trade, they say. Rather, they allege that Gerard lured his dad back into the life and brought his mother and sister along for the ride.
According to authorities, Gerard had befriended 23-year-old Michael Papa, a fellow New Yorker who began distributing Ecstasy at dance parties in the Phoenix area in late 1998 or early 1999. Papa allegedly bought the pills for $6-$8 apiece and sold them for as much as $30. But his supply was limited, authorities say, because of low capital.
"Gerard conveys the financial lucrativeness of this whole scenario to Sammy," says Jim Molesa, spokesman for the Drug Enforcement Administration in Phoenix.
Gravano joined the scheme last fall, Molesa says, becoming the brains and money behind the operation. Karen's boyfriend helped Gerard and Papa with distribution, along with dozens of their friends, while Debra and Karen were enlisted for bookkeeping, Molesa says. And he alleges Debra's restaurant was used to launder drug proceeds, while the women's home was used for storage.
Under Gravano's direction, the ring brought in about $500,000 a week, with Gravano receiving at least half, Molesa says. For his assistance, he says, Papa received 15 percent of Gravano's construction business, which became little more than a front for the drug operation.
Authorities said they found 13 pills believed to be Ecstasy in Debra's house along with a suspected drug ledger indicating money amounts and the word "pills." Also seized were $93,000 in cash and an arsenal of weapons, including three loaded handguns, a shotgun, a rifle, a revolver in the master bedroom dresser and a handgun in the family room.
More pills were taken from Gerard's home, authorities said. In Gravano's apartment, police found marijuana, a telephone voice changer, three loaded handguns and $1,940. A bulletproof vest was pulled from the trunk of his Lexus.
The family members have pleaded innocent to all charges.
Gravano's lawyer maintains his client "had a strong bias against drugs and the use of drugs." Furthermore, he says, Gravano "had been the manager of perfectly appropriate businesses - the kind of businesses that most people would be proud to say were theirs."
"I've got news for you," Molesa counters. "A crook is a crook. And if they've got the opportunity to make a buck, they're going to do it."
Debra and Karen Gravano are free while awaiting trial. Gerard Gravano remains jailed in lieu of $100,000 bond in a county jail. Five miles away, on the maximum security floor of another jail, Sammy Gravano sits alone in a 10-by-8 cell, unable to post his $5 million cash bond.
The snitch who sang to the feds isn't talking to reporters.
---
On the Net: http://www.ganglandnews.com. 
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Pauline Arrillaga is the AP's Southwest regional writer, based in Phoenix.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY430-434 of March 16
 Load-Date: March 18, 2000

 

End of Document
