

Stamps In The News: Celebrating 'the international year of the ocean'
The Associated Press
May 11, 1998, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 403 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




This year has been declared "The International Year of the Ocean" by the United Nations.
In recognition of the importance of oceans, the U.N. Postal Administration has issued a set of three commemorative sheets of 12 stamps each on this theme. Each set is in the same format - three stamps across and four down. Three countries are participating.
The values are 32 cents (U.S. currency), 45 francs (Swiss) and 3.50 schillings (Austrian).
The designs were created by three different artists featuring ocean life in different forms. The 32-cent stamp shows the artist's rendition of the temperate region of the oceans. The 45 francs depicts the polar regions of the oceans. The 3.50 schillings illustrates tropical regions.
In issuing these sets of ocean life, the U.N. Postal Administration announced that only full sheets will be sold - not individual stamps. First-day covers will be available only as a full sheet affixed to a large envelope.
For information about ordering, write to: United Nations Postal Administration, P.O. Box 5900 Grand Central Station, New York N.Y. 10163-9992. Or you may phone (800) 234-UNPA.
Due to a change in the UNPA program, the next issue will be three commemorative stamps and three souvenir sheets dedicated to rain forests. In addition, the 50th anniversary of the World Health Organization will be hailed.
-
Scott Catalog is available
The 1999 Scott Standard Postage Stamp Catalog is off the presses. The new volume contains listings of the United States, Austria and Australia. Also included are U.S. possessions, United Nations and other stamp-issuing countries whose first letters begin with A or B.
Many value changes are noted in the latest catalog. Upward changes are seen in postal stationery. In fact, more than 600 changes appear in this category.
The cover price for the first volume is $ 36. For further information about obtaining the 1999 book, contact your local dealer or write to: Scott Publishing Co., P.O. Box 828, Sydney, Ohio 45365-0828.
-
About stamp albums
Young collectors have written this column asking what kind of stamp album should they buy. Some albums feature specific countries such as the United States, Great Britain or Canada. Photos of the stamps are imprinted in the album for the collectors' convenience.
Collectors may want to select an album with loose-leaf pages so they can add to the album as they go along.
Whatever the decision, it is likely to be fun.
 

 

 
 Load-Date: May 11, 1998

 

End of Document
