

Sunday Special: Millennium Man; The last word on the sports figure of the century
The Associated Press
December 22, 1999, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 643 words
Byline: By HAL BOCK, AP Sports Writer
Body




By now, all the votes are in, all the lists are done and the consensus of opinion is that the sports figure of the century was … drum roll, please, … Babe Ruth.
Unless it was Muhammad Ali.
Or maybe Michael Jordan, Jim Brown or Wayne Gretzky.
Ruth, in particular, deserves special mention for a remarkable final 50 years. The Babe was the No. 2 choice behind Jim Thorpe in an Associated Press poll for the first half of the century. He's been dead since 1948, but in the end-of-century poll, he moved up to No. 1.
So pick a favorite. There is no wrong one among them. They are all compelling figures, each of whom left an indelible mark on the world of sports.
Ruth, the slugger, was a cartoon character come to life, a mountain of a man who merely saved baseball. Ali, the three-time heavyweight champion, was a hero for his antiwar stance at a time when the country was torn apart by that debate.
Jordan did things with a basketball that defied the imagination and Gretzky matched him with a hockey puck. Brown dominated football as few could and walked away at the top of his game.
But as significant as they were, they are also-rans to the real athlete of the century, a man of conscience who changed the sports landscape permanently.
Jackie Robinson.
Robinson has finished far down on most of the lists, ignored for the sociological revolution he created when he became the first black man to play major league baseball in this century.
Think about the significance of that. This was not about runs, hits and errors. This was about America, forced to face up to the promise of democracy and the basic truth of the Pledge of Allegiance - "One nation, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all."
Robinson integrated baseball in 1947, seven years before the Supreme Court ordered the desegregation of public schools.
At UCLA, he had been a better football player, a better basketball player, and probably a better track and field man. But Robinson's baseball skills were strictly secondary in this environment. For this experiment to succeed, he had to be a better person than he was a player.
This was a man of enormous courage and conviction, a man who was subjected to vile treatment and shrugged it off because he understood the larger picture. This was a man who made America a better place, who opened opportunity to a whole segment of its society.
Imagine what it must have been like to be the only black player in the game. Think about the assignment Branch Rickey gave him - ignore the death threats, the beanballs, the attempts to spike him. Turn away from the racist taunts, even though the competitive fire inside him must have screamed at him to answer back, to strike back.
Look at the archive film of Robinson sitting by himself on the bench, his eyes darting from side to side, seeming sometimes like a deer caught in the headlights of a speeding truck. His face was drained of the joy he should have felt playing in the major leagues. In its place was the strain of a man under pressure, a man who could not afford a single misstep.
Robinson's burden was not his alone. It was the burden of an entire community of people. The torment, however, was shouldered alone.
Every day, he was faced with unspeakable challenges, forced to deal with them alone. His support system was his team, a team that included players from the Deep South, some of whom were not exactly thrilled with having him wear their uniform.
Robinson pressed on and because he did, a door was opened and a segment of American society gained a measure of equality.
So go ahead and celebrate Ruth's gusto for life, his home runs and histrionics. Pay tribute to the civil rights symbol Ali became. Sit in awe of the athletic achievements of Jordan and Gretzky and Brown.
But first, remember Robinson, a man who by his strength of character, changed everything, forever.
End Adv for Sunday, Dec. 26
 
 Load-Date: December 27, 1999

 

End of Document
