

Syria reported to demand the removal of all Israelis on the Golan
The Associated Press
January 16, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 606 words
Byline: By SUSAN SEVAREID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DAMASCUS, Syria
Body




Syria would not accept any peace deal that would allow Israeli settlers to stay on the Golan Heights, Syria's state-run newspapers said Sunday.
In the peace talks due to resume in West Virginia this week, Israel must provide some "definite answers" about the return of the strategic plateau to Syria, the newspaper Tishreen said.
"Syria does not demand only a full Israeli troop withdrawal from the Golan, but also a total dismantlement of settlements and the departure of all settlers," Tishreen said, referring to the Israelis who have made their home on the plateau captured in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War.
The comments reflect the government's views as Syrian newspapers are tightly controlled.
In Jerusalem on Sunday, Israeli Cabinet minister Haim Ramon said Israel was aware of Syria's "tough stand."
"We have positions that are no less steadfast on matters that deal with security of the country and the quality of the peace," Ramon told Israel radio.
The Syria Times said that although the first two rounds of talks had yielded little progress, the prospects for peace were not dead.
The newspaper said that Israel's proposals on water rights "would be rejected." The paper did not give the proposals, but the Israeli newspaper Haaretz has reported that Syria had agreed to joint management of the Golan's water sources.
In Lebanon, the pro-Syrian newspaper As-Safir has published what it called "Syrian amendments" to a U.S. working document circulated at the peace talks earlier this month. The amendments stress that Syria wants a complete Israeli withdrawal from the Golan to the border before the 1967 war.
The newspaper did not give its source for the Syrian amendments, which it published Saturday.
It said the issues of a complete withdrawal and the departure of all settlers had been resolved in Syrian-Israeli talks before Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's 1995 assassination. Israel has denied this claim.
Syrian-Israeli talks resumed in December after a freeze in early 1996.
Last week, the U.S. working document was leaked to the Israeli press, much to Syria's annoyance, apparently to counter Israeli fears that Prime Minister Ehud Barak had conceded too much.
Reports on the leaked document circulated in foreign Arabic-language newspapers in Syria. The report in As-Safir, which is widely available in Syria, appeared to be an attempt to counter suggestions of agreement in certain areas.
The U.S. working document had taken Israel's side on many points, As-Safir reported, particularly regarding security arrangements and normalization of relations. The document did not mention differences on the sort of relations anticipated, including an exchange of ambassadors, trade, tourism and open borders.
But the document did indicate strong differences on the demarcation of the border and security issues. Israel wants to maintain a presence at its strategic early warning station on Mount Hermon in the Golan.
The document said Syria wants the station operated by the United States and France.
As-Safir reported the Syrian amendments as calling for Syrian liaison officers and other parties to participate in operating the Mount Hermon station for five years. The paper did not identify the other parties, but they are presumed to include Russia.
Aerial surveillance of the Syrian-Israeli border would be entrusted to the United States on condition that its information would be relayed to both sides simultaneously, Al-Safir reported.
Syria wants Israel to sign peace treaties with it and Lebanon simultaneously, Al-Safir said, citing the amendments. Israel would also need to reach a "just solution to the Palestinian refugees problem."
 Load-Date: January 17, 2000

 

End of Document
