

Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
May 6, 1996, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 761 words
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body



Cities Want Tallest Tower
 Is too. Is not. Is too! Is NOT!
So goes the discussion over the world's tallest building.
Is it in Chicago, home of the 1,450-foot Sears Tower (antennas not included)? Or is it in Malaysia, where the upstart Petronas Towers are nearing completion? Without spires, the Petronas complex is 209 feet shorter than the Sears Tower. With spires, it's 33 feet taller.
If Sears' antennas are allowed, which the experts don't want, it will remain the ranking behemoth. And if Petronas' spires are included, why aren't Sears' antennas?
The Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat (yes, there really is such an organization) has never considered antennas or TV and radio towers essential to a structure. Members met in Chicago on Friday to revisit the issue.
How important is the Sears Tower to Chicago? How does the phrase "Chicago, Home of the World's Second-Largest Building" strike you?
"People may think 'Well, we don't really need a key chain from the Sears Tower. It's not tallest anymore,"' said John Rice, spokesman for the Chicago Architecture Foundation.
Gerald Johnson, chairman of the Chicago Committee on High Rise Buildings, said the issue is a matter of ego and politics.
"Everybody wants to be tall - the biggest, the best," Johnson said.
But, he said, having the tallest building won't make tourists choose Kuala Lumpur over Chicago.
"I don't think anybody has not gone to New York in the last 25 years because the Empire State Building is the second- or third-tallest building," he said.
"While there still is a dispute over what qualifies as the tallest building in the world, there is no disputing the fact that Chicago would still have the highest observation deck in the world," said Noelle Gaffney, spokeswoman for Mayor Richard Daley.
About 1.5 million people visit the Sears Tower's top floor each year. Since it opened in 1974, it's seen about 31.5 million visitors, said Phil Domenico, the building's manager.
The Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat, based at Lehigh University in Pennsylvania, is devoted to high-rise design and construction. Members voted Friday, but the official tally probably won't be in for a month because many members cast absentee votes.
The battle is unlikely to subside no matter how the board rules.
Construction begins next year on the Shanghai Financial Center, which is designed to stand 1,509 feet - 26 higher than Petronas and 59 feet taller than the Sears Tower.
Or is it 9 feet shorter than the Sears Tower (1,518 feet with antenna)?
 
Use the facts from the story to complete each of the following statements below:
1. Chicago and Malaysia are arguing over which city has the:
.....a) best television programs.
.....b) highest antennas.
.....c) world's tallest building.
2. In paragraph three, the word "behemoth" refers to:
.....a) radio broadcasting stations.
.....b) something that is huge.
.....c) a famous department store.
3. Experts must decide if the height of a building includes:
.....a) spires (tops of towers).
.....b) antennas.
.....c) both a) and b) are correct.
4. If spires are allowed, then the Petronas Towers in Malaysia would:
.....a) be ranked the tallest.
.....b) measure about 1,000 feet.
.....c) gain 209 feet.
5. The Sears Tower is:
.....a) just about complete.
.....b) located in Chicago.
.....c) about 33 feet high.
6. Many tourists go to the Sears Tower because they want to:
.....a) visit the observation deck.
.....b) buy a new key chain.
.....c) meet members of the city council.
7. Gerald Johnson, chairman of a Chicago building committee, believes that:
.....a) the best people are tall.
.....b) Chicago benefits from having the tallest building.
.....c) only high-rise buildings attract sightseers.
8. Until recently, the Sears Tower was:
.....a) the undisputed giant.
.....b) Mayor Daley's home.
.....c) often confused with the Empire State Building.
9. It is unlikely that the tower dispute will end because:
.....a) big cities continually try to outdo each other.
.....b) it is impossible to accurately measure buildings.
.....c) the Sears Tower is under construction.
10. You can guess that the city with the biggest tower:
.....a) must be in the United States.
.....b) is located near Lehigh University .
.....c) takes special pride in its accomplishment.
 
 Answer key: 1)c. 2)b. 3)c. 4)a. 5)b. 6)a. 7)b. 8)a. 9)a. 10)c.
 
PART TWO
POINTS OF INTEREST:
American cities offer a variety of attractions. Use an almanac or encyclopedia to find the locations of these famous sites: Diamond Head, the Alamo, Gateway Arch, Golden Gate Bridge, and the Lincoln Memorial. Which city would you like to visit? Why?
 Load-Date: May 6, 1996

 

End of Document
