

The Gingrich tape and its route to the Justice Department
January 15, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 862 words
Byline: By LARRY MARGASAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Recorded in a car during a shopping trip, a tape of Speaker Newt Gingrich discussing his ethics case made its way from Florida to the House ethics committee like a classified document.
It was delivered to a congresswoman's Florida office. Mailed in a sealed envelope to her Washington office. Handed back to the people who taped it. Carried by the couple to the ranking Democrat of the ethics committee, with a cover letter suggesting they had legal immunity.
Eventually it wound up in the hands of the press, and The New York Times ran a transcript.
Now the tape is part of an ethics investigation caught up in bitter partisan fighting. The committee Democrat who received it has stepped aside from the Gingrich case. A Republican who was itching to get off the panel bowed out too, to maintain the committee's political balance.
And there are other consequences: The FBI has begun a criminal investigation. And Republicans have used the tape to escalate their attacks against Democrats.
Rep. David Hobson, R-Ohio, said Wednesday he will not participate further in the Gingrich case. He stepped down after the panel's ranking Democrat, Jim McDermott of Washington state, said he would not participate. That leaves the panel with four members from each party.
"My action will preserve that balance so the ethics process may continue to move forward in this case," Hobson said. He was going to rotate off the committee in any case after a vote next Tuesday on Gingrich's punishment.
President Clinton also weighed in on the investigation, prodding lawmakers to "put it behind us."
"I want it to be over," Clinton told reporters at the White House when asked for his reaction to the partisanship over Gingrich's case.
"The American people have given us larger responsibilities," said the president, who faces ethics questions himself over Whitewater, campaign contributions and a sexual harassment lawsuit. "Way too much time and energy and effort is spent on all these things" and not enough on "the work of the people," he said.
John and Alice Martin of Fort White, Fla., heard the tape on the Radio Shack scanner in their car while on a Christmas shopping trip. Once they realized the conversation they were picking up was of Gingrich discussing the Republican response to his admitted ethics violations, they recorded it on a hand-held machine.
They called Rep. Karen Thurman, D-Fla., and on Jan. 2 brought the tape to her Gainesville office. There, the tape was placed in a sealed envelope, wrapped in packing tape and mailed to her Washington office.
According to House Democratic Whip David Bonior, Gingrich's congressional nemesis, Thurman asked members of Bonior's staff for advice. They recommended that her constituents forward the tape to appropriate law enforcement agencies or other officials, including the ethics committee.
The Martins, meanwhile, came to Washington for the swearing-in of a new Democratic House member, Allen Boyd, and said they ran into Thurman at a reception for him.
The next day, they came to her office and picked up the package. It was still sealed.
The Martins had a cover letter to go with the tape. Addressed to McDermott, the letter said in part: "We live in the 5th Congressional District and attempted to give the tape to Congresswoman Karen Thurman. We were advised by her to turn the tape directly over to you. We also understand that we will be granted immunity."
The tape was delivered to McDermott at the committee.
Federal law prohibits intentional interception of calls from cellular telephones and also the dissemination of any such recording - if the person transmitting it knew the recording was illegal.
The penalty for a first offense is a court injunction and an unspecified fine, provided there is no illegal purpose or direct or indirect commercial gain. A second offense after an injunction carries a mandatory $ 500 civil fine.
The penalties for first offense of intentional distribution of the contents of cellular phone calls are the same.
The Martins' attorney, Larry Turner, told a press conference the couple could be liable for illegally taping the call.
James F. Rogers, a Washington attorney specializing in communications law, said Thurman could defend her role by saying she didn't disclose the contents and was not asking anyone to do so.
He said if McDermott had simply given the tape to the committee, "a court would be hard-pressed" to find that illegal.
But McDermott's role is unclear. He delivered it to the committee Monday night, but Chairwoman Nancy Johnson directed that it go directly to the criminal division of the Justice Department.
By that time, a partial transcript had been published in the New York Times.
McDermott, in recusing himself from the investigation, said Mrs. Johnson committed a grave error by not treating the tape as evidence. He said the conversation between Gingrich and Republican leaders breached an agreement that barred the speaker from orchestrating a response to his ethical wrongdoing.
The ethics committee's chief counsel, Theodore Van Der Meid, said that when the tape was brought to the committee, he asked Justice Department attorneys if they wanted it.
"They were interested," he said.
 Load-Date: January 15, 1997

 

End of Document
