

The Face of America: Some Wrinkles and Graying at the Temples
May 20, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 770 words
Byline: By RANDOLPH E. SCHMID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The face of America will be looking more like the "Golden Girls" than "Friends" as the post-World War II baby boomers turn the corner into their second 50 years.
A Census Bureau report released today forecasts that the 65-and-over population will grow from one in eight Americans now to one in six by 2020 and one in five by 2050.
And the fastest-growing segment of the population will be the "oldest old," the people age 85 and over, whose numbers are expected to double to 7 million by 2020.
"These oldest old men, and more frequently women, are much more likely than the young-old to live in nursing homes, to have substantial disabilities and to have quite restricted financial resources," said Linda Waite, director of the Center on Aging at the University of Chicago.
While most older people today receive assistance from their family or spouse that could change, she warned.
"The next 50 years may see sizable increases in the proportion of older men and women who lack family to help them. More will reach older ages without ever having married; more will spend the end of their lives having divorced and not remarried....and baby boomers had relatively small families, giving them few children to call on for help later."
"The aging of the population is changing American society in fundamental ways," noted Richard M. Suzman, who heads the demography office in the government's National Institute on Aging. "It's the equivalent of the waves of immigrants who came to the country, or the urbanization and industrialization of the country."
The first members of the massive baby boom generation turn 50 this year, and "when they turn 65 it will have an explosive effect on all facets of society," Suzman said in an interview. Some 75 million people were born in the United States during the boom years, 1946 through 1964.
The estimated 33 million Americans over age 65 in 1995 accounted for about one American in eight. The Census report projected that the 65-plus group will number 53 million by 2020 and 80 million by 2050, when its proportion of the overall population will reach the one-in-five level.
The effects will reach beyond retirement, health and long-term care, Suzman said, as working-age people increasingly face hard choices over educating their children, caring for their parents and saving for their own retirement.
On the positive side, Suzman saw today's Americans approaching their retirement years in better health and more prepared to cope with aging.
"We see signs that disability rates are dropping … I think there's hope that we can accelerate this process," he said.
In recent years, workers have been retiring earlier, but Suzman said this is likely to change. As pensions that began at age 55 or 62 are replaced increasingly by plans to which individuals contribute, people have more incentive to stay on the job, he said.
Better overall health and the availability of procedures such as simplified cataract surgery and hip replacement reduces disability and permits more people to remain at work, Suzman said. "We are seeing more and more ability to influence health," he noted.
The boomers' health is generally better than that of their parents, most women have worked and generate their own Social Security and pension income and education levels are higher, said the Institute on Aging, which worked with the Census Bureau on the report.
The growth of the over-65 population will have an impact nationwide, but particularly on eight states that are expected to double their elderly populations by 2020, the report said. They are Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Georgia, Nevada, Utah and Washington.
"These data are important because they confirm that states need to prepare their resources for an increasingly aged population," said Census analyst Kevin Kinsella.
"Some states 'age' because of in-migration of elderly, some because of out-migration of the young and some because of sustained low fertility, or some combination of these factors," Kinsella said.
Other findings of the report, "65+ in the United States," include:
-The number of Americans age 100 and over has been climbing rapidly, reaching 49,894 by mid-1994.
-The elderly are more often women than men. There are 65 men for each 100 women over age 65. The ratio falls to 50 men for 100 women over age 80 and just 27 men for 100 women over age 100.
-The percentage of elderly living in poverty declined from 24.6 percent in 1970 to 12.9 percent in 1992.
-Of the 80 million elderly projected for 2020, 8.4 million will be black, 6.7 million will be of races other than white or black and 12.5 million will be Hispanic, of any race.
 Load-Date: May 20, 1996

 

End of Document
