

The fear effect begins to do battle with the wealth effect
The Associated Press
March 13, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 568 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




We know the wealth effect is the urge to take a cruise or buy a second car - and why not, when your high-tech stock soars and the house you bought for $40,000 is now worth $120,000.
But what about the fear effect?
The wealth effect surprised many people a few years ago, perhaps when the head of the household listed assets on an equity loan form and discovered "good heavens, we're rich."
The fear effect could descend in the same way, as when the family calculates the cost of an automobile trip to the mountains or seashore and discovers it can't afford the cost of the gasoline.
Once fear enters the mind it is hard to rout, since it's reinforced each day by media reports, and by economists who say the boom can't continue and by those pesky increases in interest rates.
Eventually it wearies resistance and becomes part of the new view. Instead of believing in 36,000 points on the Dow Jones average you have to consider the possibility of it falling to 8,000 points.
Then, perhaps, along will come an obscure economist promoting what he hopes will be a best-seller, "The Coming Stock Market Disaster," subtitled "How you can avoid being one of the victims," and his promoters are sure to be signing him up for every talk show in hopes he soon replaces the big-boom boosters.
Such an agent of pessimism might be talking nonsense, as do so many seers - optimists and pessimists alike - who claim laser insight into future's secrets, but his book and message will be heard.
Fear sells. The evidence is out there, or will be, in lecture halls and bookstores, and bit by bit on the Internet too.
Remember, as the ground was being fertilized for the biggest economic harvest in history, the economic boom of the '90s, the lecture circuit was filled with buck-cadging foretellers of doom.
Rather than contemplate the future, which is a vast unknown, it is probably just as well that people consider the present, which is something that is more real, and enjoyable to contemplate as well.
Let the Fed raise interest rates and, when not doing that, warn of more to come. Read instead the findings of the latest Federal Reserve Survey of Consumers Finances.
Since 1993, it calculates, the poorest 20 percent of Americans has seen greater income gains than the richest 20 percent. Or indeed, economist David Wyss points out, more than any income group.
Wyss, who authors Standard & Poor's "U.S. Forecast Summary," newsletter notes that consumers are still spending and businesses still investing, and that employers are still hiring as they did in 1999.
Yes, the rich continue to get richer faster than do the poor, but the poor are building their wealth, which wasn't the case in many years of the '70s and '80s. And wealth begets more wealth.
For example, among households with a net worth of $25,000 to $50,000, the median net worth rose 9 percent in the period of 1995-1998, which is even faster than their income gains. Significant in that rise was home ownership.
In the lower income brackets, the big jump in net worth usually comes with buying a house. After getting a job, it's the biggest step on the long road toward developing net assets, and right now, 67 percent of households own their homes, the highest rate ever.
The message is clear: Prepare for the unknown future. Pay bills. Save and invest. Borrow less. But don't forget the present altogether. It's more real than the future.
 
End Adv AMs Wednesday, March 15
 
 Load-Date: March 16, 2000

 

End of Document
