

THE MONTAGNARDS OF CHARLOTTE: from Vietnam mountains to the new South
The Associated Press
June 5, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1406 words
Byline: By PAUL NOWELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHARLOTTE, N.C.
Body




On the porch of tribal warrior Ksang K are well-worn loafers, sandals and basketball shoes, all in a perfect row.
On this cozy gallery, where plastic chairs straddle a red brick-and-concrete floor, ancient Vietnam intersects ultramodern America.
Sometimes, they collide.
The Montagnards, one of the oldest and most primitive peoples of Southeast Asia, call themselves "The Son of the Mountains and Mother Earth." They were U.S. allies during the Vietnam War. For that, they have paid a heavy price.
Today, some of those who survived the war and communist persecution have found refuge in Westerwood Village, a small collection of eggshell-white and beige houses in west Charlotte built for the tribal people by a sympathetic American businessman.
The porches are there for a reason. The Montagnards asked for them so they could sit outside on summer evenings to talk and to guard their dwellings, as was their custom in Vietnam. Also, it is considered highly disrespectful to wear shoes inside the home, so porches are all the more necessary.
Ksang K is a small, agile man with dark brown skin and jet black hair. He steps gracefully out of Drexlite sandals as he crosses the threshold of his small ranch house. He smiles easily and the crow's feet edging his brown eyes are the first hint that he is 52.
He works the second shift at a huge T.J. Maxx clothing warehouse.
His three sons, Soe K, 29, Set K, 19, and Song K, 20, all live at home, contributing their salaries to the household income. (Many Montagnards have no surname. The K, pronounced Kay, was added when the family immigrated to America.)
"I've got my house and my three boys," Ksang says proudly. "They help me pay for it and the bills, the power and water, and everything."
It is the antithesis of the life he led on the other side of the world.
Ksang spent more than four years in a communist prison before he was freed in 1990. His offense, he says, was aiding the South Vietnamese government during the war.
"They give you small food," he said in broken English, cupping his right hand to show the size of a rice ration. "We had to work hard in the fields and some people die."
After his release he labored on tea and coffee plantations. Then came the day he was allowed to emigrate: November 10, 1997.
The communist government would not let his two married daughters and five grandchildren accompany the family. Still, the father did not hesitate. He, his wife Kis Ka, and their boys came to America, where they were free to worship according to their faith.
"My country was 90 percent destroyed," he said. "The Vietnamese would not let the Montagnard people pray. I remember one saying: 'We don't want you to believe in God. God is American.' "
About 4,000 Montagnards live in the United States, 75 percent of them in North Carolina, drawn by lush mountains, warm weather and plentiful jobs. The pro-military politics of Sen. Jesse Helms' home state also is well known among the Montagnards.
Some 800 live in the Charlotte area.
"In some ways it looks like home, but sometimes different," Ksang says.
Until he got here, Ksang knew nothing about North Carolina. He was worried about not speaking English. But what mattered was more precious than scenery or language.
"It was freedom for the first time in many years," he said, his eyes misting.
The family first lived on the city's east side, where other Asian immigrants had moved. In 1998, Ksang heard about a neighborhood for Montagnards longing to recreate something of their tribal community.
John Gandy, who owned an auto dealership in nearby Huntersville, had sold several used cars to Montagnards. He felt an odd kinship with these people, whose collective name is French for mountain dwellers. Gandy, too, came from mountain people, though his were West Virginian.
Gandy and his two brothers bought 22 acres near the Charlotte-Douglas International Airport, on which they carved 30 modest homes into the side of a gently sloping valley.
They sold them to the Montagnards for $69,000 to $89,000 each.
It is a largely treeless, blue-collar neighborhood. Jetliners roar overhead, so close that homeowners can read the tail section numbers.
When they moved in, the Montagnards might have imagined they landed on a different planet. For centuries they had lived in mountain isolation. They knew nothing about signing a mortgage, let alone the concept of 30 years of debt.
Equally unfathomable was writing a check, or driving on the interstate.
Separated by geography and time from the rest of Vietnam, Montagnard tribes preferred their own company. In the 1920s, missionaries introduced them to Christianity. Many converted, abandoning their animist beliefs.
Beginning in 1954, the newly created state of South Vietnam overrode Montagnard objections and resettled large numbers of Vietnamese in the highlands.
By 1961, the CIA had recruited the Montagnards, known for their courage and loyalty, for secret missions against communist North Vietnam. Thus began a long and close relationship with U.S. soldiers.
"The Montagnards are the most peace-loving people in the world," said Tommy Daniels, a Vietnam veteran who heads Save the Montagnard People, Inc., a Southeast Asian aid organization.
"They only wanted be left alone in the forest," Daniels said.
But the war reached even these ancient people. Trying to save their land, the Montagnards sided with U.S. troops. They played an indispensable role in teaching Americans how to survive in the foggy highlands.
"There has never been an ally in U.S. history that has fought as long or suffered as much as the Montagnards," said Daniels.
By the war's end in 1975, about 20 percent of the Montagnard population had been killed. They fought on, even though U.S. troops went home.
Ha Giao Cilpam, now the pastor of a small Montagnard congregation, spent 17 years hiding in the jungle.
"I have had no rest since 1975," he said.
In Westerwood Village, entire back yards have been transformed into gardens of corn and Vietnamese spices. Arbors crafted from tree limbs support budding grapevines.
Like other immigrants in cities across America, the Montagnards live between two worlds, never completely belonging to either. They congregate in poorer, working-class neighborhoods on the edges of towns.
They take care of their own.
Last month, Westerwood Village residents gathered before dawn at a nearby construction site. They had come to build a chapel for Cilam and his congregants. They named it the Montagnard Alliance Church.
By the end of the day, they had raised walls, a roof and a steeple.
"We thank the Lord every day that we can live here and go to work," said Ksang. "We didn't come here to seek a fortune and make it rich. We came here seeking peace."
They have adapted, but not easily assimilated. They believe in the sanctity of family at all costs. But their children rub elbows with American classmates steeped in daily dramas of dysfunction and divorce.
The high school dropout rate for Montagnard teen-agers here is disproportionately high, something that happens in other isolated refugee communities. Se Ka, a 42-year-old widow with five children, has two sons who quit West Mecklenburg High School .
Bich Ka stopped with only a month left in his senior year. He blamed his poor English.
His brother, Bond, 16, speaks fluent English and offers no excuse save laziness. "It was a mistake," he said. "I'm planning to go back next year."
While even the younger generation feels the tribal bonds, there are indications they are taking on western ways.
Bond spends most of the day playing video games on his Sega Dreamcast and listens to CDs on the stereo in the living room. He and his friends like to rent Jackie Chan movies. He baby-sits his nephew, Brian, while his mother works nights at the Highland Mills textile plant.
His nephew's first name is another signal that the transplanted villagers are abandoning at least some traditions. Instead of Montagnard names, toddlers are named Brian, or Lisa. But that doesn't mean the Montagnards will adopt all the ways of U.S. families.
"Tribal people are not like Americans," said Se Ka. "Our children are not thinking about moving away from their parents."
Soe K, son of Ksang K, said young people stay close to their elders and feel no need to wander.
"I don't go. I only stay here," he said, meaning the home he shares with his father and brothers. "We need to come here. Only here."
On the Net: http://www.www.montagnards.org 
End adv for Sunday, June 11
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY476-481, AP Graphic NC MONTAGNARD
 Load-Date: June 12, 2000

 

End of Document
