

The Digitally-Mastered, Computer-Assisted Selling of the President
October 29, 1996, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 744 words
Byline: By KEVIN GALVIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The "Mission Control" sign taped to the wall seems a grandiose label for the harshly lit room adorned by electoral maps, furnished with folding tables and featuring an inflatable space shuttle.
But cutting-edge campaign work is happening here.
At QRS NewMedia Inc., within an annex of Clinton re-election headquarters, a handful of workers with headsets and fast computers plug the campaign's message of the day into carefully selected media markets around the country.
On the television screen, C-SPAN shows Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala visiting a nationally syndicated talk radio show - an appearance the staff here arranged.
Hillary Rodham Clinton calls into the same show. Then she's on the phone to a QRS technician who digitally records her message on education for transmission to dozens of radio stations nationwide.
Before that job is done, Vice President Al Gore appears on the screen from a studio within his Las Vegas hotel. Gore's ready for four interviews via satellite with TV stations in Ohio and Michigan to counter Bob Dole's visit to the Midwest the same day.
While the Clinton campaign has won praise for managing its message, until now, little has been said about the role played by QRS, which uses state of the art technology to conduct the media equivalent of surgical air strikes.
"It used to be that for each individual station you had to fill out a sheet of paper with the satellite coordinates, you had to call to ask who was the news director for the 5 p.m. show, you wouldn't have a fax number," said Peggy Wilhide, the Clinton campaign liasion to QRS. "Here you just punch it up."
Small stations and newspapers which lack the resources to send their own reporters on the campaign trail often rely on the campaigns themselves for footage, sound and photographs.
QRS posts sound recordings and digital photographs taken by a staff member traveling with Clinton, on a press-only website which records 3,000 hits per day. Clinton administration officials sit for satellite interviews with six to 10 TV stations daily.
Mark Seitz, a former Democratic National Committee staffer who founded QRS with former Clinton advance man Steve Rabinowitz, said the 1996 operation faced more market-specific programs, tighter deadlines and other challenges than it did in the '92 campaign.
"The media markets are changing so fast that you must constantly ask, 'How can we meet the needs of these local TV stations?"' Seitz said.
By many accounts, the QRS effort has outpaced similar work by the Dole campaign.
"The president's had four years to work on it, he's had pretty much the same people, and obviously they were a little ahead of the game," Dole said on ABC's "Nightline." "But I think now we've got a team, response team, research team, that may not quite be the equal, but they're very good."
Seitz portrayed the work as a service, matching the campaign's resources to the needs of broadcasters and publishers. Reporters are free to ask any question they wish during the satellite interviews.
But QRS' sophistication renews concern about manipulation of the media.
"Once again, thanks to technology, it makes it more difficult to sort out the wheat from the chaff," said Radio-Television News Directors Association President David Bartlett. Bartlett said journalists should question campaigns about their information and be forthcoming about its source "so the audience can make a judgment about it."
After a morning conference call with other campaign officials, Wilhide tells QRS which group of voters they hope to reach. She then lines up an appropriate Cabinet or White House official to either conduct interviews with far flung news anchors or read radio spots.
The QRS data base - comprised of TV and radio station audience demographics, Census data and campaign poll results - takes the guess work out of the equation by targeting the best outlets for the day's message.
Take Mrs. Clinton's message about the president's work to improve education as an example:
One of the 14 QRS employees asks the system to target 25- to 34-year-old college-educated women with children. In a moment, it ranks the nation's radio stations according to the campaign's criteria. It shows who to contact, notes about previous contacts with the stations, and it can call them with the push of a button. If a station wants the soundbite, it's digitally transmitted in an instant.
QRS provides sound to between 50 and 100 stations for every morning rush hour.
 Load-Date: October 29, 1996

 

End of Document
