

The Tongoneo Challenges the Macarena in Latin Line Dance Craze
October 27, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 652 words
Byline: By EDDIE DOMINGUEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIAMI BEACH, Fla.
Body




A sexy sway of the hips. A few pelvic thrusts. Some simple arm movements. A catchy Latin rhythm. Put it all together and it's likely the next step in the Latin line dance craze.
First came the Macarena, which shook baseball stadiums and political arenas alike and sits atop the Top 40 charts.
But move over Macarena, here comes the tongoneo.
Exposed navels, tightfitting halter tops and skimpy miniskirts dominated the dress as contestants at a recent tongoneo contest on Miami Beach strutted for television cameras.
In Spanish, a tongoneo is a seductive hip movement. As a new song and dance, will it follow the Macarena to the top of the charts?
"It's way better than the Macarena and you can incorporate what you want to incorporate," says Catalina Montes, a finalist in the nationwide tongoneo contest that concluded in September on Miami Beach. "And it keeps you in shape."
She learned the dance a few months ago, just after the song was released. She heard it on a college radio station and loved it.
"Everybody is really getting into it now," she says. "The beat is enough. You hear it and you have to move."
The Macarena took years to catch on. It's a collection of simple arm movements followed by a jump and half-turn. The tongoneo is less robotic and slightly more complicated. It combines a series of turns, quick steps, hip swaying and pelvic thrusts that make Elvis look stiff.
"Everything has its time," says Raul, a member of the group Mestizzo that sings the song and came up with the provocative dance. "This might not be the next Macarena, but it's the next step."
From Montgomery, Ala. to Chicago to New York, the Latin line dance craze has exploded.
Yankee Stadium currently claims the record for the most people doing the Macarena at a sports event. More than 50,000 did it in New York to break the record of more than 37,000 held by the Seattle Mariners.
In Chicago, the Democrats did the Macarena every night at their convention. But the tongoneo was there too. Hispanic delegates did it at one reception.
The tongoneo has already hit gold in Mexico and the United States, according to the group's manager. But the bigger hopes are for a successful crossover into the English-language market.
It's getting a big-bucks marketing boost from record label Polygram Latino and Miller Brewing Co., which sponsored the dance competition and tour.
"I see it getting quite a bit of play," says Miami radio personality Lazaro "DJ Laz" Mendez. "It's definitely a crossover record, once they get a feel for it."
The programming director at Denver's KBNO was less complimentary, but still predicted the song will be a hit.
"It has a better chance with the American market," says Eugenio Sepulveda, who criticized the song as a Macarena takeoff.
"In the nightclubs here in Denver they dance salsa like country. They line up and do it. Americans like line dancing to salsa, but the Hispanics don't."
Bob Behar, president of Hero Productions, which operates Latin music video cable channel H-TV, says the song has "been getting good response and a lot of requests."
"It hasn't reached the level of Macarena," Behar says. "But we've been playing Macarena for seven months. It is beginning to build the same way Macarena did."
Mendez, who remixed the song in English for radio stations and nightclubs, sees it as the successor to the Macarena, which reached the top of Billboard's Top 40.
"It's taking over," he says. "Macarena opened the door."
The phones at Miami radio station Power 96 have been busy since the station played the remix, Mendez says. A competing station requested the remix the next day from the record company.
Raymon Hernandez was winner of the monthlong nationwide dance competition, which featured finalists from cities such as Chicago, Los Angeles and San Antonio, Texas.
"Everybody just wants to learn the latest dance," Hernandez says. "Friends at clubs, my family, they all keep saying, 'Teach me, teach me."'
 Load-Date: October 27, 1996

 

End of Document
