

The new $ 20 looks different but spends like the old
The Associated Press
May 20, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 614 words
Byline: By DAVE SKIDMORE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A new $ 20 bill is coming with high-tech features designed to trip up computer-savvy counterfeiters. But the change people will notice first is the larger and slightly off-center portrait of Andrew Jackson.
The new portrait, like the old, is based on a drawing from about 1820. But it's a close-up and shows the nation's seventh president with darker hair than the earlier version. The view on the back depicts the White House from the north rather than from the south.
Most of the changes are more than cosmetic. They're aimed at bogus bill makers armed with increasingly sophisticated color copiers, computer scanners, color ink jet printers and publishing-grade software.
"As we … raise the hurdle even higher for criminals, we ensure that our currency remains respected and trusted around the globe," said Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, who unveiled the new design Wednesday with Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan.
The features include:
-A watermark to the right of the portrait and in its shape, only smaller, visible when the bill is held up to light.
-An embedded polymer security thread to the far left of the portrait. "USA TWENTY" and a flag are printed on the thread. When exposed to ultraviolet light, the thread glows green.
-A numeral on the lower right corner of the front printed in color-shifting ink that looks green when viewed straight on and black when viewed from an angle.
-Very fine lines around Jackson's portrait and the picture of the White House. When duplicated on a copier, the lines come out in a wavy moire pattern.
-The words "United States of America" in microprinting visible with a magnifying glass along the lower left rim of Jackson's portrait and microprinted "USA" within the numeral 20 in the lower left.
The bills shouldn't seem that different from the notes already in Americans' wallets. The same cotton-linen paper is used and the same colors.
"It is the same easily recognizable 'greenback' known around the world," Rubin said at a ceremony at the Bureau of Engraving and Printing.
The new notes will begin circulating in the fall. Old $ 20s will be recirculated until they wear out, on average in about two years. Those notes will be legal tender indefinitely.
"The United States has always honored its currency at its full face value, no matter how old," Greenspan said.
The government began redesigning U.S. folding money with the introduction of a $ 100 note with Benjamin Franklin in March 1996 and the $ 50 bill with Ulysses S. Grant last October.
Simultaneous issues of new $ 10 and $ 5 notes and a "more modestly redesigned" $ 1 note are planned.
For many Americans, the $ 20s may offer their first glimpse of the new currency design. It's far more common than the $ 50 or $ 100 and is the bill of choice for ATM machines.
"The $ 20 represents things we buy all the time, like a tank of gas," said U.S. Treasurer Mary Ellen Withrow.
About 4.4 billion $ 20s circulate, compared with 960 million $ 50s. There are 2.9 billion $ 100s, but most circulate overseas in countries with unstable currencies.
Though the new bills are much more difficult to reproduce convincingly, Treasury Department officials fear criminals will take advantage of the public's unfamiliarity, as they did with the $ 50s and $ 100s. So the department will distribute millions of brochures and posters as well as training CD-ROMs to 3,000 major retailers, 4,300 financial institutions and 350 shopping malls.
To help those with poor vision, the $ 20 note will include a large dark numeral on a light background on the bill's back. The new $ 50s also have them.
 
 ---
EDITORS' NOTE: Fact sheets on the new note will be available via the Internet at http://www.moneyfactory.com 
 
 Load-Date: May 20, 1998

 

End of Document
