

The Doctor, the Movie Producer and the Big Sleep
September 8, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2854 words
Byline: By MICHAEL FLEEMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




On the last night of his life, Don Simpson can't stop talking about his big plans for the future.
For three hours, the co-producer of "Flashdance," "Beverly Hills Cop" and "Top Gun," yaks on the telephone to a writer-friend. He talks about Michelle Pfeiffer, about former partner Jerry Bruckheimer, about the movies he wants to make.
The next day, Jan. 19, 1996, Simpson's body is found slumped by his toilet, a biography of filmmaker Oliver Stone at his side.
When paramedics arrive, they find a house that looks like a pharmacy. Scattered about are more than 80 bottles of prescription medication containing some 2,000 pills. Sixty-three of the bottles were prescribed by one man, Dr. Stephen Ammerman.
The authorities would like to talk to Ammerman, but they can't.
Ammerman, Simpson's live-in, detox doctor, is dead too. Just five months earlier, his body was found nude and cold in the pool house of the very same $ 18 million Bel-Air estate.
 
 THE BUZZ
Today, Hollywood remains abuzz over the deaths. It's a titillating tale in a movie town that hungers for gripping yarns.
The book rights alone go for a reported $ 250,000.
Rumors about the deaths grow when authorities decline to release details. But interviews with key figures, along with copies of autopsy results, court documents, police reports and prescription records obtained by The Associated Press tell a bizarre story.
Simpson, 52, and Ammerman, 44, both died of overdoses of prescription drugs.
Both were prescribed huge quantities of addictive drugs even though they were known to be drug addicts. Some of Simpson's drugs were prescribed under a phony name in violation of California law.
In both cases, police suspect wrongdoing by doctors.
In both, doctors either deny wrongdoing or refuse to talk, citing pending investigations or doctor-patient confidentiality.
In both cases, suspicions arise that someone may have tampered with the scenes before police arrived.
And both cases raise questions about the work of the Los Angeles Police Department.
 
 THE MEDICINE MAN
Flash back to the 1960s. Ammerman is in medical school at Oregon Health Sciences University. Amphetamines help him study.
He arrives in Los Angeles as a medical doctor and finds his niche in the ER. He likes trauma cases, craves the action.
His restless mind cooks up inventions: a device to stabilize spinal injuries, a syringe that can be worked with one hand. No sales.
So his restless mind turns to the movies.
He takes acting lessons. He pens "The Legend of Kodiak," a script about a bear killed by poachers and reincarnated into a man. He bankrolls "Kodiak" himself.
On location: The script calls for the man-bear to put a live salmon in his mouth and jump into the icy waters off Kodiak Island. The actor doesn't think this is a good idea, so Ammerman jumps in and does it himself. To make a point.
The movie is going to make millions.
It doesn't work out that way.
He writes another script. It's called "Playing God." It's about a doctor who is a drug addict.
Cut to Ammerman pumping iron in the mid-1980s at a gym in Santa Monica. The gym rats are Hollywood players. Ammerman wants to play too.
The gym rats ask if Ammerman can get them amino acid supplements so they can build big muscles. Ammerman starts writing prescriptions.
One of the gym rats is Don Simpson, whose career is flying higher than Tom Cruise in an F-16. "Flashdance" has scored big and "Top Gun" is about to follow.
Simpson is trying to lose weight so he can squeeze into those black Levi's that he wears a couple of times and throws away.
He and Ammerman strike up a conversation. They have mutual interests, exhibit similar personality disorders. They are both binge eaters, binge dieters, binge everything.
Let's do lunch.
Ammerman wants to get into the movies; Simpson is in the movies. Simpson wants drugs; Ammerman can write prescriptions.
In 1993, prescription records show, Ammerman twice prescribes Percodan to Simpson.
 
 THE DOWNWARD SPIRAL
As the '80s drift into the '90s, Ammerman's restless mind writhes out of control. His moods fluctuate faster than his weight. He calms himself with sedatives, brings himself back up with amphetamines, washes it all down with booze.
By 1993, Ammerman can't keep still. Literally.
He sees a Dr. Robert H. Gerner at the Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder and Child Adolescent Psychopharmocology Institute and is diagnosed with attention deficit disorder.
Gerner is a well-known practitioneer of psychopharmocology, identified in print as an "expert."
He is also being investigated by the state Medical Board.
He has been accused, according to board records, of fondling a female patient as part of something he called "rubbing therapy."
He also allegedly prescribed about 7,000 pills to this same patient, a drug addict, from 1988 to 1990. The pills include amphetamines and antidepressants.
Gerner treats Ammerman for four months in 1993, medical records show, and writes prescriptions for five different medications. They amount to 700 pills including amphetamines, an anti-hyperactivity drug and a potent stimulant known as methamphetamine.
By 1994, the state drops the overprescription allegations against Gerner but slaps him with a 60-day suspension and seven years' probation for the sexual allegations. He is also ordered to undergo psychiatric counseling.
Within months, Ammerman switches doctors. He chooses Nomi Frederick, also a psychopharmocologist who studied under Gerner at UCLA.
Ammerman apparently lies to his new doctor. Her notes indicate he "denies current substance abuse" and incorrectly describe him as a "Harvard grad."
Frederick first prescribes a new antidepressant, then switches Ammerman to Ritalin, Prozac and Dexedrine. Ammerman prescribes himself sleeping pills.
Twice, in the spring of 1994, bizarre behavior gets him arrested. One time, he takes off his clothes and ransacks his own penthouse in Santa Monica, then gets into the neighbor's unit through a screen door. A policeman arrives and hears Ammerman making growling noises.
Sometime in the early 90s, the Medical Board gets wind of Ammerman's problems. The state gets him into detox twice.
It doesn't work.
 
 OX, HOLLYWOOD-STYLE
In the early 1990s, Simpson is battling his own demons.
He's still choking on the smoke from the box-office disappointment "Days of Thunder." A Paramount partnership dissolves. A bad business deal mires him in land development hell.
Short-attention-span Hollywood is starting to wonder whatever happened to Simpson and partner Jerry Bruckheimer.
Simpson retreats to his mansion at 685 N. Stone Canyon Road.
The year 1995 brings a terrific trio of successes: "Bad Boys," "Crimson Tide" and "Dangerous Minds." But Hollywood still doesn't see Simpson much.
He travels to Canyon Ranch in Arizona to slim down, but has little success. There are reports he orders out for ice cream.
His friends invite him to parties and premieres. Simpson makes excuses. He's too heavy; he's working too hard.
Enter the medicine man.
In the summer of 1995, Ammerman tells at least four friends he is treating Simpson for substance abuse.
It's a serious undertaking - equipment, nurses, and lots of secrecy. Parts of the estate look like a medical ward, with hospital bed, IV drips and lots of pills. Numerous prescription records link the pills to Ammerman.
The treatment is intended to wean Simpson from an amphetamine dependency, Ammerman tells Dr. Randolph Capri, a friend since medical school.
To maintain confidentiality, Ammerman thinks up a pseudonym for Simpson: Dan Wilson.
"Dan Wilson," says Capri, "is Don Simpson."
To help with the treatment, Ammerman recruits his own doctor, Frederick.
A record from the Brent Air Pharmacy in Brentwood shows that on July 22, 1995, Frederick prescribes Vistaril, an anti-anxiety medication, to a Dan Wilson at Simpson's address. Writing prescriptions to a phony person is illegal in California.
Then, in August alone, sources say, Frederick prescribes about 800 pills for Simpson. Records show prescriptions for Dexadrine, Percocet, Valium, Seconal and morphine sulfate.
 
 'IS HE BREATHING?'
It is a little after midnight on the morning of Aug. 15, 1995, in the rich hills of Bel-Air. Ammerman can't stay still.
He walks into the pool house of the Simpson estate, where his girlfriend is sleeping. He complains about being too hot. He takes a shower. He goes swimming naked. He does exercises. He crawls into his girlfriend's bed wearing a wet towel. He makes growling noises.
The girlfriend, a flight attendant, suspects the doctor's been taking wrong doses of his own medicine again.
The doctor doesn't want to talk about it. The girlfriend bolts, pulling out of the mansion's driveway about 1:30 a.m.
About 10 hours later, at 11:30 a.m., a 911 call is made from the Simpson estate. The caller is a woman. Her voice is serious, betraying only a hint of anxiety.
"I have somebody who's unconscious and I think they're dead. Please hurry."
A few minutes later, Michelle D. McElroy, a personal assistant to Simpson and the woman who made the 911 call, directs paramedics to the pool house.
Ammerman is nude and slumped against the shower door, his long legs stretched out in front of him, blood dripping from his nose. Just 10 days earlier, his head had been reforested with a hair transplant.
The coroner determines Ammerman died of a mixture of Valium, speed, cocaine and enough morphine to knock out a horse.
That much is certain, but conflicting statements, questionable police work and the possibility of missing evidence plague the investigation.
For one thing, the drugs police find on the estate don't match the drugs in Ammerman's body.
A coroner's investigator finds a vial of Valium and a syringe in the pocket of a pair of Ammerman's shorts. The Valium had been prescribed by Ammerman two weeks earlier to the nonexistent Dan Wilson.
But what he cannot find, and what no one else can find, is any trace of morphine on the estate. Police reports also make no mention of finding speed or cocaine there.
A coroner's report quotes police as saying the scene appeared to have been "sanitized." Another coroner's document says police had trouble "getting information from people present."
The official law enforcement reports on the case are full of holes, with phone numbers not taken and contradictions never resolved.
Just who was at the Simpson estate, and for how long, on the night of Aug. 14 and the early morning of Aug. 15 never becomes clear.
Was there an argument on the estate the night Ammerman died? Police reports say his girlfriend overheard an argument, but there is no mention of who is arguing or about what.
Simpson also gives police a statement and makes no mention of an argument. Police apparently don't follow up.
Who found the body - and when - is never resolved.
Police reports say McElroy reported finding the body about 11:10 a.m. when she walked into the pool house to get some sausages.
Simpson later tells screenwriter James Toback he found Ammerman's body "out by the pool" about 6 a.m. - about five hours before the 911 call. Simpson tells Vanity Fair magazine he found the body at 9 a.m.
Simpson and his friends can't even agree on who Ammerman was and what his relationship was to the famous producer.
Anthony Pellicano, a private investigator hired by Simpson, tells the press that Ammerman was a Hollywood "hanger-on" and contends Ammerman was not Simpson's doctor.
Simpson tells police Ammerman was a "friend who periodically stays in the pool house." He incorrectly describes Ammerman as a plastic surgeon.
To Vanity Fair, Simpson describes Ammerman as a Harvard graduate and a former football All-American. He was neither.
"Pellicano found out that the guy had a history of substance abuse. I had no idea of that," Simpson tells the magazine. "I've never done drugs with him in my life."
Simpson's friends find this last part hard to believe.
 
 'S DISAPPEARING ACT
Ammerman's death devastates Simpson, his friends say. The producer drops out of sight.
He is, according to various accounts, at the Menninger Clinic in Kansas for psychiatric care, in Los Angeles with the flu, in Arizona in a weight-loss program, in Barbados in a hotel room.
One place he isn't is on the set of latest big Simpson-Bruckheimer production, "The Rock."
Behind the scenes: Friends try to talk sense into Simpson. Partner Bruckheimer is at wit's end about Don's denial. It's time for tough love.
Bruckheimer breaks off the professional marriage. Simpson is floating free.
He sees other doctors, but he is a difficult patient. He doesn't give complete histories or follow doctor's orders.
He tells gastroenterologist Dr. John O'Dea that he's trying to get off prescription pills. O'Dea believes him and tells him that with the state of his heart, it is best to check into a hospital.
Simpson gets another opinion. Endocrinologist Dr. William P. Stuppy concurs with Dr. O'Dea and, in a letter, gives this grave prognosis: "Risk of sudden death."
Simpson seeks a third opinion.
Dr. Lester Tarr finds "no evidence of any significant heart disease."
About 5 p.m. on Jan. 19, another 911 call is made from the Simpson estate. This time the caller is Todd Marrero, Simpson's personal assistant.
"Hi," he says. "I need an ambulance, please."
The 911 operator offers to give Marrero a quick lesson in CPR. Marrero says it's probably too late for that.
 
 AN UNNATURAL DEATH
Simpson's attorneys, Robert Chapman and Brian Edwards, arrive at the estate after the paramedics but before the police.
Also arriving before the police is Simpson's attorney-brother, Larry Simpson. He doesn't want his brother's body just lying there.
Two uniformed cops from West Los Angeles Division arrive. They interview Marrero and the lawyers. Then they call the coroner, informing him that Simpson's death appears to be natural and that he was under the care of a Dr. Kivowitz.
A natural death? A doctor involved? The coroner declines to take the case and releases the body to the Pierce Brothers Mortuary-Westwood Village.
Early that evening, reporters flood the coroner's office with calls. Did the coroner know this was the second death at the estate within five months? Then Dr. Kivowitz is located and tells the coroner he hasn't seen Simpson in months and won't sign the death certificate.
The coroner now accepts the case, ordering a blood sample for toxocology testing. That same evening, police department brass gets involved, ordering homicide detectives to the scene.
Detectives arrive about 9 p.m. and find 80 bottles of prescription medication. Sixty-three were prescribed by Ammerman and many of the others by Gerner and Frederick, according to police sources.
Police won't comment on how the first officers on the scene could have missed all those drugs and reported the death as natural.
Again, allegations of tampering arise. According to the coroner's report, unnamed police at the scene tell the coroner's investigator the scene appeared to have been "sanitized." The department later denies such suspicions.
When the toxicology report comes in, it is longer than the credits on some of Simpson's movies. His blood contains the chemicals that make up Unisom, Atarax, Vistaril, Librium, Valium, Compazine, Xanax, Desyrel and Tigan. Cocaine is also detected.
The official cause of death: massive amounts of drugs assaulting Simpson's fibrous heart.
Several investigations begin, involving the Los Angeles Police, the State Narcotic Enforcement Bureau and the State Pharmaceutical Board.
Sources say the targets of the investigations are doctors.
 
 THE LONG GOODBYE
On Wednesday, Aug. 14, one day shy of the first anniversary of Ammerman's death, Ammerman's family attorney, Alexander Lampone, files a wrongful death suit in Superior Court in Los Angeles.
The suit alleges powerful Hollywood figures tried to cover up illegal drug use and improper medical practices that contributed to the deaths of Simpson and Ammerman.
It also contends that Frederick may have contributed to Ammerman's death by giving him "a large dose of morphine … in an attempt to sedate and control Dr. Ammerman's toxic reaction."
Frederick's lawyer, Michael Lightfoot, says she wasn't even at the estate the night of the death.
Two days after the suit is filed, more than 30 Los Angeles narcotics detectives and U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency agents rifle through files in Frederick's and Gerner's offices. Another team raids Frederick's home.
Two people are dead, says Detective Dave Miller of the LAPD, and "somebody has to answer for it."
Hollywood, meanwhile, has written its own ending.
The wake is held at Morton's. The studios sends the big guns: Disney's Michael Eisner and Joe Roth, DreamWorks' Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen, Universal's Ron Meyer, Warner's Bob Dailey.
The stars come out: Michelle Pfeiffer, Dan Ackroyd, Richard Dreyfuss, Martin Lawrence, Will Smith.
Simpson's final film, "The Rock," opens in June, six months after his death. It is dedicated "in loving memory" to Don Simpson.
It has the biggest opening of any live-action film in Disney history.
The footage from Ammerman's movie "Kodiak" sits in cans in the offices of Alexander Lampone, an Ammerman family attorney.
Says Lampone: "I really ought to look at that some time."
 Load-Date: September 8, 1996

 

End of Document
