

The White House: Winning the World Series of Politics
November 13, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 677 words
Byline: By RANDOLPH E. SCHMID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Forget about the voters. Electing the president is now the responsibility of 538 electors in the often-maligned system designed by the nation's founders, the electoral college.
Three times in the country's history the result has been to award the presidency to the candidate with fewer popular votes. Largely because of that, proposals are made periodically to change the rules and let Americans elect the president directly.
The current system, however, has its defenders. For instance, physicist Alan Natapoff of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who compares winning the White House to winning the World Series.
By requiring a candidate to win a large number of states, the system prevents winning by appealing only to a large bloc of special interest voters or regional interests.
The system "puts real flesh on the theory that the president represents everyone, not just those who vote for him," says Natapoff. "What's important is that whoever is elected represents the whole electorate."
Natapoff likens the working of the electoral college system to the World Series, this year a classic contest between the New York Yankees and the Atlanta Braves. The Yankees won the title four games to two, despite being outscored by the Braves, 26 to 18.
"Nobody thinks the Yankees are illegitimate champs with fewer runs," Natapoff observes.
Just as runs must be grouped to win individual baseball games, votes must be grouped to carry state electoral votes.
Says Natapoff: A champion must be able to win at least some of the close, tough games. By the same logic, a president should have broad appeal and not just play to isolated blocs of voters, he says.
To people who urge a simple, direct vote for president, Natapoff asks if they would make the same suggestion for the divided nation of Bosnia where Muslims and Serbs and Croats compete with one another.
In such a place, a direct election only assures that the largest bloc picks the winner and everyone knows that in advance. "Our system requires a sampling of all possible blocks, and that is why it works," Natapoff says.
It's true that a candidate with fewer popular votes can win in the electoral college, but that can't be known in advance, says Natapoff.
Unless an election is extremely close, Natapoff says, voters have more say if they are divided into "the largest possible closely contested district. And the states are that. … They conform to the spirit of the theorem."
That gives minorities a voice in the outcome and obliges them to concur in the result, he said. It also encourages everyone to participate in an election, since every vote can have an impact on the outcome.
As a physicist, of course, Natapoff has a set of mathematical formulas to brace his theory - calculations designed to show that individual voters get more power under the electoral college system.
James Madison and the founding fathers designed it without benefit of Natapoff's calculations. They just distrusted the "mob" they feared could result in an electorate swayed by passions and rumors.
Their wisdom now has the scientific underpinning provided by a modern physicist and baseball fan.
For the record: The electoral college is selected by voters in each state when they cast their ballots for president. The state has the same number of electors as it has seats in the House of Representatives and Senate combined - plus the District of Columbia's 3 votes. The total is 538 votes, meaning 270 electoral votes decides the presidency.
President Clinton won this year's electoral college handily, 379-159, but would have taken a change of only about 600,000 votes correctly distributed to have elected Bob Dole 273-265.
The electors don't actually come to Washington to meet. They meet Dec. 16 in their state capitols, and their votes are mailed in to be read on the floor of the House of Representatives at a session scheduled this time for Jan. 9. Vice President Al Gore and House Speaker Newt Gingrich preside.
Four years ago it was the job of then Vice President Dan Quayle to read the results. He announced his own defeat.
 Load-Date: November 13, 1996

 

End of Document
