

The parents: Did they miss the warning signs?
The Associated Press
April 25, 1999, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1107 words
Byline: NY38, By SHARON COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LITTLETON, Colo.
Body




Their friends portray them as the people next door: parents who attended Little League games, took their sons swimming and fishing, planned family trips and enjoyed the quiet of suburbia - until now.
The parents of Dylan Klebold and Eric Harris, whose murderous rampage Tuesday at Columbine High School left 15 dead, have dropped from sight, leaving friends to answer a haunting question that looms in this tragedy:
Did the parents turn a blind eye to warning signs their sons were deeply troubled?
Friends say what is extraordinary about the two families is how very ordinary they are: quiet people who celebrated Easters with neighbors, mowed their lawns, played hoops with their sons, sat on bleachers on long summer nights watching Little League.
"Eric's parents are what we would call dream parents," said Terry Condo, who coached Eric in Little League in Plattsburgh, N.Y., where his father, Wayne, an Air Force transport pilot, was stationed in the mid-1990s. "They were supportive, not critical. They didn't put undue pressure on their son."
"They raised their boys just like the rest of us," said Vicki Dehoff, a former neighbor of the Klebolds, who has known the family for 15 years. "The parents are not monsters."
But others have wondered how the parents missed so many red flags: The boys' admiration for Hitler. Their obsession with violent video games. Harris' venomous messages on the Internet, prompting one classmate's father to contact police last year after Eric allegedly urged others to kill his son.
And, of course, the boys' stockpiling of an arsenal, including semi-automatic guns, grenades and materials to make some 30 bombs.
"I think I would be a little concerned about my son's room if I went in there and I found a sawed-off shotgun barrel … sitting out there," on the dresser, Jefferson County Sheriff John Stone said Saturday, referring to what police found in one boy's home. Bomb-making materials, he added, also were in sight.
"A lot of this stuff was clearly visible. The parents should have known," Stone added. "I think parents should be accountable for their kid's actions."
Colorado Gov. Bill Owens, on "Fox News Sunday," said if evidence of an impending massacre had been sitting in the open in a gunman's home, "perhaps charges will be filed and certainly should be filed" against the parents.
Asked if parents should be liable if their children have guns, Attorney General Janet Reno said on NBC's "Meet the Press" that it's important to "identify who is responsible for them having guns - what they knew or should have known and take appropriate steps."
What the parents did know and when they knew it remains a mystery.
They have said nothing beyond written statements, including one Saturday from the Klebolds, saying they held a service for their 17-year-old son "who we loved as much as we knew how to love a child."
Dylan's father, Thomas, had volunteered to help authorities during Tuesday's siege after hearing his son was a suspect.
"We thought we should go to the school and try and effect his surrender, to play a role in trying to defuse what was going on," said Gary Lozow, a Klebold attorney, who contacted authorities on the father's behalf.
But it was too late.
Friends of the Klebolds describe them as caring, attentive parents.
"This is a conscientious, normal family that's done everything right," said Michael Briand, an associate of Mrs. Klebold. "This came as a bolt out of the blue because Dylan had apparently been making some progress. Apparently he was loosening his immersion in this Gothic culture."
Both Klebolds are professionals: Thomas, 52, a former geophysicist, runs a mortgage management business from his sleek $ 400,000 cedar-and-glass home at the foot of the Rockies. He has been described as a liberal who favors gun control. Susan, 50, works for the Colorado community college system, helping train disabled students for the work world.
Mrs. Klebold was raised Jewish and her grandfather, Leo, was a prominent real estate developer and philanthropist in Columbus, Ohio, where a Jewish community center is named for him.
Before her son's funeral, Mrs. Klebold had her hair done and told her hairdresser that prejudice was never taught in their home and it pained her to see her son depicted as a monster.
There was no hint of family trouble years ago in the Klebold household, said Mrs. Dehoff, the former neighbor.
"I just remember laughing a lot when I was over at her house," she said, recalling how she and her children regularly joined Mrs. Klebold and her two sons at a neighborhood swimming pool. "She has a big heart."
Mrs. Dehoff, whose daughter, Krysti, was near the school library where many of the dead were found, also is not surprised Dylan and Eric could conceal a yearlong plot to commit mass murder.
"There are so many kids whose goal in life is to hide their plans," she said. "Most of us are the last ones to see our kids in trouble. You're just blinded by … love."
Both boys apparently not only deceived their parents, but the probation officer who placed the two in an intensive probation program last year after they broke into a car and stole electronic equipment.
The Klebolds have lived in Colorado for many years. The Harrises moved to Littleton in 1996. Wayne Harris works for a flight-safety business; his wife, Katherine, for a catering company.
Before Harris retired from the military, the family was often on the move, living in Ohio, Michigan and New York since the late 1980s.
A neighbor in Oscoda, Mich., the Rev. William Stone, remembers Harris put up a basketball backboard in their driveway and played hoops with his two boys, including Kevin, who is two years older than 18-year-old Eric.
"Some families you can almost predict something tragic would happen," he said. "Not this family. They cared for each other. They seemed to enjoy their children."
In Littleton, both families have received words and tokens of support, including flowers at their doorsteps. A sign planted in the Harris' yard reads:
"Tom and Sue, We (a heart symbol for love) you. We're here for you. Call us," followed by several names.
John Horan, a funeral director who has buried some of the slain teens, said people should think twice before pointing fingers.
"I started out feeling angry toward the parents until I realized I know one of the parents," said Horan, who knows Mrs. Klebold. "It was kind of a wake-up call about being careful not to judge someone too quickly."
And coach Condo said the parents of the two boys should not be forgotten in the grieving.
"What's the rest of their lives going to be like?" he asked. "Obviously, this is not something that's going to go away."
 Load-Date: April 25, 1999

 

End of Document
