

The onward march of security at the 'People's House'
The Associated Press
August 1, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 694 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In gentler times they were the campus cops, patronage police chosen by senators and House members, more of them law students than lawmen. That began changing 30 years ago, to the professional police force that now guards the Capitol and was scarred by the gunfire that killed two of its men in a House hallway.
The Capitol remains an open building, and congressional leaders vow to keep it that way. But it is not wide open as it was a generation ago, when anybody could walk in, unchecked and unchallenged.
Security has tightened access, as it has changed the face of Washington. Pennsylvania Avenue is a dead end for traffic, closed as a thoroughfare in 1995 to protect the White House against an Oklahoma City-style bombing.
A 1983 bomb in a Senate corridor - it exploded late at night and no one was injured - already had led to heightened security at the Capitol.
Metal detectors went in, and traffic was restricted on the broad plaza at the East Front of the Capitol.
There had been a protest bombing at the Senate in 1971, powerful enough to heavily damage two rooms but again without injuries.
The shootings on July 24 were a floor below the House chamber. The most violent episode in the House was in 1954, when four Puerto Rican nationalists fired 30 shots from the visitors gallery and wounded five congressmen.
It was a mark of the security in those days that they'd been checked for cameras, forbidden, but not for weapons.
After that, the rules for access to the galleries were tightened to require that visitors get passes from congressional offices.
But that was about it. Violence was alien, not a chronic threat.
Sen. Robert Bennett, R-Utah, son of a senator and a congressional intern in that era, recalled the days when the Capitol police were "affectionately referred to as the campus cops," many of them students who took classes at night and studied at their posts during the day. They were chosen by senators and House members.
When trouble occurred, the District of Columbia police dealt with it.
"That was the situation 40, 45 years ago," Bennett said after the Capitol police killings. He said the professionalism of the Capitol police facing the gunman who breached their guard posts illustrates the change.
"It is a sad commentary that we need this kind of professional force, and we don't have the kind of society that could get by with campus cops, … but it is comforting to know that in the face of that need, we have people of the caliber that we do," he said in saluting the slain officers.
The Capitol police force, now about 1,255 strong, began changing from patronage to professionalism in 1967, when it was expanded to guard a new House office building. At the time, it numbered 250, and Congress decided that the 78 officers it was adding should be hired solely on the basis of fitness to perform police duties.
As the force and its authority grew, so did the strains between openness and security, in a Capitol complex visited by 7 million to 10 million people a year.
The Capitol Police Board once proposed that a wrought-iron fence be built around the building, like the one at the White House. Congress rejected that, settling instead for checkpoints and traffic barriers.
Strengthened security was being planned before the Capitol shootings; Congress appropriated $ 20 million for it earlier this year.
Congressional leaders have agreed to go ahead with planning for a new visitors center. An underground complex east of the Capitol, with tourist facilities and security checkpoints, was proposed but shelved in 1995.
That would put metal detectors and the first line of police across Capitol Plaza instead of inside the building itself.
Again, the tradeoff between openness and security.
"This is the people's house. We want the people to be here with us," said Sen. Trent Lott, the Republican leader. He said a Capitol open to the people is the physical manifestation of democracy and a reflection of the openness of American society.
"We pride ourselves on that fact," he said.
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 
 Load-Date: August 1, 1998

 

End of Document
