

The tighter the race, the nastier the tricks in Mexico elections
The Associated Press
May 10, 2000, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 787 words
Byline: By LISA J. ADAMS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEXICO CITY
Body




Two months ago, when Mexico's presidential election campaign kicked into full gear, the country's 210 news programs were devoting a fairly even amount of time to each of the three main candidates.
But by April, a shift had occurred: Suddenly the candidate of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, which has held the presidency for 71 years, was getting half the coverage.
The change came just as polls began showing opposition candidate Vicente Fox closing in fast on ruling party candidate, Francisco Labastida.
"From one month to another we see this sharp difference," said Arturo Sanchez, president of the electoral institute's media monitoring commission, which detected the shift.
"Why is this so alarming? Because we assumed that we had made great advances over the elections of 1994 and 1997. … We thought that this presidential election was going to be different," Sanchez said.
The electoral institute and its media monitoring are among numerous reforms adopted over the past decade to try to clean up an election system long marred by allegations the PRI bought votes, stuffed ballot boxes, showered voters with gifts and manipulated press coverage.
Its monitoring showed that from mid-February to mid-March, radio newscasts - the major source of information for many Mexicans - devoted about a third of their coverage to the ruling party. In the following month, that percentage rose to 50 percent.
Over the same period, the center-right National Action Party saw coverage drop from 31 percent to 21 percent. Time devoted to the center-left Democratic Revolution Party fell from 27 percent to 17 percent.
The results "show a clear change of politics on the part of the media," said Jacqueline Peschard, a board member of the Federal Electoral Institute. "This is what is worrisome."
Opposition parties claim government pressure is behind the shift.
"It's a damage-control operation the PRI is doing after its candidate dropped suddenly in the polls," said Jesus Ramirez, an analyst with the Democratic Revolution Party. "The state controls the media concessions … and also government advertising, a strong source of income for many media."
Sandra Fuentes, Labastida's director of international affairs, denied any government meddling, and said increased coverage merely reflects stepped-up campaigning by Labastida.
"I think that all this hysteria has to do with the fact that for the opposition, the only way that they can disqualify the PRI is by saying we resorted to the practices of the past … that the PRI can only win because it is aided by the government."
Ghosts of the political past surfaced in the state of Chiapas last month, when the PRI governor was caught on tape saying local newspapers would be pressured to report that Labastida had triumphed in a televised debate - contrary to what most polls showed.
The governor denied any wrongdoing, saying the local PRI sent the information to newspapers, which were free to publish what they wanted.
Meanwhile, the electoral institute has had difficulty running public service announcements encouraging voter participation and telling how to help prevent fraud.
In the past, the institute was given free radio and television time under a law reserving airtime for the government. This year, the national commission of broadcasters decided the institute should pay since it was spun off from the government in 1996.
Although some spots were broadcast in November and December, they "almost completely disappeared" in the first four months of this year, Sanchez said.
Following widespread publicity of the dispute, the commission of media owners reached an agreement with the institute last week and began running the ads again.
The Interior Secretariat, which oversees broadcasting - as well as political affairs - has failed to help the institute, Sanchez said. The secretariat did not respond to requests for comment.
Lorenzo Meyer, a historian at the Colegio de Mexico, said the interests of many news media owners coincide with those of the PRI.
"What the ministry does is reach an agreement with the media, not pressure it. The media are soldiers of the system," Meyer said.
The broadcasters insist it's an issue of law, not politics, and they have worked hard to ensure fair election coverage.
Despite the conflicts, almost all sides agree that coverage of the campaigns has improved greatly since the 1988 presidential campaign, when the country's two main television networks devoted 92 percent, and newspapers 55 percent, of their coverage to the PRI.
Still, there are two months left in the campaign.
"I hope that we will still have some changes in the next months," Sanchez said. "The fact is, if we want to have a good election, we need different behavior."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos MO103-104, MO106 of May 9
 Load-Date: May 11, 2000

 

End of Document
