

The Mission for Gore and Kemp: Show Off the Boss - and Yourself
October 10, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 902 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Amid all the chest-thumping and cheerleading for their bosses, Al Gore and Jack Kemp diligently pursued another assignment Wednesday night: show off their own presidential skills and, above all, don't mess up.
It was a solid performance for each man, but instant polling indicated the advantage went to Gore.
Despite their insistence that they were battling only for the men at the top of the ticket, the St. Petersburg vice presidential debate was unmistakably an early audition for the White House race four years from now.
"These guys are two policy wonks and I thought they both did very well," said Columbia University historian Henry Graff. He said of the debate: "It's a little bit like triple-A baseball compared to major league baseball. It's tryout time. They're showing off for the year 2000. That makes this maybe a little more significant, a peek at the future."
For 90 minutes, Gore and Kemp argued forcefully but politely in a fact-filled debate about economics, affirmative action, inner city revival, abortion, Medicare, the environment and foreign policy. They each held their ground and maintained respect for one another, unflappable under pressure as they faithfully echoed the positions of President Clinton and Bob Dole.
In quick polls conducted after the debate, Gore was seen as the victor by nearly half of those who watched. In an ABC survey, 50 percent said Gore won, 27 percent viewed Kemp as the winner and 21 percent called it a draw. In a CBS survey, 48 percent said Gore won, 31 percent said Kemp, 13 percent thought it was a tie and 8 percent didn't know or were undecided. For CNN, 57 percent said Gore did better and 28 percent gave it to Kemp.
Those numbers could hurt Kemp, who might be looking forward to a head-to-head match-up against Gore in the year 2000.
From the opening, Kemp passed up the invitation to attack Clinton on personal and ethical grounds, as some Republicans have urged.
"It is beneath Bob Dole to go after anyone personally," Kemp declared. Gore thanked Kemp for his answer.
At the debate's conclusion, Kemp again thanked "my friend Al Gore for a vigorous debate." And Gore said he had "enormous respect" for both Dole and Kemp. "They're good men," the vice president said.
Gore succeeded in appearing less stiff, more human. The usually long-winded Kemp joked that he couldn't even clear his throat in 90 seconds but then delivered sharp, crisp answers within the allotted time.
Both men stuck to their best manners - even as Kemp accused Clinton and Gore of trying to scare voters. "The only thing … they have to offer is fear: fear of the environment, fear of the climate, fear of Medicare, fear of Newt, fear of Republicans, fear of Bob, and probably fear of cutting tax rates." Kemp said.
Gore happily pointed out that Kemp - before joining the GOP ticket - had criticized part of Dole's tax plan as "unconscionable" and, unlike Dole, had opposed ending affirmative action.
Gore's mantra was that Dole's tax plan was a risky "scheme" that would "blow a hole in the deficit." Kemp's response was that the economy is overtaxed and over-regulated.
There's a big difference between vice presidential debates and presidential faceoffs.
Fewer people watch the understudies. The stakes are lower, because Americans vote for the person running for president, not vice president. And, vice presidential candidates don't make policy, they echo the decisions of their leaders.
Vice presidential debates can be more combative and caustic than presidential debates. The expectation of good manners is less. But Gore and Kemp were friends in the House and friendly Wednesday night.
Dole's status as a senior citizen may prompt a closer look at Kemp.
"I've been surprised that Kemp has not been subjected to more scrutiny," said University of Virginia political scientist Larry Sabato. "With a 73-year-old man, there is obviously added risk that he will not finish his term."
With Kemp as running mate, "the odds are you're looking at the guy who - if they win - would be in line more than we think of with Gore," said Charles O. Jones, a University of Wisconsin political scientist.
The history of vice presidential debates is not very long - the first one was in 1976.
In the very first faceoff, Dole wound up with a reputation as a political hatchet man for saying that Vietnam, World War II and the Korean War were "all Democrat wars."
George Bush marred his debate with Geraldine Ferraro by boasting of his effort in off-color language the next day.
Dan Quayle compared himself with John Kennedy, only to have Democratic rival Lloyd Bentsen fire back: "I knew Jack Kennedy. … And you are no Jack Kennedy."
And Retired Adm. James Stockdale, Ross Perot's running mate in 1992, became the butt of jokes with his opening debate remark: "Who am I and why am I here?"
In reality, debates have not altered the outcome of presidential races. The leader going into the debates has been the leader coming out every time and has gone on to win the White House. But still, they are a campaign staple.
"More people watch these debates now than watch our national party conventions," presidential spokesman Mike McCurry said. "And they have become, in the life of the campaign, more significant because they attract more attention from the American people."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Terence Hunt has covered the Reagan, Bush and Clinton presidencies as chief White House correspondent for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: October 10, 1996

 

End of Document
