

The Power Of The Pen
August 17, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 792 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JACKSON, Wyo.
Body




Using the power of incumbency, President Clinton plans to fill the period between Republican and Democratic conventions doing something rival Bob Dole cannot: Sign popular bills into law.
Though the legislation passed a Republican Congress, the president will bask in the stature of his office next week and seek credit for a minimum wage increase, health care improvements and massive welfare overhaul.
Call it Bills Week. Or, if he has his way, Bill's Week.
Preliminary plans put the minimum wage bill on Clinton's desk Tuesday, followed by health care on Wednesday. The welfare bill, which has yet to be sent to the White House, should be ready by Friday, administration and congressional officials say.
Aides are working this weekend to prepare splashy signing ceremonies. They hope to take advantage of a Washington truism: Congress passes bills; presidents take credit for them.
Vying for their share of the kudos, Republicans noted that none of the measures passed Congress when Clinton's party controlled it.
"This is just another case where Clinton's been drug kicking and screaming across the bridge, and he gets over to the other side and gets up and says, 'Boy, ain't I been great that I'm getting all this good stuff done,"' said GOP chairman Haley Barbour.
Immediately after the bills passed, Clinton told reporters that the measures "were plainly Democratic initiatives" and compared their passage to "pulling teeth - right here before the election."
"It's only come after the American people showed that they were bitterly opposed to the extremism that was the wont of the Congress," Clinton insisted.
Aides say they are advising him against taking such a partisan stance next week. It's not needed, they argue, when surrogates will stand in line at his Chicago convention to give Clinton credit.
Senior advisers, speaking on condition of anonymity, said they would rather Clinton commend Congress for the bipartisan efforts. Internal polls show that voters want their politicians to preach cooperation.
"What the American people want to see is the president and Congress getting things done," press secretary Mike McCurry said.
That's the tone Clinton struck after signing a bipartisan oil-and-gas royalties bill during his mountain vacation.
"This is the way America moves forward, when we tone our rhetoric down and work together and roll up our sleeves and try to meet our legitimate interests and protect our values," he said.
In Idaho Falls, Idaho, Saturday night as he prepared to board Air Force One for a flight back to Washington, Clinton noted that all three bills passed with a significant bipartisan support. "I wish we had more of that in Washington and I know you do too," he told an airport rally of about 500 people.
The signing settings are not final, but aides said Clinton almost certainly will surround himself with "real people" whose lives are touched by the laws. An example: Minimum wage workers almost certainly will be at that signing ceremony.
Some aides want Clinton to leave the White House for one or more of the ceremonies; one suggested a workplace for the wage bill. But the senior advisers seemed to think he would remain in the White House, looking as presidential as possible.
One of the senior advisers said the bills give Clinton a golden opportunity to counter criticism at the Republican National Convention, whose speakers often castigated him. With wages, health care and welfare addressed with three strokes of a pen, voters may wonder why Republicans seemed so negative, the aide said.
Barbour said voters realize that Clinton only reacted to a Republican Congress. "We finally got him pinned in," Barbour said. "We got him where he can't slip out."
Still, the president - any president - stands to gain more than Congress when a bill is signed. His act puts the bill into law; the White House press corps ensures optimal coverage.
Dole, who quit the Senate before the bills passed, may find it harder to associate himself with the legislation - especially welfare.
Though he has longed supported welfare reform, Dole aides didn't want the bill passed because they didn't want Clinton to sign it. Now it will be harder for Dole to say Clinton broke his 1992 promise to "end welfare as we know it."
Republican lawmakers, eager to build an election-year resume, passed the bill anyhow.
Indeed, Congress may have handed Clinton three chances to build momentum toward his convention.
"If the Republicans wanted to take credit, the train may have already left the station," said Stephen Hess, a political observer at the Brookings Institution in Washington.
"After the president does the signing and the convention puts the explanation mark on it, the perception comes about that they are indeed the president's initiatives.
 Load-Date: August 18, 1996

 

End of Document
