

The telling debate issues seldom the ones candidates planned
The Associated Press
September 30, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 933 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A haggard Richard M. Nixon, his appearance more telling than his words as he debated a vigorous John F. Kennedy.
Jimmy Carter, trying to defend his failing grasp on the White House against the television skills of Ronald Reagan, the performer who became a president.
The same Reagan rambling on camera four years later, then reversing the question of his age - 73 - by quipping it away.
Gerald R. Ford blundering an obvious foreign policy point, then insisting that his wrong answer was right.
George Bush glancing at his watch as though he just wanted the campaign debate to be over with, which, it turned out, is exactly what he wanted.
President Clinton, confident of re-election, commending Bob Dole for past service to the nation at the start of their 1996 debate. No need to take the offensive when he had the winning political hand.
When Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush face each other for 90 televised minutes in Boston on Tuesday, it will be the 18th time the Democratic and Republican presidential nominees have met, beginning with the Kennedy-Nixon debates of 1960.
Gore and Bush debate again in Winston-Salem, N.C., on Oct. 11, and in St. Louis on Oct. 17. The vice presidential nominees, Dick Cheney and Sen. Joseph Lieberman, meet on Oct. 5, in Danville, Ky.
Over all the years of debating - there were none for three campaigns after 1960 because one party or the other had a nominee determined to avoid them - the telling issues seldom have been the ones the campaigners planned.
Instead, matters of image and style, things that were not spoken or were said in error, have been the points that made points for one candidate or the other.
The debates have delivered no major oratory, and no breakthroughs on campaign issues. In the age of poll-testing and focus groups, a debate before a television audience of 60 million to 70 million is not a forum in which a candidate will risk new proposals.
On occasion, a preview has helped score a debate point, as when Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, the Democratic vice presidential nominee, snapped at Sen. Dan Quayle in 1988: "You're no Jack Kennedy."
Quayle had said, accurately, that he had served as many years in Congress as Kennedy when he ran for president. Quayle had been advised against repeating it in the debate, but he walked into Bentsen's line.
Often, the debates have reinforced impressions of candidates, sometimes to their detriment. That happened to Ford in 1976 when he declared that "there is no Soviet domination of eastern Europe" and wouldn't be while he was president, an error so obvious that the questioning reporter asked whether he'd really meant it.
Ford said the United States did not concede Soviet dominance - as obvious as it was.
By the time he corrected himself, the damage was done, and the image of a president prone to stumbles had been underscored.
The 1960 election, the closest popular count in American history, could have turned on the debates, especially the first one. Nixon was vice president, better known than Kennedy, confident that as the man who had debated Nikita S. Khrushchev in Moscow, he could handle the Massachusetts senator.
On the issues there was no obvious advantage either way, in any of the four Nixon-Kennedy debates, still the most in any single campaign. But Nixon was campaign weary, and ill, when he and Kennedy first met in Chicago, on Sept. 26, 1960. He was wan and sweating, while Kennedy looked fit and trim. Nixon got a call from his mother, concerned about his health, after the debate. The illness was minor, the political setback major.
The image problem afflicted Democrat Michael Dukakis in 1988, over his bland, dispassionate restatement of his opposition to capital punishment in reply to an ambush question of whether he'd still oppose execution if his wife were raped and murdered.
It fit the picture Republicans were trying to draw of Dukakis as a liberal technocrat, cold and emotionless. Only the liberal part was so, but the debate episode seemed to go with the rest of it.
Dukakis said later it wouldn't have been so damaging had he been running a better campaign against George Bush. Then again, he added wryly, "If I knew anything about presidential politics I'd be talking to you in a different capacity."
In 1984, Reagan's age became a morning-after question, not for what he said in his debate with Democrat Walter F. Mondale but because he said it haltingly and defensively, in sentences that wandered.
He blamed it on overtraining and overbriefing. And he got rid of it in a second debate by saying he would not make age an issue despite Mondale's youth and inexperience.
Reagan wasn't supposed to falter in debate - not the man with a career on camera before he became president. That points to another factor that has figured in debate ratings: Expectations.
In theory, the candidate who is supposed to be the lesser debater can win by managing not to lose much.
Bush and Gore are working at positioning now.
"The man is a great debater," Bush says of Gore at every opportunity.
But the vice president says the conventional wisdom of the expectations game is not accurate. "He really is a very good debater," Gore said, "and he's won all of the debates that he's ever been in."
Bush's father, the former president, has been in more national campaign debates than anybody else - five presidential, one vice presidential.
Bush said in a PBS interview that he didn't like them, thought them contrived, too much show business.
And about that glance at his watch in the 1992 debate:
"Now was I glad when the damn thing was over? Yeah. And maybe that's why I was looking at it."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WXS2001-2006, AP Graphic ELN DEBATE HISTORY
 Load-Date: October 1, 2000

 

End of Document
