

The UAW Plans for the Future
September 22, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 858 words
Byline: By JOYCE M. ROSENBERG, AP Business Writer
Body




The UAW looks to the future, the Fed gets ready to look at interest rates, and the government takes another look at Microsoft.
A look at what happened in business this past week:
 
 EASY FOR YOU TO SAY
The general assessment of the economy these days is that the nation's businesses are doing quite well - so well that many economists expect the Federal Reserve to nudge interest rates higher when the central bank's policy-makers meet Tuesday. But the nation's workers aren't kicking back and enjoying the good times - they're already preparing for the next downturn, whenever it may come.
When the United Auto Workers reached a tentative contract with
 
 Ford Motor Co.  this past week, the union exacted a guarantee that the No. 2 automaker would maintain at least 95 percent of its current 105,025 UAW jobs at U.S. plants over the life of the agreement. The provision, the first in the auto industry, guards against layoffs, and comes as Ford, one of the companies benefiting from a stronger economy, is adding jobs.
The UAW knows that jobs can become expendable quickly. The union is hoping for similar provisions as it finishes contract talks with No. 1
 
 General Motors Corp.  and No. 3 Chrysler Corp.  But GM, hoping to trim its work force to become more efficient - is not expected to agree to a guarantee.
Downsizings continue in other industries. International Business Machines Corp.  is offering incentives to thousands of administrative workers either to leave the company or find new jobs in divisions that are growing.
Meanwhile, the financial markets will be awaiting the verdict on the economy from the central bank's Federal Open Market Committee. The consensus is that the FOMC will push rates a quarter of a percentage point higher, or keep them stable until after the election.
Positive economic statistics released during the past week, including a jump in housing starts and a drop in the number of people seeking unemployment benefits, made it appear more likely that the Fed would act to prevent the economy from overheating and driving up inflation.
Higher interest rates would likely make it tougher for consumers who are already juggling too much debt. The American Bankers Association said credit card delinquencies rose to a record 3.66 percent during the second quarter, up from 3.53 percent during the previous three months.
 
 PUTTING MICROSOFT UNDER THE MICROSCOPE, AGAIN
The Justice Department is again looking at how Microsoft Corp.  gets computer makers to use its software instead of somebody else's. The company announced that the department's antitrust division had requested information about its Internet products and strategies. The request came several weeks after Netscape Communications Corp. , Microsoft's biggest rival in the Internet software business, complained that Microsoft was forcing PC makers to pre-install its Internet programs on their machines instead of competitors' products.
Microsoft is a relatively small player in the Internet business, but it dominates the business of operating systems. It's not a question of market share, but of tactics to try to gain market share.
This is the second time in just over a year that the government asked Microsoft for information about its sales strategy; last time, Justice was looking at the company's plans for an online network. The investigation was starting to look dormant to some observers, but obviously not to the government.
 
 WINNERS, LOSERS, IN BETWEEN
WINNERS: Gay and lesbian employees of IBM. The computer company is becoming the nation's largest company to extend health and other benefits to the domestic partners of its gay and lesbian workers.
LOSERS: Lockheed Martin and Boeing Co. , after falling short in the bidding for a $ 1 billion contract to upgrade air traffic control systems at hundreds of airports. Raytheon got the deal.
IN BETWEEN: McDonald's Corp. , coming to market with a new line of fish and chicken sandwiches that are bigger and more expensive than similar items on the fast-food company's current menu. Analysts are already wondering how well the items will do because of consumers' less-than-enthusiastic response to the recently-introduced Arch Deluxe cheeseburger.
 
 TICKER
 
 er System Inc.  is selling its consumer rental trucks, the one with the easily recognized yellow vehicles, to an investor group for $ 575 million … The trade deficit grew to $ 11.7 billion in July because of larger imports of Japanese cars, Chinese toys and foreign oil … British Airways and
 
 Canadian Broadcasting Corp.  announced thousands of job cuts …
 
 Crestar Financial Corp.  is buying Citizens Bancorp for $ 774 million in stock.
 
 COMING UP:
MONDAY: The Treasury releases its monthly budget statement.
TUESDAY: The Conference Board issues results of its monthly survey on consumer confidence.
WEDNESDAY: The National Association of Realtors releases August existing home sales figures.
THURSDAY: The Labor Department releases weekly jobless claims numbers, while the Commerce Department releases August durable goods figures.
FRIDAY: Commerce releases its final second-quarter Gross Domestic Product figures.
 
 End adv for weekend editions Sept. 21-22
 Load-Date: September 22, 1996

 

End of Document
