

The Weird, The Loony, The Official GOP Protesters of 1996
August 15, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 599 words
Byline: By DEBORAH HASTINGS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN DIEGO
Body




His sign, at least the part that was publishable, read "Sodomy Is No Family Value," and it was very clear that protester Fred Phelps blamed every societal ill on homosexuals.
Ronald C'zar, self-proclaimed Emperor of the World, had come to bitterly complain that the United States government was interfering with his empire.
Most of the time, the official demonstration site of the Republican National Convention is neither official nor much of a protest venue. Oh, the big rabble-rousers, the immigration and abortion chanters, have ended some of their marches there.
But the most vocal and organized demonstrators usually hit the pavement fronting the convention center, or have their own rally at a different spot. Meanwhile, the Free Speech Site, a fenced-in parking lot that looks more like a big playpen, gets delegates from the not-too-tightly wrapped.
"Most of you are going to hell," shouted a man wearing nothing but black overalls and a utility belt, who goes by the name Bobby Bible and was a fixture outside O.J. Simpson's criminal trial. "Most of the Republicans are going to heaven," he warned.
Eventually, Mr. Bible's fire-and-brimstone railings began to enrage some of the 50 or so people milling about the site.
"Why don't you just go home?," shouted 17-year-old Sean Levin, of Cave Junction, Ore., sporting a T-shirt that said "Vote For Me" and holding a Clinton campaign placard.
"You're disgracing Christians," Levin added.
Since Monday, hundreds have stood without incident and wailed inside the chain-link fence while no one except other demonstrators and large numbers of reporters seem to pay much attention.
Nary a delegate has ventured in, said Police Sgt. David Johnson, one of about 20 officers and U.S. Department of Justice mediators assigned here as peacekeepers. So far, there have been no arrests and no injuries.
"This Philadelphia reporter came up and said 'Is it in the water? Nobody gets mad around here,"' Johnson said Wednesday. That was before Mr. Bible started his diatribe on gays and hell and three uniformed officers surrounded him.
Created by the city to keep protesters away from the convention center, the site has generated controversy, as has a similar facility planned for Chicago's Democratic gathering later this month.
The American Civil Liberties Uniono sued when San Diego planned to put the site a fair distance from delegates. The facility was then allowed to open just across the trolley tracks from the massive, waterfront convention center.
Speakers are confined to 55 minutes, timed by a traffic light. When the light turns red, the microphone goes dead. Podium speakers were required to register two months ago, but those depending on lung power alone are allowed to speak at will.
But because San Diego doesn't require demonstration permits, and probably because they didn't want to be stuck inside a parking lot, big groups such as the National Organization for Women staged their press conferences elsewhere.
Cori Langdon, an entrepreneur whose hand-lettered sign promised "The Official T-Shirt of the Republican Convention," had been at the site all week. By Wednesday, she had sold 47 shirts, at $ 10 each, reading "Republicans Suck."
"I've seen everything," said the woman. "Mr. Condom bought a T-shirt from me."
Mr. Condom, aka The Condom Man, aka Derek Hodel, has made a career of following GOP nominee Bob Dole while dressed as a human prophylactic. His message, he says, is AIDS awareness.
Sgt. Johnson didn't know about the message. Asked to name the strangest sight, he shook his head and laughed.
"Oh, Condom Man, probably. Have you seen him?"
 Load-Date: August 15, 1996

 

End of Document
