

The growing moral debate over the value of human embryos
The Associated Press
September 24, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 870 words
Byline: By RICHARD N. OSTLING, AP Religion Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




There's a growing moral debate over something smaller than the period at the end of this sentence.
Such is the size of the early human embryo, or blastocyst, the cluster of cells formed just after fertilization that will grow into a newborn infant if nature is allowed to take its course.
How should citizens view this tiny thing? Is it a human being? A potential human being? Does it have rights? Should society protect it?
Or, if there's a potentially big payoff in terms of medical progress, should society allow it to be put to death? In the classical formulation, does the end justify the means?
This issue - paralleling the abortion debate - engages theologians, researchers, politicians and such organizations as the American Cancer Society.
Research using human embryos is currently limited by a congressional ban on federal funding. That could change, depending on reaction to a 111-page report issued last week by the National Bioethics Advisory Commission that urges public aid.
The panel of 17 scientists and academicians, chaired by Princeton University President Harold T. Shapiro, advises the government on the ever more complex moral conundrums in biological research.
The embryo debate, brewing for years, was newly energized by scientific developments late last year. A University of Wisconsin team reported it had extracted and cultivated human "stem cells" taken from early embryos. And a Johns Hopkins University team acquired stem cells from aborted fetuses, a technique the panel also discusses.
Both projects were privately funded, by the Geron Corp. of Menlo Park, Calif.
Stem cells have the ability to produce the wide variety of cells that make up tissues in the human body. Researchers hope these wonder cells might provide powerful new therapies for Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, diabetes, heart failure and many other ailments. But that would require extensive research on human embryos and fetuses.
In its 1973 decision legalizing abortion, the U.S. Supreme Court decided embryos and fetuses are not "persons" or entitled to legal protection until late in pregnancy. But the bioethics commission says most Americans believe "human embryos deserve respect as a form of human life."
Weighing such respect against projected medical benefits, the federal panel endorses research that kills unwanted human embryos, those left after in vitro fertilization treatments. It also favors publicly funded research using aborted fetuses.
Panel member Thomas H. Murray, president of the Hastings Institute, a think tank on bioethics, reasons that the embryos and fetuses "are going to be destroyed anyway" and, medically, "the potential is quite enormous." He says it's like using the bodies of accident victims for research.
Anticipating the federal panel's proposals, the Center for Bioethics and Human Dignity in Bannockburn, Ill., issued a protest in July from 340 scholars and activists who say embryos are "the tiniest of human beings."
Citing the post-Nazi Nuremberg Code, the World Medical Association's Helsinki declaration and the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights, this group declares that "members of the human species who cannot give informed consent for research should not be the subjects of an experiment unless they personally may benefit from it."
One of the signers is C. Christopher Hook, director of ethics education at the Mayo Graduate School of Medicine in Minnesota. Hook, a lay Protestant, says it's scientifically clear that "when fertilization is complete, a unique genetic human entity exists."
He says society must not allow "subsets of the population to be targeted for destruction in the name of usefulness."
With tissue from aborted fetuses, Hook said, proponents can argue there's a conflict between the claims of the fetus and of the mother, but no such conflict justifies the purposeful killing of embryos.
These critics also contend there's no need to use embryos and fetuses because recent research indicates similar benefits could come from stem cells taken from adults. The bioethics panel doubts this.
Religious views vary widely, according to the panel, which heard from 11 religious representatives on May 7. Strong support for protection of the embryo and fetus comes from the Catholic Church and conservative Protestants. But the panel cites support for its approach from thinkers like Margaret Farley, a Catholic ethicist at Yale divinity school, and Rabbi Elliot Dorff of the University of Judaism in Bel Air, Calif.
The panel opposes the buying and selling of human embryos and fetuses and production of stem cells through human clones and human-animal hybrids. It also opposes "at this time" the notion that the government should support the cultivation of human embryos specifically for research purposes.
A federal study group endorsed such human embryo farming in 1994. But the current panel decided the supply of stem cells from abortions and fertility treatments is sufficient for now.
Murray says problems of supply or developments in biology could bring reconsideration, say in five years. "At that point the public will have had five years to reflect on how they feel. I am unwilling to predict where the American people will be on this in five years."
 Load-Date: September 24, 1999

 

End of Document
