

The president's proposals for the budget
The Associated Press
February 7, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 3849 words
Body




President Clinton's proposed budget by agency and issue:
 
AGRICULTURE
The Agriculture Department would get $65 billion in 2001 to pay for programs ranging from farm subsidies to food stamps and meat inspection. The budget includes $5.8 billion in higher spending for farmers to help them cope with the ongoing depression in grain prices. Congress has provided $15 billion in emergency farm assistance over the last two years. The centerpiece of the administration's aid package is a new "supplemental income" program that would cost $2.5 billion in 2001 and provide direct payments to growers based on fluctuations in crop revenue. There is another $1.3 billion in higher spending for conservation programs and $1 billion to expand federally subsidized crop insurance, pushing the cost of the program to nearly $2.6 billion.
The president also is proposing a 20 percent increase, an extra $68 million, in funding for food-safety programs. The USDA budget would make 250,000 people eligible for food stamps by ending a federal restriction on the value of recipients' personal cars. Food stamps would be restored to 90,000 legal immigrants.
Republicans already are criticizing the "supplemental income" plan as inadequate, and some see it as an unwanted change in the market-oriented approach of the 1996 farm law.
This year's budget is $6.1 billion lower than the president's proposal for 2000. Crop subsidies are running much higher than was expected a year ago, and the 2000 budget includes the farm bailout package that Congress passed.
ARTS
Spending by the National Endowment for the Arts would rise to $111 million in fiscal 2001, a $7 million increase over this year.
The NEA budget has been at or slightly below the $100 million level since 1996. The administration annually seeks more than that, but some Republicans, who have charged the agency with promoting obscene work, have tried either to cut the budget drastically or kill the agency outright. In fiscal 1995 the budget was $162 million.
With strong NEA supporters within their own ranks, Republican leaders last year abandoned efforts to abolish the NEA.
Clinton this year has proposed a "Challenge to America" that would award more than 1,100 grants at a cost of $49 million, some going to "youth-at-risk" programs aimed at cutting delinquency. The idea, an NEA statement said, is to connect arts organizations more closely with families and communities.
This year another $10 million in the proposed budget for the Department of Education would go to a youth program in collaboration with the NEA.
CHILDREN, WOMEN AND FAMILIES
For a third year, President Clinton is seeking child care spending increases, including $573 million more for the Child Care and Development block grants to states - which the administration says would help 150,000 more children.
He failed to win a fiscal 2000 increase for this $1.1 billion program, which is the primary source of child-care subsidies for poor families.
Clinton also wants new tax credits for businesses building or expanding child care programs for workers, an investment of $42 million next year and $1.4 billion for the decade.
The president has proposed spending $125 million in 2001 on new grants for programs that would help noncustodial parents, mostly fathers, train for and get jobs so they can help keep up with child support payments. Another $130 million spending increase would go to programs helping low-income families make the transition from welfare to work.
Clinton also wants $27 million to help close the wage gap between men and women, something he says will help two-earner families as well as single mothers. It would train government inspectors to step up enforcement and train women for careers they have been underrepresented in.
A similar, $14 million initiative failed in Congress last year.
DEFENSE
Modernized weaponry, better benefits for soldiers and a big jump in spending on weapons and equipment add up to a $277.5 billion defense budget the Pentagon says will "preserve American military excellence."
With increases offset by cuts in other programs, proposed Pentagon spending for fiscal 2001 is exactly the same as this year's level. But it likely will be increased by Congress, where support for higher defense spending is strong.
Defense Department officials touted their plans to spend $60 billion for new weapons and equipment to help modernize the force - a procurement level Pentagon planners had been hoping to reach for years. It represents a one-third increase over 1998 spending.
The budget proposes a 3.7 percent military pay raise, increased health benefits and $5 billion in additional housing subsidies for military personnel living off base.
Assuming presidential approval of a national missile defense system, the budget proposes $1.9 billion for the plan to defend all 50 states against limited ballistic missile attack. An additional $2.6 billion is sought for other missile programs.
Peacekeeping operations in Bosnia and Kosovo are fully funded, with $2.2 billion in the 2001 budget and a request for $2 billion to cover expenses in the current year.
The budget provides for several advanced aircraft, including the F-22 fighter, the V-22 tilt-rotor plane, a new amphibious assault vehicle and upgrades to helicopters and AV-8B and F/A-18 warplanes. For the Navy, it includes building three Arleigh Burke-class destroyers, a new attack submarine and the final Nimitz-class aircraft carrier - the most expensive single piece of equipment in the budget at more than $4 billion.
EDUCATION
Clinton's nearly $39 billion education budget plan, roughly 4 percent more than last year's proposal, would give a high priority to wiring classrooms for the Internet, hiring more teachers, fixing crumbling schoolhouses and making college more affordable. Congressional Republicans say the fight will not be over the amount of money sought but rather how it's spent.
For fiscal 2001, the president is seeking $24 billion for a tax plan to support bonds for school modernization, $1.3 billion in grants for emergency repairs to fix the worst buildings, $100 million to triple spending on after-school computer centers in poor communities and $150 million to double funding for training new teachers specifically to use classroom technology.
He calls for a record expansion of the preschool Head Start program.
Clinton also wants a $1.75 billion installment to hire more teachers and $1 billion to double summer and after-school spending.
Republicans say such decisions are best made by states and school districts and shouldn't be mandated. GOP lawmakers have promised to outspend Clinton again this year - focusing on school choice, tuition tax breaks, increased special education funding and giving local communities the option of spending new teacher and school-construction money on other programs.
The president also seeks to increase college attendance with $30 billion to provide tuition tax relief, nearly $1 billion to increase Pell Grants and other aid programs for needy students and $120 million to curb violence and increase academic performance with smaller, more manageable high schools.
ENVIRONMENT-ENERGY
For the second year, the president is proposing a "land legacy" initiative, seeking $1.4 billion to protect historic places and natural treasures and restore coastal areas damaged by offshore oil drilling. Similar proposals are gaining bipartisan support in Congress.
Clinton's budget also requests $1.6 billion for a program to deal with climate change including more research in energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies, and $170 million to promote clean energy in developing countries and the preservation of rain forests. The president wants $767 million in fiscal 2001 for energy conservation, an increase of $77 million. While some increase in conservation programs is likely, Congress has been cool to Clinton's past climate change initiatives.
Overall spending would decline slightly at the Environmental Protection Agency to $7.3 billion, although money operations, including enforcement and developing regulations, would increase 11 percent to $3.9 billion.
The president also proposed an additional $50 million ($334 million total) for Everglades restoration; more money for fighting pollution in the Great Lakes; an additional $100 million ($250 million total) for salmon recovery in the Pacific Northwest; and a 12 percent increase to $170 million for endangered species protection programs.
He also for the second year proposes "Better America Bonds" to generate $10.8 billion over five years for creating open spaces and other environmental protection programs in urban areas. While the proposal has strong support among local officials, Congress has shown little interest in the idea.
HEALTH CARE
Clinton is proposing initiatives costing $110 billion over 10 years that he says will reduce the number of Americans without health insurance by 5 million.
These include a $76 billion proposal to extend coverage to 4 million parents of children who are eligible for federally supported state Child Health Insurance Programs, known as CHIPs. Getting that initiative under way would cost $800 million in fiscal 2001. Clinton is asking for an additional $400 million next year and $13.6 billion for the decade to get more children enrolled in CHIPs.
The president wants $100 million in 2001 and $6.5 billion over 10 years to give states options for expanding Medicaid coverage for legal immigrants, pregnant women, the disabled and people who leave welfare rolls to take jobs.
Starting in 2002, at a cost of $10 billion over the decade, he would give tax credits to people who want to keep private health insurance from a previous job. Tax credits worth $1.7 billion also would become available to disabled people who lose government health coverage because they work.
Beyond the $110 billion in new initiatives, Clinton wants to give families who care for elderly or disabled relatives at home $3,000 tax credits, costing $100 million in 2001 and $27 billion for the decade.
Less expensive versions of some of these same ideas died in Congress last year, in part because of the president's own veto of a Republican tax-cutting plan.
This year, Republicans and some moderate Democrats are supporting a standard health insurance tax credit for individuals and families who aren't covered through employers or eligible for public assistance programs - about 27 million people.
MEDICAL RESEARCH
Clinton is seeking $18.8 billion for the National Institutes of Health, a $1 billion increase. The biggest slices of the increase go to research in heart disease, the nation's No. 1 killer, and cancer. Also, $20 million will establish a new Office for Research on Minority Health, to help uncover why some minorities suffer unusually high rates of infant mortality, diabetes, heart disease and other illnesses.
The $2 billion proposed for AIDS-related research is a 5.2 percent increase from this year. Clinton also is seeking $125 million under the Ryan White Act to provide treatment for low-income AIDS patients, and $40 million in new funds for state and local AIDS prevention programs.
The budget includes a total $342 million spread among different agencies to help fight HIV around the world. That's a $100 million increase.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention would receive $123 million, a 25 percent increase, to fight emerging infectious diseases such as the mysterious West Nile virus outbreak that hit New York last summer. Most of the increase would fund an electronic database where local health officials could share information that would let CDC spot deadly outbreaks faster.
The Food and Drug Administration would receive $10 million in new funding to crack down on illegal prescription drug sales over the Internet.
Clinton also seeks $16 million more than the $12 million the FDA currently spends to monitor and protect against side effects from medications, estimated to kill 100,000 Americans a year.
Clinton seeks $20 million in new funding for the Agency for Healthcare Quality and Research to study how the nation can reduce the number of medical mistakes, which are estimated to kill up to 98,000 hospitalized Americans a year.
MEDICARE
Congress rejected the president's plan last year to spend $118 billion over 10 years to create a prescription drug benefit for the elderly. His new proposal includes $160 billion to create the optional benefit, which would pay half of senior citizens drug bills. Coverage would be capped at $1,000 a year to start, but Clinton has added a $35 billion reserve to help those with the highest bills.
Clinton's plan also would ask older Americans to pay slightly more out-of-pocket to get the drug benefit - $26 a month to start instead of the $24 proposed last year.
The president is asking again for about $8 billion over 10 years to let people aged 55 to 64 who lack health insurance buy into the Medicare program, now limited to those 65 and older. He has added new tax credits, costing $1.6 billion, to make that option more affordable.
Clinton's additions to Medicare coverage, which would not become available until 2002, would come mainly from expected government surpluses. However, he also has proposed saving about $70 billion by giving Medicare access to tools that private health plans use to cut costs, including establishing networks of providers who agree to offer discounted services.
Republican leaders in Congress have said they will offer an alternative to Clinton's Medicare drug plan this year, with money targeted to help older people afford private coverage.
TAXES
The president's proposed $181 billion in tax increases over the next decade is similar to those rejected by the Republican-led Congress last year, including a 25-cents-a-pack cigarette tax increase and attempts to curb abusive corporate tax shelters.
The revenue increase helps the president offset $351 billion in tax relief, including $45 billion in relief from the "marriage penalty," $54 billion for new retirement savings accounts, $32.7 billion in relief for the middle class from the alternative minimum tax and credits or deductions for child care, long-term health care, charitable giving, college costs, school construction and inner-city development.
The tax increases mean Clinton would use less of the projected budget surplus for tax cuts than either Republicans in Congress or the leading GOP candidates for president. Clinton's net tax relief would be about $170 billion, far less than the $483 billion over five years advocated by Texas Gov. George W. Bush or the $237 billion proposed by Arizona Sen. John McCain.
"I guarantee that Republicans in Congress will strongly oppose the president's $181 billion tax hike," said Rep. Bill Archer, R-Texas, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee.
A proposed cigarette tax increase, which would raise almost $66 billion over 10 years, is less than half the 55-cent tax advocated by Clinton last year and ignored by Congress.
The president would raise nearly $23 billion by limiting many corporate tax shelters, a thriving industry that costs the federal government billions of dollars a year.
The budget also would impose new restrictions on corporations with dealings in "identified tax havens," usually foreign countries with a friendly or nonexistent tax law.
SOCIAL SECURITY
Clinton, like congressional Republicans, has proposed using surpluses expected from Social Security payroll taxes - about $160 billion in 2001 and $2.2 trillion over the next decade - to pay down the national debt.
Economists say that would help make room in future federal budgets for the cost of providing retirement benefits to the massive generation of baby boomers.
Clinton wants specifically to earmark for Social Security future income tax surpluses that would have otherwise had to be used to pay interest on the debt. That would be $690 billion transferred to Social Security in 2011-2016, as the first baby boomers begin to retire.
Republicans last year rejected that part of the president's plan, calling it a gimmick that avoids tough choices the country should make about how much of its resources to devote to the coming tidal wave of elderly citizens.
TECHNOLOGY
The president proposes $1.46 billion to protect America's most important computer networks, including $500 million on research to help develop tools to track down hackers and cyberterrorists. He also proposed $100 million for as many as 1,000 "community technology centers" where people without computers could visit to use the Internet, plus $50 million for a new grant program to buy computers and Internet connections for low-income families.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Commercial television stations would be required to pay fees on their existing analog TV channels that would raise at least $200 million annually. Proceeds from the so-called lease fee would help federal, state and local governments upgrade communications systems used by fire, police, emergency rescue and other public safety agencies.
Broadcasters have been given a second TV channel to convert to higher-quality digital television. When the switch is complete in 2006, broadcasters are required to return their analog channels to the government and, under the proposal, would no longer have to pay the fee.
Republicans in Congress, at the urging of broadcasters, have generally opposed imposing new fees on broadcasters and a similar provision in last year's budget was not enacted.
The administration proposed giving the Federal Communications Commission about $237 million for fiscal year 2001. The agency's current budget is $210 million.
The budget also allots $84 million for fiscal Year 2000 to pay for the public broadcasting system's transition to digital technology.
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
With an eye toward increasing affordable housing stock, especially for older people and the homeless, President Clinton proposed increasing the budget of the Department of Housing and Urban Development by $6 billion in 2001 to $32.1 billion.
Under the proposed budget, 120,000 new incremental housing vouchers would be financed at a cost of $690 million.
It also proposes a 12 percent increase, up to $50 million, to step up enforcement of housing anti-discrimination laws.
The budget includes 60,000 new rental assistance vouchers. Last year, 50,000 vouchers were approved after four years without vouchers.
It seeks a third round of empowerment zones, in which 10 new zones would be designated and in effect through 2009. It includes an estimated $4 billion over 10 years to extend federal grants and tax breaks to businesses that invest in poorer regions.
The Economic Development Initiative/Community Empowerment Fund would get a $76 million boost to $100 million to create jobs and promote economic development in poor areas.
IMMIGRATION
The Immigration and Naturalization Service would see its budget rise 11 percent to a record $4.8 billion. That would represent a 219 percent increase in INS funding since 1993, when President Clinton took office.
The $523 million in new initiatives proposed for next year includes the hiring of 430 additional Border Patrol agents, which falls short of the 1,000-agent hiring goal directed by Congress. The agency also would add 115 immigration inspectors at land borders and 154 at airports and finance 1,000 new detention bed spaces.
LAW ENFORCEMENT
The administration is proposing major anti-crime increases, including the largest gun enforcement expansion ever, more aid to state and local governments to keep hiring police officers and buy hi-tech equipment and the biggest federal prison construction program since the mid-1980s.
The Justice Department would see actual spending rise 21 percent from $22.4 billion, but much of that is in state and local aid appropriated in earlier years.
For the first time in this administration, Congress gave Justice essentially no increase for fiscal year 2000. Clinton seeks to resume the department's rapid growth with the largest increase since 1994, when his plan to pay for 100,000 local police officers was enacted.
Thwarted last year in his bid for major new gun controls by Republicans who claimed existing gun laws were not being enforced, Clinton is seeking $150 million to pay for 1,000 new state and local gun prosecutors over three years and $14.5 million for 113 new federal gun prosecutors. The Treasury is seeking money for 500 additional Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms agents.
He calls for $2.4 billion over three years to build 17 new federal prisons with 20,000 beds.
Clinton seeks $1.3 billion to continue his program of adding another 50,000 officers and buying hi-tech equipment in local police departments. Last year Congress finally provided all but $250 million of a similar request. He resurrects his unsuccessful proposal to replace a Republican violent-crime block grant, worth $1 billion this year to state and local governments, with more targeted crime-prevention grants.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
 
The budget proposes a $2.5 billion increase in federally funded civilian scientific research and development, bringing to $43.3 billion the amount proposed for R&D by 11 government agencies and departments. This is a 6 percent increase over fiscal 2000.
Included in these federal initiatives would be $225 million for nanometer research, the science of manipulating and moving matter on the molecular scale, and $1.74 billion for research on global climate change.
NASA's proposed budget outlay is $13.7 billion, an increase of $229 million over fiscal year 2000.
Included is $2.4 billion for space science, such as probes to Mars and new satellites to study the sun and establish an early warning system for solar eruptions.
Money for earth sciences, orbital research directed toward the home planet, will fall about 3 percent to $1.4 billion. However, this will pay for the continued launch of satellites designed to analyze Earth's weather, climate and land use.
The NASA budget will include $2.1 billion for continued construction of the International Space Station, $256 million for safety improvements to the space shuttle and $290 million to continue development, with private companies, of a new reusable launch vehicle.
SMITHSONIAN
The administration is seeking $371 million for the Smithsonian Institution, which runs 16 museums and the National Zoo. That would be an increase from $329 million this year.
Construction began this year on a 17th gallery, the National Museum of the American Indian. It is due to open in late 2002 adjacent to the Air and Space Museum, one of the capital's most popular attractions.
The Smithsonian gets more than a quarter of its total spending from private sources and businesses.
TRANSPORTATION
The $54.9 billion budget is up 9 percent, an increase partly funded by rising income from fuel taxes. The budget includes a 21 percent increase for programs aimed at getting unsafe trucks off the roads, reducing drunken driving and increasing use of seat belts. There is $1.9 billion to expand airport runway capacity, $6.3 billion for mass transit and $30.4 billion for road building and maintenance.
 Load-Date: February 8, 2000

 

End of Document
