

The keys to reading the returns in the nation's first primary
The Associated Press
February 1, 2000, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 763 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: MANCHESTER, N.H.
Body




Claiming victory in advance is a risky tactic in the New Hampshire presidential primary, but Sen. John McCain did so Monday - with nothing to lose by saying he'd win.
He's got to beat Gov. George Bush in the voting that will remodel the Republican race.
The Democratic verdict will determine whether Vice President Al Gore really is vulnerable to challenger Bill Bradley, whose campaign is braced against defeat, aiming at least to come close.
Those are keys to reading the returns in the first of the presidential primaries Tuesday.
Close won't suffice for McCain in the five-name Republican contest. His strategy for overtaking Bush nationally hinges on winning in New Hampshire and using that boost to catch the front-runner in his next chosen test, in South Carolina on Feb. 19.
There's a troubled record of victory forecasts in the leadoff primary state. Sen. Edmund S. Muskie lost ground by winning without a landslide in 1972. Ronald Reagan almost upset President Gerald R. Ford in 1976, but the outcome was judged a setback to his challenge because his state chairman had said he'd win outright.
Given those lessons, candidates have tried to avoid raising expectations about their prospects. Not McCain.
"I am confident of victory," he said in Keene on Monday. He has staked his challenge on it by concentrating on New Hampshire, skipping the first GOP competition in Iowa, where Bush won and Steve Forbes ran second in caucus voting on Jan. 24.
Forbes, who claimed success in 30 percent of the vote there - Bush got 41 percent - is in more difficult territory in New Hampshire, running third in the polls, looking for enough of the GOP vote to claim his self-financed campaign stands a chance as a more conservative alternative to Bush and McCain.
But his campaign acknowledges that he can't do it without a breakthrough primary win in one of the states ahead. He'd have to upset Bush, McCain or both to manage it.
Another ardent conservative, Gary Bauer, could be near the end of his campaign, which almost folded after he ran fourth in Iowa, behind Alan Keyes. Bauer never was a threat to the leaders, but he was a goad from the right in eight campaign debates.
McCain, running as a GOP reformer against the establishment, especially the campaign finance system, began far behind but overtook Bush, edging ahead in New Hampshire polls now too close to call either as a clear favorite.
Bush stuck to the custom of hedged forecasts, saying he'll do well, that he doesn't expect to lose - but that his campaign is a national one that will survive whatever the outcome.
He leads McCain comfortably in polls of South Carolina Republicans.
John Weaver, McCain's national campaign coordinator, said the senator can catch Bush there with the boost of a New Hampshire victory and an intensive, 16-day campaign drive.
But McCain must go there with a win in his column, or he will go there limping against Bush. A New Hampshire defeat would be a stumble for Bush, but he's got the advantages of the national lead, a record campaign treasury, and powerful alliances in the states ahead.
For Bradley's Democratic challenge, New Hampshire is not a pass-fail test; the former New Jersey senator said he has the resources and the determination to go into what he calls the national campaign to come.
There are no more delegate-awarding Democratic contests until March 7, the day of primaries in 11 states, California and New York among them.
Bradley's strength in New Hampshire will determine whether he gets there as an insurgent in a position to overtake Gore, or as a twice-defeated challenger struggling for a revival.
A Gore victory in New Hampshire would inevitably prompt pressure from Democratic leaders for Bradley to yield and end the heightening hostilities of their campaign attacks and counter-attacks. Short of beating the vice president, Bradley can't avoid that talk. But a close count against Gore would make it easier to rebut.
It is the Democratic establishment he is challenging anyhow. He says they stand for the old politics, he wants something new.
Democratic congressional leaders chimed in for the Gore campaign with a letter urging Bradley to stop "negative, personal attacks," to which two Senate allies of the challenger retorted Monday that he was only telling the truth.
"We are not trying to divide the party," said Sen. Bob Kerrey of Nebraska. Sen. Paul Wellstone of Minnesota said Bradley was the man under attack, until he'd had it with Gore.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears has reported on Washington and national politics for The Associated Press for more than 35 years.
 Load-Date: February 2, 2000

 

End of Document
