

THE 20TH CENTURY; Brief summary of the Vietnam War
The Associated Press
November 30, 1999, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 600 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Events of the Vietnam War:
After the defeat of the French in the first Indochina War, the Geneva Agreement of 1954 divided Vietnam along the 17th parallel into Communist North Vietnam, with the seat of government in Hanoi, and South Vietnam, with its leaders in Saigon.
The U.S. joined forces with South Vietnam to preserve what both countries said was a democracy against an invasion from the North. At first the U.S role was small, with only 300 military advisers in the country by 1959.
But it grew as the war intensified with military setbacks to South Vietnamese forces coupled with political instability in Saigon following a government coup and the assassination of President Ngo Dinh Diem by his own troops.
President Lyndon B. Johnson, claiming North Vietnamese torpedo boats had attacked U.S. destroyers in the Gulf of Tonkin - which some historians question - launched air strikes against the North on Aug. 5, 1964.
Not only that, but he drew from Congress the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, congressional authority "to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression." It set the stage for the massive American buildup that would follow.
By 1965, North Vietnamese regulars and their Viet Cong allies threatened to cut South Vietnam in half. The United States, seeking to neutralize the North Vietnamese, sent in its first combat troops on March 8, 1965 - the 4,000-man 9th Marine Expeditionary Brigade. The American buildup continued until it reached more than a half million troops.
The North Vietnamese Tet offensive of 1968 was the turning point of the war. Seventy thousand North Vietnamese and Viet Cong troops attacked more than three-fourths of South Vietnam's provincial capitals, 64 district towns, scores of villages, a dozen U.S. bases, and major cities including Saigon and the old imperial capital of Hue.
The Tet offensive - launched on the Tet holiday or Vietnamese Lunar New Year on Jan. 31 - pointed up the vulnerability of South Vietnamese cities and towns. It raised questions about U.S. policy and military strategy in what had turned into a stalemate and a war of attrition.
In the end, the Tet offensive was a military victory for the Americans and their South Vietnamese allies, who recaptured the cities and towns and inflicted heavy casualties on the North Vietnamese. But it was a psychological defeat in the United States. It triggered hundreds of antiwar protests, increased congressional opposition to the war, and ultimately brought down the Johnson administration.
Johnson's successor, President Richard M. Nixon, began a phased withdrawal of American forces in 1969, culminating four years later with the signing of the Paris Peace Agreement that ended the United States' direct military intervention in Vietnam on Jan. 27, 1973. By then, nearly 50,000 Americans had died in combat.
While the agreement ended the United States' longest and most divisive war and brought home nearly 600 American prisoners of war, the fighting never stopped for the Vietnamese.
In early 1975, North Vietnamese troops closed in on Saigon. With the capital's fall imminent, the United States evacuated its embassy on April 29. It was a scene of chaos as throngs of South Vietnamese tried to force their way into the grounds in desperate attempts to board helicopters taking off from the rooftop.
The next day, April 30, 1975, the South Vietnamese government unconditionally surrendered.
---
 
(Source: George Esper and The Associated Press, "The Eyewitness History of the Vietnam War 1961-1975.")
End Adv for Sunday, Dec. 5
 
 Load-Date: December 6, 1999

 

End of Document
