

The Nomination His, Dole Makes the Senate His Bully Pulpit
March 20, 1996, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 957 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Body




Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole says his quick wrap-up of the GOP presidential nomination shows he offers "the right agenda for the next generation," but he admits the prospect of being president is "scary."
What looms is the selection of a running mate - a delicate matter in a divided party - and a renewed threat of a Ross Perot third-party candidacy.
Solid victories in four Midwestern states on Tuesday, coming exactly a month after a humiliating loss to commentator Pat Buchanan in New Hampshire, nailed down the party's nomination for the 72-year-old Dole. He had first sought it 16 years ago.
"The moral of the story is if you … don't give up too easily, you can still make it," Dole said in an interview broadcast today on "CBS This Morning."
"It's scary in the sense that you want to be sure you can do it," he added. "I'm convinced I can."
With Buchanan reduced to nuisance status, Dole is planning to make the Senate his bully pulpit - and is also planning to give himself a week off sometime soon in the Florida sunshine.
But for now "I'm going to be a full-time senator," Dole said, in line with his strategy of using his Republican leadership position to carry the fight to President Clinton.
Both of the November rivals are leaders within the government, so each is able to undercut - or cooperate with - the other, intertwining even more than usual the business of government with the requirements of politics.
In a first skirmish today, the rivals met in the White House in one more effort to settle their yearlong dispute over how to balance the government's budget and still preserve their competing priorities.
"We had a good visit with the president … about an hour and 10 minutes," Dole told reporters after he, House Speaker Newt Gingrich and House Majority Leader Dick Armey returned to the Capitol. "We laid out our priorities, the president laid out his priorities. Hopefully, together we can work out America's priorities."
Dole's intention is to use Republican congressional majorities to put before Clinton bills - tax cuts, welfare reform, regulatory reform, the line-item veto - bearing the GOP stamp.
The idea is to make the Democratic president choose between going along or being vulnerable to the label of defender of the status quo.
White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta said the unique situation would challenge both Dole and Clinton.
"I think it's going to be a test of his leadership," Panetta said of Dole on NBC's "Today" show. "Certainly, it's a test of the president's leadership, whether or not there's cooperation there to get the job done."
In an interview with The Associated Press, Dole predicted that Clinton's edge in head-to-head polls against him would melt away now that Dole is the clear candidate. "We're going to be hard at work convincing the American people we have the right agenda for the next generation and the next century," he said.
"The fall campaign is under way," Dole said as returns from Ohio, Illinois, Michigan and Wisconsin nailed down his 22nd consecutive victory. "It is 230 days to defeating Bill Clinton."
Buchanan, already working the immigration issue in California, wasn't ready to concede that Dole had it wrapped up just yet, although he accepted that Dole was "very, very close." An AP count put Dole's delegate total at 1,005 to 109 for Buchanan, with 996 needed to nominate.
For his part, Dole doesn't plan to campaign in California until Friday, three days before the voting.
In a new twist, two Buchanan aides - spokesmen Greg Mueller and John Condit - said Buchanan had done well enough in the industrial Midwest to make him vice presidential material.
Buchanan's appeal to blue-collar Democrats and Perot voters should "send a message to Dole that he needs Pat on the bottom half of the ticket," is the way Condit put it.
But Buchanan said such talk was "grossly premature. … We are doing battle for the nomination."
"What's still at stake is the heart and soul of the Republican Party and where the party is headed," Buchanan said on NBC. "Half of the voters said yesterday they did not believe Bob Dole had any ideas. ...I've got to speak for those folks at the convention."
Nearly complete returns showed Dole winning majorities in the four states, with Buchanan taking a third of the vote in Michigan and Wisconsin - his best votes of the primary season - and more than a fifth in Illinois and Ohio.
Even as the Buchanan threat faded, billionaire Perot threw a scare in the Dole camp by saying that if members of his newborn Reform Party want him as their candidate, "I would give it everything I have."
Just a month ago, Perot said "no" when asked if he would run. But his spokesman said Tuesday that "a sense is settling in among the public out there that there ought to be more choices."
Aides are working to put Perot's name on the November ballot in Texas, Florida and as many as a dozen other states. It is generally felt that in 1992 Perot skimmed enough votes to give some crucial states to Clinton. Some say President Bush would have won re-election in a two-man race.
Meantime, the vice presidential decision promises to vex Dole. Midwestern voters, in surveys as they left polling places, made it clear that retired Gen. Colin Powell has strong appeal. Powell has insisted he's not interested, and the GOP's most conservative elements dislike his centrist views.
But when asked if they preferred their own governors - who are all Republicans, all popular and all considered potential veep candidates - many Midwesterners said they preferred Powell.
Only Michigan voters clearly favored their governor, John Engler. In Ohio, Powell edged out Gov. George Voinovich. In Wisconsin, Tommy Thompson tied with Powell. In Illinois, voters preferred Powell to Gov. Jim Edgar.
 Load-Date: March 20, 1996

 

End of Document
