

The new, new, new Gore and the new, new, new Bush
The Associated Press
June 17, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 870 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Reinvention was a signature issue for Al Gore as vice president. It has become one for Al Gore as candidate in his often restyled presidential campaign. Gov. George W. Bush has done some remodeling, too.
So far, 2000 has been the year of the campaign makeovers.
In the latest episode, the campaign chairman Gore named 13 months ago to retool a slow-starting operation has resigned, blaming health problems.
Tony Coelho is out, Secretary of Commerce William M. Daley is in. Coelho has been hospitalized for an intestinal ailment. He also faces a government ethics investigation.
Reinventing government was part of Gore's day job, and he says it succeeded, saving more than $100 billion and cutting the bureaucracy to the lowest payroll in 40 years. Those numbers have been questioned by critics and dismissed by Republicans.
"They haven't reinvented the government bureaucracy, they have simply reshuffled it," Bush says.
There has been some reinventing and some reshuffling on both their presidential campaigns.
Presidential candidates always change in the process of running, altering tactics and styles to fit their situations. But it usually happens quietly and gradually, not abruptly, with announcements that the candidate is now going to try something different.
These candidates have been above the fray, tough, nice, tough, nice again.
Gore changed his campaign address to Nashville, Tenn., and his clothes to casual. Bush was more conservative than compassionate until he had the Republican nomination locked away. Since then, he has pushed proposals aimed at claiming the political center, while Gore contends his rival is still far to the right.
Nothing harsh or personal, though.
The latest Gore strategy is to avoid all that. "I choose not to attach any elegant epithets to my opponent," he said in an interview with The New York Times.
This while Bush was working with his advisers on plans for a Republican National Convention with a positive script, minus the programmed attacks on the opposition that usually are part of the fare.
Earlier, Bush planners had even talked of forbidding so much as the mention of Gore's name during the convention, before realizing that nobody could keep Republicans from talking like Republicans for four days.
When he clinched the Democratic nomination more than three months ago, Gore said he wanted a general election campaign of ideas, not insults. But he did not spare the latter - Bush was arrogant, smug, inexperienced, reckless, irresponsible, he jabbed.
Then he changed tone. Without sparing his criticism of Bush's proposals, he stopped talking about his opponent by name. That is being left to others, notably his allies in the Clinton Cabinet and White House.
"I don't know how many times you're able to reinvent yourself in the course of a campaign," Bush said of that shift, nearly three weeks ago.
Two or three times, anyhow, because Bush has had that many remodelings himself.
He started as the candidate who was going to change the tone of campaigning, keep it positive and above personal conflicts. That worked at first; indeed, when he belatedly appeared in a 1999 campaign debate, he volunteered a good word for Sen. John McCain, then one of five rivals for the nomination. "He's a good man," Bush put in for McCain when the senator faced hostile questions.
That was before the competition got real and the tactics got tough.
"The days of smiling and letting John McCain define me are over," Bush said after his defeat in the New Hampshire presidential primary.
The new Bush was more conservative than compassionate, on the offensive until he clinched the nomination. Then he remodeled again, moving back to the center, the classic strategy for a Republican. The art, as Richard M. Nixon once said, it to move far enough right to win the nomination and then far enough left to win the election.
Gore's reinventions began with his effort to manage the dual role of candidate and vice president, seeking the advantages of office but in his case, seeking to shed the baggage of President Clinton's personal scandals.
He also began as the lofty leader, not deigning to mention Bill Bradley's name until the challenger began closing in last fall. Then he overhauled his whole show, moved his campaign headquarters out of Washington, adopted a new, more casual wardrobe trying to shed the stiffness image.
He said he would campaign like an underdog. He challenged Bradley to weekly debates, later upping it to two a week and still later making it a challenge to Bush.
After beating Bradley, Gore turned down the volume on his campaign, just as the new Bush began offering catalog of programs that edged into usually Democratic territory on issues such as housing, health care for the poor, the environment, education.
Gore denied that his campaign was drifting again. But he does have another new look, his three-week set of prosperity and progress speeches, telling what he calls the economic success story of the past eight years, and saying he is the candidate who can continue it.
Reinventions aside, that is what he was saying in the first place.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears has been reporting on Washington and national politics for The Associated Press for more than 35 years.
 Load-Date: June 18, 2000

 

End of Document
