

The tale of the law book that found its way into the jury room
The Associated Press
April 10, 1999, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 553 words
Byline: By PEGGY HARRIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LITTLE ROCK, Ark.
Body




In a bizarre twist that could have caused a mistrial, one of the jurors in Susan McDougal's case apparently decided to bring a little outside expertise to jury deliberations.
The deliberations had barely begun Friday when U.S. District Judge George Howard Jr. suspended them to address concerns over juror Michael Nance, who had brought a law book into the jury room. Jurors in criminal cases are constantly admonished to stick solely to the judge's instructions for guidance.
Mrs. McDougal is accused of two counts of criminal contempt and one count of obstruction for refusing to answer grand jury questions about the business dealings of President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
She says she refused because she believed Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr wanted to "get" the Clintons and would charge her with perjury if he didn't like her answers.
A court clerk discovered the book of state and federal court rules and brought it to the judge's attention. The book bore the signature and business card of former Arkansas Supreme Court Justice John I. Purtle, an acquaintance of both Mrs. McDougal and the Clintons.
Howard ordered an FBI investigation into possible jury tampering, then called it off after satisfying himself that the strange tale the two men were telling was true: Nance had bought his house from Purtle, who had apparently left the law book behind when he moved.
The entire day was taken up sorting out the Purtle-Nance saga. The two men said they never contacted each other, handling the house sale through a real estate agent. Purtle occasionally bumped into Mrs. McDougal in 1996 at her first Whitewater trial but said he had nothing to do with her current case.
Starr's prosecutors wanted Nance dismissed and the deliberations to continue with 11 jurors. Alternate jurors had already been dismissed before deliberations began Thursday.
The defense wanted Howard to keep the full 12-member jury, arguing that members hadn't been "tainted" by Nance's apparent reference to the book. Defense lawyer Mark Geragos, who said he suspected the jury had come to a decision on the obstruction charge, said he might ask for a mistrial if Nance were removed.
In an earlier interview, Purtle said he worked with Mrs. Clinton on a legal case in the early 1990s before she became first lady. He said he has no connection to Mrs. McDougal's trial, but feels strongly she shouldn't be prosecuted.
After Purtle's testimony, Howard questioned Nance privately, then announced his decision in court.
Howard backed off his plans for an FBI investigation, ruled that Nance could remain on the jury and told jurors to return to court Monday to resume their deliberations.
Outside the courthouse, prosecutor Mark Barrett said, "It was kind of a roller-coaster day." He agreed with Howard's decision to call off the FBI investigation and said his confidence in the jury had not been shaken.
Geragos lambasted what he called the prosecution team's "institutional paranoia." He noted that before Purtle was brought in for questioning, Barrett said that Purtle, while he was on the state Supreme Court, sided with Mrs. McDougal and her husband in a case that involved a branch office for a bank they owned in northern Arkansas.
"If I had spun that tale, they'd be accusing me of having electrodes implanted in my brain," Geragos said.
 Load-Date: April 10, 1999

 

End of Document
