

The Cleveland Browns are back in the NFL
The Associated Press
March 24, 1998, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 802 words
Byline: By DAVE GOLDBERG, AP Football Writer
Dateline: ORLANDO, Fla.
Body




It's official. Cleveland finally has the Browns back.
Sure the NFL had promised to give the city that Art Modell deserted after the 1995 season a new team for 1999, complete with the old Browns' uniforms and history.
But there was still a collective sense of relief when the league's owners voted unanimously on Monday to give the city an expansion team and backed it up by giving the team its first major executive even before it has an owner.
He's Joe Mack, former assistant general manager of the Carolina Panthers, who will build a personnel department to scout college and pro players who will take the field for the team's first exhibition - the 1999 Hall of Fame game at Canton against Dallas.
"Two things came through to us," said Carolina owner Jerry Richardson, chairman of the NFL's stadium committee. "How strongly Cleveland wanted an expansion franchise and how they wanted a decision sooner rather than later.
That decision came on a busy opening day at the NFL meetings.
The owners also:
- Approved the extension of the collective bargaining agreement three years to the end of the 2003 season. The vote was 28-1-1, with Wellington Mara of the New York Giants voting no and Al Davis of Oakland abstaining.
- Attempted to crack down on off-field violence with a new policy that allows commissioner Paul Tagliabue to suspend any player convicted of assault, spousal abuse, gun possession or other off-field crimes.
- Gave Tagliabue a five-year contract extension, to run through 2005, and doubled his salary from $ 2.5 million per year to $ 5 million.
The Cleveland decision fulfilled a promise the league made to the city after Art Modell moved the old Browns to Baltimore after the 1995 season.
But it wasn't clear that they would get the go-ahead at these meetings until Tagliabue and Richardson visited the new 72,000-seat stadium site a week ago.
"It was partly what we saw in Cleveland, that the stadium is becoming a reality," Tagliabue said. "Partly, it was our conversations with the mayor and how the fans feel and their desire for an expansion team."
That brought full circle the most emotional move during the two-year period when three franchises moved and several others threatened to do so.
"I was one of the people who wanted to get this done," said Modell, whose announcement in 1995 that he would move the team shocked everyone - from fans in the old Dawg Pound at Cleveland Stadium to Tagliabue and other top NFL officials.
These Browns will move into a new stadium on the same site as the old one, built in the Depression era. But the team will wear the old Browns' orange and white and while there will be permanent seat licenses, there also will be a Dawg Pound designed for the average fan.
Some major developments are yet to come - like selection of an owner and a decision on the fee they will pay to play, probably between $ 350 million and $ 400 million.
But Mack, who will operate under the direction of George Young, the former Giants general manager who now is the NFL's vice president for league operations gives them a good start - he helped Carolina develop into the most successful first-year franchise ever when it finished 7-9.
Of the other actions on the first day of the NFL meetings, the most important was ratification of the labor contract.
But the most interesting was the attempt at a crackdown on off-field violence.
"The object is to deter misconduct," Tagliabue said. "We want to help the players keep out of trouble and we think this is one way to do it."
The latest in a long run of off-field transgressions by NFL players include Dave Meggett of the New England Patriots, accused of assault in Toronto and Tito Wooten of the Giants, who is undergoing counseling after being accused of assaulting a live-in girl friend.
Charges against Wooten were dropped when Wooten told the judge that the couple had reconciled. The woman subsequently committed suicide.
Meggett and former Patriots defensive end Steve Brannon were charged with sexual assault in February after a 33-year-old woman complained to police that she was assaulted at Toronto's Royal York Hotel. The charges are pending.
The NFL's policy, sending players to counseling if they are convicted of crimes, has been in place since last August. But starting July 1, players will be subject to fines, suspensions or both.
Tagliabue said the tougher disciplinary rules were not prompted by the case of Latrell Sprewell of the Golden State Warriors, suspended by the NBA for attempting to choke coach P.J. Carlesimo. Sprewell's contract was terminated, before being reinstated by an arbitrator.
But the NFL policy is worded to allow termination. "An NFL employee who threatens violent criminal activity against co-workers shall be subject to discipline, including termination of employment," reads a letter sent to the 30 teams.
 Load-Date: March 24, 1998

 

End of Document
