

The president's proposals for the budget
The Associated Press
February 8, 2000, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1187 words
Body




President Clinton's proposed budget by agency and issue:
 
AGRICULTURE
The Agriculture Department would get $65 billion in 2001 to pay for programs ranging from farm subsidies to food stamps and meat inspection. The budget includes $5.8 billion in higher spending for farmers to help them cope with the ongoing depression in grain prices. Congress has provided $15 billion in emergency farm assistance over the last two years. The centerpiece of the administration's aid package is a new "supplemental income" program that would cost $2.5 billion in 2001 and provide direct payments to growers based on fluctuations in crop revenue. There is another $1.3 billion in higher spending for conservation programs and $1 billion to expand federally subsidized crop insurance, pushing the cost of the program to nearly $2.6 billion.
The president also is proposing a 20 percent increase, an extra $68 million, in funding for food-safety programs. The USDA budget would make 250,000 people eligible for food stamps by ending a federal restriction on the value of recipients' personal cars. Food stamps would be restored to 90,000 legal immigrants.
Republicans already are criticizing the "supplemental income" plan as inadequate, and some see it as an unwanted change in the market-oriented approach of the 1996 farm law.
This year's budget is $6.1 billion lower than the president's proposal for 2000. Crop subsidies are running much higher than was expected a year ago, and the 2000 budget includes the farm bailout package that Congress passed.
ARTS
Spending by the National Endowment for the Arts would rise to $111 million in fiscal 2001, a $7 million increase over this year.
The NEA budget has been at or slightly below the $100 million level since 1996. The administration annually seeks more than that, but some Republicans, who have charged the agency with promoting obscene work, have tried either to cut the budget drastically or kill the agency outright. In fiscal 1995 the budget was $162 million.
With strong NEA supporters within their own ranks, Republican leaders last year abandoned efforts to abolish the NEA.
Clinton this year has proposed a "Challenge to America" that would award more than 1,100 grants at a cost of $49 million, some going to "youth-at-risk" programs aimed at cutting delinquency. The idea, an NEA statement said, is to connect arts organizations more closely with families and communities.
This year another $10 million in the proposed budget for the Department of Education would go to a youth program in collaboration with the NEA.
CHILDREN, WOMEN AND FAMILIES
For a third year, President Clinton is seeking child care spending increases, including $573 million more for the Child Care and Development block grants to states - which the administration says would help 150,000 more children.
He failed to win a fiscal 2000 increase for this $1.1 billion program, which is the primary source of child-care subsidies for poor families.
Clinton also wants new tax credits for businesses building or expanding child care programs for workers, an investment of $42 million next year and $1.4 billion for the decade.
The president has proposed spending $125 million in 2001 on new grants for programs that would help noncustodial parents, mostly fathers, train for and get jobs so they can help keep up with child support payments. Another $130 million spending increase would go to programs helping low-income families make the transition from welfare to work.
Clinton also wants $27 million to help close the wage gap between men and women, something he says will help two-earner families as well as single mothers. It would train government inspectors to step up enforcement and train women for careers they have been underrepresented in.
A similar, $14 million initiative failed in Congress last year.
DEFENSE
Modernized weaponry, better benefits for soldiers and a big jump in spending on weapons and equipment add up to a $277.5 billion defense budget the Pentagon says will "preserve American military excellence."
With increases offset by cuts in other programs, proposed Pentagon spending for fiscal 2001 is exactly the same as this year's level. But it likely will be increased by Congress, where support for higher defense spending is strong.
Defense Department officials touted their plans to spend $60 billion for new weapons and equipment to help modernize the force - a procurement level Pentagon planners had been hoping to reach for years. It represents a one-third increase over 1998 spending.
The budget proposes a 3.7 percent military pay raise, increased health benefits and $5 billion in additional housing subsidies for military personnel living off base.
Assuming presidential approval of a national missile defense system, the budget proposes $1.9 billion for the plan to defend all 50 states against limited ballistic missile attack. An additional $2.6 billion is sought for other missile programs.
Peacekeeping operations in Bosnia and Kosovo are fully funded, with $2.2 billion in the 2001 budget and a request for $2 billion to cover expenses in the current year.
The budget provides for several advanced aircraft, including the F-22 fighter, the V-22 tilt-rotor plane, a new amphibious assault vehicle and upgrades to helicopters and AV-8B and F/A-18 warplanes. For the Navy, it includes building three Arleigh Burke-class destroyers, a new attack submarine and the final Nimitz-class aircraft carrier - the most expensive single piece of equipment in the budget at more than $4 billion.
EDUCATION
Clinton's nearly $39 billion education budget plan, roughly 4 percent more than last year's proposal, would give a high priority to wiring classrooms for the Internet, hiring more teachers, fixing crumbling schoolhouses and making college more affordable. Congressional Republicans say the fight will not be over the amount of money sought but rather how it's spent.
For fiscal 2001, the president is seeking $24 billion for a tax plan to support bonds for school modernization, $1.3 billion in grants for emergency repairs to fix the worst buildings, $100 million to triple spending on after-school computer centers in poor communities and $150 million to double funding for training new teachers specifically to use classroom technology.
He calls for a record expansion of the preschool Head Start program.
Clinton also wants a $1.75 billion installment to hire more teachers and $1 billion to double summer and after-school spending.
Republicans say such decisions are best made by states and school districts and shouldn't be mandated. GOP lawmakers have promised to outspend Clinton again this year - focusing on school choice, tuition tax breaks, increased special education funding and giving local communities the option of spending new teacher and school-construction money on other programs.
The president also seeks to increase college attendance with $30 billion to provide tuition tax relief, nearly $1 billion to increase Pell Grants and other aid programs for needy students and $120 million to curb violence and increase academic performance with smaller, more manageable high schools.
 Load-Date: February 9, 2000

 

End of Document
