

THE 20TH CENTURY; Tale of the tape: Recordings leave history that can be rewound<
The Associated Press
October 25, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1595 words
Byline: By MICHAEL HILL, Associated Press Writer
Body




It is Teddy Roosevelt waving his fist at a crowd and speaking in oddly high-pitched cadences.
It is dirt-poor cotton pickers of the Depression raising their voices to praise God.
It is Dorothy clicking her sparkly heels in Technicolor, Nazi soldiers goose-stepping in Paris, an astronaut hopping on the moon.
It is Caruso's mighty "O Sole Mio." And it's even the rock-'n'-roll question, "Who put the ram in the ram-a-lam-a-ding-dong?"
It is the record - on audio and videotape, on compact discs, grainy film and old shellac records - of the recorded century, the first era when large swaths of life played out in front of cameras and microphones, leaving a historical record that can be unspooled, projected and rewound.
The newsreels, TV archives, music recordings and even home movies that tell the 20th century's story make a mind-bendingly large collection, one that is straining for space even as some of it wastes away. Preservationists race the clock to save recorded artifacts that make the past vivid in a way written documents cannot.
---
 
"Once I built a railroad, made it run, made it race against time. Once I built a railroad, now it's done. Brother, can you spare a dime?" - Bing Crosby singing "Brother, Can You Spare a Dime," 1932.
---
 
"A better grasp of how people looked, how they said things" - that's what recordings provide, said Patrick Loughney, head of the moving image section of the Library of Congress. "To me, that's what helps define the 20th century from the 19th century."
Sounds and moving images were being recorded toward the end of the 1800s, but the new century brought the movie industry. The first American narrative film was "The Great Train Robbery," a silent shoot-'em-up released in 1903.
Crank-up record players gained wider use in this era, giving ordinary people the revolutionary ability to enjoy popular music in their homes. Enrico Caruso, already an established opera singer, added a more novel credential to his resume: recording star.
Newsreels came in 1909. Kodak introduced 16mm film for home movie use in 1923. Feature-length "Talkies" came in 1927. By 1930, England's King George V recorded his New Year's greeting for the British Broadcasting Corp. And the advances kept coming at fast-forward speed: Technicolor film, eight-tracks, cassettes, videotapes, computer hard drives, digital audio tape, CDs, DVDs.
Nowadays sights and sounds are recorded and disseminated worldwide all day, every day, from presidential lip bites to deadly earthquakes. More than 800 million record albums and singles were sold in the United States alone last year. Personal video cameras record births, weddings, even surgical procedures and the most intimate acts, which may then go across the Internet.
Any of this is a candidate for history.
---
 
"Ilsa, I'm no good at being noble. But it doesn't take too much to see that the problems of three little people don't amount to a hill of beans in this crazy world." Rick (Humphrey Bogart), giving up the girl in "Casablanca," 1942.
---
 
Recorded history has its greatest hits.
Think of the Watergate tapes that helped bring down Richard Nixon's presidency. Think of Abraham Zapruder's 26-second home movie of President Kennedy's motorcade in Dallas, recently valued at $16 million for his heirs. Think of George Holliday's videotape, shot as the plumbing supply manager watched Los Angeles police officers beat Rodney King.
But there is also historical value in more humble recordings that reveal who we are, what we did, what entertained us.
A browser through the Library of Congress could come across "Casablanca" and Krazy Kat cartoons; bittersweet songs by Leadbelly and preserved voices from the Dust Bowl.
The National Archives has a copy of "Rear Gunner," a World War II training film with Ronald Reagan playing an airman.
Bowling Green State University's archives have Amway testimonials along with a full complement of popular music.
In the University of Georgia's archives, Peabody Award-winning TV shows share shelf space with obscure home movies.
Linda Tadic, the latter archive's director, compares home movies with old diaries. "Think about people 100 years from now. They will see or hear how people lived," she said.
Or think about how people 100 years from now might puzzle over old classroom instructional films - morality tales shown to young baby boomers about the virtues of being clean, abstinent or popular. Skip Elsheimer has 7,000 such films stashed around his Raleigh, N.C. home and shows them occasionally. While the films might seem laughable to audiences today, the 33-year-old technical support worker sees something more.
"On kind of an odd level, when you look at the films from the '50s you don't get to see what the '50s looked like," he said. "But you get to see what they wanted the '50s to look like, which has a value in itself."
But as Elsheimer's crammed and leaky basement demonstrates, the problem with recorded history is keeping all the stuff.
---
 
"You're a riot, Alice. A regular riot. I hope they like those jokes on the moon, 'cause that's where you're going!" Ralph Kramden (Jackie Gleason) addressing his wife, Alice (Audrey Meadows), on "The Honeymooners," 1955-1956.
---
 
Sound and moving image archives are brimming.
The Library of Congress has collected 2.5 million sound and voice recordings, some 300,000 films plus 350,000 TV and video productions. The National Archives holds almost 700,000 motion pictures, videotapes and sound recordings, mostly products of the federal government.
The UCLA Film and Television Archive contains more than 5,000 miles of newsreel footage alone.
At Bowling Green, which has 700,000 sound recordings, archivist William Schurk said, "We have truly run out of space here."
To cope with the crush, The Library of Congress plans to open a new audiovisual center in Culpeper, Va. in 2003. The National Archives has already moved to a larger space in College Park, Md.
Film in particular can be a space hog. A feature film can run 10 reels, each bigger around than a dinner plate.
Worse yet, most movies shot before 1951 are on nitrate-based film, which is extremely flammable. Its replacement, acetate-based "safety film," doesn't burn readily but can decay in a manner so pungent it's called the "vinegar syndrome."
Cool, dry storage can lengthen film life, and major American film studios have taken heed. More alarming is the fate of so-called orphan films - newsreels and independent works not protected by studios.
The National Film Preservation Foundation was created in 1997 to find funds to save these endangered films. Among the successes: A newsreel of gray-bearded Confederate veterans dancing at a 1930 reunion; 1939 footage of black opera singer Marian Anderson performing at the Lincoln Memorial after being denied permission to perform at Constitution Hall; and home movies from a World War II detention camp for Japanese-Americans.
"Film is history," said director Martin Scorsese, a foundation board member. "With every foot of film that is lost, we lose a link to our culture ..."
Still, film is stable compared to videotapes and other magnetically recorded mediums. Home video can start disintegrating within two decades. Even professional stock video used for old newscasts and TV shows is at risk.
"The volume is growing exponentially with cable channels," said Gregory Lukow, who is helping create the National Television and Video Preservation Foundation. He compared the organization's efforts to emergency room "triage."
Much recorded history is already lost.
It is estimated that half of the commercial films produced before 1951 are gone, including a movie with Greta Garbo and works by director John Ford. Among countless missing TV shows: the network broadcast of the first Super Bowl.
The Museum of Television and Radio issues appeals for missing programs in the hope that some old production staff member might have a kinescope or tape stashed in the attic. It has happened, such as when "lost" Honeymooners episodes were recovered in the '80s from Jackie Gleason.
Lost sound recordings include a spoken word record made by Mark Twain, and Scott Joplin performing at the 1904 St. Louis World Exposition. Joplin's playing is known today through paper piano rolls.
---
 
"Unforgettable, in every way. And forevermore, that's how you'll stay." - Natalie Cole joins her deceased father, Nat King Cole, on a digitally-aided duet of his signature song, 1991.
---
 
The so-called digital revolution might someday solve some archiving problems. But not just yet.
Digital copies of films, for instance, compress the image, lessening the picture quality. Besides, digital recording is still in its toddler stage - there still is no industry standard that preservation professionals feel comfortable with.
"There's a different format that comes out every Tuesday," joked Tadic.
What is on the horizon at the end of the recorded century?
More.
Historians have taken the federal government to court in an attempt to have the government's electronic records preserved. Feature films are being produced specifically for the Internet. Web-cams are continually capturing the comings and goings of everything from street corners to living rooms. Internet-ready song recordings in the MP3 format are gaining popularity.
It's a new wave in the revolution that put phonographs in the home and movie houses on street corners almost 100 years ago. And it will likely raise a new round of questions:
Can this stuff be saved?
Who should save it?
What deserves to be preserved alongside grainy old images of a tub-thumping president?
End Adv for Sunday, Oct. 31
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY340-346 of Oct. 25; graphic series logo
 Load-Date: November 1, 1999

 

End of Document
