

The case of the coroner and the broken bone heads to jury
October 11, 1997, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 675 words
Byline: By AMY WESTFELDT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




A coroner with a reputation for finding suspicious deaths where others didn't is on trial for his professional life, accused of breaking a bone in a dead man's neck to make a suicide look like a murder.
The case of Claus Speth, which went to the jury Friday, has pitted some of the nation's best-known medical examiners against each other and revealed a political, ego-charged world of doctors who don't like being second-guessed.
At issue is the death of Ronald Puttorak, a 43-year-old accountant who was found hanging by bedsheets in his Essex County jail cell in 1993.
Puttorak's family suspected foul play rather than the official autopsy finding of suicide, and it hired Speth for help pursuing a possible wrongful-death lawsuit against the state.
"They missed something!" Speth shouted to an assistant shortly after examining the dead man's throat.
Speth claimed to have noticed a break in the small, U-shaped hyoid bone at the base of the tongue, an injury more consistent with a strangulation death than a hanging. He also said he found surrounding bleeding tissue, indicating the bone had broken when Puttorak was still alive.
The state medical examiner's office contends the bone was not broken until Speth examined it, and said no hemorrhaging tissue existed.
After Speth came under criminal investigation in the case, he was essentially abandoned by the people who hired him in the first place. Puttorak's family dropped him from the case and eventually accepted that it was a suicide after all.
Speth, 61, was charged with evidence-tampering, lying under oath and tampering with a witness. If convicted, he could get up to five years in prison. The jury deliberated four hours Friday before breaking for the weekend.
Prosecutor Glenn Goldberg told jurors at the end of the monthlong trial that Speth broke the bone in the body to advance the Puttorak's wrongful-death claims and make himself look like a forensic genius.
"Lawsuit. … Expert witness. Expert testimony. Money," Goldberg said, explaining the motive.
Defense attorney Gerald Krovatin said Speth was framed by colleagues who wanted to make him the villain. Someone either accidentally or deliberately broke the neck bone, then cut away the bleeding tissue Speth had found while examining the neck, the lawyer said.
"Was this tissue removed to make Dr. Speth look like a liar?" Krovatin asked. "Who's going to get indicted next for that?"
The case has drawn bitter lines in the small world of top coroners, pitting prosecution expert Michael Baden, a former New York City medical examiner, against defense expert Cyril Wecht, the coroner who became famous for disputing the single-bullet theory in the assassination of President Kennedy.
Baden testified that Speth asked him to intervene on his behalf with Dr. Geetha Natarajan, the then-acting state medical examiner who reported her suspicions about the broken bone to authorities.
Prosecutors said Speth had a vendetta against Natarajan and created a phony citizens group that mailed out critical letters about her. Speth's attorneys noted that Baden was a godfather to Natarajan's children and argued that Baden was biased in her favor.
Speth has had a prickly relationship with his colleagues over the years. He resigned as Gloucester County medical examiner in 1992, facing a bitter reappointment battle and accusations of poor conclusions and sloppy record-keeping.
Speth, as a free-lancer, later turned the tables on the medical examiners, uncovering two botched autopsies.
In 1993, Speth found two bullets in the brain of a high school teacher whose death had been ruled accidental. He also found that a woman whose 1992 death was ruled accidental was actually strangled, raped and sodomized.
Speth was so driven an investigator that the state's undertakers once demanded that he resign for grilling mourning relatives too harshly about their loved ones' deaths. At the time, Speth said he was "fed up with these unfair attacks on my job performance.
"I have never denied I get angry," he said. "My anger comes because I insist on excellence."
 Load-Date: October 11, 1997

 

End of Document
