

The landlords come to inspect the premises
May 11, 1997, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 689 words
Byline: AP By DEB RIECHMANN, Associated Press Writers
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body



MIKE FEINSILBER
 The president is mired in scandal. Congress spins its wheels, getting little done. That's the Washington in the news.
Yet Americans see beyond the political swamp. They come to Washington with their kids and their idealism in tow, and find pleasure and inspiration in the nation's capital that they can draw from no other place.
At the Lincoln Memorial, gym teacher Virginia Bloom, a visitor from Pennsylvania, bounds up the 56 steps, just for the fun of it.
At the Vietnam wall, second-grader Stephanie Ferrell reads aloud her two-page school report about a "long ago" war and how her granddad - "Pop-Pop" - didn't have to fight because he was deaf in one ear.
At Constitution Gardens, Californian Maggie Forman, a self-described "Orange County right-winger," says she'll visit the White House. But, she laughs, "just to see the house, not the occupant."
They put up with horrendous lines, these visiting Americans. They are herded about. They sit in the Senate gallery and watch one or two senators talk aimlessly to an empty room and a TV camera.
Most of what the tourists see deals with the dead and preserved past - the place Lincoln died, the Lindbergh airplane, statues of forgotten heroes on horseback.
Traffic is terrifying, parking a challenge, the subway a mystery. The museums are crowded and noisy.
And being a tourist can be stressful. Posing for a picture just steps from where Martin Luther King Jr. spoke of his dream at the Lincoln Memorial, a husband barks at his wife, struggling to find the shutter: "Don't you know where the button is? It's in the same spot that it's always been!"
Yet the visitors profess themselves highly satisfied, enlightened, uplifted by having been here.
It is a once-in-a-lifetime trip for many, like Andy and Sherry Depinet, who keep their toddler, Morgan, entertained with M&Ms while they wait to ride to the top of the Washington Monument.
On the drive in with their daughter, Depinet, an electrician at the Copperweld Steel mill in Mansfield, Ohio, told his wife: "It will be a vacation she'll never remember and we'll never forget."
The Washington of negativity, complexity, corruption and manipulation is not what draws Americans to their capital.
The Washington that attracts them is the one seen on picture postcards; it puts them in touch with a patriotism so deep-rooted it overpowers the day-to-day cynicism.
That Washington is the one that brought Doris Parker, 54, of Seattle. Diabetes is taking away her sight, and her two girlhood friends from Juliaetta Elementary School in Idaho wanted her to see the capital before her world went dark.
Standing at Lincoln's feet, she turned to marvel at the image of the Washington Monument shining in the waters of the reflecting pool. To herself, she whispered: "Isn't this something."
"We are inspired by the majesty of our country," said Pam Hall of Santa Barbara, Calif., another member of the Juliaetta "Three Amigos." She pauses. "It makes you forget all the petty bickering."
Visiting the Vietnam Veterans Memorial with its list of 58,209 names etched in black marble arouses deep feelings for teacher Virginia Meadows, who brought 54 third-graders from St. Mary's County, Md.
Like her pupils, she is too young to remember the war; still, she said, nodding toward the memorial, "It is hard for me to go there without crying."
Not everyone is so moved. One of Mrs. Meadows' charges, Nicole Bishop, 8, was singularly unimpressed by the White House.
"It was kind of boring, because all you get to do is look," she said between bites of a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. "It wasn't what I thought it would be because the ceilings were cracked." Also, she reported, the walls of the Blue Room aren't even blue, her favorite color.
A symbol of the presidency, the White House - even with beige wallpaper in the blue room - attracts lines of tourists, regardless of the politics of the occupant.
When Sherry Depinet, 27, was dating her future husband, she asked him what his religion was.
"Republican," he replied.
Still, the Depinets wouldn't leave Washington without stopping first in front of the White House to snap a picture of Morgan.
 Load-Date: May 11, 1997

 

End of Document
