

The Artists:Painter uses art to help protect the environment
May 23, 1997, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 606 words
Byline: By LUNA I. SHYR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEDONA, Ariz.
Body




Twenty-five years ago, when Curt Walters got bored painting in his studio, he packed up his easel and oils, headed for the Grand Canyon and planted himself at the edge of the stunning expanse.
It was the beginning of a love that would make Walters famous for his sweeping canyon landscapes. But as he studied his muse over the years, he noticed troubling changes in the quality of the air.
"I paint what I see and I started to notice drastic changes in my painting, in the texture and softness," Walters said. "I could tell which days were polluted, had pollen, were dusty because of pollutants and which were not.
"I found myself going to the canyon during the winter a lot and avoiding summers."
In 1993, Walters found a way to use his art to help protect the canyon - and the environment.
With his paintings fetching up to $ 42,000 apiece, Walters approached the Grand Canyon Trust, a regional group based in Flagstaff that is dedicated to preserving the natural wonders of the Colorado Plateau.
The plateau spans 130,000 square miles in Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico and Utah.
Walters told the trust he wanted to add paintings to the cash gifts he was donating.
"We were very pleased and honored he would do that," said Eric Howard, a trust spokesman. "It's an incredible benefit because he reaches audiences who may not be 'environmentalists.' Art lovers all of a sudden start to see the light."
Since then, Walters has donated about $ 12,000 to the trust. That's in addition to two paintings of the Grand Canyon - each worth about $ 25,000. He donated another painting to the National Park Service in 1994 to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the Grand Canyon National Park.
"I'm not running out there with the pickets and signs, but this sort of gave me a voice," said Walters, 46. "I grew up in the Southwest on the Colorado Plateau and I see a lot of things happening that I wish weren't happening."
A native of Farmington, N.M., Walters cited overdevelopment, dams and open-pit mining as some of the changes he finds regrettable. Walters has made his home for the past 17 years in Sedona, a town nestled among spectacular red-rock formations in central Arizona.
The artist's efforts enabled the Grand Canyon Trust to serve on a multistate commission that studies air quality problems in the West, said Howard, the trust spokesman. Walters' donations helped pay for the trust's representative to attend commission meetings.
A report last summer by the commission found that haze at the canyon during prime tourist season leaves the views at less than half what they would be under natural conditions.
The haze is apparent to Walters, who packs his canvases, oils and easel into the back of a weathered van and drives two hours north to the canyon about four times a month.
There he paints the canyon on canvases as large as 50-by-80 inches, capturing the shifting light and shadows with orange, red and yellow oils.
His work caught the eye of the Forbes magazine family last summer. The family invited Walters and 14 other landscape artists to paint the family ranch in Fort Garland, Colo. The resulting work was exhibited at the Forbes Gallery in New York in January.
Dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov, actor Robert Urich and basketball legend Kareem Abdul-Jabbar also own some of Walters' American Impressionist paintings.
Walters himself has his paintings hanging on virtually every wall in his home, an airy structure filled with colorful oils and large Asian vases.
"I think my paintings have allowed me to step into public groups and make them aware of what's happening to the Colorado Plateau," he said. "I don't need pickets - I have paintings."
 Load-Date: May 23, 1997

 

End of Document
