

The fall of the House that Ruth Built?
The Associated Press
October 18, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1039 words
Byline: JERRY SCHWARTZ, AP National Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




For the 33rd time, the World Series has come to that rare green diamond in the South Bronx - to a storied place where today's heroes share the field with legions of pinstriped ghosts.
This is Yankee Stadium. This is baseball Valhalla, the fabled arena of Gehrig and the Babe, DiMaggio and Dickey, Mantle and Berra.
But this may be the fall of The House That Ruth Built.
It doesn't have super boxes. The parking and approach roads aren't great. The neighborhood - well, it's well-lighted and secure, but it's still the South Bronx.
So principal owner George Steinbrenner has said he might desert the big ballpark in the Bronx. Perhaps the Yankees will move to New Jersey; perhaps the city will build a new park on Manhattan's West Side, behind Pennsylvania Station.
"It kind of shocks me, the idea of not having Yankee Stadium for baseball," says Philip Lucas, an associate professor of history at Cornell College in Iowa who has written about baseball and business.
But remember, New Yorkers have seen this before. The same wrecking ball destroyed Ebbets Field in Brooklyn, where the Dodgers were beloved, and Manhattan's Polo Grounds, where the Giants slew more diminutive teams.
And remember, we've all seen this before. Ghost ballparks are everywhere: Forbes Field in Pittsburgh, Sportsman's Park in St. Louis, Shibe Park and the Baker Bowl in Philadelphia, Crosley Field in Cincinnati, old Comiskey Park in Chicago - each one different and vivacious and much loved in its time.
"When there is no room for individualism in ballparks, then there will be no room for individualism in life," wrote baseball gadfly Bill Veeck.
The old ballparks, most of them built to replace fire-prone wooden stadiums in the early part of the century, were full of idiosyncrasies.
There was the Polo Grounds, shaped like a horseshoe - 277 and 256 feet down the lines, and 505 feet to center. Ebbets Field had a gorgeous marble rotunda at the entrance. Shibe Park had a 22-foot corrugated iron wall in right field - a "spite fence" erected by A's co-owner Jack Shibe so fans couldn't watch games from roofs across North 20th Street.
They called the outfield at the Baker Bowl "The Hump" because it had one - the Pennsylvania Railroad ran underneath it. (It also had a big billboard that announced "The Phillies Use Lifebuoy," and the fans rejoined, "But they still stink!")
In Cincinnati, 176 batters won free tailored suits by hitting the Spiedler Suit sign on a building beyond the left-field wall. In Brooklyn, a suit could be won by hitting the Abe Stark clothiers sign in right field (Abe's resulting fame got him elected borough president).
In those days, many Dodgers lived nearby, in Brooklyn's Bay Ridge section. And like the fans, they took the subway to the stadium.
Ebbets Field, like most of the old stadiums, was small by today's standards. "It was cozy, intimate, very colorful … You could sit in the last row and you were not far from the action," says Ralph Branca, star pitcher for the Dodgers in the 1940s and '50s.
Some of the action was in the stands. From Section 8, the Dodger Sym-Phony tooted and razzed opposing players, while "Howling" Hilda Chester wielded cowbells in center field.
Every stadium seemed to have its crazy fan. Shibe's was The Huckster, a fan with a deep voice who did not need to shout to unnerve opposing players. At Crosley Field, Harry Thobe danced during games, dressed in red and white from head to toe, parasol in hand and the sun gleaming off his 12 gold teeth.
Then, gradually, everything changed.
Each of the old stadiums "was built in ethnic, white, working-class neighborhoods that had a certain period of vitality and then went into decline," says Bruce Kuklick, a professor of history at the University of Pennsylvania.
And Kuklick, author of "To Every Thing a Season: Shibe Park and Urban Philadelphia, 1909-1976," says many stadiums declined with their neighborhoods. Others lacked amenities that newer stadiums could offer for all those fans who moved to the suburbs.
"When you have a clientele that doesn't come to the park by mass transit, then you need mass parking," Kuklick says.
At the same time, "Baseball in the first half of the century … was a much more local phenomenon than it is now," Kuklick says.
Television brought far-off teams into living rooms. Players move around more often, thanks to free agency; they rarely live in the city where they play, and almost never take public transportation. The intimate tie that cities and neighborhoods had with their teams was loosened.
During the 1960s and '70s, the one-of-a-kind playing fields in places like Pittsburgh, Philadelphia and Cincinnati were replaced by cookie-cutter, all-purpose stadiums, set upon acres of concrete parking lot. It wasn't the same.
"They leveled Forbes Field and replaced it with Three Rivers Stadium, and that stadium almost killed the Pirate franchise," says Philip J. Lowry, author of the ballpark book "Green Cathedrals."
So in the last few years, there has been a backlash. Starting with the celebrated Oriole Park at Camden Yards, there has been a move to return ballparks to the inner cities, if not to residential neighborhoods. The new ballparks have soul - charming dimensions and architectural elements.
It has happened in Cleveland and Arlington, Texas, and there are plans afoot in San Francisco, in Pittsburgh and, alas, in Detroit. Twice, in 1988 and 1990, fans have formed chains to hug Tiger Stadium, but if all goes according to plan the old arena will be replaced in 2000.
Fenway Park in Boston opened April 12, 1912, the same day as Tiger Stadium, and there's talk of razing its famous Green Monster, and building a new stadium. Only in Chicago does an old stadium thrive, anchoring a strong, stable neighborhood and giving joy to its Bleacher Bums. Wrigley Field's diamond, it seems, is forever.
But not necessarily Yankee Stadium's.
Bronx officials want to spend $ 535 million to refurbish the park and invigorate the neighborhood. A campaign is being waged to give voters the right to decide if they want to pay for a new stadium.
To baseball's true believers, a new Yankee Stadium would be heresy.
"This is sacred, hallowed ground, where Ruth and Gehrig and Mantle played," says Lowry. "This cannot be destroyed."
 Load-Date: October 18, 1998

 

End of Document
