

The hoe, the combine and now the Internet
March 19, 1997, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 518 words
Byline: By MATTHEW YI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TULARE, Calif.
Body




In the Internet's fast-paced cyberworld, what farmers don't know can hurt them, information specialists say.
"As more and more organizations get on the Internet, you would be at a competitive disadvantage if you don't have Internet access," said Harold Myers, president of an agriculture online service in Visalia, Calif. "Within three to five years, everyone will have an e-mail address. There's no way around that."
Myers' Associated Produce Services is poised to launch an Internet home page that will provide "all you need to know about the fresh fruit and vegetable industry."
"There's a whole lot of people in the industry who want to learn about the Internet but don't have the time or the inclination," he said. "With our site, they don't have to spend a lot of time. They just default (go directly) to our page and everything will be there for them."
Internet use in business has grown astronomically in the last few years and agriculture is no exception, said Jeff Ennen, general manager of the Advanced Technology Information Network at California State University-Fresno.
"Instead of surfing the Internet, we should harvest the Internet because there's just so much information and resource in there," Ennen told farmers at a recent equipment show. "One of the interesting things about the Internet is that you are only limited by your imagination."
Ennen's department - only about a year old - designs and maintains Internet sites for agricultural organizations.
One of Ennen's clients is the California Department of Food and Agriculture. At its site, farmers find everything from the latest information on California's recent floods to high-tech tips on irrigations systems.
Ennen also designs commercial sites like one for Diamond Walnut that features a cheese ball recipe.
"It's a wonderful idea to promote your products," Ennen said.
But marketing products online is not new.
"There's a wheelchair manufacturer in Fresno who has a web site where you can order specific parts on the Internet. You just fill out a form on your screen," Ennen said. "If it's possible for wheelchairs, it's certainly possible for agriculture."
In fact, some people who attended Ennen's seminar are thinking about doing just that.
"I'm just getting into it myself," said Paul Codorniz, whose family owns a dairy in Tulare County, Calif. "I want to find out if the Internet is a viable means to market dairy products."
Matt McEwen wants to set up a web site for his grandfather, who owns a citrus nursery. McEwen also said he is looking into being able to take purchase orders online.
"In about five years, I think everyone will be on the Internet in the agriculture industry," Ennen said. "There's been some real good working applications, not just your 'gee whiz, I can get the weather stuff."'
Although the number of farmers using the Internet has grown, it's hard to know just how much, Ennen said. So his department is writing a grant proposal to study how the Internet affects agriculture.
"If I were to say in 1987, 'Gee, I wonder what it would be like in 1997,' I never would have guessed it would be like this," Ennen said.
 Load-Date: March 19, 1997

 

End of Document
