

The real battle may be for the Democratic presidential nomination
The Associated Press
July 1, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: National Political
Length: 831 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




George W. Bush is threatening to put the GOP presidential nomination in the bank with a record-shattering fund-raising haul, and Al Gore faces tough a primary battle that could leave him financially and politically drained.
It was supposed to be the other way around.
The 2000 presidential campaign began with expectations that a dozen little-known GOP candidates would wage a bloody battle to face the Democratic vice president. Gore, backed by a popular president and the White House political machine, chased all but one of his Democratic rivals from the race before it began.
Six months later, Gore holds a wide lead in polls over former Democratic Sen. Bill Bradley, but his financial edge is ebbing. The aura of inevitability is gone.
Instead, a winning aura is gathering around Bush, whose lead in money, polls and endorsements is expanding every day.
"I think the Bush cash cow is a warning signal to all Democrats," said Democratic consultant David Axelrod, a Gore ally.
Bradley announced Wednesday that he raised more than $ 11 million. Though $ 7 million shy of Gore, the total virtually guarantees that the Hall of Fame basketball player will have the resources to compete with Gore deep into the primary season.
The immediate reaction was a subtle change of tactic in the Gore campaign, which has begun to sharpen its knives for a tougher-than-expected primary campaign.
"I'm not surprised Bradley can raise money," said Gore adviser Kiki Moore. "But going into the third quarter, things get much more difficult with no message and no ideas to propel him beyond that."
Even President Clinton joined the no-ideas chorus, noting that Bradley has said he won't outline his agenda until the fall. "I personally believe you should begin by saying why you want the job," he said at a news conference Thursday.
Clinton also followed the Gore party line by challenging Bush's plans to forgo federal money and not abide by spending caps. He said the historic move would put the Texas governor in line with Republican congressmen "unanimously hostile" to campaign finance reform.
Already looking ahead to the general election, Bush's aides say he may have no choice but to ignore the caps.
"A candidate coming out of Texas, especially one who people are claiming his views are not well known, would not be able to compete with a sitting vice president unless he had the resources to do so," spokesman David Beckwith said.
Gore allies say the vice president will need extra resources to compete against Bush.
"George Bush is of the same ilk as Newt Gingrich and Lee Atwater who specialize in negative advertising," Democratic Party chairman Joe Andrew said.
For the first time in years, the Democratic Party has more cash on hand than debt. Andrew said the party will be in a better position than ever before to help its nominee after the primary season - especially if Bush emerges unscathed with a bundle of cash and no spending limits.
If that happens, Andrew said the party will be prepared to mount an issue advertising campaign to counter what he expects to be an expensive Republican ad blitz.
"This is a game of chess," he said. "They're going to have to be more careful because they're looking at a revitalized party that is able to respond."
Bush leads by leaps and bounds in polls of Republican candidates after widening his advantage in June with his first campaign swing. He startled GOP rivals and Gore supporters Wednesday, announcing a fund-raising total of more than $ 36 million.
That is nearly 10 times as much as his closest GOP competitor and twice as much a Gore.
"Other than George Bush literally falling off the end of the earth somewhere in the Andes Mountains, I don't see how you can stop him," said GOP consultant Rich Galen, who dressed up with a little hyperbole the reaction to Bush's first four months in the race.
Ignoring spending caps in place since the 1970s would allow Bush to compete dollar-for-dollar with Steve Forbes, who is financing his GOP campaign out of his pocket.
Forbes is already airing television ads that have given him a modest boost in some state polls, but he is still considered a longshot.
If Bush wins the GOP race, ignoring the spending caps also would give him unprecedented freedom to spend money early to prepare for the general election.
Gore says he will abide by the spending caps. If Bradley forces him to compete deep into the primary season, he could win the nomination but be left in the same position Bob Dole found himself after locking up the 1996 GOP race: Broke.
Clinton, unchallenged in the 1996 Democratic primary, used his and his party's money to attract mainstream voters well before Dole.
"Busting the caps gives Bush the opportunity to position himself in the race and perhaps position Gore as well," Axelrod said. "But I don't think it will be determinative. If nothing else, this will spur greater giving and more of a sense of urgency about Gore."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Ron Fournier is The Associated Press' chief political writer.
 Load-Date: July 1, 1999

 

End of Document
