

The Lowering Of the Prime Leaves The Average Joe Unexcited
February 1, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 682 words
Byline: By KAREN SCHWARTZ, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The prime rate has dropped. Borrowing money is cheaper. We'll feel more confident and do more buying.
That's the theory, anyhow.
On Thursday, a day after the Federal Reserve cut interest rates for the second time in seven weeks, people shopping for mortgages were pleased.
Marshal R. Korman, who owns a small insurance company, sold his condo and made an offer on a new house in the Long Island suburbs of New York. On Thursday, he found out it had been accepted.
"It's extra special for me," he said, explaining he bought his condominium seven years ago when interest rates were 11.5 percent, and expects to get a 6.5 percent mortgage on his new house.
"It's my feeling that interest rates are probably as low as they are going to go. It wasn't the absolute deciding factor (in buying the house), but it didn't hurt."
Kaie, who owns a small Manhattan diner and like many others interviewed for this story wouldn't provide his full name, hopes the rates will drop even further so that he can afford to buy a house. But the flip side, he notes, is that his money earns less interest at the bank.
"I don't like the fact that you take the money out at high interest and when you put it in, you get low interest," he said. "I remember I used to get 14 or 15 percent interest on a six-month CD. Now it's 4 or 5 percent."
Of course, what he doesn't remember is that the prime rate reached 21.5 percent in December 1980, compared to the 8.25 percent that took effect nationwide Thursday. So 15 years ago, his certificates of deposit may have earned high interest, but the interest on his loans, if he could get any then, cost much more.
The Federal Reserve rate reductions mean banks can now borrow more cheaply, and as a result, they lowered their prime lending rates. Many home equity loans and credit card rates are tied to the prime, so those borrowing costs also come down.
Not everyone was impressed.
"It has no reality in relation to the real world," said David, who sells estate jewelry in midtown Manhattan. "That's money for the the big boys who borrow for production."
"People are worried about jobs," he added. "If they're worried about jobs, they don't want to spend money."
Others are not willing to shift money out of investments with falling returns.
John Berenzy, a poet and musician from Woodstock, N.Y., took out a 13-month CD last year that has a 6.20 percent yield. If he were to take out that same CD today, it would yield only 4.28 percent.
He's pleased with his investment, and he's also aware that the stock market has been reacting well to the lowered prime. But with his wife expecting a baby in April, he's hesitant to try to make a quick buck.
"It's very hard for me to take money that I've spent my whole life saving and do anything risky with it. I'd be more likely to do that if I was a bachelor," he said.
Deborah Huggins, a clothing store manager with a 15-year-old stepson, said she'd be pleased if the interest rates stay low until he's through with college, but finds the uncertainty of it all disconcerting.
"You can't really be positive. You can't really plan as much as you'd like to cause you can't predict what's going to happen."
Heather Fischer, a music therapist at Beth Israel Hospital, is paying off her school loans right now. She's not sure whether the lower interest rate will have a positive or negative effect on her.
"I feel like it's made purposefully confusing so you don't really know what's going on," she said.
With an MBA in finance, Julie knows that the lower interest rates are going to help her. She and her husband are in the process of refinancing their home in New Milford, N.J., and expect to save about $ 200 a month.
"We had originally missed the boat about two years ago when interest rates had bottomed out," she said, explaining they couldn't find a house they wanted when the prime was as low as 6.25 percent.
They bought about 15 months ago, and "now it seems like the door is open again."
She doesn't think that interest rates will drop again, so "we kind of decided that this decrease was going to be the one."
"We didn't want to get greedy," she said.
 Load-Date: February 2, 1996

 

End of Document
