

The longer the exile, the less likely a Tyson return
July 9, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 707 words
Byline: By JIM LITKE, AP Sports Writer
Body




The only book with fewer pages in it than "Mike Tyson's Remaining Boxing Skills" might be "Mike Tyson's Guide to Dining Out." It's the difference between slim and none.
Most people have focused on how long the 31-year-old Tyson will be banished from boxing when the Nevada State Athletic Commission decides his fate today. But the bottom-line issue is whether he can survive as a fighter in exile for any length of time at all.
The curiosity factor and a carnival atmosphere will sell tickets whenever and wherever Tyson's return to the ring takes place. But only once. The second time will require a caliber of boxing Tyson may no longer be able to produce. And the longer he is out, the consensus seems to be, the less likely Tyson is to produce it.
"Anything over 12 months would be disastrous," veteran trainer Emanuel Steward said.
Steward trained Evander Holyfield briefly, but does most of his work with quick-handed middleweights like Tommy Hearns and Oscar De La Hoya. He predicted years ago that Tyson wasn't built for the long run, comparing his bruising, straight-ahead approach to Joe Frazier.
"Those types, they usually don't fight past 27, anyway," Steward said. "They slow down."
Angelo Dundee, whose perspective is especially useful in this case, was even more pessimistic. "I don't think you will see the same Tyson again," he said.
Dundee trained Muhammad Ali, who was stripped of his license in the prime of his career for refusing induction into the Army in 1966. He doesn't see Tyson regaining anything close to his old form.
"His skills will definitely erode," Dundee said. "They already eroded during his time in prison."
Not surprisingly, an even gloomier forecast was offered by a third veteran trainer, Kevin Rooney.
"I'm willing to play devil's advocate," he said, "even though personally I think he's done."
Rooney, it should be noted, has an ax to grind. A disciple of the late Cus D'Amato, he trained Tyson during the salad days of 1987-88, but left the team following a bitter split early the following year. He was awarded $ 4.4 million by a jury in his breach-of-contract lawsuit against Tyson in September, 1996, but that was overturned by a federal court judge. Rooney is appealing.
"Nine years ago, Don King got hold of Mike and he went from potential greatness to absolute idiocy.
"The only way he can come back is to fire everybody around him right now, go up into the mountains for six months, come down and hire me. Then he's got to go back to training with the kind of desire and devotion he used to have.
"But if that happened … well then," Rooney paused, "I'd love to see it."
Rooney is not the only one ambivalent about Tyson and his future.
Forty-seven percent of the people surveyed in a recent poll for ABC-TV's "Nightline" wanted him banned from boxing for life. But 31 percent said a temporary suspension was good enough. And even though state boxing commissioners around the country said they will honor Nevada's decision, some, like New Jersey's Larry Hazzard, have gone on record saying a two-year ban would be plenty.
Tyson's future fell into the hands of Nevada's boxing regulators in the first place because he tried to make a late-night snack of Holyfield's ears three rounds into their June 28 rematch. Some people interpreted the biting - especially the second instance, which got him disqualified - as proof that Tyson was a washed-up fighter going in.
That school of thinking holds that Tyson came into the rematch no different and no better prepared, that he found out once more Holyfield had more resolve and resorted to biting when he realized he couldn't win.
Steward didn't buy that. He didn't defend Tyson's tactics. But he did say that he thought the head-butting that resulted in Tyson suffering deep cuts in both fights caused him to panic. "He realized his whole career was on the line and he just freaked out."
Rooney had a similar take on the fight.
"I don't buy the business about him trying to get disqualified. Just look at the replay when he gets the warning. If you know him at all, you know what he's thinking: 'I'm Mike Tyson. I'd like to see the somebody who's big enough to disqualify me."'
Well, he finally found them. The tough part now is convincing them not to end his boxing life.
 Load-Date: July 9, 1997

 

End of Document
