

The Gingrich tape and its route to the Justice Department
January 16, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 835 words
Byline: By LARRY MARGASAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The audio tape of House Speaker Newt Gingrich plotting strategy traveled in a sealed envelope from Florida to Washington, like part of an intelligence mission.
By the time it arrived at the Justice Department last Monday night, 22 days after the surreptitious taping of the telephone call between Gingrich and other Republicans, the operation's cover was blown.
As a result, the tape is part of an ethics investigation caught up in bitter partisan fighting. The committee Democrat who received it has stepped aside from the Gingrich case. A Republican who was itching to get off the House ethics committee bowed out too, to maintain the panel's political balance. The FBI has begun a criminal investigation.
The phone call was heard on a scanner and taped in a car. The tape was delivered to a congresswoman's Florida office. In an envelope sealed with packing tape, it was mailed to the lawmaker's Washington office. There, it was handed back to the couple who made it.
They carried it to the ethics committee, and gave it to the ranking Democrat. A letter from the couple, accompanying the sealed package, said they understood they had legal immunity. It didn't say who made that promise.
Eventually the tape wound up in the hands of the press, and The New York Times ran a transcript.
The tape has become part of the political theater that has punctuated the final weeks of the ethics investigation.
Outside counsel James M. Cole's report was to be finished today, but ethics panel Chairwoman Nancy Johnson, R-Conn., told reporters Wednesday: "It takes a while … to print it. You would not expect to see it tomorrow."
John and Alice Martin of Fort White, Fla., heard the conversation on the Radio Shack scanner in their car while on a Christmas shopping trip. Once they realized the conversation they were picking up was of Gingrich discussing the Republican response to his admitted ethics violations, they recorded it on a hand-held machine.
They called Rep. Karen Thurman, D-Fla., and on Jan. 2 took the tape to her Gainesville office. There, the tape was placed in a sealed envelope, wrapped in packing tape and mailed to her Washington office.
According to House Democratic Whip David Bonior, Gingrich's congressional nemesis, Thurman asked members of Bonior's staff for advice. They recommended that her constituents forward the tape to appropriate law enforcement agencies or other officials, including the ethics committee.
The Martins, meanwhile, came to Washington for the swearing-in of a new Democratic House member, Allen Boyd of Florida, and said they ran into Thurman at a reception for him.
The next day, they went to her office and picked up the package. It was still sealed.
The Martins had a cover letter to go with the tape. Addressed to McDermott, the letter said in part: "We live in the 5th Congressional District and attempted to give the tape to Congresswoman Karen Thurman. We were advised by her to turn the tape directly over to you. We also understand that we will be granted immunity."
The tape was delivered to McDermott at the committee.
Federal law prohibits intentional interception of calls from cellular telephones and also the dissemination of any such recording - if the person transmitting it knew the recording was illegal.
The penalty for a first offense of intentionally intercepting or distributing the contents of a cellular phone calls is a fine of up to $ 5,000. The government can also obtain a court order barring repeated violations.
The Martins' attorney, Larry Turner, said at a press conference the couple could be liable for illegally taping the call.
James F. Rogers, a Washington attorney specializing in communications law, said Thurman could defend her role by saying she didn't disclose the contents and was not asking anyone to do so.
He said if McDermott had simply given the tape to the committee, "a court would be hard-pressed" to find that illegal.
But McDermott's role is unclear. He delivered it to the committee Monday night - after the Martins' had said publicly he was the person they gave the tape to - but Mrs. Johnson, the chairwoman, directed that it go directly to the criminal division of the Justice Department.
By then a partial transcript already had been published in the Times.
McDermott stepped aside from the investigation Wednesday night. He said Mrs. Johnson committed a grave error by not treating the tape as evidence. He said the conversation between Gingrich and Republican leaders breached an agreement that barred the speaker from orchestrating a response to his ethical wrongdoing. Republicans say the transcript, to the contrary, shows that Gingrich was following the agreement.
Wednesday, Rep. David Hobson, R-Ohio, got his wish. After telling everyone who would listen how much he wanted to get off the ethics committee, he now had his chance.
McDermott's removal left five Republicans and four Democrats on a panel that is supposed to be evenly balanced. It was clear that a Republican would have to leave.
Hobson jumped at the opportunity.
 Load-Date: January 16, 1997

 

End of Document
