

The GOP primary of the Democrats' dreams
The Associated Press
March 1, 2000, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 865 words
Byline: By DAVID ESPO, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Not long ago, Republicans looked forward to a long, enervating campaign - for the Democrats. They dreamt of George W. Bush marching through the GOP presidential primaries, emerging unscarred and flush with cash.
Then the voters showed up.
Their story line, sketched in caucuses and primaries since the end of January, is almost the precise opposite. In the process, rifts are opening up in the electoral coalition the GOP rode to victories from the 1980s until the mid-1990s.
Thus, Vice President Al Gore is in position to wrap up the Democratic nomination - in practical reality if not in delegate strength - by the time the votes are counted next week in contests in 15 states.
Bill Bradley, whose insurgent's campaign soared in November and December, fell short in Iowa and New Hampshire. He's fallen further virtually everywhere in the polls since then and is in search of a comeback. Without one, he faces the possibility of a coast-to-coast rout next week, unless he unexpectedly decides to quit sooner.
"I come here today to ask you to unite this Democratic Party and let's get on with the task of winning the election," said Gore recently in Colorado, beginning to make the type of comments typically uttered by the man at the top of the ticket.
On the Republican side, Bush and Sen. John McCain are locked in an increasingly contentious battle, charging each other with negative campaigning and battling over allegations of religious intolerance. In the meantime, the Texas governor's $70 million campaign treasury dwindles.
Shut out in primaries in Arizona and Michigan last week, Bush rebounded to win in Virginia, North Dakota and Washington state on Tuesday. In victory, he swiped at McCain's recent criticism of Pat Robertson and Jerry Falwell. "We are uniting our party without compromising principles," said the Texas governor. "We are expanding our base without destroying our foundations."
"It was expected to be the other way around," said Ed Gillespie, a Republican strategist who helped craft the "Contract With America" that helped fuel the GOP takeover of Congress in 1994 - the last time the party claimed a clear-cut victory in national elections.
And it's the Democrats who are enjoying the show.
"I'm hopeful it continues for days if not weeks," Senate Democratic leader Tom Daschle said of the GOP race.
Democrats are particularly drawn to the events of recent days, in which McCain criticized Robertson and Falwell as "agents of intolerance." The two men are leaders of the religious right, whose votes and campaign donations have powered GOP victories in the past.
"We think the public introspection on the part of Republicans is very healthy for the country and certainly for the Democrats," Daschle told reporters with a smile.
His counterpart, Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, hadn't looked nearly as cheerful a few moments before when he was asked a similar question.
McCain's comment "where he … starts being specifically critical of individuals was unhelpful," said the Mississippi Republican. "I also think that if you convey in any way that you don't have religious tolerance you should correct that very quickly," he said, in apparent reference to Bush's visit to Bob Jones University, a school that bans interracial dating and whose officials have been accused of anti-Catholic sentiments.
Still, Lott added, "I view it all also as an education process and I believe that the Republican nominee will be a stronger candidate in the fall after having been through a primary where you learn some lessons."
In the meantime, the Republican debate proceeds quite noisily.
McCain says it's about time somebody questioned basic political assumptions of his own party. Without fundamental changes, he says, "we will again suffer electoral defeats as we have in the last two presidential elections and the last two congressional elections."
Thus, he reads Robertson out of the party, says of Bush, "He is a Pat Robertson Republican," and points to polls showing that he, McCain, would be the stronger candidate in the fall.
The irony is that Bush read the same election returns McCain did, and asked some of the same questions - but more tentatively - in the run-up to the primaries.
He staked out his ground as a "compassionate conservative," publicly parted company with the GOP leadership in the House on a proposal that would have spread out a lump-sum tax break for the poor, and downplayed his opposition to abortion.
At the same time, party leaders flocked to his side because they, too, were fearful of losing another election.
Then, on shaky ground after losing the New Hampshire primary, Bush did what Republican front-runners have done in the past. He looked to South Carolina to steady him, and headed for Bob Jones University.
He won South Carolina handily. But McCain countered three days later with a victory in Michigan, home to a heavy Catholic vote, after his campaign warned voters in prerecorded telephone conversations that Bush had visited a place known for anti-Catholic bigotry.
The debate has raged since, the Democrats pleased to look on and hope it continues.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - David Espo has covered presidential politics for The Associated Press since 1980.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo XPD109
 Load-Date: March 2, 2000

 

End of Document
