

The 2004 primaries: trying to slow the states' rush to the front
The Associated Press
March 15, 2000, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 788 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




While Al Gore and George W. Bush campaign for the White House, the Democratic and Republican parties both are looking at changes in the presidential primary system to keep future nominations from being settled so swiftly that voters lose interest.
Indeed, keeping them interested is the challenge now facing the vice president and the Texas governor after both beat challengers in coast-to-coast primaries last week, before capturing on Tuesday night the delegate majorities that will make them the nominees.
Bush said voters may go into a period of political hibernation in the months ahead, but he and Gore can't afford a campaign standstill in the longest head-on contest for the White House.
The front-loaded primary and caucus schedule, which got that way as states moved up their primaries in order to gain influence in the campaign, enabled the 2000 nominees to clinch delegate victories earlier than previous candidates, except unopposed presidents seeking renomination.
Six states voted in the no-contest campaign Tuesday, bringing to 28 the number of states awarding delegates in one party or both in just eight days, since the Democrats resumed voting.
Until the first Tuesday in March, only Iowa and New Hampshire were allowed to start selecting Democratic delegates.
Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, Tennessee, Texas and Oklahoma helped Bush and Gore clinch the nominations Tuesday night, in voting that reflected an attempt dating from 1988 to have the South vote on the same day so as to strengthen its regional hand. Three of the states that were part of that combination have since moved up a week, and Florida party leaders already are talking about doing so in 2004 so that their primary won't be, as one said, irrelevant.
Gore swept the March 7 primaries, ending Bill Bradley's challenge. Bush won the major Republican contests that day, and John McCain dropped his campaign.
So a week later was too late to do anything but ratify the outcomes.
Before this campaign started, the Republican and Democratic national committees began weighing the nomination process for the next one, with panels considering whether to seek a more measured pace for the 2004 primary calendar and beyond. Even if they decide to try, history and political reality put the odds against them.
There's been talk of change for more than 20 years, perhaps to a system of regional primaries, which is one of the options now.
But the obstacles that always have blocked changes in the primary process are still there. Both parties would have to sign off on the same plan to make it work. Or Congress would have to step in where it has been wary of treading, and enact a law creating a presidential primary framework, over the certain protests of the states.
Both parties have tried before, and the Democrats did set rules on when a state can vote, with penalties to enforce them. They let Iowa and New Hampshire go first, and require that the rest of their delegates be awarded between the first Tuesday in March and the second Tuesday in June.
Republicans tried to discourage primary leapfrogging by offering a 10 percent delegate bonus to reward states that would wait. That didn't work because extra delegates are no lure when they won't be chosen until the contest is over.
So to change the system, the Republicans would have to tell their state parties what to do, which goes against their grain.
"That's a big philosophical hurdle in our party," said Republican National Committee Chairman Jim Nicholson. But he added that it should be confronted.
"I think change is badly needed," Nicholson said in an interview. "If we don't change it, we're headed inexorably to a national primary day, and I think that would be bad."
Without change, he said smaller and later states will have neither influence nor an incentive to turn out voters. "It's just going to continue to get worse until we do something," Nicholson said.
"The goal has got to be voter participation," said Democratic National Committee Chairman Joe Andrew. "Not just a rigid system that tries to spread things out."
Andrew said timing isn't the only issue. He said the Democrats took a major step to open the process by barring winner-take-all primaries and awarding delegates in proportion to the popular vote. Had the Republicans done so, he said McCain would still be competing.
Nicholson said the GOP committee studying the primary system is looking at that question. But ending winner-take-all rules is another matter. In New York, where Bush won the primary last week, Gov. George Pataki is now proposing to change to a winner-take-all GOP primary in 2004.
EDITOR'S NOTE: Walter R. Mears has reported on Washington and national politics for The Associated Press for more than 35 years.
 Load-Date: March 16, 2000

 

End of Document
