

This time, the bottom of the ticket could make the difference
The Associated Press
October 7, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 739 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: DANVILLE, Ky.
Body




In the story of the two brothers, one ran away to sea, one became vice president, and neither was heard from ever again. That sometimes has been the lot of vice presidential nominees, too.
But not this time. Democrat Joseph Lieberman and Republican Dick Cheney are not the low visibility campaign figures prior running mates often have been. In the closely rated contest between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, the running mates could turn out to be crucial players.
It is often said that people vote for president, not for vice president. But in a contest so close that a percentage point or two, or a state or two, could turn the outcome, the No. 2 nominees could be factors.
They matched performances Thursday night in their vice presidential debate at Centre College, arguing differences firmly but politely, and with a collegial tone, before the largest audience they will have all campaign.
"I thought we had a very good night," Cheney said, and the first poll conducted after the debate agreed with his assessment. The ABC poll showed 43 percent thought he had won, 24 percent said Lieberman had done better, and 27 percent rated them even.
More broadly, the vice presidential campaign advantage so far has been Gore's with Lieberman, the first Jew nominated on a national ticket. The ebullient senator from Connecticut who called his role a miracle seems to be thriving in it.
Cheney was the safe choice, the running mate Bush's people said he picked because he was more concerned about governing than about campaigning. But candidates do not get to the former without the latter, and Cheney has proved a routine campaigner at best.
He was thrown off stride from the start by questions about his votes against popular programs as a conservative congressman from Wyoming. Next came criticism of his big money retirement deal with the oil supply corporation he had headed, and the question of whether he would forgo millions of dollars worth of stock options were he elected vice president. He finally said he would forfeit the options.
Then he was dogged by questions about skimpy donations to charity and about not voting in 14 elections, most of them on local offices or issues, in the five years he had lived in Dallas.
Lieberman came to the ticket with his own set of problems, but managed to duck or talk his way around them. He swallowed his support for test runs with school vouchers, his sometime skepticism about affirmative action, his backing of private investments as a part of Social Security, his criticism of making prescription drug benefits part of Medicare. These positions differed from Gore's.
Lieberman also had problems early on when he made religion part of his standard campaign speech, pressing it to the point that the Anti-Defamation League said he was overdoing it.
Lieberman also is running for re-election to the Senate in Connecticut, with an overwhelming lead. The dual role makes congressional Democrats uneasy because if he and Gore win, Lieberman will resign the seat and the Republican governor will appoint a Republican to the Senate.
Lieberman brought a special asset to the Gore ticket: his standing as the Senate moralist who was one of the first Democrats to denounce Clinton in the Monica Lewinsky scandal. While Lieberman scolded the president in a Senate speech in 1998, he voted in 1999 against convicting Clinton of the impeachment charges.
A Washington Post poll published Sept. 30 showed Bush and Gore even on the question of which would do a better job of improving the nation's moral values but the Democrat's rating shot up to a 10-point advantage when Lieberman's name was part of the question.
Vice presidential nominees have been election factors before. Without Lyndon Johnson, John F. Kennedy probably could not have won crucial Texas. Bob Dole's harsh campaign hatchet work in 1976 may have cost Republican votes. Dan Quayle's challenged qualifications probably did the same in 1988, but George Bush won anyway. Gore was an adroit ally and campaign companion for Clinton in 1992.
Incidentally, that observation about the vanishing vice president came from one - Thomas Marshall, who served under Woodrow Wilson. He's the man who ventured another bit of vice presidential wisdom:
"What this country needs is a really good five-cent cigar."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears has reported on Washington and national politics for The Associated Press for more than 35 years.
 Load-Date: October 8, 2000

 

End of Document
