

Troubling question: Is the man with the badge a street-gang member?
February 10, 1997, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 899 words
Byline: By MIKE ROBINSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




First, a federal grand jury charged seven police tactical officers - elite, front-line troops in the war on drugs - with plotting to shake down undercover agents posing as drug pushers.
Then, two days into Chicago's worst police scandal in a decade, there was a fresh bombshell:
Prosecutors accused one of the indicted officers of playing both sides of the street - both cop and street-gang leader.
"Edward Lee Jackson is a high-ranking leader of the Conservative Vice Lords street gang," prosecutors said in a memo asking a court to deny bail.
It was the latest sign that the 13,500-member Chicago Police Department has been penetrated by members or close associates of the city's drug-selling street gangs.
In a sense, it's not surprising. Old hands scoff at the notion that gang infiltration of the police is a new threat, noting that the mob has pulled the strings on a few rotten apples in the police department since the time of Al Capone.
Chicago has an estimated 30 active criminal gangs with perhaps 50,000 hard-core members. With so much gang activity, authorities say, some gang members are bound to slip through the department's screening system.
It's a potential nightmare for police. The gangs, organized like corporations and led largely by middle-aged career criminals, sell millions of dollars worth of heroin and cocaine annually. Competition for market share most often makes work for the morgue - police say 28 percent of Chicago's 789 homicides last year were gang-related.
When gang members wear badges, the possibilities for sabotage are endless.
"If there's a shooting, for example, for the gangs to have someone on the inside who could get the names of witnesses before the investigation is even over - to me, that's a scary thought," says Jack Hynes, head of the gang unit in the Cook County state's attorneys office.
The latest scandal followed a 13-month FBI and police investigation that focused on a stationhouse in the heart of the West Side's Austin district, for decades a haunt of the Vice Lords street gang.
Officials say a photo found in Jackson's locker at the Austin stationhouse shows him socializing with Conservative Vice Lords.
Jackson's attorney, Arthetta Joan McClain-Hill, denies that allegation and scoffs at the notion that her 26-year-old client is a member of the Conservative Vice Lords, a branch of the larger gang.
But Jackson wouldn't be the first gang affiliate to join the force.
The North Side Shakespeare District was the object of a shakeup in 1995 after the Chicago Sun-Times reported that police assigned there were also members of the Latin Kings street gang. In a three-year span, at least 15 officers were forced to resign, charged with gang-related crimes or investigated for membership in a street gang.
And last March, former policewoman Sonia Irwin was convicted along with seven members of the Gangster Disciples gang in a conspiracy involving millions of dollars worth of cocaine. She had been assigned to the department's gang crimes unit.
One problem is that the neighborhoods that produce gang members - such as the South Side's tumble-down Englewood area, spawning ground of the Gangster Disciples - often produce police officers as well. Officers who come back to enforce the law often find childhood friends standing on the drug corners.
Ms. Irwin was the childhood sweetheart of a man prosecutors call the No. 2 leader of the Gangster Disciples - the city's largest gang and one that authorities say now has branches in 38 states.
Several other cities awash in drug money - Miami, New Orleans and New York - are in the throes of police scandals. But those cases haven't turned up gang members doubling as police officers.
"I believe Chicago and Washington are pretty unique in that respect," says James Fife, a former New York policeman and now a professor of criminal justice at Temple University. He says a policewoman-gang member was found "riding shotgun" for a major drug pusher in the nation's capital.
But Chicago State University criminal justice Professor George Knox, however, says his own nationwide surveys of gang members have turned up numerous tales of gang infiltration.
"I think it's all over the place," says Knox.
Chicago police, who have prided themselves on increasing professionalism of the department in recent years, say they screen applicants to make sure they have no criminal records and a clean work history.
They say they carefully interview references and neighbors before letting applicants into the police academy. But some applicants are too young to have a work history, and references and neighbors can always lie - especially in neighborhoods where crossing the gang can mean trouble.
To gain tighter control, the department will require its next batch of rookies to have two years of college and increase the minimum age to 23.
Since gangs are defined as criminal organizations, being a member automatically bars applicants from joining the force.
But freedom of association guaranteed by the Constitution limits how far city officials can go. "A brother or a sister who is a gang member doesn't preclude being hired," says department spokesman Paul Jenkins.
"I think there are gang members in every walk of life and so probably there are gang members in most lines of work," says Jenkins. "The difference at the police department is that we will actively seek them out and will move to end their employment."
 Load-Date: February 10, 1997

 

End of Document
