

TV spies of the '60s are on the ratings case at 'Diagnosis Murder'
November 12, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 943 words
Byline: By LYNN ELBER, AP Television Writer
Dateline: MALIBU, Calif.
Body



Nov. 11
 The set of "Diagnosis Murder" is a nest of spies.
The blonde in black, the dapper British chap, the wiry man with the guarded air - we know who they are, and we know why they're here: to take advantage of that tender spot in our hearts for TV characters of the past.
Barbara Bain, a k a Cinnamon Carter of "Mission: Impossible," Patrick Macnee of "The Avengers" and Robert Culp of "I Spy" are conspiring to increase the audience for Dick Van Dyke's mystery series during this month's ratings "sweeps."
The 9 p.m. EST Thursday episode on CBS, also featuring "Man from U.N.C.L.E." star Robert Vaughn (absent this particular afternoon of filming), is a '60s flashback that TV networks dub "stunt casting" and actors call a lark.
It's certainly effective exploitation. When Bob Newhart and Judd Hirsch were joined on "George & Leo" recently by 20 costars from their old series, the freshman comedy enjoyed its best ratings so far.
"Diagnosis Murder" has been particularly adept at the game, shaping episodes around TV favorites including Andy Griffith of "Matlock" and Mike Conners of "Mannix" and enjoying a ratings boost each time.
In the latest recycling effort, corporate synergy proved useful. Bain could reprise her "Mission: Impossible" role because the rights are within the Viacom Inc. family, which produces "Diagnosis Murder."
The other three TV spies, lacking similar connections, play newly written characters. In the episode, Carter comes out of retirement to help Dr. Sloan (Van Dyke) protect a young colleague's father, a former CIA agent (Culp), from assassination.
The villain: either Macnee, an international security expert, or government bureaucrat Vaughn. Also aboard for the ride is Phil Morris, son of Bain's late "Mission: Impossible" co-star Greg Morris.
Only Bain and Van Dyke, it seems, had worked together before. On the "Dick Van Dyke Show," she played the fianc Dee he dumps to marry Mary Tyler Moore.
Stunt casting may be a network gimmick, but Van Dyke offers no apologies for going along.
"I love it. I have some peers on the set who can reminisce with me. I'm the oldest one around (on 'Diagnosis'); I try to recollect things, and nobody else remembers," he said, flashing a wide smile.
"The audience that watches our show are of a vintage that they love to see these old people back - I say 'old people,' including myself," Van Dyke added hastily, wary of giving offense to his guest stars.
All right, we're ready to cry "U.N.C.L.E." and admit to being of the vintage that grew up with Cinnamon et al. So meeting the husky-voiced Bain, the courtly Macnee and Culp, still tennis bum trim, was more than a bit of a kick.
There's a coziness to nostalgia, of course, even when it's a TV memory you're summoning and not a real-life one. Add to the charm the possibility of getting these espionage (and show business) veterans to spill a few secrets.
Culp recounted taking an idea for an action show first to friend Carl Reiner and then to Reiner's actor-producer buddy, Sheldon Leonard. It was 1964.
"Leonard told me 'I like your idea, kid, but I like mine better. I can tell it to you in two sentences: Two guys who are spies for the U.S. government travel around the world posing as a pro tennis player and his trainer. One of them is black.' "
"He was right," Culp said. "I Spy," with Bill Cosby as the first black actor to star in a TV series, aired from 1965 to 1968 on NBC.
Bain's ability to remain cool under pressure was tested from the outset with "Mission: Impossible."
"The final approval, which most people don't know, was Lucy (Lucille Ball), because she owned the show. So I had to bounce over to her bungalow on the Paramount lot and be approved," Bain recalled.
"At the time, they wanted you to bring in a piece of film you had just done, and the last one I'd done was a comedy. But I was not going to walk into Lucille Ball's bungalow with a comedy. So I went in without anything, just me, and she said 'Looks great to me.' "
Carter reigned from 1966 to 1969 on the spy drama, and Bain believes she fits as nicely in a '90s setting.
"She was probably the first woman (character) on television who was there with the big boys, who was intelligent, who could carry her own in a situation and didn't say, 'Yes, dear, no dear."' Macnee, who played Jonathan Steed opposite a succession of female costars (with Diana Rigg the first and best), has strong ties to "The Avengers" - whether fighting with apparent relish over rerun royalties or writing a book on the series.
It's a role he almost lost before filming began.
"They said, 'And you carry a gun, of course.' And I said no, I don't. I've been in WWII for five years and I've seen most of my friends blown to bits and I'm not going to carry a gun. They said, 'What are you going to carry?' I thought frantically and said an umbrella."
Macnee, with a cameo in the upcoming "Avengers" film, couldn't resist offering accessory advice to the new Steed, Ralph Fiennes.
"I said to him 'You're not going to play it with an umbrella and a bowler hat. … This is the '90s. You don't need to weigh yourself down with all that color; I only invented it because they were going to fire me.'
"'Oh, yes, I am,"' Macnee quoted Fiennes as saying.
Who says those young stars don't respect tradition?
---
Elsewhere in television …
IT'S ACES: David Hyde Pierce and Sela Ward are co-hosts for the 19th annual CableAce Awards, honoring the best in cable programming. The ceremony, live on TNT at 9 p.m. EST Saturday, will be in Los Angeles' Wiltern Theatre. The diverse group of presenters includes actors Helen Mirren and Kevin Bacon, comedian Chris Rock, boxer Evander Holyfield and newsman Walter Cronkite.
 Load-Date: November 12, 1997

 

End of Document
