

Tyson vs. Nevada athletic commission the best bout of the weekend
The Associated Press
September 16, 1998, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 744 words
Byline: By JIM LITKE, AP Sports Writer
Body




The heavyweight champion of the world fights Saturday night in Atlanta. A much better bout will take place a dozen hours earlier on the other side of the country.
That one pits Mike Tyson against the same five members of the Nevada State Athletic Commission who took away his boxing license in July 1997. From the look of things, Tyson will be lucky to get a fair fight.
Every time he gets into another scrape, newspapers around the country run an agate type-sized list alongside the story chronicling all Tyson's past transgressions. And if the list the commissioners have taped to their desk is current, the only thing his exile has demonstrated is that Tyson is still just as destructive outside the ring as inside it.
Tyson is on probation stemming from a 1992 rape conviction, but it hasn't cramped his style. On the contrary. He is facing a civil suit over an incident last March in a restaurant in which two women claim he turned a table over on them. And during an aborted attempt to get New Jersey to license him, Tyson blurted an obscenity to his attorney toward the end of the hearing, proving his patience is as limited as his vocabulary.
Those incidents would have been trouble enough for most guys. But Tyson being Tyson, he had to double the ante before sitting down at the table in Las Vegas.
According to Gaithersburg, Md., police, Tyson was a passenger in a Mercedes-Benz being driven by his wife when his car was rear-ended by a second car that had been rear-ended by a third. The drivers of the other two cars got out and were talking when Tyson joined them.
Apparently, he was in no mood for conversation. In a complaint filed with police, one of the drivers, a 50-year-old, said Tyson kicked him in the groin. The other, age 62, claimed he was punched in the face.
Tyson denies striking either man, and the truth may not be sorted out until the matter goes to court. But Dr. Elias Ghanem, chairman of the Nevada commission, said it won't stop his panel from asking tough questions about it or voting on Tyson's request at the end of the scheduled five-hour session.
"It's going to be a very, very tough hearing I'm pretty sure, only because of what has happened recently," Ghanem said. "It all has to come into play."
In this feel-good summer of home runs and heroes who remind us how sportsmen are supposed to behave, the decision would appear to be a no-brainer.
"The thing that would worry me," said promoter Bob Arum, who's never been a Tyson fan, "is that the next time he gets in the ring, he's going to bite some guy's nose off instead of both ears."
Remember, Arum is the same guy who once explained away an inconsistency by saying, "I was lying to you yesterday. Today I'm telling the truth." But he's also managed to get to the heart of the Tyson matter - at least as far as the Nevada commission is concerned.
Tyson left the ring a desperate fighter. What's happened since suggest he is no less desperate as a civilian. But the truth is, Mike never behaved outside the ring.
The newspaper list of Tyson's transgressions taped to my desk dates back to 1978, when as a 12-year-old, he was arrested for purse-snatching in Brooklyn, N.Y., and sent to reform school. The latest entry is barely a month old.
But Tyson has a probation officer back in Marion County, Ind., whose job it is to decide whether he belongs in jail. That is separate from the question of whether Tyson should be allowed to pursue his livelihood.
Up until he tried to make a snack of Evander Holyfield's ears, the ring was the one place - the only place - where Tyson truly seemed to be in control.
Holyfield, who fights the IBF's No. 1 contender, Vaughn Bean, on Saturday night, has already said he would like to see Tyson get his license back. His reason may be entirely selfish, so that the two can stage Tyson-Holyfield III, which would certainly be the highest-paying fight of all time.
Frankly, the reason for the endorsement doesn't matter. The Nevada commissioners should make their decision based solely on whether they believe Tyson can control himself inside the ring. They've got plenty of time to grill him and free rein to ask the kind of questions that should test the absolute limits of Tyson's restraint.
They owe him enough to withhold judgment until they hear the answers.
"He's got to rise to the occasion during this licensing because it's going to be a test of what kind of person he is. They call him Iron Mike," Ghanem said, "but we'll just have to wait and see."
 Load-Date: September 16, 1998

 

End of Document
