

UN views the devastation of the NATO bombing
The Associated Press
May 19, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 593 words
Byline: CANDICE HUGHES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KRAGUJEVAC, Yugoslavia
Body




Half-finished Yugo cars hang from a huge assembly line under gaping holes in the roof. Sheet metal dangles from the walls, flapping in the breeze. The nearby foundry is a blackened skeleton of twisted metal and ruined machinery, grim evidence of the destructive might of NATO air power.
Little wonder that Yugoslav officials were anxious for a U.N. inspection team to visit the wreckage of the 140-year-old Zastava plant, once the pride of Yugoslav industry and maker of cars that even the United States once imported.
Now local officials say the plant has been blasted out of business - and its 36,000 employees put out of work - by NATO airstrikes, devastating the local economy.
"I hope to God it stops soon," Mayor Veroljub Stevanovic said of the bombing campaign, now in its eighth week.
The factory in Kragujevac, 62 miles south of Belgrade, was among the first stops Wednesday for the U.N. team. Its members are supposed to assess the scale of the humanitarian crisis gripping Yugoslavia and what might be needed when the fighting stops.
The group later was to visit the war-ravaged Serbian province of Kosovo, where NATO says Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's refusal to stop the violent and brutal expulsion of ethnic Albanians is what prompted allied bombing.
An "economic and social catastrophe" was the somber assessment by U.N. team leader Sergio Viera de Mello after viewing the destruction at the Zastava plant, which made cars, trucks, parts, farm machinery and light weapons.
Frustrated, angry locals standing outside the plant didn't hesitate to lob some verbal strikes toward the foreign visitors.
"What do they want?" asked Goran Dulic, 26. "They are cuddling us with one hand and beating us with the other."
Zastava officials said the plant was hit by 20 missiles over a period of two days in early April. Drajan Srejovic, Zastava's vice president, said the damage amounted to about $ 1 million. A heating plant that served the town was also damaged.
No one was killed in the attack, but plant officials said 124 people were injured, 24 seriously. NATO said it struck Zastava to destroy an ammunition plant within the factory. The Zastava "special purpose" plant used to be the state arsenal and the main producer of infantry weapons and artillery pieces in former Communist-run Yugoslavia.
That made little difference to local residents.
"What has the Yugo to do with Kosovo?" one local journalist asked aloud, referring to the little car that often was the butt of jokes in the West.
De Mello sought to remind his hosts that the key to ending their woes lay in resolving the Kosovo crisis.
"I think it must remain clear what the central problem is," he said. "Once that solution is found, the rest will follow."
In an earlier meeting with Kragujevac's mayor, de Mello said the team was looking at what would be needed to rehabilitate agricultural and basic services before winter "so as to reduce the suffering as a result of these conflicts."
The deputy mayor in charge of health and social policy for children and refugees, Vesna Pajevic, said the bombing "has had a horrendous impact" on the city's children. "All of a sudden they're experiencing in reality all the things they saw only in films."
Teams of psychologists have been organized to work with the children, who "are asking 1,000 things we cannot answer," she said.
Someone had hung a small poster on the door of the city hall showing a skull in a U.N. helmet, with a caption that read: "This photo shows that the U.N. is no better than NATO." A member of the U.N. team took it with him.
 Load-Date: May 19, 1999

 

End of Document
