

Under the law, Elian case is simple: the father gets the boy
The Associated Press
April 11, 2000, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 620 words
Byline: By LAURIE ASSEO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In legal terms, the Elian Gonzalez dispute seems a much simpler case to immigration law experts than the turmoil surrounding it suggests.
"We have a fit parent. What is there left to discuss?" said George Washington University law professor Alberto Benitez.
Attorney General Janet Reno was correct in deciding to return Elian to live with his father in Cuba, the professor said. "It is a very, very simple and narrow immigration issue," he said.
Benitez and other legal and immigration experts say because the boy is an alien, federal courts and not state courts have clearly authority to decide the case. Miami relatives who hope to keep the 6-year-old shipwreck survivor in the United States are proceeding on both legal fronts.
Even if a Florida family court should decide the case, however, the Miami relatives likely would lose, said Bernard Perlmutter, director of the University of Miami's Children and Youth Law Clinic. Parents' rights "are so far superior, so paramount to other relatives. … That is the heart of our family law."
The child's best interest - a phrase heard often in the heated debate over Elian - is not the legal standard for taking a child from a parent and giving custody to another relative, Perlmutter said.
Instead, Florida law allows custody to be taken from an unwilling parent only if the parent is proven to have abused or neglected the child.
Elian's fate has been debated since he was found clinging to an inner tube off the Florida coast on Thanksgiving. His mother and 10 other Cubans drowned when their boat capsized during an attempt to reach the United States.
Since then Elian has lived with his great-uncle, Lazaro Gonzalez, in Miami. Last week the boy's father, Juan Miguel Gonzalez, came to the United States and said he wants to take his son home.
If the boy ultimately is returned to Cuba, "We're not returning Elian to Juan Miguel, we're returning him to Fidel Castro," attorney Linda Osberg-Braun, representing the Miami relatives, said in an interview Monday.
But Charles B. Keely, a Georgetown University professor of international migration, predicted courts would not credit the argument that living in communist Cuba is persecution enough to warrant keeping the boy here.
He suggested a circumstance where an American child was in a country where officials said "Nobody should be sent to the U.S. It's a horrible place."
"We'd say 'twaddle,"' Keely said.
Last month, a federal judge upheld Reno's decision to return Elian to his father. The decision "is a matter within the discretion of the attorney general," because the federal government has authority over immigration, said U.S. District Judge K. Michael Moore.
On Tuesday, the Miami relatives asked a Florida family court for a hearing to bar Elian's return to Cuba until his father's fitness is considered.
"There are many, many, many other issues concerning the best interests of this child that are important," said Eduardo Rasco, an attorney for the relatives.
The federal government argued that the Florida court has no authority to overrule federal immigration law, adding in court papers, "A father should not have to await further state court proceedings to get his son back."
The relatives told a federal appeals court that since children as young as Elian are allowed to testify in serious criminal trials, the INS should take his desires into account.
However, Benitez said 6-year-olds are presumed to lack the competence to decide what is best for them.
In the case of a Soviet youth who did not want to return to his home country with his parents in the early 1980s, a federal appeals court said a 12-year-old was "presumably near the lower end of an age range" of maturity to assert rights separate from his parents.
 Load-Date: April 12, 2000

 

End of Document
