

WALTER MEARS: What They Say When the Votes Go the Other Way
February 15, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 806 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




For fallen presidential candidates, the exit lines are the hard ones, epitaphs to ambition, spoken through gritted smiles by losers conceding the rejection that haunts any politician.
So it was for Sen. Phil Gramm, a $ 20 million presidential campaigner now relegated to running for re-election in Texas. "I have taken a licking in this race and I am eager to get back into that race," he said in becoming the third man out of the 1996 Republican field.
In a general election, one candidate wins, one loses and concedes. In a contest for presidential nomination, it is multiple choice, and Gramm was No. 5 in the Iowa Republican caucuses Monday night. None but the brain dead could miss that message, he acknowledged.
It was his second defeat; a week earlier Pat Buchanan had upset him in Louisiana's preview caucuses.
"I am today ending my campaign for president of the United States," Gramm said Wednesday to the forlorn cheers of supporters in a crowded Senate hearing room. "When the voter speaks, I listen, especially when the voter is saying someone else's name."
But the political ego that sends a man into presidential competition does not concede it at that; Gramm went on to say that he still believes he was the best candidate the Republicans could have chosen.
"My problem was an inability to convince voters that I was right," he said, diagnosing the affliction of all defeated competitors.
Gramm was the third man out of the 1996 GOP field, the best financed and, by his account, in the black when he quit. The other two, California Gov. Pete Wilson and the longer-shot Sen. Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, both said they couldn't afford to keep going, and dropped out before the competition began.
"There should be no tears, as much as your hearts and mine tell me to fight on," Wilson said when he withdrew. No excuses, no regrets, Specter said at his departure.
But no one who puts himself through the rigors of a modern presidential campaign can withstand early defeat unscathed by at least some of the above. They just don't admit it.
Both have now endorsed Dole for the nomination. Gramm said he was not ready to endorse anyone, but he's likely to join the Dole camp, too. He had nettled Dole while they were campaign rivals, but Gramm said his mission now will be in the Senate, and aligning with the Republican majority leader will serve that purpose. Dole telephoned Gramm to wish him well.
Gramm had raised more campaign money than any other Dole rival, and spent more. He won a projected 10 delegates in his two caucus defeats. Hardly cost effective, but better, at least, than John B. Connally, who spent about $ 10 million and got one delegate before quitting the 1980 race. Connally hedged his dropout enough to say that there might be a miracle that would put him back into competition. There was none, of course; Ronald Reagan was the nominee.
Gramm's pre-New Hampshire withdrawal recalls the exit of George Romney, ranked the early leader for the 1968 Republican nomination. He quit two weeks before a New Hampshire primary in which the polls showed Richard M. Nixon would have trounced him. "I wouldn't have missed it for the world," he said of his brief candidacy, adding the obvious, that he wasn't finding much rank and file support.
Buchanan, incidentally, was part of the Nixon campaign team that year, basic training for his candidacy now, as was his challenge to George Bush in 1992. He never won a primary against Bush, but his 37 percent share of the New Hampshire primary vote was an early embarrassment to the president, and Buchanan kept going all season, determined to get a prime time slot at the Republican National Convention. He did, only then endorsing Bush, in a speech that played to the GOP right, talking of "a religious war … a cultural war" for the values and soul of America. It was no help to the ticket.
In the lore of the dropouts, none outranks Lyndon B. Johnson's in 1968, although he never formally declared candidacy. Under Democratic challenge over his Vietnam war policy, Johnson got out two days before the Wisconsin presidential primary, where Sen. Eugene J. McCarthy was about to defeat him.
Johnson announced U.S. bombing limits and hinted at peace overtures, and said partisan divisions should be no factor in those efforts. "Accordingly," he concluded, in an exit line that altered American politics, "I shall not seek and will not accept the nomination of my party for another term as your president."
But for style points, the best getaway has to be that of Sen. Fred Harris in 1976, when he said his showings were neither victories nor real defeats: "We didn't know what to call it, so we just decided to call it quits."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: February 15, 1996

 

End of Document
