

WALTER MEARS: It's The Economy, Stupid; the Sequel
August 20, 1996, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 727 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Bob Dole scorned the slogan, but seized the topic - and once again, it's the economy, stupid. President Clinton will welcome a replay on the issue that helped put him in the White House.
The economy line was on a wall poster at Clinton's campaign headquarters last time, meant to keep his people focused on the subject. There will be no need for such reminders now, with Dole pushing his massive tax cuts and Clinton calling them a risk to the economic progress he boasts as an attainment of his first term.
He won it over George Bush, a president undone in large part by economic woes. The recession of 1991 undermined his campaign; times were improving as he ran, but the voters didn't see, or feel, the improvement. His reneged vow against new taxes added to the undertow.
Things aren't booming now, but they are better.
Bush had to try to convince voters that the economy was better than most of them thought. Dole has to persuade them that things are worse.
The Republicans are banking on middle-class anxiety about the economic future, stagnant family incomes, and the plain, simple offer of a 15 percent tax cut as elements of an economic message against Clinton.
The president counters that times are good and his programs are making them better. "This opportunity strategy is working," Clinton says. He points to deficits that have declined by almost 60 percent, to new jobs and to economic growth, up by an unexpectedly high 4.2 percent for the three months ended June 30.
That's a campaign windfall for the Democrats. Other economic statistics suggest that it was a temporary jump and the pace is slowing. And the Republicans argue that the pattern of the Clinton years is of anemic growth and higher taxes.
"They've given you lower wages, economic anxiety and the largest tax increase in the history of the world," Dole said in a campaign rally line he'll be repeating again and again.
The Republicans point to average economic growth rates of 2.4 percent a year since 1992, compared with 3.2 percent over the previous decade of GOP White House rule.
Each side has its own selective statistical arsenal, shaped to its own argument.
The average growth rate in the last 18 months of the Bush administration was 1.8 percent, pulled down by the recession, even though the economy turned upward during 1992.
Dole calls the 1993 tax increase the biggest ever; adjusted for inflation, the 1982 increase he helped manage through Congress took more.
The Republicans say a re-elected Clinton probably would increase taxes; In a CBS television interview, the president said he has no intention of raising taxes, but wouldn't say never because an emergency might demand it.
Dole once took a similar position, but in this campaign has pledged there will be no tax increases, only cuts. He did amend that to the point of saying he might close loopholes which, of course, means somebody's taxes would go up.
Dole's campaign banner is emblazoned with the big tax cut, 15 percent for everybody, with other breaks for a total of $ 548 billion over five years, and a promise to balance the budget at the same time.
Clinton calls that indiscriminate and unaffordable. He's proposing $ 110 billion in tax reductions, and may add to his list of targeted tax breaks as the fall campaign begins.
Tax cuts help campaigners. Clinton proposed one in 1992, although he did not pursue it in office. But he doesn't mean to cede the subject to Dole.
"We agree on one thing," he said. "Americans do deserve a tax cut."
Dole does have the advantage of simplicity. "Is there anybody here who doesn't want a tax cut?" he asked a campaign crowd. There wasn't.
But there also is skepticism that he could deliver his cut and balance the budget too, and he already is defending it against Democratic assertions that popular programs like Medicare would have to be cut to do it.
Given his game plan, Dole began with an incongruous message. "It is not, as was said by the victors four years ago, 'the economy stupid,"' he said in his acceptance speech. "It's the kind of nation we are."
Dole said Clinton's stress on the economy was insulting because it put material concerns above all else.
But Dole isn't talking philosophy now. He's talking tax cuts.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: August 20, 1996

 

End of Document
