

WALTER MEARS: Impeachable offenses are in the eye of the beholder
The Associated Press
October 1, 1998, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 779 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Long before congressional reports warranted X ratings, a Supreme Court justice wrote that he couldn't define pornography "but I know it when I see it."
That's about where the definition of impeachable offenses stands in the case against President Clinton.
The House Judiciary Committee is preparing to consider whether Clinton committed any in the Monica Lewinsky scandal, and possibly in other matters, - while commissioning a separate inquiry into what they are.
Even that, Rep. Henry Hyde said, will produce advice, not a binding definition. "I think every member of the committee will make their own mind up as to what is an impeachable offense," the Republican chairman said.
Sen. Trent Lott, the Republican leader, said bad conduct that brings disrepute on the office would meet his test for impeachment. Lott wouldn't say whether that would cover Clinton's behavior.
Hyde had another example, saying it had been suggested that a president who went on vacation the day of another Pearl Harbor would be impeachable.
The whole case has been tangled in disputes over the meaning of words, acts and offenses.
Prosecutor Kenneth W. Starr told the House he had substantial and credible evidence of acts that may constitute grounds for impeachment, centering on obstruction of justice and perjury, in the president's attempts to hide his conduct in the Lewinsky affair.
Clinton's defense is founded in fine distinctions and definitions. It begins with a judge's ruling on the meaning of sexual relations for the questions put to Clinton in his sworn deposition in the Paula Jones sexual harassment case on Jan. 17. The wording approved by U.S. District Judge Susan Webber Wright listed erogenous body parts and said that a person is engaging in sexual relations by contacting any of them with intent to arouse or gratify another person.
But any list has loopholes, which Clinton used in denying he'd had sexual relations with the former intern, even after he was forced to admit that he did have inappropriate intimate contact with her.
"My understanding of this definition is that it covers contact by the person being deposed with the enumerated areas..." Clinton said in his testimony to the Starr grand jury.
The dictionary would have been more difficult to evade than the anatomy book. It defines sex more comprehensively. But that isn't what Clinton was asked.
He sparred about other definitions, too.
"It depends upon what the meaning of the word 'is' means," he replied when questioned about his lawyer's use of that verb in denying a sexual relationship of any kind.
And to questions about his testimony that he couldn't recall being alone with Ms. Lewinsky:
"Well, it depends on how you define alone." He said they were, but the doors were open so he never really thought they were.
And those are simple words. Defining an impeachable offense is not.
In the end, what one is depends on who's got the voters to say what one is. The Constitution is specific on two offenses, treason and bribery, neither of which is involved in this case. Beyond that, it says "other high crimes and misdemeanors" are impeachable.
So there is no fixed standard. Hyde said that leaves it flexible to fit circumstances and the facts. And the politics, since the side with the votes in the House determines what's impeachable. In the case of Richard M. Nixon in 1974, the House Judiciary Committee voted three articles of impeachment, for obstruction of justice - proven by his own White House tapes - in the Watergate cover-up, for misuse of the power of federal agencies, and for defying House subpoenas.
Nixon resigned before the House acted.
The other presidential impeachment was of President Andrew Johnson in 1868, on 11 counts, one for campaign speeches against Congress, the rest for firing the secretary of war in defiance of a law requiring Senate consent.
The Republican House voted impeachment on those constitutionally fragile grounds. Johnson survived by one vote in the Senate, the only president ever impeached.
No precedent there to guide what happens now. But the history of that impeachment proves the political point - the side with the votes can decide what constitutes grounds against a president.
On standards as hard to define as those the late Potter Stewart invoked when the Supreme Court ruled against censorship of sexually-explicit writings in 1964, and he said that he wasn't going to attempt a definition of hard-core pornography because he probably couldn't do so intelligibly even though he knew it when he saw it.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 
 Load-Date: October 1, 1998

 

End of Document
