

WALTER MEARS: The trial of the century
The Associated Press
January 5, 1999, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: State and Regional
Length: 813 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Before President Clinton was impeached, the congressman who will be the lead prosecutor said the House decision was "merely" that there was enough evidence for a Senate trial.
There's nothing mere about it now - one Republican senator said it is not only the trial of the century but of all time.
And Sen. Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania also said it should be a full trial, with witnesses testifying before the Senate. He said so outside the White House Monday, after watching Clinton propose a tax break for long-term health care. Specter complimented Clinton for a good job in handling that business as usual.
In the unprecedented situation awaiting the Congress convening Wednesday, the incongruous is ordinary.
Rep. Henry Hyde, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, leads the 13 managers who will prosecute the impeachment case when it begins - locking the normally talkative Senate into a rigid and silent role as Clinton's jury.
"Now we seek impeachment, not conviction nor censure," Hyde said on Dec. 11, as the committee brought its party-line charges against Clinton. "Those are decisions for the other body, the Senate. We merely decide if there is enough for a trial."
That was decided on near party-line votes in the House for two counts of impeachment - perjury and obstruction of justice - in the Monica Lewinsky sex scandal. Republican leaders blocked a vote on censure, scrapping that Democratic alternative, 230 to 204.
Republicans said flatly that censure was unconstitutional, although Hyde and others had earlier suggested it might be an option for the Senate.
It may yet be - there are Republicans who see it as a way to settle the case short of firing the president, which Americans overwhelmingly oppose in public opinion polls. Of course the polls registered majority opposition to impeachment, too, and the House went ahead.
Since the impeachment votes on Dec. 19, the House tone has hardened, with Hyde and his prosecution team demanding a full Senate trial to prove their case for conviction of the president.
But Senate leaders are talking of compromise, on trial and punishment.
Sen. Trent Lott, R-Miss., the majority leader, has guardedly endorsed the idea of an abbreviated trial without witnesses, followed by a test vote to determine whether two-thirds of the Senate considers Clinton's conduct, if proven, to warrant conviction.
Assuming, as Senate leaders do, that there are not the votes to convict - with 55 Republican senators, 45 Democrats and 67 votes required - the impeachment trial could be adjourned by majority vote, and the Senate could consider censure. But that would take advance agreements; it isn't envisioned by the rules.
"They hear the country, they want to get it concluded, and that's a way to get it concluded," said Rep. Asa Hutchinson, R-Ark., one of the House managers. Hutchinson said on ABC that there should be a trial, with witnesses, and that Ms. Lewinsky would be on the short list to testify "in a very dignified way."
But neither the dignity nor the duration of a Senate trial would be manageable once testimony began, although a majority could vote at any point to end the whole proceeding. Were Democrats to hold their lines, that would take the votes of at least six Republican senators.
Lott's hints of a three-day trial led Hyde to write him that "the Senate should hear from live witnesses ..." and should not short-circuit the case the House brought against Clinton.
He said the "extensive factual record" compiled by special prosecutor Kenneth W. Starr was sufficient for House impeachment, but that the managers will want to summon witnesses at trial.
Democrats called that inconsistent. Republican Sen. Mitch McConnell of Kentucky said it was noteworthy that the House chose not to hear from "the characters that have become all too familiar" in the Lewinsky scandal, and that he is not wildly interested in having them called before the Senate.
During the House debate, Hyde said, "We have been attacked for not producing fact witnesses," but the House didn't need them, with 60,000 pages of Starr evidence in hand. "We had the facts - under oath," he said then.
But now, Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., complained, the House is trying to tell the Senate how it must proceed. Worse still, he said, one of the House managers, Rep. Bob Barr of Georgia, said senators don't have the attention span of the average juror, so the case will have to be simplified for them.
"That kind of condescending arrogance is not going well," Leahy said on CBS.
He was one of 16 senators on TV Sunday morning. Specter was another, and he said on NBC that even with witnesses, the trial can be expedited and brief.
"Probably less time than we spend on the Sunday talk shows," he said.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: January 5, 1999

 

End of Document
