

WALTER MEARS: The $ 7.7 trillion story tucked in the budget book
February 15, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 738 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Tucked away in the back of the book, there's a $ 7.7 trillion chapter in the federal budget. It covers government insurance and credit commitments, a giant enterprise that backs bank deposits, underwrites home mortgages, lends money to students and provides an alphabet soup of other guarantees.
The administration plans a year-long review of the way all this works, leaning toward increased reliance on private credit, and on requiring that private lenders share the cost when borrowers don't repay.
But there are still social objectives to be served, notably that of providing credit to minority and low-income Americans the budget calls "borrowers at the boundary," who couldn't invest in homes or education without government-backed lending.
Directly and indirectly, the federal government is the largest U.S. lending institution and insurer against risk. By the numbers, Washington is providing:
- $ 165 billion in direct loans.
- $ 805 billion in loan guarantees.
- $ 5 trillion in insurance.
- More than $ 1.7 trillion in loans and guarantees through government sponsored enterprises, privately held but federally chartered and backed financial institutions.
Those programs have little visible impact on the budget, which has made them politically appealing in a time of sparse resources and promises, like President Clinton's, that the era of big government is over.
The loans and guarantees involved benefit anybody who puts money in the bank, plus farmers, veterans, retirees and future pensioners, students, home buyers, small businesses, exporters and more. The massive deposit insurance system dates from the Depression, and now guarantees about $ 2.7 trillion in bank and savings and loan deposits, insured at up to $ 100,000 an account.
The crisis in deposit insurance in the 1980s and early 1990s, and the savings and loan bailout, prompted a closer look at the array of federal guarantees. Since 1991, the federal budget has had to appraise each program, covering the direct costs and the potential future liabilities.
Most of those liabilities will remain potential, unless there are wholesale loan failures or crises that force insurance bailouts.
The Clinton budget foresees none, although it includes a warning that while the savings insurance system is in good shape now, "an economic downturn could put significant pressure on the deposit insurance funds."
During the crisis years, 1,400 banks and 1,100 savings and loans failed, busting the insurance fund and forcing the bailout. In 1996, only five banks and one savings and loan went under.
Even so, the risks remain. While the banking business has recovered and consolidated, the budget notes, it also is assuming "the risks inherent in providing a growing array of increasingly sophisticated services," including international operations.
The changing financial marketplace also will affect pension guarantee programs and disaster insurance.
Federal credit programs could be marked by those changes, too.
The budget notes that private lenders and insurers may start taking over functions that have been underwritten by the government. While that could provide more leeway to help the people who most need it, a problem goes with it.
Private institutions, the budget appraisal says, "may take away the best risks among those who have been borrowing from the government or with its guarantee, leaving the federal program facing a smaller pool of riskier clients."
That could dump future costs on the taxpayers unless the programs involved are remodeled or even ended.
As a politically practical matter, not many will be. The benefits are too widespread and too popular, the immediate costs low and effectively outside the rigors of the drive for balanced budgets.
The low-profile credit guarantees can mesh with high visibility policy objectives, Clinton's education push, for example. Student loans are expected to increase by 40 percent over the next five years.
Besides, the credit programs usually keep going. One was set up to help get electricity and telephone services to rural America, when there wasn't much. Now more than 99 percent of rural households have electric power, and 97 percent have telephones. There are still $ 40 billion in loans out, with new ones made for maintenance and modernization.
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: February 15, 1997

 

End of Document
