

WALTER MEARS: Starting at the middle of the road
January 16, 1997, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 688 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It's getting crowded in the political center. And even the middle of the road has to lead somewhere, beyond the centrist slogans of both Democrats and Republicans.
That's when the differences will emerge, between and within the parties, right and left.
Outlining agendas and setting themes, President Clinton and congressional leaders talk of the center as the place to be. Clinton called his re-election a victory for the vital center, after a campaign in which Republicans said he was expropriating their issues.
"The president ran on our agenda," House Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas, repeated as the new Congress convened. He cited in particular the promise of a balanced budget by 2002.
"The center, I presume, is that we all agree we need to do this," said the Senate majority leader, Trent Lott, R-Miss. "We need responsible budgets, we need honest budgets, we need honest numbers and we need a balanced budget."
The last point is prospective, five years away, and while details of the path to balance will be disputed, Clinton and the Republican Congress almost certainly will settle on a plan this year.
Still, the budget Clinton sends Congress on Feb. 6 won't meet the GOP definition of centrist on items like welfare, for which he wants increased spending, and defense, which he will seek to cut. On the other wing, there probably will be liberal complaints about the depth of proposed curbs in Medicare and Medicaid spending.
Sen. Tom Daschle, D-S.D., the minority leader, said Democrats were able to get some of their proposals adopted in 1995 "because we were able to come to the middle and demonstrate that … Republicans could join us there comfortably."
"We want to provide proposals that will be viewed as moderate, sensible, centrist proposals that allow Republicans and Democrats, conservatives and liberals, to work together," he said.
One of them will be for targeted reductions in the capital gains tax, a Republican aim Democrats once resisted as a GOP tax break for the rich. Now there is increasing Democratic support for limited reductions.
Republicans will seek sharper cuts in the tax on investment profits. "We are committed to that, and we want it to be real," Lott said.
Clinton has recommended a tax break on capital gains from the sale of homes. "The president knows he's going to have to do better than that," Lott told the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
In describing his agenda for the new Congress, Lott joked that a Democratic friend had accused him of being a closet moderate.
"But I don't think it's moderation or liberalism or desertion of your conservative principles if you acknowledge the realities and start off with the attitude we're going to work together," he said.
Clinton described his view of "the vital center" to the Democratic Leadership Council on Dec. 11. "We have clearly created a new center," he said. He said it was not "the lukewarm midpoint between overheated liberalism and chilly conservatism," but an effort to combine mainstream values with new ideas.
That philosophy will be part of his keynote messages for his second term - the inaugural address on Monday and the State of the Union address on Feb. 4.
Then the real test, translating themes into action in a divided government. The Republicans aren't in the revolutionary mood that prevailed two years ago, when they gained congressional control. Clinton has said there must be changes to meet new challenges, but his proposals in and since the campaign have been relatively modest ones.
Historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr. coined the phrase "The Vital Center" as the title of a 1949 book, with a new edition due out this year, but dissents from Clinton's definition. In the Internet magazine "Slate," Schlesinger, a Democratic liberal, writes that "no great president was a middle of the roader."
According to Schlesinger, the middle of the road "is definitely not the vital center. It is the dead center."
Perhaps so. But that is the consensus starting point this year.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: January 16, 1997

 

End of Document
