

WALTER MEARS: Dole's the Candidate but Newt's the Target
April 23, 1996, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 732 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In alphabetical or political pecking order, D, for Dole, comes before G, for Gingrich. But not when Democrats are talking. They prefer it the other way around, seeking to capitalize on voter misgivings about the Republican Congress and especially the speaker of the House.
Even Newt Gingrich acknowledges the sagging polls right now. "Sure," he conceded in a television interview. But he said those attitudes will change as Congress does its work and Republican positions become clear.
It is an odd interval in the presidential campaign in which Sen. Bob Dole, the majority leader, is the guaranteed GOP nominee for the White House. No one in that post has run against an incumbent president before. Dole is having his own problems in the dual role, taking setbacks on health care legislation, for example, and in the maneuvering over an increase in the minimum wage, an issue on which Democrats have gained ground,
The polls show him trailing President Clinton, whose campaign has nearly five times the bankroll available to Dole for the four months before they are formally nominated. That's because Clinton was unopposed for renomination and did not have to use up his budget in the presidential primaries.
So the setting would seem right for a campaign aimed solely at Dole, the other major party name on the Nov. 5 ballot for president. But Democratic strategy this spring is to run against Gingrich, too, trying to capitalize on the attitudes reflected by polls showing voter discontent with Congress, and on negative ratings of the speaker.
When Vice President Al Gore goes on campaign and political fund-raising missions, he bears down on "The Gingrich-Dole Congress." It is almost a slogan.
And always in that sequence. Gore used it 10 times in a speech to the American Society of Newspaper Editors, prompting one to ask him whether he meant Gingrich-Dole as the name of the Republican nominee.
He answered with a quip. "Al Gore did not intend to change the majority leader's name in any way," the vice president said. "It is axiomatic that in the Congress of the United States, the speaker of the House is the senior official. … And therefore, the appellation 'Gingrich-Dole Congress' is merely accurate, objective and descriptive."
Also purposeful. While Gingrich has a solid base among conservatives, his negative rating among voters in general is far higher than Dole's, according to the pollsters. He also is seen as extreme, exactly the label the Clinton campaign wants attached to the Republican Congress.
Gingrich said in a CNN interview that he does not think that is going to hurt the Dole ticket in the fall. "People will learn that we voted to cut taxes, that we voted to balance the budget, that we voted to reform welfare with a work emphasis, that Bill Clinton vetoed," Gingrich said.
The speaker, who was the face and the voice of the Republicans after they won Congress for the first time in four decades, has kept his profile and his voice a bit lower this year. He took his name out of presidential speculation late in 1995, and declared himself a team player and Dole's junior partner as the Kansas senator piled up his nominating majority.
That, and cheerleader for a nominee he knows is no orator. Gingrich says the voters are going to be electing a president, not a talk show host. "He's not a great speaker, he's in the Eisenhower tradition," Gingrich said. "… Dole is at least as articulate as Dwight Eisenhower."
At a Monday night gathering of big donors to his political action committee for maintaining GOP control of Congress, Gingrich warned against believing early polls, reminding the group of "President Dukakis - who was 19 (points) ahead" in 1988.
Gingrich opened his own House re-election campaign earlier Monday in Roswell, Ga., and later went to the Atlanta zoo with a group of schoolchildren, in an Earth Day effort to enhance the Republicans' standing on environmental issues.
Gore said Clinton is committed to protecting the environment from the Congress he then called by that familiar, hyphenated name.
"The Gingrich-Dole Congress has attempted to tear down over 25 years of bipartisan progress," the vice president said. "Where families see parks, the Gingrich-Dole Congress sees parking lots."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: April 23, 1996

 

End of Document
