

WASHINGTON YESTERDAY: "Pearls by the bushel; diamonds by the peck"
The Associated Press
July 10, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Commentary; Washington Dateline
Length: 822 words
Byline: By LAWRENCE L. KNUTSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




After 70 years of complaints about mud, dust and wandering cows, the years following the Civil War saw the backwater capital on the banks of the Potomac suddenly become a magnet for new wealth and the height of expensive fashion.
In the last three decades of the 19th century, new money established a beachhead, millionaires rolled in, old society felt itself eclipsed and the sometimes sleepy, sometimes turbulent national village changed forever.
The years immediately after the war marked the capital as a place where newly minted, self-made millionaires from the western gold mines, or make-a-buck cities like Chicago or Cincinnati, could find acceptance, build palatial mansions and fill their lavish parties with Cabinet members, senators, foreign envoys, and perhaps the president.
Established, old-money Washington was aghast.
"Ill-gotten and well-gotten wealth have usurped the leadership of society," a newspaper observed in 1878. "It is a custom, we are informed, for a society woman to dazzle, not by her beauty or conversation, but by the quality of her dress and the value of her jewels, and that a costume is not remarked upon as being in good taste or becoming, but as having cost so many hundreds dollars."
Over the next decade, the invasion of wealth continued until it transformed the city with new mansions and lavish parties and speeding carriages.
"Washington is like no other city on the world … There is a fairy-tale sense of instability about it," society columnist Frank Carpenter, writing under the byline "Carp," said in 1882.
Here's Carp, describing the social season of 1885: "There is enough silk worn here every winter to carpet a whole state. There are pearls by the bushel and diamonds by the peck."
In an age where there were few pressing national problems, Carp began to count diamonds:
"At the White House the other night there were at least 500 women wearing diamonds of various sizes. I counted 50 pairs of solitaire earrings whose stones were as big as the end of my thumb, and 30 diamond stars and pendants, any one of which would buy a large farm."
One woman in a flowing red gown alone yielded a count of 85 diamonds.
"She shook at least $5,000 this way and that every time she moved her head," the journalist reported.
No wonder Mark Twain called it "the gilded age."
"The rich newcomers captured the leadership of Washington high society in the 80s, and their flag waved atop the social pinnacle for the rest of the century," writes Kathryn Allamong Jacob in "Capital Elites," an account of the era of "the rootless rich" published by the Smithsonian Institution Press in 1995.
Many of the newcomers shared three things in common: they had started life among the working poor and amassed their money by luck or pluck or by practices that skated the purely ethical.
But then they found themselves rich but unloved by the established social order in the towns in which they lived, frozen out of the social whirl in cities like New York and Philadelphia.
Washington offered a more fluid environment, even for those who lacked the common social graces.
These were people, said Carp, who "have nothing but their money to recommend them."
"Many use bad grammar, the men cannot avoid mentioning their wealth, and the women, whether their figures make it advisable or not, dress in the most extravagant extremes of fashion," he wrote. "Stories of the crudities of these people are legion."
Old Washington society, called "the antiques" by some, felt itself pushed aside and was not pleased, even when some newcomers appeared to have gold-edged credentials.
Mrs. Violet Blair Janin, the granddaughter of Francis Preston Blair and a member of one of the oldest Washington families, was not impressed when scholar Henry Adams became a Lafayette Square neighbor even though Adams numbered Presidents John and John Quincy Adams among his ancestors.
"Of course it may be nicer to have had your great-grandfather and grandfather presidents than to be one yourself," she icily told her diary in 1893.
"Still, as those who went before the great-grandfather were very plain people, we of older blood do not think of him (Henry Adams) as such a great aristocrat."
With time, the income tax and economic depressions, the fortunes of Washington's wealthy class sagged and many of its members abandoned the capital.
Many of their surviving mansions are now embassies. That includes the Massachusetts Avenue palace - now the Embassy of Indonesia - built in 1903 by Irish immigrant and former laborer Tom Walsh.
Walsh had struck it rich in Colorado gold and used the money to buy his family a place in Washington society.
His family's pockets became so deep that his daughter, Evalyn Walsh McLean, had no trouble finding the money to buy the Hope Diamond. It is now the star of the Smithsonian Institution's gem room.
EDITOR'S NOTE - Lawrence L. Knutson has covered the White House, Congress and Washington's history for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: July 11, 2000

 

End of Document
