

WASHINGTON TODAY: They Sing the Electric of the Body Politic
July 24, 1996, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 735 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When Bob Dole became full-time presidential candidate, he borrowed a flourish from the prairie socialist, poet Carl Sandburg.
"Yesterday is a wind gone down," Dole recited at the close of his farewell speech to the Senate. "A sun dropped in the West.
"I tell you that there is nothing in the world. Only an ocean of tomorrows. A sky of tomorrows."
Score one for the poets, those overlooked observers of the American condition.
Candidates have their focus groups and pollsters to tell them what ordinary people think, their ad people and consultants to burnish the image, the think-tanks and advisers to tune the issues.
Even psychics get some respect.
But those who size up America artfully in verse live down a road less travelled.
No longer the "unacknowledged legislators of the world," as Britain's Percy Bysshe Shelley called them more than 150 years ago, poets are mainly just unacknowledged - here for presidential inaugurations, then gone.
"I don't want anything to do with poets," Lyndon Johnson is said to have ordered aides after one came to the White House and criticized the Vietnam War. "Don't bring me any poets."
It's not as if they have nothing to say.
It's just that what they say these days is not often pleasant.
Lucille Clifton, in "Note from Memphis," writes "history is chasing you, america, like a mean dog."
For Jonathan Williams, "boobus americanus hath swept the boards"
Poets don't hear America singing much anymore. Sandburg's ocean of tomorrows seems to have dried into a cracked and dusty plain.
"Worstward Ho," writes Anselm Hollo one of the poets in the bleak new anthology "American Poets Say Goodbye to the 20th Century." And good riddance, they might have added.
Galway Kinnell, the Pulitzer Prize-winner whose "Vapor Trail Reflected in the Frog Pond" was one of the most famous poems of the Vietnam War era, welcomed Dole's use of poetry.
"It's good for Dole to be doing that," Kinnell said from Vermont. "By saying poetry of some kind of tenderness and concern, you acquire a little bit."
Poets' corners have debated for generations whether politics makes good poetry. For most of that time, little of the kind has been produced. What does make it into print is often acidic.
Even Walt Whitman, who wrote "I Hear America Singing" in the 19th Century, and vowed "I will report all heroism from an American point of view," turned bitter and biting about his country at times.
And Sandburg, before his death in 1967, tore into wickedness against the poor and the working stiff, even while praising American optimism in Chicago, "City of the Big Shoulders … so proud to be alive."
"Good poets are always saying two things at once, and often they are contradictory things," said Bill Wadsworth, executive director of the Academy of American Poets.
"The problem with bad poetry is that the writer is trying to simplify things to a message, in which case he can get a bumper sticker."
Kinnell agrees, saying anti-war poetry from the period that made him so celebrated has not worn well.
"The premise was that the world was divided into the good people, the lovers, and the evil people, the killers," he said. "It was a false premise. The poetry didn't stand up."
But if poets are "the mirrors of the gigantic shadows which futurity casts upon the present," as Shelley put it in an 1821 mouthful, what do they reflect?
Poet Robert Bly, for one, still hears America singing, but it is singing nursery rhymes.
Bly, whose writings launched the so-called men's movement, says in a new non-fiction book that Americans have become locked in perpetual childhood.
"People don't bother to grow up," he says in "The Sibling Society," "and we are all fish swimming in a tank of half-adults."
The consistent finding of opinion polls that Americans don't see the future as brightly as they did before is echoed in contemporary poems that go beyond the introspective subjects that dominate the art.
"Our country moving closer to its own truth and dread," as feminist poet Adrienne Rich puts it.
Three decades before Bill Clinton asked Maya Angelou to read at his inauguration, John F. Kennedy summoned Robert Frost to usher in his presidency. Because of the sun's glare, the old poet was unable to make out the words of the dedication he had written for the occasion, instead he recited "The Gift Outright" from memory.
"A golden age of poetry and power" the unread verses concluded. "Of which this noonday's the beginning hour."
 Load-Date: July 24, 1996

 

End of Document
