

What's This? The NAM and Clinton Have The Same Line
May 15, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 574 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Do the National Association of Manufacturers and the Clinton administration see things the same way? Maybe. At least on an issue that has implications for both.
That issue is the number and quality of jobs, a subject that has been much in the news of late, often with negative suggestions. And neither the NAM nor the administration can afford bad publicity. Not about jobs.
Neither benefits from such a condition, so both the White House and the NAM seek to correct widespread impressions by emphasizing the positive, and by convincing workers that the great American job machine still works.
Each has issued a report extolling its contributions to the job scene, which has become one of the more uneasy and even controversial areas of economic enterprise, a place where anxiety and controversy exist.
The NAM report, "Improving the Condition of the American Workers," emphasizes the creation of "millions of jobs over the past 25 years - 8.4 million since 1992" while raising compensation.
The White House reported, "Job Creation and Employment Opportunities: The U.S. Labor Market, 1993-1996," points to 8.5 million jobs since President Clinton took over, and suggests the jobs are mainly good ones at good wages.
If you aren't inclined to quibble about discrepancies in the numbers, the message these reports carry is on the mark, but that message is nothing about which to become unduly impressed. Big country, big statistics.
In fact, it can be assumed that many workers, lots of economists, some politicians and more than a few labor critics aren't impressed at all. "They are now spinning the same line of economic propaganda," says one critic.
That would be the Labor Research Association, headed by economist Greg Tarpinian, which sees the underlying purpose of the reports being an effort to dispel notions among workers that the economy isn't treating them well.
"The American people are not stupid," the LRA states in a "news analysis for trade unionists." They know when it's getting harder to make ends meet."
Oddly, the LRA might find support from the right in still another report, this one from Stephen Moore, director of fiscal policy studies for the Cato Institute, a free-market think tank.
Had the economic trends of the 1980s continued into the 1990s, says Moore, who earlier served as a senior economist on Congress' Joint Economic Committee, the average American would be richer by $ 4,000 a year.
That's not all, according to Moore. He contends that more than 5 million more Americans would be working today, and that the federal budget deficit would be almost $ 70 billion lower this year.
So, what was the big change in economic policy from the 1980s to the 1990s?
You could defend the position that it was taxes - specifically the huge tax increase in 1993. Whatever, job growth hasn't kept pace with the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s. And a big question remains about the quality of work.
According to the LRA, "Downsizing is taking place in the core section of the economy - where jobs are well paid and carry benefits with them - as employment growth is taking place in areas that are more insecure."
While a mix of politics and economics usually produces a blend on which you could gag, there is something in all this that could produce a smile about the future of America.
When the Clinton White House and the NAM can agree, and the free-market Cato Institute can supply figures that more or less support the LRA position, there is hope.
 Load-Date: May 15, 1996

 

End of Document
