

Which comes first - the new stadium or the competitive team?
The Associated Press
July 19, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1025 words
Byline: By LAURENCE M. CRUZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEATTLE
Body




When the Seattle Mariners' owners sidestepped voters and got legislators to approve hundreds of millions of dollars for a new ballpark to keep the franchise in town, they promised a competitive team.
And though the team is solidly in last place in the AL West, it seems the owners are holding up their end of the bargain with a $ 53 million player payroll - the seventh-highest in baseball.
Yet one year before Safeco Field opens to fans after the 1999 All-Star break, the question remains: Does the new ballpark prosper because of a winning team? Or does the team get better because the new stadium - and increased fan support that owners believe will follow - ensure the payroll necessary for a playoff-caliber lineup?
The answer could mean the difference between a successful franchise and one that founders - financially and otherwise - in a sparkling new setting.
State-of-the-art ballparks surely bring in the money - at least $ 10 million to $ 15 million a year initially, according to Dean Bonham, president and chief executive officer of the Bonham Group, a Denver-based sports marketing and consulting firm.
And more revenue - from ticket sales, naming rights, advertising, private suites, parking and concessions - can mean a superior product on the field if ploughed back into the player payroll.
No less than five of the seven teams with new ballparks made the playoffs within two years of moving to new quarters. A sixth made it within four years.
The Cleveland Indians' payroll climbed from $ 21.9 million in 1993 - the year before they moved to Jacobs Field from Cleveland Stadium - to almost $ 60 million this year. Jacobs Field has had more than 250 consecutive sellouts, and the Indians appear to be playoff-bound for a fourth year running.
The Baltimore Orioles have been among the top three revenue-producing clubs since Camden Yards opened in 1992 and had the highest attendance in baseball from 1995 to 1998 - "without question" because of the new facility, said Joe Foss, the club's vice chairman of business and finance.
"What happened since 1992 moved us from a small- to medium-sized market club to a large-market club," said Foss, whose Orioles made the playoffs in 1996 and 1997.
The Mariners made the playoffs in 1995 and '97. And their dramatic finish in 1995 - coming back from an 11-game deficit to catch the Angels in the AL West - is credited with clinching the legislative support needed to finance the new stadium after King County voters rejected the proposal.
Nobody is suggesting a new stadium alone will make the Mariners consistent championship contenders.
It's just one element in a three-part formula that includes a commitment from management to field a competitive team and the financial resources to live up to that commitment, Bonham says.
"The objective every year is that we can make it to the World Series," said Mariners president Chuck Armstrong.
Teams with slim payrolls have enjoyed post-season success, he concedes, "although lately you've got to be among (the wealthy clubs) to have a shot at it."
And there may be the rub.
Without a Tom Hicks - the broadcast media mogul who recently acquired the Texas Rangers - and without the big money of large-market broadcast rights to buoy their payroll, can the Mariners generate the money they need, even with the new stadium?
The team's operating loss was $ 4 million in 1997, a figure some expect to more than triple this year given a $ 10 million payroll increase and lower attendance at the aging Kingdome.
Cost overruns on the new stadium and parking garage have already exhausted the project's $ 25 million contingency fund by more than $ 4 million, forcing a revision of the initial $ 417 million budget. Camden Yards and Jacobs Field came in more or less on budget.  And player costs are still soaring. Some estimate Ken Griffey Jr. and Alex Rodriguez could be worth $ 15 million apiece when their contracts expire in 2000.
Will the franchise be able to keep them both?
They can't afford not to, Bonham said, citing the NHL's ill-fated Buffalo Sabers as a team learning that lesson the hard way.
But there's a point where hard realities must be faced, says Dennis Lehman, the Indians' executive vice president of business.
"We really can't afford to have a player that would take 25 percent of our player payroll," Lehman said. "It's out of proportion with what we try to do."
Armstrong would not comment on player contracts but said the club "would like to have Rodriguez and Griffey play their entire careers with the Seattle Mariners."
Club officials would not speculate on what stadium cost overruns are likely to total by next July.
"From the public standpoint, there really aren't cost overruns," said Ken Johnsen, executive director of the Public Facilities District board, which is in charge of building the ballpark.
The overruns are the responsibility of the franchise, which reaffirmed that commitment in May.
It's hard not to be optimistic about the club's future when standing in the bleachers of the already spectacular stadium, which showcases the city's skyline, Puget Sound and Mount Rainier.
And perhaps the optimism is not all misplaced.
"In Seattle's case, you have an extraordinary potential," Bonham said, predicting ticket-revenue increases of at least 100 percent.
Naming rights alone, from Seattle-based Safeco Insurance Cos., will generate $ 40 million in the next 20 years - earning back most of the $ 45 million the Mariners will pay toward the stadium. And at up to $ 145,000 each, the stadium's 161 private suites are expected to bring more revenue.
But whatever lies ahead for the Mariners and Safeco Field, one thing seems inevitable: Ever since player costs began to balloon in the late 1970s, owners have been trying to raise revenues by cutting other costs.
"At some point, you're going to run out of options for increasing revenue streams," Bonham said, since broadcast rights and sponsorship have all but reached their limits.
Pay-per-view and new stadiums are the next big things, he said, but their days, too, are numbered.
"Owners … are going to have to live and die by the same rules that business men do in the real world." Bonham said.
 Load-Date: July 19, 1998

 

End of Document
