

With the Rage Gone and the Issues Dulled, America Passes Judgment
November 5, 1996, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 1073 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Body




It's finally Election Day, and America is choosing between Bill Clinton's conduct of the presidency and Bob Dole's promise of a more disciplined stewardship to carry the nation into the next century.
Whatever their presidential prospects, Republican leaders seemed cocky about retaining GOP control of Congress for only the first time since Calvin Coolidge occupied the White House six decades ago.
The nation voted for the next president and decided, in 435 House races and 34 for Senate seats, what sort of Congress he would have to work with.
Dole voted early this afternoon in Russell, Kan. - the town that sustained him when he was an injured war veteran - and Clinton voted in Little Rock, Ark.
"It's a good day for America," the president said, and told a poll worker that daughter Chelsea had been with him every time he voted since she was born. Hillary Rodham Clinton also cast her ballot and said she felt "wonderful."
Dole, cast his ballot - "for myself" - in the First Christian Church in his hometown of Russell, Kan. He said he'd voted there "a lot of times before, but I never voted for myself for president. I was a little nervous." He was accompanied by his wife, Elizabeth, and daughter, Robin.
Of the three major presidential candidates, Ross Perot was the first to vote. He drove his wife and daughter to a recreation center in Dallas and said of the campaign: "Never dull, always something going on."
Voting, democracy's ritual of renewal, took place in thousands of places - a shingled veterans' hall by the harbor in South Portland, Maine; a garage behind a funeral home in Chestnut Hill, Pa.; a yellow brick library in Marietta, Ga.; and in Minneapolis' Fire Station 15, where the pumper truck had to be moved outside to make room.
A number of congressional races were expected to be close. The outcome could hinge on whether runoffs will be required in a handful of races in Texas.
Earlier, Haley Barbour, the GOP chairman, said "I don't rule out Bob Dole winning this election."
But for days Republican ads argued, in unspoken acknowledgement that Dole's prospects were poor, that the country should not give Clinton "a blank check."
"I think probably we have a greater chance of actually increasing the number of seats we will have," said Newt Gingrich, the Republican House speaker whose scorched-earth speeches made him the symbolic issue in contests across the nation.
Barbour called increased Republican strength in the Senate "likely." Close races abounded; the South was the key.
In Georgia, computer programmer Mike Collier, 30, said he voted for Clinton even though he wasn't fond of his performance in office. His reasoning: "It's better to keep somebody who's not too terrible in."
In Michigan, social worker Diana Ruckert, 25, said she voted for Dole even though she knew the polls show his trailing. "That's what voting's all about," she said.
In Maine, voter Ann Hasey expressed disgust at "one of the nastiest, meanest elections I've ever seen."
Clinton seemed ever more confident of becoming the first re-elected Democrat since Franklin Roosevelt's 1936 landslide, and the polls gave him reason. His goal reached beyond victory - he wanted to win with more than 50 percent of the vote, a target denied him in 1992 and made difficult again by Perot's insurgent candidacy.
Clinton won 43 percent in 1992 to then President Bush's 37 percent and Perot's 19 percent.
The president was said to be looking ahead to a second term, setting up a transition team that may release a round of Cabinet resignations as early as this week.
Before Clinton voted, Janet Hedges, a "stay-at-home-mom" from Little Rock, cast her ballot ahead of the president but in the same polling place.
"I voted for Bill," she said as she hurried back to her 5-year-old daughter and 2-year-old son.
On the final day, Dole, his voice cracking, raced across four time zones as he headed toward Russell, Kan. His main message - he could be trusted while Clinton could not. "My voice may change, but I still keep my word," he said.
Perot slapped Clinton's ethics in a Texas speech and a final binge of television speeches. "We are headed toward a second Watergate and a constitutional crisis," Perot said.
Across the nation, turnout is expected to be low. It could fall close to 50.1 percent of citizens over age 18, the rate recorded in 1988, the lowest in modern times.
Four years ago, spurred by Perot, turnout reached 55 percent.
In places, the voting was brisk this morning. More than 100 people were waiting in line when the polls opened at Westover High School in Albany, Ga. In Louisville, Ky., Martha Johnson, waiting with 20 other voters, said, 'I can't believe these lines. I guess it shows a lot of people think this is probably one of the most important races in a long time."
In the Cat Creek precinct in Garfield County of eastern Montana, voters cast their ballots in the bathroom of an abandoned one-room schoolhouse, a 60-foot trailer house. The bathroom was used for privacy.
Election judge Kathleen Edwards, a 72-year-old ranch wife with wind-whipped hair and a ruddy complexion, said she expected 100 percent turnout in the precinct. Her husband, Lawrence "Hoolie" Edwards, rattled off the first names of ranchers as they arrived.
Voters waited in line for up to two hours this morning at precincts in Gingrich's suburban Atlanta district.
Through the national campaign, no great debate developed between Clinton and Dole and the Republican challenger had trouble arguing he knew how to cut taxes 15 percent across the board and still balance the budget.
The 73-year-old Dole, crippled by wounds in World War II, sought to make character the issue against the 50-year-old Clinton, who avoided military service in Vietnam.
For his part, Clinton campaigned on an incumbent's traditional don't-let-them-take-it-away stance. "Will you seize the day to keep your country moving in the right direction?" he asked.
Republicans hold a 53-47 majority in the Senate, so Democrats must gain three seats for control, assuming Clinton is re-elected and Vice President Al Gore is available to break a tie.
In the race for House control, Democrats, aided by the labor movement, targeted Republican freshmen, and dozens of races looked close. It would take a net shift of 18 seats to the Democrats for them to regain control and Gingrich contended his party could actually pad its 235-197 majority. There is one independent in the 435-member House and two vacancies.
 Load-Date: November 5, 1996

 

End of Document
