

'Democratic' frenzy in the Arab world - a wind of change or just a mild breeze?
The Associated Press
March 9, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1538 words
Byline: By DONNA ABU-NASR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon
Body




Ever since the United States invaded Iraq, some Arab leaders have been acting out of character, talking about big changes in the works and using all the proper keywords: democracy, transparency, choice, human rights.
In the year that Baghdad fell and Saddam Hussein was captured, Saudi Arabia has announced it will hold its first ever election; Syria has freed 130 imprisoned critics of the regime; Egypt has revoked legislation used to jail journalists; Libya has promised to give up weapons of mass destruction programs.
Yet, despite the frenzy of activity the winds of change seem a mild breeze at best - an attempt to do the minimum without allowing any real dilution of power.
The Saudi elections are only municipal. Syria still holds hundreds of political prisoners. Libya's human rights record is as bad as ever, according to monitoring groups.
"Something is extremely wrong in this Arab world," said Mansour al-Jamri, editor-in-chief of the Bahraini Al-Wasat newspaper, and a prominent opposition figure in the Gulf country. "You cannot turn a donkey into a horse."
With a massive U.S. military presence in their midst, and a Bush administration determined to see real change, Arab leaders are facing their biggest collective challenge ever.
They are squeezed from both sides.
On the one side is an increasingly sophisticated population that is more connected to the world thanks to the satellite and the Internet, and more aware of democracy's potential to empower them.
On the other is rising Islamic fervor, fueled by poverty and despair of secular governments' inability to give their people anything to be proud of.
Given all that, al-Jamri and others wonder whether Arab regimes can take the risk of embracing real democracy, knowing it may mean their ouster by one side or the other.
"If there are political reforms, then power will slip from their hands," said Hisham Kassem, head of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights.
A democratic process will take time and patience, he says, and the reforms so far may seem superficial, but they show that the American message is sinking in - that "this issue cannot be taken as a joke."
Theodore Kattouf, the U.S. ambassador to Syria until last August, said that in the Arab-Islamic world today, elections with real political parties are important, but "People have to know that the process is fair and transparent, that their votes count."
Some Arab regimes have had bitter experience with elections, especially where they boosted Islamic fundamentalist parties. Algeria held a multiparty election in 1992 but aborted it when Islamic parties looked like winning, and a decade of ferocious bloodshed ensued.
Jordan held a parliamentary election in 1989 in which Islamic legislators made impressive gains, only to lose popularity when it became clear they could not deliver on their promise to improve living conditions.
King Abdullah dissolved Parliament in 2001 and delayed elections, fearing they would be inflamed by Palestinian-Israeli fighting next door. In December, however, he promised to transform Jordan into a model democracy and guarantee some parliamentary seats for women.
As for the Palestinians themselves, their democracy experiment born out of the 1993 Oslo agreement has had mixed results.
They held presidential and parliamentary elections in 1996 in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. However, Yasser Arafat has largely ignored the parliament, often refusing to sign major legislation. There is no independent judiciary and criticism of Arafat can lead to imprisonment. But there is some room for grumbling and the occasional protest march.
Arafat and other officials say they would like to hold elections, but that voting is impossible as long as Israeli troops are stationed in most West Bank towns.
The Arab world's baby steps toward reform actually began after the Sept. 11 attacks, when some senior Arab figures recognized the link between the absence of democracy and the rise of religious fanaticism.
It picked up pace after Baghdad fell to the American-led coalition in April and Bush's grand design for the Middle East became clearer.
In November, Bush declared that Western governments had been wrong for decades in backing undemocratic, corrupt leaders in the Middle East. As long as the region has no freedom, he said, "it will remain a place of stagnation, resentment and violence ready for export."
Washington still counts many of the region's leaders-for-life as close allies, including Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak and the kings and potentates of Saudi Arabia, Jordan and the Gulf States.
But the administration has also come up with a plan. The Greater Middle East Initiative is modeled on the 1975 Helsinki pact through which the West could press the Soviet Union to allow more freedom and human rights.
The Bush initiative, though harshly condemned as foreign interference, has pushed Arab governments to come up with their own ideas for debate at an Arab summit in Tunisia March 29-30.
One change already noticeable is the growing number of intellectuals in Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia and elsewhere who are willing to criticize their governments to foreign reporters and be quoted by name.
Saudi Arabia seems to be working on two tracks. Its state-guided press is being allowed to write more critically about government performance. At the same time a campaign targeting suspected Muslim extremists has landed hundreds in jail on charges of plotting or abetting the terrorist bombings that have struck the kingdom in the past year.
Saudi intellectuals have welcomed the elections as a step in the right direction, but have reservations: Not all the councils will be elected, the municipalities will have limited influence and it's not clear yet whether women will have the vote.
The absolute monarchy last year used torture and arbitrary detention, restricted the right to freely practice one's religion and had not stopped violence and discrimination against women, according to the U.S. State Department's latest world survey of human rights.
Syria has abolished its feared economic security courts, which tried financial crimes under emergency laws, and it has given people more freedom to criticize.
Yet, Haitham Maleh, head of the Human Rights Association in Syria. said he has been banned from travel after returning from a trip to Europe and the United States during which he described Syria as an "autocratic state" in a speech before the German Parliament.
Experts say the tempo of reform in Syria depends on the amount of U.S. pressure exerted, but that Syria's overall response is inadequate.
Aktham Naisse, chairman of the Committees for the Defense of Human Rights in Syria, says the U.S. presence in neighboring Iraq has put the Syrian government "in a state of confusion," and it hasn't figured out what to do. "It's a catastrophic situation," he said.
"We'll be content, at the start, with a country that's half-democratic, half a police state, as long as it's headed in the direction of a state where the rule of law prevails," Naisse said.
This month he was arrested at a rare demonstration by about 20 Syrian human rights campaigners, believed to be the first such rally the country has had. He was released after a few hours.
Egypt, the most populous of the 21 Arab states, has been under emergency law since Mubarak came to power in the wake of predecessor Anwar Sadat's assassination by Islamic extremists.
Although the Islamic terrorism that wracked Egypt through the 1990s is all but over, authorities still have wide powers to arrest civilians, hold them indefinitely and try them in military courts with limited right of appeal.
In September, Mubarak promised a wide range of political and economic reforms, spoke of expanding political participation, and then scrapped the press law. But Parliament is controlled by Mubarak's National Democratic Party, which is accused of dominating parliamentary elections through intimidation and fraud.
In December, Yemen hosted the Inter-Governmental Regional Conference on Democracy, which allowed politicians and rights activists to debate reform. Eight months earlier, opposition groups accused the ruling General People's Congress party of suppressing parliamentary election results that showed them to have won. The ruling party claimed victory.
Some experts say democracy will never take off if it's seen as doing America's bidding.
"The United States has no credibility because of its policies of bias toward Israel, with its occupation of Iraq, with its patronizing approach, with its attempt at talking at the Arabs rather than to the Arabs," said Clovis Maksoud, former Arab League ambassador to the United States and the United Nations.
"Whatever they promote is almost dead on arrival, not because of what they say but because of what they do."
Others say the real test is what will happen in Iraq.
"The success of democracy there will turn into a driving force that will force other Arab governments to introduce real reforms," said Dalal el-Bizri, a Lebanese sociologist and columnist who lives in Cairo.
"But if there's anarchy, then even the cosmetic changes that are taking place now will stop and governments will then have to derive their legitimacy not from democracy but from religion."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY432-438
 Load-Date: March 10, 2004

 

End of Document
