

'You have the guns. We have the votes,' a voter kept waiting under a baking sun sneers at police
March 11, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 499 words
Byline: By ANGUS SHAW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HARARE, Zimbabwe
Body




Zak Kamasho, waiting five hours with 2,000 other Zimbabweans seeking to vote, shook his fists and sneered at police who kept the gates to the polling station locked Monday.
"You have guns. We have votes," he said.
A judge ordered voting be extended into a third day in Zimbabwe's fiercely fought presidential election, but six hours after the school-turned-polling station was to open, the gates were still locked.
The vote pits President Robert Mugabe who led the nation to independence in 1980 against Morgan Tsvangirai of the Movement for Democratic Change.
In recent years, Zimbabwe's economy has collapsed and political violence - blamed mostly on the ruling party - has become rampant. Tsvangirai is the first real threat to the increasingly unpopular Mugabe after 22 years in office.
Opposition officials accused Mugabe's government of delaying the opening of polls to disenfranchise voters in urban areas like Harare, an opposition stronghold. The large voter turnout was taken as a sign of support for Tsvangirai.
The crowd seethed with anger and settled down only after the polling station's election officer Charles Mabeka received orders to reopen the station at noon.
"I was told not to start until we got the order. We have been ready since 7 a.m.," he said.
Peter Gede, a businessman, scoffed at the explanation, calling the reason for the delay obvious.
"(The government is) trying to rig it. They are trying to stop us from voting … they are desperate and frightened," said Gede.
Under the baking noon sun, women found shelter under umbrellas. The line thickened under the shade of a curbside tree. But police soon ushered voters back into single file lines.
"I am fed up. If I hadn't made up my mind, I wouldn't support Mugabe after this," said Michael Chivi, an unemployed father of two who spent the night outside the school.
Chivi said that when news trickled through Sunday night that voting had been extended, police came brandishing riot sticks and drove voters out of the school yard and locked the gates despite promises voting would continue into the night.
They threatened to "spread tear gas if we didn't go home," he said.
At another school a few streets away, the polling station opened on time after dawn but closed after about 30 minutes. It also reopened at noon, but by then several hundred voters had left.
"They don't want us to vote. We want to vote. We want to change the president," said a 35-year-old woman who said she was too frightened to give her name.
Another voter, identifying himself only as Simon, said he tried to vote Sunday but was turned away after being told he was not on the list of registered voters. He tried another polling station, but was chased away.
Early Monday he tried again, but after waiting five hours he had to leave to go to his job at a fast food restaurant.
"I just wanted to put my X. To me it's not going to be a fair election because my vote is not going to be counted. I have nothing that I can do, only to cry in my heart," said Simon.
 Load-Date: March 12, 2002

 

End of Document
