

35 years on, a six-day war that changed the Middle East still being waged on several fronts
May 28, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1880 words
Byline: By DAN PERRY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Until 35 years ago, a tangle of barbed wire ran down the middle of Assael Street in Jerusalem. The homes on the eastern side were in Jordan. Those on the west were in Israel. Arabs and Jews lived yards apart, in enemy countries.
Chickens would occasionally slip under the fence, recalls Varda Cohen, but never people.
Then came June 1967, and suddenly war was imminent. Israeli soldiers moved into Cohen's yard on the Israeli side of the Abu Tor neighborhood, and she and her husband Shalom moved away. Across the fence, Jordanian soldiers dug in near the home of the Cohens' Palestinian neighbors, the Barakats. They, too, moved out temporarily.
"We were very afraid," says Talat Barakat, who was then a boy of 15. "We listened to the radio all the time, and everybody knew a war would come."
It came, 35 years ago this Wednesday, and although it's remembered here as the Six Day War, in a way it is still being fought.
Israel was euphoric over a victory that had delivered it from Arab armies sworn to destroy it. It had quadrupled its territory, capturing the Sinai Desert and Gaza Strip from Egypt, the Golan Heights from Syria, and from Jordan the West Bank and east Jerusalem with their Jewish, Muslim and Christian holy places.
Today, many Israelis see the West Bank and Gaza as a poisoned chalice of misery and suicide bombings.
The Palestinian people, nonparticipants in the war, initially emerged as its greatest victims, condemned to long years of Israeli military occupation. Yet those years would galvanize them into a determined and cohesive nation.
"Rarely in modern times has so short and localized a conflict had such prolonged, global consequences," writes Michael Oren in "Six Days of War," a new history of the conflict.
"Seldom has the world's attention been gripped, and remained seized, by a single event and its ramifications. In a very real sense, for statesmen and diplomats and soldiers, the war has never ended. For historians it has only just begun."
In 1967, Israel was 19 years old, half of it desert, no wider at its most populous point than a morning's jog. Beyond its borders, living in impoverished camps, were many of the 700,000 Palestinians who fled or were driven from Israel in the 1948 war.
Many dreamed of reclaiming their homes, and a few took up arms, infiltrating Israel on raids. Israel held their host countries responsible and mounted reprisal attacks. Two Middle East wars had already been fought. Border skirmishes and tussles over scarce water were making a third inevitable.
In May 1967, goaded by Arab rivals, Egypt, the most powerful Mideastern country, blockaded the Straits of Tiran, Israel's gateway to the Southern Hemisphere. Egypt signed military pacts with Jordan and Iraq in addition to its alliance with Syria, and threatened war. Israel mobilized its citizens' army. The world held its breath.
"We truly thought we might not survive," says Cohen, 77, her accent revealing German origins even after a half-century in Israel. "We thought we might be overrun by the Arabs."
But Israel struck first, attacking the Egyptian air force, destroying many of its planes on the ground, seizing the Gaza Strip and pushing its armor all the way to the Suez Canal.
Haidar Abdel Shafi, a respected doctor, caught the last train home from Cairo, arriving in Gaza hours before war broke out.
"On June 5, the shelling began from the sea and land and I went to volunteer at Shifa hospital," he says.
"It was such a bad feeling to see Israeli soldiers in Gaza," he says.
The occupation had begun.
Jordan, which then ruled the West Bank, joined the fighting, along with Syria, and by the time the guns fell silent on June 10, Israel controlled the Golan, the Sinai, Gaza and the West Bank - including east Jerusalem with its Old City, home of some the sites holiest to Jews, Christians and Muslims.
The walls and rubble that divided Jerusalem were swiftly torn down and cleared away. While leaving the other territories in limbo to await peace negotiations, Israel annexed the Arab half of Jerusalem and declared the city its eternal, indivisible capital.
When the Cohens and the Barakats returned to Abu Tor, they found the barbed wire gone from their street.
"It is as if we were saved," recalls Varda Cohen. "We visited the Old City - I remember it was full of people - and I remember the Arabs just sitting outside the shops on the steps, and they were stunned."
Across the street, a very different mood prevailed.
Talat Barakat figured the new situation was temporary. "I thought there would soon be a solution. I waited. We are still waiting."
---
Israel expected the Arabs to learn from their defeat that they could not destroy it, and to offer peace in exchange for captured territory. But Israel also made clear it would not withdraw all the way back to the narrow prewar borders.
Four months later came the answer from an Arab summit: no peace with the Jewish state.
And so a status quo settled in, and Israel began to change in fundamental ways.
A nation that had felt vulnerable and - with memories of the Nazi Holocaust still fresh - certain in the justice of its cause began to act and be perceived as a regional power.
In the country's early years, Israelis championed self-reliance and took pride in their laborers and farmers, so different from the stereotype of the European Jew. But now cheap labor from the West Bank and Gaza was available for their fields and restaurant kitchens and construction sites. The economy prospered, but self-reliance suffered.
In a country built on secular, socialist principles, powerful religious currents were unleashed. Devout Jews saw the 1967 victory as divine intervention and a mandate to populate the West Bank - the heartland of biblical Israel.
Meanwhile, the Jewish community in America, where many had previously viewed Israel with some detachment, was electrified as well.
"The feeling of impending catastrophe was so powerful," says historian Oren, who followed the war as a teen-ager in West Orange, N.J., and moved to Israel a few years later. "It was a trauma followed by intense relief and elation and the sum effect was to jolt American Jewry into almost uniform support for Israel."
With the Soviets entrenching themselves in Egypt and Syria, the conflict became part of the Cold War, and the United States, which had avoided getting involved, now became Israel's political, military and economic backer.
To the Arabs, defeat was measured not just in territory and their more than 8,000 dead - tenfold Israel's - but in crushed national pride.
"The war collapsed the Arab world. It was a shameful defeat," says Egyptian historian Abdel-Azim Ramdan.
Ramdan blames Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser for prodding Israel into war and being too proud to retreat from his blockade of the Straits of Tiran even though his army was "not ready for war."
"The Arab world still suffers from this defeat."
In 1973, under Anwar Sadat and allied with Syria, Egypt managed to recapture a slice of Sinai in another war, and six years later it became the first Arab country to make peace with Israel. Jordan followed in 1994, after King Hussein decided to forego any claims to the West Bank in favor of the Palestinians.
But on the Palestinian front, things went nowhere for decades.
Living standards in the occupied territories rose as farmers adopted Israeli techniques, trade with Israel blossomed and workers picked up respectable paychecks from jobs in Israel.
But the constant military presence and the spread of Jewish settlements eating into land and water resources raised tensions to the point that they erupted in a full-scale rebellion, or intefadeh, in 1987.
Even in Jerusalem, which is under Israeli civilian law rather than military rule, Palestinians complain that they are made to feel like foreigners on their own land.
Anwar Basti, a 23-year-old who works in his family's pizza parlor, barely suppresses his rage when he tells of being refused a permit to build a home for a future family on his plot of land. Israel controls the permits, and Palestinians say it withholds them as a way of driving Arabs out of the city.
Basti says he'll never marry, because "I cannot share this black life with anyone. I smile at people when they come here to eat. But inside, I am not smiling."
---
The first intefadeh ended in 1993, when Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization signed accords setting up autonomy zones in Gaza and the West Bank cities that were supposed eventually to grow into a Palestinian state alongside Israel.
But the sides could not agree on the borders, the sharing of Jerusalem and the future of the refugees, and in September 2000 a second intefadeh erupted.
Palestinians have been shot by soldiers in the streets and fields and died in ambulances stopped at Israeli roadblocks. Israelis have been ambushed on the roads and blown up in markets, bars and buses by suicide bombers.
Israel maintains that in negotiations that ended without agreement last year, it offered the Palestinians the vast majority of the West Bank and Gaza and a significant foothold in Jerusalem. The Palestinians insist there was never such a clear-cut offer. Many Israelis have concluded that in spurning what they see as a hugely generous offer, the Palestinians have shown they aren't looking to live alongside Israel - but in place of it.
Now, after a huge sweep through the West Bank in pursuit of the suicide bombers and other militants, Israeli armor rings the autonomous zones, and Palestinians can hardly move between their towns.
The animosity is now overwhelming, and mutual. Palestinians have destroyed many Israelis' faith in peace by openly celebrating suicide bombings. Palestinians believe that by electing hawkish Ariel Sharon and supporting his military tactics, Israelis are signaling they are no longer interested in peace.
The Palestinians' higher birth rate threatens to beat Israel in the population race if Israel keeps the West Bank and Gaza. But the presence of 200,000 Jewish settlers in these territories - among them zealots who would rather fight than move - makes land for peace even harder to envisage.
Many Israelis simply want to be separated from their Palestinian neighbors, even if it means giving up the fruits of the Six Day War.
"We have been through so much incitement. So much hatred. So much death. There is no way now but to live apart," says Varda Cohen, once a strong supporter of the peace effort. "I don't want anything to do with them anymore."
---
Talat Barakat is 50 now, and a father of four. He believes that despite their support for suicide bombings, most Palestinians want peace.
"I don't support the suicide bombers," he says. "But let me tell you: No one does these things for no reason. There is a brother who was killed. Or a house that was destroyed. Or someone who has nothing to eat."
Varda Cohen moved away years ago but is back in Abu Tor visiting. She approaches Barakat's home, and he opens the gate to invite the white-haired woman in. Tentative introductions are made. It turns out they have never spoken.
"I do remember you, from when you were a boy," she says. "You have the same face still."
Barakat apologizes for not having recognized her and says, "Many years have passed."
"That's OK," she says. "I'm no longer so young."
They smile, and fall silent.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY338-343 of May 28, Graphic SIX DAY WAR
 Load-Date: May 29, 2002

 

End of Document
