

A decade later, many wonder whether Saddam should have been the target
January 17, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 795 words
Byline: By DONNA BRYSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




A decade after the Gulf War, debate persists over whether the U.S.-led coalition should have pursued Saddam Hussein instead of declaring its mission complete with the retreat of Iraqi troops from Kuwait.
In the days when President Bush - father of the current president-elect - was comparing Saddam to Hitler and assembling a coalition force to battle him, Iraqi dissident Hamid Bayati had hoped he was finally seeing the beginning of the end for the Iraqi leader.
Surely, this international army would march into Baghdad and free Iraq of its dictator, Bayati remembers thinking from his exile in London.
"All the Iraqis were hoping that the war wouldn't stop until Saddam was removed," Bayati said by telephone from London.
But when the war stopped in 1991, Saddam was still in place - and remains so a decade later. Now some feel he's at his strongest since the war, his isolation weakening and, possibly, weapons programs progressing.
Some Iraqis - Shiite Muslims in the south and Kurds in the north - rose up against Saddam following the Gulf War, and were savagely crushed.
"With a little bit of help, they thought, they would have rid themselves of Saddam," said Iyad Allawi, leader of a London-based coalition of Iraqi dissident groups. "But that help did not come."
Today, it is tempting to think an opportunity to remake Iraq and remove a destabilizing force in the region was lost.
But the question of whether to pursue Saddam was far from clear-cut in 1991, said Amatzia Baram, head of Israel's Gustav von Heinemann Middle East Institute and an expert on Iraq.
America's Arab allies were happy to see Iraq driven from Kuwait. But they were unlikely to help set a precedent for foreign troops to forcibly change an Arab government. The United States was wary of involving itself in the internal uprising.
"And was the United States to stay in Iraq for 20 years, until there was Jeffersonian democracy in Iraq?" Baram said.
Fixing Iraq was never the objective, said Retired Lt. Gen. C.C. "Buck" Rogers, deputy to Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf during the war.
"Now, in hindsight, should we have taken him out? I would say yes," Rogers told The Associated Press this week in Florida. "On reflection, it probably would have simplified things."
Saddam was severely weakened by the war. Nearly a fifth of the 500,000 fighters Iraq mobilized for the war were killed - as were 35,000-45,000 civilians, Iraq says. Thousands of tanks, armor and artillery pieces were destroyed.
Key Iraqi military installations were bombed by the allies, the uprisings that followed sapped more of Saddam's strength and trade sanctions imposed by the United Nations have destroyed Iraq's economy.
But now Rogers and others believe Saddam has re-emerged as a threat, thanks in part to the millions he has been able to earn selling oil under a U.N.-supervised program meant to ease the effects of sanctions on Iraqi citizens.
Kuwaiti political scientist Massouma al-Mubarak said Kuwaitis nervously wonder when an emboldened Saddam will attack again - and how: another invasion? a terrorist bombing?
"Saddam still portrays the people of Kuwait and the rulers of Kuwait as the enemies of Iraq and the land of Kuwait as part of Iraq," she said. Saddam, she added, doesn't care about world reaction: "He could do any crazy thing."
Saddam has been free of U.N. weapons inspections for two years. Experts worry he has used the time to at least partially reconstitute his nuclear, chemical and biological weapons programs.
Saddam hit Israel with 39 Scud missiles during the Gulf War. Baram, the Israeli think-tank chief, said Saddam may tip the few missiles he has left with biological or chemical weapons and launch them at Israel.
Saddam is increasingly popular among Arabs because of his denunciations of Israel and his pledges of monetary support for Palestinians in their confrontations with the Jewish state.
While Saddam has been regaining strength, the international opposition to Iraq has weakened. Paris and Moscow, which both contributed to the Gulf War coalition, are leading the campaign to ease or erase the U.N. trade sanctions.
The sanctions are opposed by those who say they take too high a toll on Iraqis and by businesspeople interested in getting a share of Saddam's oil billions. Washington insists sanctions cannot be lifted until Saddam proves he has surrendered weapons of mass destruction.
Bayati, the Iraqi dissident, has come to believe the West wants a strong Saddam. He is an excuse to keep troops in the region and a bogeyman useful for persuading Gulf states to buy U.S. weapons, Bayati said.
"We've tried the Republicans and the Democrats, and we've found they don't want to take Saddam out," he said. "The only way to remove Saddam is by the Iraqi people themselves, not by foreign troops."
 Load-Date: January 18, 2001

 

End of Document
