

A final chapter in the search for body of Nigeria's activist-icon
August 6, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 888 words
Byline: By GLENN McKENZIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PORT HARCOURT, Nigeria
Body




After Nigeria's former ruling military hanged Ken Saro-Wiwa, security agents warned cemetery workers the body's location was a secret they should carry to their graves.
"We were stripped naked and kept in police cells without food for four days," recalled Friday Zorzor, one of the gravediggers. "We knew that if we ever talked about it to anyone, even worse things could happen to us."
Seven years later, a change of government - and a change of heart by some police - have allowed U.S. investigators to unravel the mystery and exhume what are believed to be the remains of the internationally known Nigerian playwright and activist.
During an exhumation lasting several weeks, American forensic experts from the group Physicians for Human Rights last month dug up what they believe are the remains of Saro-Wiwa and seven others of the so-called "Ogoni Nine." The men's executions made Nigeria an international pariah and laid the groundwork for the return to civilian rule in Africa's most populous nation.
Saro-Wiwa, 54, and the eight others from his minority Ogoni tribe were executed by a military tribunal on Nov. 10, 1995, after they were convicted of orchestrating the mob killings of four tribal chiefs.
Saro-Wiwa insisted he and the others were framed to silence their outspoken opposition to the late dictator Gen. Sani Abacha's regime and Nigeria's oil industry, which Saro-Wiwa accused of polluting villagers' land and stealing their oil.
Saro-Wiwa had campaigned on behalf of the 500,000 Ogoni people who live in the oil-rich Niger Delta and said their land and water were being destroyed by oil industry pollution. In 1993, protests forced oil giant Royal-Dutch Shell to withdraw from Ogoniland. The firm has never returned.
The executions sparked global condemnation leading to U.N. arms sanctions against Nigeria. Nigeria, Africa's most populous country, was suspended from the Commonwealth of Britain and its former colonies.
Saro-Wiwa's hanging also stirred antimilitary sentiment within Nigeria, and after Abacha died of apparent heart failure in 1998, his successor quickly agreed to elections. President Olusegun Obasanjo gave his assent to the search for Saro-Wiwa's remains shortly after winning elections in 1999.
The U.S. team hopes to use DNA tests to match bone fragments exhumed from an overgrown cemetery in the southeast oil city of Port Harcourt with blood samples from surviving relatives.
"I'm very hopeful. It is highly likely that one of them is Ken," said team leader William Haglund, a Seattle-based forensic anthropologist.
The discovery is the climax of a yearslong battle by Saro-Wiwa's family to overcome state secrecy and bureaucratic red tape, while trying to persuade relatives of the other eight activists to cooperate.
Some of the victims' relatives were initially reluctant for fear of giving blood for DNA tests and because many could not afford a decent burial for their loved ones if they were found. In the end, however, only two families declined to be involved.
Some officials feared exhuming Saro-Wiwa's remains would reopen wounds from one of Nigeria's most tumultuous political chapters, forcing authorities to re-examine past military injustices, Saro-Wiwa's younger brother, Owens Wiwa says.
A one-time nominee for the Nobel Peace Prize, Saro-Wiwa received Sweden's Right Livelihood Award and the Goldman Prize from a San Francisco foundation, recognizing him as one of Africa's leading environmentalists.
He wrote plays, children's books and novels critical of the military government and the oil industry - including "Sozaboy," the story of a cab driver who finds himself in the army, and "Prisoner of Jebs," which poked fun at the ruling elite.
Saro-Wiwa also wrote and produced one of Africa's most popular television series, "Basi and Co.," which satirized the rich and famous.
For Owens Wiwa, the search was fueled by his desire to bring his brother home.
"In our culture, we don't allow (our people) to be buried outside Ogoni," Wiwa said. "We just want to take Ken home."
Yet misinformation delayed the search. Initial reports the men had been dumped in a mass grave and their remains covered in acid proved to be false.
Zorzor, who still works at the cemetery, and former gravediggers narrowed the investigation by drawing from memories of a towering iroko tree, church ruins and ant hills near the graves.
As Haglund and his team painstakingly dug through mud beneath saplings and weeds, they experienced initial disappointments, including the discovery of a mass grave - believed to hold robbers or paupers - before finding nine individual plots, including eight believed of the Ogoni Nine.
One was immediately ruled out because it was a woman, and a final body is still missing, Haglund said. Saro-Wiwa's small stature meant he was "easier than some others" to identify, he added.
In 2000, Saro-Wiwa's family held a symbolic funeral, burying an empty coffin with the author's books and golden pipe on Wiwa family land in Bane, the corn and cassava farming village where Saro-Wiwa was born.
Now, the family hopes for the real thing.
"We want the bones back. We want to get the head back. We want our man back at home," said Saro-Wiwa's 98-year-old father, Jim Beesor Wiwa, his eyes glistening with tears.
---
On the Net:
Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People, www.mosopcanada.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NGA101-103
 Load-Date: August 7, 2002

 

End of Document
