

Africans tell of deaths in the desert, saying Moroccans abandon them there
The Associated Press
October 18, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1336 words
Byline: By SCHEHEREZADE FARAMARZI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TOUIZGUE, Morocco
Body




The 26-year-old Nigerian left his home in Casablanca one afternoon to buy sardines and orange juice for dinner. Police arrested him, seized his legal refugee papers and beat him, he says, displaying scratched and blackened wrists as proof of having been handcuffed.
Within 48 hours, he says, he and nine busloads of other Africans were dropped in the middle of the Sahara Desert, all left to suffer hunger and thirst - and some to die.
The Moroccan government denies claims from human rights groups that it has been dumping Africans in deserts, abandoning them there as a way of coping with an influx of thousands of refugees trying to reach Morocco's Spanish enclaves as a route to hoped-for prosperity in Europe.
Refugees tell a different story. On Monday, the Moroccan government led a group of about 40 journalists on a tour of two desert holding centers at Touizgue and Berden, allowing them to speak freely with the Africans there.
Many say police picked them up on the streets, in their homes, at their workplaces. Others spoke of Moroccan forces leaving them within 30 miles of the borders of Algeria or Mauritania, handing them meager food and water and telling them to "go" but giving them no directions. Some described the horror of seeing spouses, siblings or infant children die, and of having to drink urine to survive.
Yet most of those interviewed at the holding centers were different from the illegal refugees who have been trying in vain to make it over a barbed-wire fence and sneak into the Spanish enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla on Morocco's northern coasts.
These sub-Saharan Africans - like Tijani Abdellahi, who went to the grocery and wound up in the desert - are in Morocco legitimately, many with homes and jobs. They have United Nations' asylum-seeker status and paperwork to prove it, meaning that Morocco, under the Geneva Conventions, cannot deport them.
Authorities apparently picked them up in their sweep to return illegal refugees to countries such Algeria, which Moroccan officials blame for allowing migrants to cross into Morocco. Such repatriations continued Tuesday.
"I can't go back to my house," Simon Pierre Auder, 38, of Liberia, shouted to visiting journalists as he waved the keys to his Casablanca home.
Their plight came to attention last week when Medecins Sans Frontieres, or Doctors Without Borders, reported that Morocco had dropped about 1,000 people in the desert and left them there to walk for nearly a week. As a result, the government established the two holding centers for those people to find refuge.
People interviewed Monday told various stories of how they managed to survive and make it to the centers, one a military encampment, the other a police outpost of mud huts, both about 124 miles away from where the Africans claim they were dumped in the middle of the Sahara.
The heat, thirst and fatigue set in quickly, recalled Joseph Edoboro, a Nigerian. His three-month-old baby, Frank, died first, followed a few hours later by his wife, Stella, 22, despite his efforts to save her.
"I pissed in a can for my wife to drink," said Edoboro, 28, recounting his arduous journey until Moroccan authorities picked up him and some other Africans and brought them to Touizgue.
Abdellahi said police arrested him near his home in Casablanca at 4 p.m. on Oct. 2 as he returned from the store. He thought his U.N. papers would help him out, he said, but at the police station officers punched him in the face and stomach and told him to return to his country.
The next day, Moroccan police drove him and 47 other Africans from various countries to Oujda, about 200 miles to the east. They spent the night at a police station there where he was beaten again, he said, adding that police seized his cell phone and about $150.
At 9 a.m. the next day, he and many others were put into nine buses and driven about 450 miles. In his group was Edoboro, his wife and baby son. Around 8 p.m., they were transferred into three trucks and driven deeper into the desert.
When they stopped, soldiers gave each African given six cans of sardines, three jugs of water and three loaves of round Moroccan bread.
"They said, 'go,"' recalled Abdellahi, as several other Africans crowded around a reporter. Someone in the crowd said a soldier told them they were 22 miles from the Algerian border in southwestern Morocco and close to the Mauritanian frontier.
"We didn't know where to go," he said. "There were no lights, no signs."
Three days later, when their food and water ran out, they walked back to Moroccan soldiers at a post apparently in southern Morocco, but the soldiers threw stones at them.
Monday Eborigbe, a 26-year-old Nigerian, picked up the story:
"We said, 'We are going to die in the desert.' Since they were driving us away, rejecting us, we decided to go elsewhere." So they headed toward the Algerian border.
Guards there took pity on them and gave them food and water, Abdellahi said. "They asked us where we had come from. We said Morocco. Then they deported us to Morocco again - into no-man's-land."
They walked back to the Moroccan soldiers. "We said … they can kill us if they want," said Abdellahi. The soldiers told them not to approach because the small stretch of soil between them was mined.
The Africans sat across from the soldiers for about five hours in the sun as the soldiers removed the mines. The soldiers called them over and offered them water and bread, then drove them for two hours to the Touizgue holding center.
This was Sunday, Oct. 16, two weeks after Abdellahi was picked up outside his home.
James Benjamin, who worked as a mechanic in Rabat while awaiting asylum in a third country, left his brother Bright, a car washer, lying dead in the desert.
"My brother died because he was not able to drink his urine, but I was," he said.
Aziz al-Hassan, a 27-year-old Ghanaian, was in a group of 20 Africans who wandered near the Algerian border for seven days. Nine of them died31, he said.
An official with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees in Rabat, Marwan Tassi, said the Moroccan government had not yet responded to his agency's request to visit Africans in the holding centers.
El Hassan Al Kanjiti, a senior official with the local government in Goulimine, the main city in the area, dismissed claims that the Africans were abandoned in the desert.
"They hate us because we prevent them from going to Europe," he said.
But when pressed to comment on persistent claims by the migrants of ill-treatment, Al Kanjiti, could only say: "I don't know. I didn't see it with my own eyes. … What can we do?"
Similar stories were told by Africans at the military encampment in Berden, where nearly 200 Africans from 14 countries - most with U.N. papers - are being held.
"People die in the desert," said Onesmus Johnson, 30. "I saw two die in front of me, two Nigerians. They were helpless, very tired, couldn't walk."
Alexander Dennis, 25, of Liberia, showed a reporter a journal he kept on a sardine wrapper.
"We drove about (375 miles) and we reached a point where we were thrown in the desert - between Morocco and Algeria - called no-man's-land. It was so wild and in the night we walked through the wilderness 'til we saw the lights of the Algerian patrol guards.
"So we lit a fire to signal to them. They found us at about 6 a.m. on Oct. 4 and … "
He didn't have time to write the rest. So he tells the rest of the story. The Algerians showed them the way back to Morocco. On the way the group gave all its sardines and water to a pregnant women among them.
They had been walking for five days when Moroccan police found them, took their cell phones and drove them to Bouafra, in eastern Morocco. After two days in Bouafra, Dennis and 600 other migrants were transported to Berden.
Many others wanted to tell their stories, but there wasn't time. As helicopters prepared to depart, a refugee ran up to reporter and thrust a small piece of paper into her hands. "It's a list of people from Sierra Leone," he said - the names of six people still held at the encampment.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo of Oct. 13: DLM104
 Load-Date: October 19, 2005

 

End of Document
