

All women's crew among eight teams contesting round-the-world race
September 21, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 586 words
Byline: By KRYSTYNA RUDZKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Lisa McDonald has one more crew member than her competitors, and she insists the field is even in the Volvo Ocean Race.
The American skipper's boat, Amer Sports Too, has a crew of 13 women. And it will have the same weight as her male rivals after organizers allowed a late request for an additional crew member.
"We'll have the same weight as the guys on the starting line," said McDonald, who is in her second round-the-world yacht race. "I don't think it's unfair. The average weight of one of the guys in the male crew is 176 pounds and the average for a girl is 143 pounds. That is a lot."
The other crews reluctantly agreed to allow Amer Sports Too the extra member. It's the fourth time the race has featured an all-female crewed boat.
Along with seven other teams, crewed by the world's top sailors, Amer Sports Too will set out Sunday from Cowes, on the Isle of Wight, on a nine-month journey. The race will take the boats to South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Brazil, the United States, France and Sweden before finishing in Kiel, Germany, in June 2002.
McDonald, 31 of Newport, Rhode Island, sailed on EF Education in the last race in 1997-98, when the event was called the Whitbread. While its sister boat EF Language won, McDonald's boat broke its mast in the Southern Ocean and never really recovered.
This time, McDonald has more responsibility, and is joined by six of her EF teammates on Amer Sports Too and seven rookies.
"It's my first time as skipper, but it's a great crew," McDonald said. "My strength is in my crew. They give me the strength to be strong in my role as manager of the boat.
"This time, half the team have come back for a second round-the-world race, so we're bringing a certain amount of experience with us that we lacked last time."
McDonald's sister boat in the race this time is Amer Sports One, skippered by experienced New Zealander Grant Dalton. It will be the sixth round-the-world race for the Admiral's and America's Cup veteran. Dalton won the Whitbread in 1993-94 with NZ Endeavour and finished runner-up four years ago.
Also competing are ASSA Abloy and SEB from Sweden; djuice dragons from Norway; Team News Corp, a New Zealand syndicate headed by Australian media mogul Rupert Murdoch; Team Tyco, based in Bermuda but run from Baco Raton, Fla.; and illbruk challenge, from Germany.
Unlike the last race, each of the nine legs counts for the same amount, with no weighting for the longer or Southern Oceans legs.
The change means the first and longest leg, at 7,350 nautical miles, is worth the same as leg six, which is only 850 nautical miles. The change should make for a more competitive race - previous events have been virtually decided after the first leg when results were based on elapsed time.
Illbruck is classed one of the favorites, with U.S Olympic silver medalist John Kostecki as skipper. Kostecki, second in the Soling class at the 1988 Olympics, competed in the last Whitbread and in two America's Cups.
Another strong contender is djuice dragons, skippered by Norwegian Knut Frostad, who won the 2000 Sydney to Hobart yacht race in Australia. ASSA Abloy has the advantage of having American co-skipper Mark Rudiger, who was the navigator aboard 1997-98 winner EF Language.
The boats will head for Cape Town, South Africa, where they are expected to arrive Oct. 23. The other legs will take the fleet to Sydney, Australia; Auckland, New Zealand; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Miami, then Baltimore; La Rochelle, France; Gothenburg, Sweden, before finishing at Kiel.
 Load-Date: September 22, 2001

 

End of Document
