

Amid tight security, Americans around the world mark Independence Day
July 4, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 928 words
Byline: By JILL LAWLESS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Wary but determined, Americans around the globe marked Independence Day with barbecues, sports and parties Thursday despite warnings that large gatherings could become a target for terrorists.
Even Cuba announced an unprecedented Fourth of July observance in homage to the American people. The Communist Party newspaper Granma said a gathering Thursday evening at Havana's Karl Marx theater would feature music and poetry honoring Americans and their traditions.
Italian President Carlo Azeglio Ciampi sent a message to President Bush stressing Europe's solidarity with America over the Sept. 11 attacks. "Terrorism hit at our common values, which we will continue to defend together," the message said.
While some usual American parties were canceled, many overseas events went ahead, although with heightened security. At the Vatican, Roman Catholic cardinals and international envoys walked through metal detectors before munching hot dogs in the garden of the U.S. ambassador's residence.
In the Australian capital, Canberra, mounted police patrolled outside the U.S. ambassador's house, while inside 1,100 Australians and Americans ate chili dogs and apple pie to the strains of Bruce Springsteen's "Born in the U.S.A."
Herb McEachin, an American who coaches Canberra's professional basketball team, said the celebration had special resonance because of the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon.
"That was a horrific event last year and it still sticks with us now. So to be with our fellow Americans here today, it brings us closer together and I think it's something that's been intensified," he said.
The FBI warned about the possibility of a holiday-timed terrorist strike, though it said it knew of no specific threat.
Parties were canceled by the U.S. Embassy in the West African nation of Ivory Coast, the American Business Council in Kuwait and the American International School in Vienna, Austria. In Sweden, the annual summer American Festival changed its name to Stockholm Summer Festival.
In Paris, where the American Club has celebrated the Fourth of July with picnics, lavish parties and cruises on the Seine, it marked this year's holiday with a simple cocktail party at a private club.
But the U.S. military's 6th Area Support Group in Germany went ahead with its annual rodeo and festival, and American peacekeepers in Kosovo played softball, basketball and volleyball. U.S. officials in Dublin put on a big bash to thank the Irish for their support after Sept. 11, inviting 2,500 guests to the ambassador's home.
William Farish, the U.S. ambassador to Britain who hosted more than 500 guests on the lawn of his residence at Regent's Park in central London, urged Americans to be alert but celebrate anyway.
"My message is to have a spectacular July Fourth," he told British Broadcasting Corp. radio. "Obviously, be aware, but I don't think that means to change anything they were doing."
Many Americans kept a low profile in the Middle East, where anti-American feeling runs high because of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. But American soldiers and sailors at several Persian Gulf bases celebrated and U.S. embassies held receptions.
At the U.S. Navy's 5th Fleet base in Bahrain, many sailors got a break from work. "We miss home but we are celebrating in our own special way," said Lt. Chris Davis, spokesman for the 5th Fleet who was on his way to a private barbecue.
More than 700 Jordanians, including members of the royal family, attended a party at the U.S. Embassy in Amman. In Jerusalem, security worries led an American-Canadian organization to move its celebration from a park to the zoo, where 2,000 people ate hot dogs and pizza next to preening flamingos.
In Lebanon, a fireworks display lit the night sky over Beirut's waterfront in honor of the American holiday as about 25 protesters gathered at one intersection carrying anti-U.S. and anti-Israel placards.
In Manila, Philippines, some 2,000 people waving small U.S. flags marched to the U.S. Embassy, chanting "Long live America!" Across the street, a group opposed to the presence of U.S. soldiers to train Filipino troops fighting Muslim guerrillas in the south, shouted "Puppet! Puppet!" at the marchers.
Crowds of Puerto Ricans, meanwhile, who support making their island the 51st U.S. state donned hats and shirts covered with stars and stripes and carried American flags through the streets of San Juan. About 2,000 people attended the pro-statehood celebration in the U.S. territory.
Police in Santiago, Chile, said pamphlets with anti-U.S. slogans were found outside a Blockbuster video shop set afire by a bag full of sawdust doused in kerosene. The fire was quickly put out.
Among the most poignant celebrations were those at Bagram air base in Afghanistan. Security around the base, headquarters for some 7,000 U.S. soldiers in Afghanistan, was tightened, but inside a holiday atmosphere reigned.
Dozens of American flags fluttered amid the rows of green tents at the dusty, wind-swept base north of Kabul. Some soldiers used sandbags to support makeshift soccer goals near a hangar, while others played basketball on a helicopter pad flanked by U.S. AC-10 gunships and decaying Soviet MiG fighters.
Some soldiers found the holiday especially symbolic because the United States helped free Afghanistan from the repressive rule of the Taliban.
"If you're going to celebrate Independence Day, it's good to do it when you're helping another country get its independence," said Staff Sgt. Rhonda Lawson of New Orleans. "But I'd rather be at a music festival in New Orleans."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XSG104,106;MLA111,112;LON108;KAR102;WBER111;JRL105
 Load-Date: July 5, 2002

 

End of Document
