

Among the lions, the ladies like dark manes, study shows
August 22, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 431 words
Byline: By PAUL RECER, AP Science Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




On the Serengeti plain, the lady lion prefers a swain with a black mane.
That's the finding of a study analyzing how the dense collar of hair about the neck of male lions affects the love life of Africa's biggest cat.
Peyton M. West, a researcher at the University of Minnesota, said it's the mane color, not the length, that matters most to the female lions of Tanzania.
"We were completely surprised by this," said West, first author of the study appearing Friday in the journal Science.
West said the female lions may instinctively be drawn to the black manes because males with darker manes seem superior in a number of ways.
"A dark mane is apparently a marker the female uses to evaluate the fitness of a male," she said. This suggests that lions' manes evolved over time through sexual selection, said West.
Dark-maned male lions generally have a higher level of testosterone "which means they are more aggressive fighters," said West, and this can be key to raising cubs successfully.
An aggressive male is more able to chase away invading bachelors who try to take over the pride, said West. This is important because if there is a change in male leadership of a pride, the new dominant male routinely kills all the young cubs sired by the deposed male. Thus, by choosing to mate dark-maned, aggressive males, a female lion gives her young a better chance of surviving, the researcher said.
West said that records collected for decades by scientists observing lions in Tanzania's Serengeti National Park show that male lions with dark manes are more likely to recover from wounds. She said it is not clear why this is so.
She noted that dark manes seem to intimidate other male lions, which means a lion with a black collar of hair has to fight less often and therefore has fewer injuries.
West and her co-author, Craig Packer of the University of Minnesota, investigated the effects of mane color by setting up life-sized models of lions near where the animals lived in the Serengeti.
She said they found that female lions, when given a choice, would try to seduce the models that had the darker mane, ignoring those with blond hair.
Male lions, said West, tended to attack more often the lion models with short manes or with light-colored manes, while avoiding the models with black manes.
West said that most prides have a surplus of female adults and that during mating season the lady lions will try to lure the males into fathering cubs. She said the researchers discovered that females gave most of their attention to the males with the dark manes.
On the Net:
Science: www.sciencemag.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX108-109
 Load-Date: August 23, 2002

 

End of Document
