

AP News in Brief; U.S. inserts more special forces, plans resupply of Taliban opposition through the winter
November 4, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2076 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




More U.S. special forces entered Afghanistan to support anti-Taliban rebels as top commanders said Sunday the Taliban government is weakening but still controls substantial troops that will take time to thin out and conquer.
Air Force Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said a couple more teams of special forces were inserted in Afghanistan the last few days. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said last week he hoped to at least triple the number of special forces inside Afghanistan, now believed to number between 100 and 200.
The teams are working with opposition leaders and are likely to include Green Berets, U.S. Army commandos who specialize in advising foreign troops.
The Pentagon said Sunday that U.S. bombing over the weekend focused on targets close to four key cities near the Taliban front lines with northern alliance rebels: Bagram, Taloqan, Konduz, and Mazar-e-Sharif.
Cuba braces for Michelle's approach as 'extremely dangerous hurricane' speeds up
 
HAVANA (AP) - Hurricane Michelle slammed into Cuba's coast Sunday packing winds up to 135 mph and headed toward the country's premier tourist resort as the government evacuated more than a half-million people from low-lying areas.
Heavy surf pounded beaches in the lower Florida Keys, which forecasters say will likely be brushed by Michelle's winds after it slices crosswise through Cuba.
With 135 mph winds and a death toll of 12 already in Honduras, Nicaragua and Jamaica, the storm had local relief officials worried.
The International Red Cross in Geneva reported that 24,500 Red Cross volunteers in Cuba were helping government authorities in evacuation efforts.
Michelle made landfall around 4 p.m. EST on the Zapata Peninsula, on Cuba's southern coast in the central province of Matanzas near the Bay of Pigs, about 70 miles southeast of Havana, home to 2 million of Cuba's 11 million citizens.
 
Arab leaders say bin Laden waging war against the world, doesn't speak for Arabs and Muslims
 
DAMASCUS, Syria (AP) - Osama bin Laden is waging a war against the world and does not represent Arabs and Muslims, senior Arab officials said Sunday during a gathering of foreign ministers in the Syrian capital.
"I think there is a war between him (bin Laden) and the world," Egyptian Foreign Minister Ahmed Maher told reporters before the meeting of Arab League foreign ministers.
Arab League Secretary General Amr Moussa also reproached bin Laden, the United States' prime suspect in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, saying he "does not speak for Arabs and Muslims."
Bin Laden and his al-Qaida organization have called on Muslims to wage holy war against the United States following the Oct. 7 launch of U.S. airstrikes against Afghanistan, where the Taliban rulers have refused to hand over bin Laden.
 
Pakistani tribesmen enter Afghanistan to fight United States
 
PESHAWAR, Pakistan (AP) - At least 1,500 armed Pakistani tribesmen crossed into neighboring Afghanistan on Sunday to join the Taliban in what they called a holy war against the United States.
The tribesmen, members of the same ethnic group as many Afghans, defied a ban by their government, which has been unsettled by domestic opposition to its support for the U.S.-led campaign against Afghanistan's ruling Taliban and terror suspect Osama bin Laden.
Protests, however, had been relatively small in recent weeks.
In the northwest border town of Bajur, another 8,000 to 10,000 pro-Taliban Pakistanis rallied to demand President Pervez Musharraf's resignation.
The protesters were members of the fundamentalist Jamaat-e-Islami, or the Islamic Party. Its leader, Qazi Hussain Ahmed, was charged with sedition Sunday for urging the military to overthrow Musharraf in a speech a few days ago.
 
Israel begins pulling troops out of West Bank town
 
TEL AVIV, Israel (AP) - Israel began pulling out of a West Bank town early Monday, the military said, more than two weeks after invading six towns following the assassination of an Israeli Cabinet minister.
The Israeli forces were withdrawing a few hundred yards to the edge of Palestinian-controlled territory in the town of Qalqilya and into Israel, the military said.
The planned withdrawal went ahead despite an attack in Jerusalem Sunday by a Palestinian gunman who opened fire on a bus, killing two Jewish teen-agers and wounding more than 40.
The U.S. government had demanded repeatedly that Israel pull its forces out of the West Bank towns it took over after ultranationalist Israeli Tourism Minister Rehavam Zeevi was assassinated on Oct. 17 by militants from the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. The group said the move was revenge for Israel's killing of PFLP leader Mustafa Zibri.
 
Traces of anthrax reported on a package sent from NBC to the New York mayor's office
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Traces of anthrax were reported Sunday on a package sent from NBC to the New York mayor's office and at a Veterans Affairs' hospital in Washington.
Health investigators were stymied in efforts to find the source of anthrax that killed a New York woman, but experts said they were relieved that no new cases linked to her unique exposure have surfaced.
On Capitol Hill, workers prepared to sterilize the anthrax-contaminated Hart Senate office building with chlorine dioxide gas, but the Longworth House office building was reopening Monday morning for the first time since Oct. 17.
Capitol Police Lt. Dan Nichols said late Sunday all portions of the building will be open except for three sealed off rooms where anthrax has been found.
Officials at the Mayo Clinic were to announce Monday a new DNA test that can give a quick answer about any possible anthrax sample.
 
Fighting erupts again in Central African Republic capital
 
BANGUI, Central African Republic (AP) - Presidential guard units and soldiers loyal to the Central African Republic's former army chief of staff clashed in the capital on Sunday, a day after government forces tried to arrest the ousted general.
A resident said at least one woman was killed after being hit by a stray bullet. A hospital employee said two children were seriously wounded.
Patasse's government accuses Bozize of helping plan the May coup attempt, which led to a week of battles between mutineers and loyalist soldiers. Bozize denies the charges.
Bozize led military operations that put down the May coup attempt, keeping Patasse in power. He also defended Patasse's government during army mutinies in 1996 and 1997.
Patasse has held power since he won elections in 1993, ending the 12-year military dictatorship of Gen. Andre Kolingba.
 
Leftist rebels kill three policemen, kidnap at least 11 people in Colombia
 
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - Fighters from Colombia's largest rebel group killed three policemen and kidnapped at least 11 civilians over the weekend, authorities said Sunday.
On Saturday, three police officers were killed and two injured during a three-hour battle with the rebels in Paujil in Caqueta province, 155 miles south of the capital, he said.
Fighters from the FARC also abducted eight truck drivers after setting up a roadblock late Saturday in Casanare province. In the same region, the rebel army also kidnapped three technicians from a national radio and television institute.
On Sunday, gunmen abducted a local judge and three lawyers from a park outside Caldas, 215 miles north of Bogota, army spokesman Capt. Jorge Florez said.
Guerrillas have battled the government and a rival right-wing paramilitary army for 37 years. An estimated 3,500 people are killed every year.
 
Police suspect Irish dissidents in car bombing in central England
 
BIRMINGHAM, England (AP) - A car bomb explosion in the central English city of Birmingham was probably the work of the outlawed anti-British group the Real IRA, police said Sunday.
The device partially exploded in a busy area late Saturday but caused no serious injuries.
No group has yet claimed responsibility for the explosion but police said it bore the hallmarks of Real IRA, an Irish dissident group that has carried out several attacks in Britain.
Sims said the bomb was "a very substantial device" similar in size to car bombs planted outside British Broadcasting Corp. studios and in Ealing, west London, earlier this year. The Ealing bomb contained nearly 90 pounds of explosives, police said at the time.
Saturday's bombing came just hours after politicians in Northern Ireland found a way to rescue their power-sharing government. It was on the verge of collapsing after Protestant extremists defeated David Trimble's re-election as government leader Friday.
 
Embassy siege anniversary shows drift from hard-line message
 
TEHRAN, Iran (AP) - Amid this year's commemoration to mark the anniversary of the day the U.S. Embassy was overrun in 1979- attended by about 5,000 people Sunday - were hints that the old formulas are no longer enough. Iran's hard-line rulers have been troubled by recent street rallies and questioned over foreign policy.
Sunday's crowd at the embassy was filled out by students ranging in age from about seven to the teens and military conscripts. The children paid little attention to the speakers, who included Ayatollah Ahmad Jannati, head of the powerful Guardian Council.
Even state television sharply scaled back on coverage of this year's anniversary protest.
None of the famous hostage-takers appeared at the demonstration, which marks the storming of the embassy on Nov. 4, 1979, after the Islamic Revolution ousted the U.S.-backed monarchy. Fifty-two Americans were held captive for 444 days.
 
Disease center vaccinates workers in preparation for possible smallpox scare
 
ATLANTA (AP) - The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has vaccinated some of its health workers against smallpox as a precaution in case they need to investigate a terrorist attack involving the deadly virus, a spokesman said Sunday.
While the CDC has no evidence that anyone is readying a terrorist attack using smallpox, which was eradicated outside laboratories 21 years ago, officials of the federal agency say the virus is so dangerous that it is important they be prepared.
The agency expects a number of false alarms as doctors heighten their suspicion of anthrax, smallpox and other diseases, said Dr. Jeffrey Koplan, the CDC director.
Last week, the CDC vaccinated about 140 members of epidemiological teams that can be sent at a moment's notice to examine suspected cases of smallpox.
This week, the CDC will begin a series of training courses on smallpox for some employees and state and local health workers.
 
Jifar breaks race record in his first New York City Marathon; Okayo sets record for women
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Sunday's New York City Marathon was unlike any other - and not just because both winners set course records.
Tesfaye Jifar of Ethiopia and Margaret Okayo of Kenya pulled away for comfortable victories in a red-white-and-blue affair dedicated to victims of Sept. 11.
The marathon adopted the motto "United We Run." There was a view of lower Manhattan, where the World Trade Center once stood, as runners crossed the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge. About 10 people ran in place of relatives killed Sept. 11, including Ralph Maerz, a 56-year-old ex-smoker whose 29-year-old son Noell died in Tower 2.
There were about 25,000 runners, roughly 5,000 fewer than normal, a disparity race organizers attributed to fears about safety.
Runners were told not to accept cups of water from spectators lining the course. Unprecedented marathon security also included more than 2,800 police officers and a no-flight zone banning private airplanes over the route.
 
A wild welcome for Harry Potter at his movie premiere
 
LONDON (AP) - Shrieks of excitement and a blizzard of photo flashes greeted three astonished young stars at Sunday's premiere of the long-awaited film, "Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone."
Young fans, some dressed up as the boy wizard and his friends, gave a wild welcome to Daniel Radcliffe, the 12-year-old who plays Harry, and Rupert Grint, 13, and Emma Watson, 11, who play Harry's school pals Ron and Hermione.
The British trio, getting their first taste of celebrity, seemed happy, stunned and nervous before the masses of cameras and microphones, and the voices shouting their names from every direction.
Stars from television, film and the pop music world showed up by the dozen, almost all of them with a child or two in tow, for the premier of the film, which will be titled "Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone" in the United States.
 
 Load-Date: November 5, 2001

 

End of Document
