

AP News in Brief; Bush opens his first trip to the Middle East for two peace summits
The Associated Press
June 2, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1930 words
Dateline: SHARM EL-SHEIK, Egypt
Body




President Bush, taking the lead in the frustrating search for Mideast peace, pledged Monday to work unstintingly for the goal of Israel and a Palestinian state living side by side without bloodshed. He said that "this is going to be a difficult process" but claimed progress.
Bush was likely to win support from Arab leaders at a summit Tuesday for countering terrorism and for his peacemaking effort. But Arab acceptance of Israel remains conditional on Israel yielding all the land it won in the 1967 Mideast war. That includes part of Jerusalem.
The United States also was trying to narrow differences between Israel and Palestinian leaders before Bush meets with them on Wednesday in Jordan.
Israel wants the Palestinians to refer in their statement to a Jewish state. And the Palestinians want Israel to specifically endorse the establishment of a Palestinian state.
On the explosive security front, meanwhile, a compromise was taking shape, with Israel apparently willing to settle for a ceasefire now, provided the Palestinians confront terror groups and uproot them at a later stage. Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas contends his authority is not broad enough yet to take the militants on directly.
- FCC eases limits on media ownership in party-line vote
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Federal regulators voted Monday to allow companies to buy television stations reaching nearly half the nation's viewers and to own newspaper-broadcasting combinations in the same city, relaxing decades-old rules against media concentration.
The 3-2 vote by the Republican-controlled Federal Communications Commission brought strong criticism from opponents, including one lawmaker who predicted an "orgy of mergers and acquisitions" putting a few giant companies in control of what most people see, hear and read.
Many media companies favored the move, saying current restrictions hindered their ability to grow and compete in a market changed by cable TV, satellite broadcasts and the Internet.
Rather than squelching diverse viewpoints and local control in news and entertainment, the companies say, freedom from old restrictions will allow them to provide better news coverage in more communities. The broadcast networks say the changes will help keep free TV alive by helping them compete with pay services for quality programming.
FCC Chairman Michael Powell said the FCC achieved its goal of "building modern rules that take proper account of the explosion of new media outlets for news, information and entertainment."
- Your life at your fingertips - courtesy of the Pentagon
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Coming to you soon from the Pentagon: the diary to end all diaries - a multimedia, digital record of everywhere you go and everything you see, hear, read, say and touch.
Known as LifeLog, the project has been put out for contractor bids by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, or DARPA, the agency that helped build the Internet and that is now developing the next generation of anti-terrorism tools.
The agency doesn't consider LifeLog an anti-terrorism system, but rather a tool to capture "one person's experience in and interactions with the world" through a camera, microphone and sensors worn by the user. Everything from heartbeats to travel to Internet chatting would be recorded.
The goal is to create breakthrough software that helps analyze behavior, habits and routines, according to Pentagon documents reviewed by The Associated Press. The products of the unclassified project would be available to both the private sector and other government agencies - a concern to privacy advocates.
- Report critical of treatment of Sept. 11 detainees
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Some of the hundreds of foreigners held after the Sept. 11 attacks were abused by guards and kept under harsh conditions, spending 23 hours a day in cells and sleeping under bright lights, according to a report released Monday.
The Justice Department's Office of the Inspector General described "significant problems" in the Bush administration's actions toward the 762 foreigners held on immigration violations after the attacks. Among other things, it found the FBI took too long to determine whether the detainees were involved with terrorists.
Under U.S. law, the government has up to 90 days to deport or release detainees. But it can hold them much longer if they are involved in a terrorism or criminal investigation. Some of the Sept. 11 detainees were kept in custody up to eight months.
Only one, Zacarias Moussaoui, has been charged publicly with any crime related to terrorism. Government officials say 505 were deported. Others are awaiting deportation or have been charged with nonterrorism crimes.
- Summit leaders say they'll work together to bolster faltering global economy, tackle terrorism and rebuild Iraq
 
EVIAN, France (AP) - President Bush's fiercest opponents over Iraq worked to put the war and the rift with America behind them Monday, with French President Jacques Chirac and German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder pledging firm support to build a stable and prosperous Iraq.
But charges the United States and Britain used flawed intelligence about Iraq's weapons of mass destruction to justify the war cast a dark shadow on the summit. British Prime Minister Tony Blair rejected the accusations, leading a chorus of defensive comments around the globe from America and its allies over why they went to war.
Summit host Chirac and other G-8 leaders meeting in this Alpine resort projected outward harmony. Leaders who vehemently opposed Bush's war decision made a conspicuous show of shaking his hand. Privately, the leaders purposely shrank from discussing their differences over the war and tried to propel their relationships forward.
"We had a good meeting. Because it could have been a disaster," Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien told reporters.
"We realized we had to look to the future instead of the past, and everybody took that stand, with positive effect," he said. "It was very cordial from all sides."
There were even warm words between Bush and Chirac - estranged after France actively campaigned against the war.
- 3rd Infantry Division to take over center of Baath Party resistance in Fallujah
 
BAGHDAD, Iraq (AP) - Military commanders are calling on America's battle-hardened 3rd Infantry Division, which led the assault on Baghdad, to put down attacks by apparent loyalists of Saddam Hussein's fallen regime in a troubled area west of the capital.
According to U.S. officers and military documents, the 3rd Infantry will move into the area around Fallujah, a deeply conservative city where the Americans are facing increasing hostility from Iraqis.
The division's 2nd Brigade Combat Team will relieve the 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment, which has kept a small number of troops in Fallujah and nearby Habaniyah since U.S. forces took control of the area in mid-April, according to the division's orders and officers speaking on condition of anonymity.
The brigade's mission will be to remove supporters of Saddam's Baath Party and other militias opposed to U.S. occupation. The second part of the mission will be to help restore any damaged infrastructure.
The operation is expected to begin within the next 10 days.
The Baath Party still has strong support in Fallujah and Habaniyah. On May 27, Staff Sgt. Michael B. Quinn, 37, of Tampa, Fla., and Sgt. Thomas F. Broomhead, 34, of Fort Carson, Colo., were killed when two Iraqis opened fire at a checkpoint in Fallujah.
 
Phoenix bishop agrees to give up some authority to avoid indictment
 
PHOENIX (AP) - The Roman Catholic bishop of Phoenix has relinquished some of his authority in an unprecedented agreement with prosecutors that will spare him from indictment on charges of protecting child-molesting priests.
Under the agreement, Bishop Thomas J. O'Brien acknowledged he concealed sex-abuse allegations against priests, Maricopa County Attorney Rick Romley said Monday.
O'Brien, the spiritual leader of 430,000 Catholics in Arizona since 1981, signed the agreement May 3. The deal guarantees him immunity from prosecution for any criminal cover-up, Romley said.
Romley said investigators had gathered enough evidence to indict the bishop on obstruction of justice charges. However, Romley said that the deal had achieved prosecutors' goals.
"In my primary objective, I have to do something to protect the children in the future," Romley said. "This has to change. I had to force a change and that's what I'm trying to do with this."
O'Brien offered his resignation but the Vatican refused, Romley said.
- TiVo to sell customer viewing data
 
SAN JOSE, Calif. (AP) - TiVo Inc., the company whose digital video recorders were recently praised as "God's machine" by Federal Communications Commission chairman Michael Powell, is hoping to profit from its omniscience.
The leading maker of digital video recorders on Monday began offering advertisers and broadcasters second-by-second information on the television commercials and shows its users are watching - or skipping.
Digital video recorders let TV viewers record programming onto a hard drive, pause live broadcasts, do instant replays and quickly skip commercials. TiVo's machines also can analyze their users' recording habits in order to detect preferences and suggest similar programs the viewers might like.
Those features have helped TiVo amass a cult-like following and prompted Powell to rave at this year's International Consumer Electronics Show that TiVo was his favorite Christmas gift.
-
A revival of 'Little Shop of Horrors' cancels its Broadway engagement
NEW YORK (AP) - The new Broadway season has suffered its first casualty - even before the show opened. "Little Shop of Horrors" has canceled its summer Broadway engagement.
An $8 million revival of what was one of off-Broadway's biggest hits had been scheduled to begin preview performances July 16 at the Virginia Theatre where the marquee for the musical already is up. An opening had been set for Aug. 14.
"The magic, the chemistry just wasn't there for this production," producer Marc Routh said Monday, although he declined to get into specifics about the show, which was directed by Connie Grappo and has choreography by Kathleen Marshall.
"We just have very high standards for this material," Routh said. "It's a challenge to translate an off-Broadway show and make it into a successful Broadway show. We've seen that fail with 'One Mo' Time' a couple years ago."
"Little Shop," based on the cult 1960 Roger Corman movie about a man-eating plant, ends an engagement June 15 in Coral Gables, Fla., where the show received qualified approval from the local critics.
- Robredo's a real card; four Spaniards in quarterfinals
 
PARIS (AP) - Meet Tommy Robredo, the latest wild card dealt by the French Open.
He celebrates midmatch points as though he's just won a title. He spins drop shots when no one else would. He's 21, the youngest man left at Roland Garros.
And now he's in the final eight of a Grand Slam tournament, joining Albert Costa, Juan Carlos Ferrero and Carlos Moya to give Spain four quarterfinalists at a major for the first time in the Open era.
Robredo upset three-time French Open winner Gustavo Kuerten 6-4, 1-6, 7-6 (2), 6-4 Monday in the fourth round, proving that his victory over top-ranked Lleyton Hewitt was no fluke. Next up: Costa, the defending champion.
"I've beaten the Ace, I've beaten the King," Robredo said. "Now I need to beat the Jack, don't I? I've beaten No. 1, I've beaten someone who won here three times, and the next person in my path is Costa.
"If I beat Costa, I'll have beaten the entire deck of cards."

 

End of Document
