

AP News in Brief; Powell defends U.S. commitment to environment, the poor at world summit
September 4, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1640 words
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




Repeatedly interrupted by jeers and protests, Secretary of State Colin Powell defended the United States' environmental record and its efforts to help the poor in the developing world Wednesday, the closing day of the World Summit.
"The U.S. is taking action to meet environmental challenges, including global climate change," Powell told delegates at the summit.
The United States has been criticized for President Bush's decision last year to reject the Kyoto Protocol, which many countries view as crucial for reversing a global warming trend blamed for cataclysmic storms, floods and droughts.
The United States has said it was taking many other actions to fight global warming, but the international agreement's strictures were inappropriate and too costly for the U.S. economy.
Washington also had been hammered for resisting binding targets to increase the use of renewable energy sources, and for Bush's decision not to attend the summit.
As Powell spoke, delegates from non-governmental groups in the audience repeatedly interrupted him, shouting "Shame on Bush." Two people held up a banner reading, "Betrayed by governments." At least two people were removed by security.
 
Bush invites congressional leaders to White House for talks on Iraq
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - President Bush, answering demands to know his intentions toward Iraq, invited the congressional leadership to a Cabinet Room briefing and dispatched his Pentagon chief to Capitol Hill.
The president's meeting Wednesday with top Democratic and Republican lawmakers - including leaders of the Intelligence, Armed Services and International Relations committees - comes amid increasing signals that Bush is ready to go public with a fuller picture of what the United States knows about Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's weapons capabilities.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, who was going to the Capitol on Wednesday to provide closed-door "operational updates" on the war on terrorism, told reporters Tuesday that the administration had secret information supporting its claims that Saddam is close to developing nuclear weapons and must be overthrown.
Rumsfeld said it is already publicly known that Iraq wants to acquire nuclear weapons, that nuclear technologies have spread in recent years and that Iraq has ways of obtaining such materials.
"And we know some other things, but those are the kinds of things that would come out if and when the president decides that he thinks it's appropriate," Rumsfeld said. "I'll leave that for the coming days and weeks."
Secretary of State Colin Powell, in South Africa for a United Nations summit, similarly suggested that Bush was nearing a decision - if not on his course of action against Saddam, then a more detailed indictment of the Iraqi leader. Powell said Iraq, in trying to deny any work on weapons of mass destruction, has been playing a "con" game for years.
"Where we are now is that it is time for the international community to speak back," Powell said. Asked what the United States will do, the secretary replied: "The president will articulate it. He will articulate fully and in the near future."
 
West Nile virus confirmed in death of Georgia organ recipient
 
ATLANTA (AP) - Donated organs from a Georgia woman killed in a car crash last month may have proved deadly when the West Nile virus in her blood apparently killed one recipient and sickened others.
Officials at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Tuesday an organ recipient died in Atlanta on Aug. 29 after receiving the Georgia woman's tainted organ.
Three other people also received organs from the woman. The CDC said two of them have the virus and have developed encephalitis, an inflammation of the brain. West Nile has not been confirmed in the third person, who is recovering from a milder infection.
Health officials said the organ recipients could have contracted the virus from mosquitos, but it is unlikely. The cases are believed to be the first West Nile infections from a medical procedure.
The CDC was tracking about 60 blood donors whose products were used in transfusions to the Georgia organ donor before she died to determine if the blood products gave her West Nile, officials said.
Health officials stopped using the 60 donors' blood and said they were searching for about a dozen people who had already received blood products from those donors.
 
Governing body of war crimes tribunal opens historic meeting, but U.S. is absent
 
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - The governing body of the International Criminal Court opened its first meeting to the applause of dozens of diplomats - but the seat of the United States, which opposes the court, remained conspicuously empty.
There was no mention of a U.S. campaign to exempt Americans from prosecution during Tuesday's meeting at the United Nations, but countries opposed to the U.S. drive called for closed-door talks and invited all nations to attend.
The United States was absent as U.N. Undersecretary-General for Legal Affairs Hans Corell pounded the gavel to launch the Assembly of States Parties, made up of the 76 nations that ratified the treaty creating the world's first permanent war crimes tribunal. It plans to be fully operational by next year.
The assembly's first order of business was to elect Jordan's U.N. ambassador, Prince Zeid Al-Hussein, as its president.
 
Renegade Afghan commander urges holy war against US troops
 
PESHAWAR, Pakistan (AP) - A renegade Afghan commander with links to Iran called for a jihad, or holy war, against U.S. forces in Afghanistan and said international peacekeepers were failing to provide security in the country.
"All true Muslim Afghans who want an Islamic government in their country must know it is possible only when the United States and allied soldiers are forced out," Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, a former prime minister of Afghanistan, said in a taped message. "We must all unite and rise against them."
The Pashtu-language message was received by The Associated Press on Tuesday. It was Hekmatyar's second public call for a holy war against U.S. troops in Afghanistan.
International peacekeepers say Hekmatyar is a suspect in a spate of bombings in the Afghan capital and speculate that he may also have formed an alliance with remaining al-Qaida and Taliban leaders.
 
Bush administration rewriting regulations, handing out money to boost religious groups
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Congress has yet to approve President Bush's "faith-based initiative," but the administration is preparing to rewrite federal regulations and hand out millions of dollars for social services to religious groups.
At the Department of Health and Human Services, a new pot of money is aimed at helping small churches and other religious groups break into government grants. Officials say there's no problem using tax dollars for a program in which prayer is central, a point that Congress has refused to endorse.
The administration takes a broad view of the constitutional separation between church and state. If tax dollars are used for secular elements of the program - like a computer or a van - the rest can have a religious base, said Robert Polito, director of the HHS Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives.
 
Island streets flooded as typhoon Sinlaku approaches Japan, Taiwan
 
TOKYO (AP) - A powerful typhoon spun toward Taiwan and Japan's Okinawan islands Wednesday, forcing residents into shelters and halting transportation amid strong winds and heavy rain.
At midday Wednesday, typhoon Sinlaku had surface winds of 89 mph and was passing just north of Minami Daitojima, an island between Taiwan and Japan's main islands, the Japanese Meteorological Agency said.
It was expected to hit Taiwan and Okinawa's larger islands late Wednesday or early Thursday.
The typhoon comes on the heels of another cyclone that ravaged Korea, leaving at least 184 people dead or missing. Rusa, the Malaysian word for deer, was the worst typhoon to hit South Korea since 1959, when Sarah killed more than 840.
The cleanup from that disaster continued Wednesday.
Villages remained swamped in waist-high water, and soldiers were mobilized to provide supplies. The government's anti-disaster center said 119 people were confirmed killed and 65 others missing following the weekend storm.
Property damage was estimated at $1.4 billion.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Calling the arts "a highway into the soul of the people," playwright Arthur Miller accepted an award deferred once by Sept. 11 and a second time by the illness of his late wife.
A six-nation panel of advisers gave Miller its Praemium Imperiale prize Tuesday to honor a body of work that has spanned more than half a century and that includes "Death of a Salesman" and "The Crucible," both standards of American theater.
The panel was to announce the award last Sept. 14 in France but canceled after the September terrorist attacks. Miller missed the October award ceremony in Tokyo because of the sudden illness of his wife, photographer Inge Morath, who later died.
He accepted the prize Tuesday at a special luncheon in Manhattan, delivering a short speech on the power of the arts to unlock the secrets of global cultures.
"When the cannons have stopped firing, and the great victories of finance are reduced to surmise and are long forgotten, it is the art of the people that will confront future generations," he said. "The arts can do more to sustain the peace than all the wars, the armaments and the threats and the warnings of the politicians."
Miller, a winner of the Pulitzer Prize, is renowned for plays that elegantly depict human struggle and despair. His other work includes "All My Sons," "A View From the Bridge" and "The Misfits," written in 1961 for then-wife Marilyn Monroe.
He was married to Morath, an Austrian-born photographer who won international prizes in her own right, for 40 years. She died in January at age 77.
 Load-Date: September 5, 2002

 

End of Document
