

AP News in Brief; U.S. supplied the kinds of germs Iraq later used for biological weapons, documents show
September 30, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1300 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Iraq's bioweapons program that President Bush wants to eradicate got its start with help from Uncle Sam two decades ago, according to government records getting new scrutiny in light of the discussion of war against Iraq.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention sent samples directly to several Iraqi sites that U.N. weapons inspectors determined were part of Saddam Hussein's biological weapons program, CDC and congressional records from the early 1990s show. Iraq had ordered the samples, claiming it needed them for legitimate medical research.
The CDC and a biological sample company, the American Type Culture Collection, sent strains of all the germs Iraq used to make weapons, including anthrax, the bacteria that make botulinum toxin and the germs that cause gas gangrene, the records show. Iraq also got samples of other deadly pathogens, including the West Nile virus.
The transfers came in the 1980s, when the United States supported Iraq in its war against Iran.
 
Victims of in African ferry disaster screamed for help and gasped for air for hours
 
DAKAR, Senegal (AP) - Screaming for help and gasping for air, countless victims of one of Africa's deadliest ferry disasters survived for hours in the overturned MS Joola, rescue divers said Monday - describing scenes of horror in air pockets that had kept the vessel afloat.
With nearly 1,000 presumed dead, it appeared Monday the true toll could be even hundreds higher - with ticketing authorities saying all children under 5 would have gone unticketed, and thus apparently uncounted. "Children were found clutching their mothers," said Haidar el Ali, a diver who visited the doomed vessel.
President Abdoulaye Wade acknowledged the state-run MS Joola was overcrowded when it capsized in the Atlantic just before midnight Thursday, tumbling under the waves in a heavy gale.
 
President returns to White House, tackles domestic and international issues
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Back at the White House after a fund-raising swing and visit to his Texas ranch, President Bush met behind closed doors Monday with Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld to discuss Iraq and other security matters.
Bush scheduled a heavy afternoon of meetings, some of them on domestic issues stalled in the Democrat-controlled Senate.
He and aides talked strategy in the Oval Office on how to push forward with his "faith-based initiative," which would allow religious institutions more latitude in competing for a share of government social-services money. The GOP-led House has approved a bill with some of what Bush wants, but many senators are troubled by questions of separation of church and state.
Another set of advisers met with Bush on the stalemate over the proposed Department of Homeland Security, which has bogged down over partisan differences on union protections for its workers.
 
French troops seek out trapped Westerners; army says rebels suffering heavy losses
 
YAMOUSSOUKRO, Ivory Coast (AP) - Government soldiers claimed Monday they had inflicted heavy losses on rebel troops in Ivory Coast, while French troops in jeeps with mounted guns scoured the countryside in search of isolated Westerners who might need rescue in case of all-out war.
With rebels and loyalists still facing off ahead of a promised government attack, questions were growing Monday over how well loyalist forces could make good on their threat. Many were armed with outdated equipment, including guns held together with tape.
Trying to avert a bloody showdown, West African foreign ministers flew into the commercial capital Abidjan on Monday to talk with the rebels and try to persuade them to agree to a cease-fire.
Mediators included foreign ministers from Nigeria, Ghana and Togo. The delegation planned to meet with the shadowy rebels, Foreign Minister Hackman Owusu-Agyeman said, confirming that the envoys had managed to identify those they believe are leading the insurgency. He refused to give details.
 
In strategy shift, conventional U.S. forces search Afghanistan's mountains for al-Qaida and Taliban
 
MASI KALAY, Afghanistan (AP) - Soldiers of the 82nd Airborne are combing the rugged mountains that border Pakistan in a new U.S. military strategy emphasizing conventional forces rather than elite troops in the search for al-Qaida and Taliban fighters.
In a strong show of force, more than 200 soldiers swept into a number of villages in southeastern Afghanistan on Sunday and uncovered a giant cache of weapons: hundreds of rocket propelled grenades, thousands of rounds of heavy machine gun ammunition and dozens of mortar rounds.
For months, the military has relied mostly on small special forces units in the region, one of the most active fronts in the U.S.-led hunt for al-Qaida and Taliban. But since late August, conventional forces - mostly drawn from the 82nd Airborne - began moving from Bagram Air Base, the U.S. military headquarters north of Kabul, and from Kandahar in the south, to growing bases along the volatile Pakistani border.
 
Food companies switch fats in face of changing tastes
 
DALLAS (AP) - Dr. Sarah Blumenschein sees a pattern in the overweight children who come to her clinic: They snack more often and they eat out more often - especially at fast-food restaurants.
"The kids don't realize the high calorie and fat levels in fast food," said Blumenschein, a pediatric cardiologist at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas. "The marketing of fast food has been very clever."
She applauds the recent announcements by McDonald's Corp. and Frito-Lay Inc. that they will reduce a particular form of fat in making french fries and chips.
But she and other medical experts said the move was overdue, and they plan to keep pressing the U.S. food industry to do more to reduce fat, not just substitute one for another.
 
Home movies featuring Bob Dylan, Beatles are released after decades in a garage
 
UNDATED (AP) - Home movies aren't supposed to be this cool: footage of Bob Dylan goofing around at Hamlet's castle. The Beatles taking the stage in 1964.
But for more than 30 years, drummer Mickey Jones had those and other 8 mm images sitting in his garage collecting dust. He says he never gave it much thought. Now he is releasing them for the first time.
Jones, 61, took the movies during his career as a drummer, most famously backing Dylan during his 1966 world tour.
The silent, full-color tapes include a dark-sunglass-wearing Dylan getting a private tour of Hamlet's castle in Denmark, members of his band goofing off between gigs, and fans waiting outside hotels for a glimpse of their hero.
The Jones tapes show Dylan and his band - who would later become The Band - on stage, in hotel rooms, taxis and buses, and walking the streets of Europe.
 
Home runs, scoring down again this year
 
UNDATED (AP) - Forget the long ball.
After a decade of record-setting bashing in baseball, pitchers finally are starting to catch up with hitters.
Home runs in the major leagues declined for the second straight season and scoring was at its lowest level since 1993. The drop coincides with baseball's push to have umpires call a larger strike zone, the one defined in the rule book.
"We've seen the emergence of some outstanding pitching over the last two, three years," baseball executive vice president Sandy Alderson said Monday. "Is that cyclical? I think it's difficult to assume it's related to the strike zone. But the trend is clearly downward."
Scoring dropped to 9.24 runs a game this year, its lowest level since a 9.20 average in 1992, according to the Elias Sports Bureau, baseball's statistician. Just three years ago, bulked-up batters sent 10.58 runs across the plate each game.
Home runs? After peaking at 2.34 a game in 2000, the average dropped to 2.25 last year and sank to 2.09 this season. It hasn't been that low since 1998.
 Load-Date: October 1, 2002

 

End of Document
