

AP News in Brief; Bush and Rice say CIA cleared Bush's State of the Union speech; Tenet accepts blame
The Associated Press
July 11, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1364 words
Dateline: ENTEBBE, Uganda
Body




President Bush on Friday put responsibility squarely on the CIA for his erroneous claim that Iraq tried to acquire nuclear material from Africa, prompting the director of intelligence to publicly accept full blame for the miscue.
"I gave a speech to the nation that was cleared by the intelligence services," Bush told reporters in Uganda.
Hours later, CIA Director George Tenet issued a statement, saying the 16 words in Bush's State of the Union address concerning a purported uranium deal should never have been uttered by the president.
"This was a mistake," Tenet said. "This did not rise to the level of certainty which should be required for presidential speeches, and CIA should have ensured that it was removed."
--- WTO panel rules that U.S. steel duties are illegal
 
GENEVA (AP) - In a stinging rebuke to the United States, the World Trade Organization ruled Friday that heavy duties on steel imports imposed by the Bush administration violate global trade rules.
Washington immediately said it would appeal, and would keep in place the tariffs that President Bush had justified as necessary to protect domestic steel producers against a flood of cheap imports during a restructuring period.
In response, the European Union stepped up plans to impose $2.2 billion in retaliatory duties on U.S. imports, ranging from footwear to fruit and vegetables - possibly pricing them out of the market.
A three-member panel of trade experts said in a 968-page ruling that the "safeguard" duties of up to 30 percent introduced by the United States last March were out of line with WTO rules. That confirmed an interim ruling issued earlier this year and upheld complaints filed by the European Union, Japan, South Korea, Norway, Switzerland, China, New Zealand and Brazil.
--- Thousands mark anniversary of 1995 massacre, bury 282 victims
 
SREBRENICA, Bosnia-Herzegovina (AP) - Survivors wept over long rows of caskets Friday and remembered families wiped out in Europe's worst massacre of civilians since World War II as they buried the newly identified bodies of 282 victims to mark the slaughter's eighth anniversary.
The slayings of up to 8,000 Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica at the hands of the Bosnian Serbs have come to symbolize Bosnia's devastating 3 1/2-year war.
But Friday's ceremony, held under heavy security in this bleak corner of eastern Bosnia, held signs of hope that the ethnically divided nation may find the will to heal: For the first time, the Bosnian Serb prime minister was among mourners.
The slaughter at Srebrenica, at the time a U.N.-protected zone, began on July 11, 1995, shortly before the end of the war. The victims' bodies were dumped in mass graves throughout eastern Bosnia.
--- Coke says federal prosecutors investigating claims raised by whistleblower lawsuit
 
ATLANTA (AP) - Federal prosecutors have begun a criminal investigation into fraud allegations against Coca-Cola Co., including claims that the beverage giant rigged a market test at Burger King outlets to inflate the popularity of its slush drink Frozen Coke.
Coke announced Friday that the U.S. attorney's office was investigating, but it did not provide details. Also Friday, Burger King said it would phase out the sale of Frozen Coke at its fast-food restaurants and stop using Coke's frozen carbonated-beverage machines.
The fraud allegations were raised in a whistleblower's lawsuit against Coca-Cola, the world's largest soft drink company. The suit included accusations that Coke manipulated the Burger King market test to inflate the popularity of Frozen Coke.
--- Lawsuit alleges abuse at Indian boarding schools
 
ROSEBUD, S.D. (AP) - Sonny One Star says he learned not to cry or scream when he was beaten and sexually assaulted at his Roman Catholic boarding school on the Rosebud Sioux Indian Reservation.
Four decades later, he says it is time for a different approach.
"Today, I'm ready for retaliation," said One Star, a leader on the reservation.
He and five other Sioux are suing the federal government for $25 billion on behalf of perhaps thousands of students allegedly abused at Indian boarding schools around the country. They hope to have the case certified as a class-action.
--- Audit finds Ag Department workers buy rock concert tickets, tattoos with credit cards
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Agriculture Department employees used government credit cards to pay tuition for bartender school, to buy Ozzy Osbourne concert tickets, lingerie and tattoos and to make a down payment on a car.
A random audit by the department's inspector general of just 300 of the 55,000 department employees who carry the government credit cards showed they had charged $7.7 million in personal purchases in a six-month period from Oct. 1, 2001, to March 31, 2002.
The cards are intended to cover travel expenses, but many were used routinely whether the employees were traveling or not, according to the audit released Friday. Among the uses were paying for 900 purchases at Wal-Mart, Kmart and Target and making car payments.
The cardholders took out $196,000 in cash on the cards, which cost the department more than $137,000 in bank fees, the audit said.
--- Enron creditors to get fraction of what they're owed
 
HOUSTON (AP) - Enron Corp.'s thousands of creditors will get only a fraction of the $67 billion they are owed when the former energy giant, driven into bankruptcy by an accounting scandal, emerges from Chapter 11 as two companies with new names.
The energy company's reorganization plan, filed early Friday after five deadline extensions, said most of Enron's 20,000 creditors will receive 14.4 cents to 18.3 cents on every dollar owed.
"The plan represents the best that could be done under the circumstances," said Howard Seife, an attorney representing several insurance companies among Enron's creditors.
Enron's 2001 bankruptcy was one of the most expensive in history and the first in a wave of corporate accounting scandals. The expected recovery for Enron's lenders falls well short of returns for other bankruptcies. Bondholders in WorldCom's bankruptcy, the only Chapter 11 case larger than Enron's, are to receive 36 cents on the dollar.
The plan is subject to approval by the bankruptcy court.
--- Rap pioneer facing challenges to rebuilding legendary label
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - When rap pioneer Marion "Suge" Knight was released from prison two years ago, he vowed to return Death Row Records to the top of the charts.
At the time, he told The Associated Press that it was "time for great records."
It hasn't happened. Aside from two albums of old Tupac Shakur material, Death Row has produced next to nothing. And for the second time this year Knight was behind bars, awaiting a hearing on a suspected parole violation.
Some wonder if Knight - who helped muscle rap into the mainstream a decade ago with superstars such as Dr. Dre, Snoop Dogg and later Shakur - is still a force in the music industry.
"He has to prove himself all over again," said Erik Parker, music editor of Vibe magazine. "As time slips by, people care less. There's no production, no real hits."
Knight said his company was "going 1,000 mph" after his prison release, but spokesman Jonathan Wolfson acknowledges it has yet to regain its previous notoriety.
--- Kidd staying with Nets
 
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. (AP) - Jason Kidd picked the New Jersey Nets over the defending champion San Antonio Spurs in hopes of winning his first NBA title.
Kidd ended 11 days of free agency angst for the resurrected Nets when he spurned an offer from the Spurs on Friday and agreed to a six-year, $99 million deal with New Jersey.
"After great thought and consultation with the important people in my life, I have decided that I want to remain a New Jersey Net," said Kidd, the perennial All-Star point guard who was the biggest catch of the free agent market this offseason.
His decision came the same day that word emerged that center Alonzo Mourning would join the Nets as a free agent. Mavericks owner Mark Cuban said in an e-mail that Mourning wouldn't sign with Dallas and instead had chosen New Jersey.
Nets president Rod Thorn said the league's rules on free agency prevented him from commenting on either Kidd or Mourning until next week.
 Load-Date: July 12, 2003

 

End of Document
