

AP News in Brief; Powell heckled as he defends U.S. commitment to environment, the poor at world summit
September 4, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1407 words
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




Unfurling banners and shouting "Shame on Bush," dozens of activists at the World Summit heckled Secretary of State Colin Powell on Wednesday as he defended America's record on the environment and helping the developing world. Thirteen activists were dragged from the room.
Boos from the rear of the summit's main hall repeatedly interrupted Powell's five-minute speech to an audience of 1,500 government leaders and delegates.
"The American soul has always harbored a deep desire to help people build better lives for themselves and their children," Powell said. "We have always understood that our own well-being depends on the well-being of our fellow inhabitants of this planet Earth."
The United States joined 190 other nations on the summit's last day Wednesday in adopting an action plan aimed at improving the lives of the poor and reversing the destruction of the planet.
 
Bush ask Congress for broad authority against Saddam; looks to U.N. next
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - President Bush promised Wednesday to seek Congress' approval for "whatever is necessary" to oust Saddam Hussein including using military force, as the White House considered giving Iraq a last-ditch ultimatum over weapons inspectors.
House Speaker Dennis Hastert said Congress would vote before the Nov. 5 elections on how to deal with the Iraqi president, ensuring that Iraq is a high-profile issue in the campaign for control of the House and Senate.
Democrats who control the Senate said the non-binding resolution is possible but not certain because of the lack of time and Bush's failure thus far to make his case for war. "It would not be my assumption that the military course is the only action available to him today," said Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D.
 
Musharraf says it is too early for U.S. to scale down military operations in Afghanistan
 
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (AP) - Pakistan President Gen. Pervez Musharraf said Wednesday it's too early for the U.S. military to consider scaling down military operations in Afghanistan.
Musharraf also said in an interview with The Associated Press that there's no need to extend U.S. military operations into Pakistan, even though he acknowledges "some al-Qaida elements" have taken refuge in his country.
"That would be unwise. There is no need of it. There are forces here. The army is deployed," Musharraf said. "We can't rule out pockets of al-Qaida elements not only in our border regions but in our cities, but we are searching and combing the area."
Although there is no evidence to confirm that U.S. military units have searched for al-Qaida fugitives on Pakistani soil, witnesses report seeing limited numbers of special operations troops working with Pakistani forces in the tribal areas near the Afghan border.
 
Man arrested in Washington after police find 16 guns in car
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - A man who police said may have made threats against President Bush was arrested Wednesday about two miles from the White House after authorities discovered 16 guns in a car he was driving.
The man was stopped around 12:30 p.m. EDT in the Adams Morgan section of Washington. Washington Police Chief Charles Ramsey said the suspect may have threatened Bush, but he offered no specifics.
The Secret Service received information Tuesday suggesting a man was driving from Pennsylvania toward the White House with explosives. The Secret Service issued an alert for police agencies to be on the lookout for him.
Washington police stopped a Chevrolet Cavalier registered in Pennsylvania and driven by Jeffrey Cloutier, 33, of Newport, N.H.
Authorities found 10 rifles and six handguns in the car, but Ramsey said no explosives were discovered.
 
GOP, Democrats joust over Homeland Security personnel issues
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Against steadfast Democratic opposition, Senate Republicans prepared Wednesday for an all-out effort to give President Bush the management flexibility he seeks for the proposed Homeland Security Department.
Republicans were preparing to offer two key amendments to a Democratic-written Homeland Security bill, but votes were not expected until next week. Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott said the bill is unacceptable to Bush unless those changes are made.
"If we do not, the president of the United States will veto it, and we will sustain his veto," Lott, R-Miss., told reporters.
Both sides also accused each other of playing politics with the legislation, with Democrats portrayed as cozying up to labor union supporters and Republicans seen as trying to weaken unions and employee job rights.
 
Health officials considering options should West Nile prove transmissible by blood
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Health officials were trying to determine Wednesday if West Nile virus can be spread through blood transfusions. But any test to screen donated blood for the sometimes deadly disease is at least months, maybe years, away, they said.
Still, they emphasized that the blood supply is very safe and the risk of contracting West Nile from blood is significantly lower than the risk of forgoing any procedure that would require a transfusion.
West Nile, which emerged in the United States just three years ago, has exploded across much of the country this summer, with 673 cases and 32 deaths. But concern increased Tuesday when officials confirmed that at least three of four people who had received organs from a Georgia woman had contracted the disease. One died.
Officials said they are convinced that these patients got the disease through their transplants, though they do not yet know whether the virus can be spread through blood as well.
 
Stocks rise sharply as investors look for bargains
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Buyers returned to the market Wednesday after five days of selling, sending the Dow climbing more than 100 points.
Analysts attributed the gain to technical factors and said they were skeptical of the market's ability to sustain a rally. They said investors are focused on the anniversary of the terrorist attacks and a spate of corporate profit warnings expected before the third quarter ends this month.
Still, the Dow ended a five-day losing streak by closing up 117.07, or 1.4 percent, to 8,425.12. The Dow recouped some of the 610 points it gave up in the previous five days - 355 of which were lost Tuesday.
The broader market was also higher. The Standard & Poor's 500 index rose 15.38, or 1.8 percent, to 893.40, having lost 69 points in the past five days.
The Nasdaq composite index rose 28.47, or 2.3 percent, to 1,292.31 after trading lower in four of the previous five sessions.
 
Judge says woman should keep Miss North Carolina crown despite topless photo furor
 
RALEIGH, N.C. (AP) - The fight over who should be Miss North Carolina grew more complicated Wednesday as a judge said the woman who stepped down because of topless photos should keep her crown and the runner-up filed suit to be declared the winner.
Rebekah Revels, 24, smiled slightly as Superior Court Judge Narley Cashwell announced his ruling in her favor. Seated directly behind her, first runner-up Misty Clymer sat silently, her mouth open.
Clymer assumed the title in July when Revels stepped down after Miss America officials received an e-mail about the photos from her former boyfriend, Tosh Welch. Clymer held the title until last week, when a judge returned it to Revels pending this week's hearing.
It wasn't immediately clear whether Revels will be allowed to compete in the Miss America pageant Sept. 21.
 
Owners expected to ratify labor deal Thursday
 
UNDATED (AP) - Baseball owners are expected to ratify a new labor contract when they meet in Chicago on Thursday, a stark contrast to their four-month deliberation before approving their agreement in 1996.
On Friday, commissioner Bud Selig embraced the new deal, calling it "historical." Six years ago, he refused to publicly discuss the agreement for more than two months, then submitted it to owners without any recommendation.
When teams voted that Nov. 6, they rejected the contract 18-12. Twenty-one days later - after Selig recommended approval - owners ratified the deal in a 26-4 vote, with Cleveland, the Chicago White Sox, Kansas City and Oakland opposed.
"A long and winding road has come to an end," Selig said that day, speaking at the same Chicago airport hotel where owners are to meet Thursday.
This time, he immediately acknowledged the tentative agreement, appearing one hour after it was completed at a news conference in New York with union head Donald Fehr.
 Load-Date: September 5, 2002

 

End of Document
