

AP News in Brief; Iraqi governing council votes to dispatch a delegation to the U.N.; violence re-erupts in Baghdad
The Associated Press
July 14, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1809 words
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




Iraq's new governing council, acting confidently in its first full day on the job, voted Monday to send a delegation to the U.N. Security Council and assert its right to represent Baghdad on the world stage.
But in a reminder of the challenges faced by the new council as it takes its initial steps toward what is hoped to be a transition to democracy, violence erupted again in the capital. An explosion wrecked a car near the council's meeting site and yet another U.S. soldier was killed in an ambush.
In a statement, President Bush called the establishment of the council "an important step forward in the ongoing transition from ruthless dictatorship to a free and democratic Iraq with Iraqis determining their own future."
As the U.S.-backed council met, governments in Europe and Asia - even those critical of the U.S.-led war to oust Saddam Hussein - welcomed the body as a first step in returning political power to the Iraqis.
Both supporters and opponents of the conflict believe formation of an Iraqi administration could make it easier for them to contribute to the reconstruction of the shattered country - a crucial way of improving their ties with Washington.
 
Bush says U.S. intelligence 'darn good' and he made right decision in invading Iraq
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Defending his credibility, President Bush said Monday the United States made the right decision to invade Iraq and the intelligence on which he relied was "darn good" - even though some of it now is in question.
Bush said the United States was reviewing documents and interviewing Iraqis in an intensive effort to support the administration's still unproven claim that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction.
"When it's all said and done," Bush insisted, "the people of the United States and the world will realize that Saddam Hussein had a weapons program."
Bush spoke in the Oval Office alongside U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who opposed the U.S.-led war. The two met to discuss Iraq, the Middle East and peacekeeping in Liberia.
Bush has been on the defensive since the administration acknowledged it could not document his State of the Union claim in January that Iraq had been trying to buy uranium in Africa to develop nuclear weapons. That claim was based on British intelligence that had been called into question by the CIA. Nevertheless, CIA Director George Tenet has accepted responsibility for not seeking removal of the statement from Bush's speech.
Amid the finger-pointing over blame, the embarrassing episode forced the administration to concede it did not know the source of the British intelligence - and, in fact, was not trying to determine the source.
 
NAACP no-shows highlight growing discontent with black voters
 
MIAMI BEACH, Fla. (AP) - Three of the Democrats' nine presidential contenders drew the wrath of the president of the NAACP on Monday for skipping the group's candidate forum, reflecting a growing sentiment among blacks that their loyalty to the Democratic Party is being taken for granted.
The six Democratic presidential hopefuls shared the stage with four empty chairs, each labeled with the name of a White House candidate who didn't make it. They were President Bush and Democrats Joe Lieberman, Dick Gephardt and Dennis Kucinich.
While Bush's absence wasn't a surprise - he hasn't attended NAACP conventions since taking office - the group's leaders were outraged at the Democratic no-shows.
"In essence, you now have become persona non grata," NAACP President Kweisi Mfume said of the Democrats who passed on the event. "Your political capital is the equivalent of confederate dollars."
The party is off to a somewhat rocky start with minorities in this election cycle. Black party leaders were furious when the Democratic National Committee planned to layoff 10 staffers this spring, and all were black. The DNC backed off that plan and has been working with the Congressional Black Caucus to ease tensions.
 
U.N. arms hunter says U.S. claims are off-base on Baghdad nuclear cache
 
VIENNA, Austria (AP) - A top U.N. weapons hunter says it would have been "virtually impossible" for Iraq to revive a nuclear bomb program with equipment recently dug up from a Baghdad backyard, as the Bush administration contends.
Jacques Baute said the long-term monitoring of Iraq's nuclear establishment planned by the U.N. Security Council would have stifled any attempt to build a huge uranium-enrichment plant for making bomb material.
"This is a mistake people are making," Baute said. Such contentions ignore the fact that Iraq would have operated for years under international controls had the U.N. plan not been aborted by war, he said.
Baute also said in an interview with The Associated Press that it appears the unearthed cache of uranium enrichment parts, surrendered by an Iraqi scientist last month, lacked critical components, and its accompanying blueprints were marred by errors.
Baute, a French nuclear physicist, led the International Atomic Energy Agency inspection teams that - until the U.S.-British invasion in March - crisscrossed Iraq in search of banned weapons.
 
House close to passing measure that would block new meat labels
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - In the belief Americans would "buy American" if given a choice, ranchers and farmers persuaded Congress last year to require country-of-origin labels on meats, fish, fruits and vegetables.
Responding to pressure from large cattle operations, packing houses and grocers who say the labels will be too expensive, lawmakers now find themselves under pressure to renege on requiring the labels - at least on meat.
A $17.5 billion appropriations bill debated Monday in the House would forbid the Agriculture Department from spending any of the money to meet a deadline of September 2004 for having the labels affixed to hamburger, sausages and other beef and pork products.
Rep. Henry Bonilla, R-Texas, heading the effort to scuttle or at least delay the labels, said they would cost grocery stores, meatpackers and others processors at least $1.9 billion the first year, based on preliminary Agriculture Department estimates. He predicted consumers would experience "sticker shock" once the costs were passed through.
"If you're a domestic producer of beef or pork, you are going to have to comply with an enormous amount of record keeping, a great deal of cost," said House Agriculture Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte, R-Va.
The Bush administration agreed, saying in a White House statement Monday that the question is a marketing rather than food safety issue and should be studied more before the government starts requiring the labels.
 
Liberian war refugees take shelter in stadium, collecting food aid and hope
 
MONROVIA, Liberia (AP) - Buckets in hand, thousands of rain-soaked Liberian war refugees gathered Monday on the muddy soccer field of a sports stadium, clamoring for emergency food rations.
Driven from their homes by fighting between army and rebel forces, entire families have moved into the stadium, building shelters of bamboo and leaves under bleachers, laying clothes to dry on the running track and camping out in locker rooms and offices.
Pressure is mounting on the United States to lead a peacekeeping mission to quell the violence in the West African nation founded by freed American slaves.
President Bush met Monday in Washington with U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who appealed for help in bringing peace to Liberia.
After their meeting, Bush said he wanted to dispatch a contingent of Americans "limited in size and limited in tenure," but gave no hint of whether they would be military advisers, humanitarian experts or soldiers. He said any mission would depend on Liberian President Charles Taylor stepping down and leaving the country.
"It may require troops. We don't know how many yet," said Bush, adding that he was awaiting reports from U.S. teams sent to assess the military situation and humanitarian needs.
 
China sentences tycoon to 18 years in prison on fraud, bribery charges
 
BEIJING (AP) - Less than a year ago, Yang Bin was an orchid-selling sensation ranked as China's second-richest man. He had a fortune estimated at $900 million, an equally outsize personality and a new appointment to lead a North Korean free-trade zone.
On Monday, Yang was sentenced to 18 years in prison after being convicted of fraud and bribery, a stunning downfall for a leader of China's new capitalist class.
Yang's conviction came amid a Chinese crackdown on tax evasion and a series of investigations of leading business figures for possible tax and financial offenses.
A court in the northeastern city of Shenyang convicted Yang of all charges, including the illegal use of agricultural land, contract fraud, forgery of financial documents and offering and taking bribes, according to an assistant to his defense lawyer.
A woman who answered the phone at the court said she had "no idea" about the sentence and refused further comment. She would only give her family name, Liu.
 
Combs relaunches label with all-star album
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Sean "P. Diddy" Combs called in all favors to secure an all-star lineup for his "Bad Boys II" soundtrack, the first album on his recently revamped Bad Boy record label.
"I came to them honestly. I said, 'Can you help me out? When I come back on the scene, I want to come back in a big way with a big soundtrack,"' Combs told The Associated Press on Monday. "I wanted to set it off with a bang."
The CD, which drops Tuesday, features Combs, Justin Timberlake, Beyonce, Jay-Z, Snoop Dogg, 50 Cent and Nelly, among others.
If the hip-hop mogul sounds a bit anxious, it's because the soundtrack to the Martin Lawrence-Will Smith action flick is not just another album release for Bad Boy.
Combs' company was a dazzling star of boutique labels in the mid to late 1990s, with hits from acts ranging from the Notorious B.I.G. to Faith Evans to 112 to P. Diddy himself.
But after the killing of Notorious B.I.G. in 1997, hits from other artists became more infrequent, costs soared, and Bad Boy began to lose some of its bling.
 
Armstrong keeps Tour lead on a harrowing day
 
GAP, France (AP) - Lance Armstrong kept his lead in the Tour de France on Monday as he avoided a nasty crash in the Alps that forced his closest rival from the bicycle race. But he can do without these harrowing close calls.
Joseba Beloki, runner-up to the four-time champion last year and in second place entering the day, is finished with this Tour. He broke his right leg, wrist and elbow in a crash that nearly took out Armstrong, too.
The cyclists were speeding down the day's last mountain, trying to catch leader Alexandre Vinokourov. Then Beloki braked, skidded on the slick and melting tarmac and hit the deck hard.
Armstrong was just behind and drove off the road into a field to avoid hitting the Spaniard. He recovered to finish fourth in the stage on Bastille Day.
 
 Load-Date: July 15, 2003

 

End of Document
