

AP News in Brief; Long wait for Harry Potter finally reaches the witching hour
The Associated Press
June 21, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1650 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Alexandra Korves, 12 years old, hoisted the new Harry Potter book over her head like a trophy and flashed a victory smile that let her braces shine.
"I've been waiting so long for this," Korves said shortly after midnight Saturday, after standing on line with more than 200 others outside Books of Wonder on a muggy New York night. She was one of the countless many who had stood on line around the world.
Yes, they had arrived.
Like millions of pigeons freed from their cages - even if a few were sprung early - "Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix" finally, officially, landed into the hands and hearts of adoring readers.
In scenes once only a fantasy writer could concoct, kids went mad for an 870-page book whose appeal is neither sex nor violence, but such childlike standards as friendship and magic.
----- Billions in Iraqi assets, but where are Saddam's?
 
GENEVA (AP) - The global search for Saddam Hussein's riches is turning up Iraqi assets worth hundreds of millions of dollars in European and Middle Eastern banks, but little if anything has his name on it.
"There's no way Saddam Hussein would have opened an account in his own name," said James Nason of the Swiss Bankers Association, whose members are required to report any suspicious accounts to the government of Switzerland.
Lebanon, Britain and Switzerland have each found about half a billion dollars in Iraqi assets, but it is not clear to whom the money belongs beyond official Iraqi government accounts.
The United States, which launched the search for Saddam's wealth the day after the U.S.-led invasion started last March, acknowledges that finding the hidden assets will be very difficult.
----- Uranium feared looted from Iraq's nuclear facility tracked down
 
VIENNA, Austria - U.N. atomic experts have tracked down tons of the uranium feared stolen from Iraq's largest nuclear research facility, diplomats say - and it appeared much of it was on or near the site.
The Tuwaitha nuclear facility was thought to contain hundreds of tons of natural uranium and nearly two tons of low-enriched uranium, which could be further processed for arms use. Tuwaitha was left unguarded after Iraqi troops fled the area on the eve of the war.
U.S. troops didn't secure the area until April 7. In the meantime, looters from surrounding villages stripped it of uranium storage barrels they later used to hold drinking water. Villagers said the looting continued when the Marines handed over control to another unit in mid-April.
----- France, African nations back stronger U.N. force in Congo
 
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - France and many African nations are backing Secretary-General Kofi Annan's call for a larger U.N. peacekeeping force with a more robust mandate in war-torn eastern Congo, but the United States appears reluctant to agree.
Many Congolese are hoping the United Nations will intervene to stop fighting in the region. On Thursday, attackers abducted two U.N. observers, reportedly to demand that the U.N. mission in Congo be given a stronger mandate.
At present, U.N. troops in Congo are deployed under a mandate that only allows them to fire in self-defense. They have not attempted to stem the violence between rival factions of the Hema and Lendu tribes that has killed more than 500 people in and around the eastern town of Bunia since the beginning of May.
----- Overhaul at panel appointed to investigate Air Force Academy scandal
 
DENVER (AP) - Women's advocates disappointed by an Air Force report on sexual assaults at the Air Force Academy say they are pleased with changes in a committee created by Congress to investigate the scandal.
On Friday, three days before the committee's first meeting, executive director Anita Blair was replaced. And Amy McCarthy, a committee member who was publicly skeptical of claims of rape by female cadets, resigned.
Women's advocates had criticized Blair, a former vice president of the conservative Independent Women's Forum, for opposing the integration of women in the military. Blair, an assistant secretary of Navy, was not available for comment.
She was being replaced by a lawyer who works with committee chairwoman Tillie Fowler.
Fowler said Blair was too busy to run the committee. She said she hoped a replacement would be named by Monday for McCarthy.
----- FDA approves new treatment for allergic asthma
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Patients with serious asthma caused by allergies are getting a new weapon to block the attacks, with approval of the drug Xolair by the Food and Drug Administration.
The drug, approved late Friday, is expensive, requiring monthly shots that will cost between $5,000 and $10,000 a year, depending on the dose. It is intended only for sufferers from serious allergic asthma who get no relief from standard medication
Doctors have been anxiously awaiting it, however, because it works differently than any other asthma medicine, blocking an allergic reaction well before it triggers the hallmark gasping for air.
That same reaction is behind a range of allergic ailments, from hay fever to peanut allergy, that scientists hope Xolair one day will prove key to treating, too.
----- Runaway train cars derail near Los Angeles, flinging lumber onto homes
 
COMMERCE, Calif. (AP) - Crews worked Saturday to remove tons of lumber that inundated and demolished homes along a railroad line when more than two-dozen runaway freight cars came spilling off the tracks.
Authorities said it was amazing no one was killed.
Thirteen people, including three children, were treated for minor injuries at the scene or at hospitals after Friday afternoon's accident that shattered two homes and damaged at least two others in a blue-collar area east of Los Angeles.
A total of 28 freight cars derailed, unleashing a blizzard of wood, newsprint and fiberboard.
"We saw the train demolishing and splintering the house. You saw the power lines going down, the sparks. I was in shock," said witness Jason Mendez, 34.
----- EU leaders reach out to Balkans with aid and hope for future membership
 
PORTO CARRAS, Greece (AP) - European Union leaders reached out to the Balkans on Saturday with commitments of fresh economic aid for a corner of the continent torn apart by ethnic rivalries.
Meeting with the leaders of Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro, the 15 EU leaders granted $249 million in assistance and reiterated their intention to bring the countries into the EU someday.
"The future of the Balkans is within the European Union," a summit statement to be issued after the meeting said.
The statement stressed the need for democracy, the rule of law and minority rights if the countries are to join the EU - a prospect that is years off.
----- Former synagogue director pleads guilty to embezzling from congregation
 
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Prosecutors said Temple Sinai's "Breakfast Club" was an exclusive affair with only two members - the synagogue's executive director and bookkeeper - who embezzled $1.2 million from the congregation.
Dormer temple executive Barry Wilf pleaded guilty in federal court Friday to bank fraud, mail fraud and tax evasion.
Wilf, 47, acknowledged that between 1993 and 2000 he wrote hundreds of checks from accounts at the Dresher synagogue - some as big as $10,000 - and deposited the money in an account for "The Temple Sinai Breakfast Club," an entity invented to cover his tracks.
A federal grand jury charged Wilf's bookkeeper, Betty Shusterman, 73, with helping him implement the scheme and taking a cut of the money. Shusterman, who had worked for the synagogue since 1963, pleaded innocent and is scheduled to go to trial in July.
In court filings, prosecutors described a systematic looting that drained 10 percent of the temple's operating budget and left it in perpetual financial distress.
----- Elite Marines force begins quest to join special operations
 
CAMP PENDLETON, Calif. (AP) Eighty-six men have begun a one-year trial to determine if the Marines will join Navy SEALs, Green Berets and Air Force Special Operations Forces in the military's special operations forces.
The Marine Corps Special Operations Command Detachment One was activated during a ceremony Friday at Camp Pendleton, where it will begin training next week.
In October, the commando force will join Naval Special Warfare Group One in Coronado, Calif., to train with the Navy. It will go overseas in April, likely for combat missions in the war on terror.
Unlike other special operations forces, the Marines unit will have a deep roster of specialists in areas including fire support, counter-intelligence, linguistics and communications. Marine Lt. Col. Robert J. Coates, a seasoned reconnaissance officer, is heading the unit.
----- Suit alleges John Unitas Jr. defrauded father's company
 
BALTIMORE (AP) - The son of football legend John Unitas has been accused in a lawsuit of defrauding the company that bore his late father's name.
The suit alleges John C. Unitas Jr. made himself the beneficiary of a $125,000 life insurance policy in his father's name that was supposed to go to Unitas Management Corp., The (Baltimore) Sun reported in Saturday editions.
The company managed licensing and sports memorabilia deals for Unitas Sr. and other former athletes.
The lawsuit was filed Friday in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Baltimore on behalf of Unitas' accountant, attorney and widow, who was the second wife of the longtime Baltimore Colts quarterback.
They are seeking the return of roughly $60,000 from Unitas Jr., though the lawsuit acknowledged the plaintiffs don't have a full account of the money that's alleged to be missing.
"Clearly throughout 2001 and most probably continuing through 2002, both before and after the death of Johnny Unitas, (John Unitas Jr.) pillaged and ravaged the funds of (Unitas Management Corp.) for his own use and benefit," the lawsuit says.
An attorney for Unitas Jr. declined to comment in detail until he had seen the complaint.

 

End of Document
