

AP NewsBreak: Iraq will create war crimes tribunal in the coming days, Iraqi and American officials say
The Associated Press
December 6, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1155 words
Byline: By NIKO PRICE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




A law creating an Iraqi-led tribunal that could put Saddam Hussein and hundreds of his aides on trial for crimes against humanity and genocide could be passed in the coming days, Iraqi and American officials told The Associated Press.
Some human rights groups criticized the plans, saying Iraq's U.S. occupiers have too much of a hand in them and that Iraqi judges and prosecutors may not have the experience needed to try the cases.
The law creating the tribunal will be similar to proposals made in Washington in April, one member of Iraq's Governing Council said. The law calls for Iraqi judges to hear cases presented by Iraqi lawyers, with international experts serving only as advisers.
That would be starkly different from U.N.-sponsored tribunals set up to consider war crimes in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda. In those cases, international judges and lawyers have argued and decided cases.
Two members of the Governing Council - Mahmoud Othman and Samir Shakir Mahmoud - said Friday the tribunal would be created in the coming days, as did an official of the U.S.-led occupation authority, who spoke on condition of anonymity. The New York-based International Center for Transitional Justice said its sources in the coalition authority said the tribunal could be established as early as Sunday.
Othman said the tribunal would hear hundreds of cases involving members of the former regime.
"There will be more trials than only the 55 deck of cards," he told AP, referring to the U.S. list of most-wanted Iraqis. "Anybody against whom a complaint is filed with evidence against them could be tried."
Already, thousands of relatives of the missing have filed complaints against members of the former regime. One group in Baghdad, the Iraqi Human Rights Society, took 7,000 complaints before the paperwork overwhelmed its staff.
The Governing Council has been discussing the war crimes tribunal law for months, and it was not expected to encounter major opposition within the governing body. The U.S. occupation authority, which has veto power over Governing Council decisions, also must sign off on the plan.
It remained unclear when the trials would begin. The coalition authority now holds at least 5,500 people in prisons, but it isn't known how many of those are war crimes suspects and how many are accused of common crimes.
Those in custody include Ali Hassan al-Majid, known as "Chemical Ali" for his role in chemical attacks on Kurds in the 1980s; Saddam's secretary, Abid Hamid Mahmud al-Tikriti, and Muhammad Hamza al-Zubaydi, a leader of 1991 suppression of the Shiite Muslim rebellion. If Saddam himself is captured, he presumably would be tried by the special tribunal as well.
As evidence, prosecutors will use a growing cache of documents seized from the former regime. The coalition now has an estimated nine miles of paperwork, and Iraqi human rights groups and political parties have even more.
Evidence also will come from the excavation of mass graves that dot the Iraqi landscape. Some 270 mass graves are believed to hold at least 300,000 sets of remains. Forensic teams are expected to start excavating a few for evidence in late January, according to an AP investigation.
Human rights workers said the trials could include genocide cases - for a campaign against Kurds in northern Iraq in the 1980s, and for the draining of southern marshes in 1992 that drove many Shiites from their homes.
They also could include cases against former Iraqi officials for the massacres of Shiites and Kurds in 1991, when those communities rose up against Saddam at the end of the Gulf War.
The tribunal will use a combination of laws, according to people who have seen a draft of the plan, including the Iraqi penal code of 1969 and the Iraqi criminal code of 1971. In addition, the new charges of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity - taken from international courts - will be added, they said.
Human rights groups have criticized the draft, but Othman said the only changes are small alterations in legal wording.
Some groups said the United States has dictated the terms of the tribunal - down to who would be prosecuted, and how - and worry Iraqi judges and lawyers may not be up to the task.
"Any tribunal established on behalf of the Coalition Provisional Authority will not be able to rid itself of the perception and the fact that it is an instrument of American power," said Paul van Zyl of the International Center for Transitional Justice. "Any justice it dispenses will be of dubious legality and questionable legitimacy."
Richard Dicker, director of the international justice program at Human Rights Watch, said he was concerned officials didn't consider bringing in judges who have worked on major war crimes trials in other countries.
"After three decades of Baath Party rule, the capacity of Iraqi judges to conduct incredibly complicated trials has been greatly diminished," he said by telephone from New York. He said he worried about the tribunal's ability to provide fair trials.
Two recent studies of the Iraqi judicial system, obtained by AP, describe a legal system riddled with corruption and incompetence. One was conducted in August by the United Nations; the other in June by the Justice Department.
"A degraded justice system and inadequate and outdated legal framework is not capable of rendering fair and effective justice for violations of international humanitarian law and other serious criminal offenses involving the prior regime," the U.N. study said.
But Sandra Hodgkinson, director of the coalition authority's human rights and justice office, said she believed an Iraqi court system - with some training from international experts - will work.
"Iraqis want it that way, and they're capable of doing it that way," she said. "There is no need to have an international tribunal when the local population is willing and able to do it."
Adnan Jabbar al-Saadi, a lawyer with the Iraqi Human Rights Ministry who said he expected to argue some of the tribunal cases, agreed.
"I think it's very important for people to see the criminals who killed their families in court," he said. "The United Nations asked us if they should give money to people so they would feel better, and I told them nothing will make them feel better except seeing the responsible criminals in prison."
Some groups questioned the legality of the tribunal. Under the Geneva Conventions, an occupying power can't create new laws, except when needed to restore order.
"They have authority to prosecute people for current crimes, and violations of existing law, and war crimes committed during hostilities," van Zyl said. "They do not have authority to prosecute people for past gross violations of human rights."
Hodgkinson said she wasn't concerned about questions of legality.
"I would be surprised if anybody would ever raise this as an issue," she said.
---
Associated Press writer Sameer N. Yacoub contributed to this report.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY194
 Load-Date: December 7, 2003

 

End of Document
