

AP News in Brief; After opening door to the east, NATO to build links with Central Asia
November 22, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1259 words
Dateline: PRAGUE, Czech Republic
Body




After agreeing to expand their alliance deep into the former Soviet bloc, NATO leaders were reaching out Friday to the Central Asian nations whose assistance proved vital in the U.S.-led war in Afghanistan.
NATO is eager to develop closer ties with the former Soviet republics that run through a volatile region north of Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan, seeing them as potential allies in the fight against terrorism - a security challenge that has become a top priority for the Western alliance.
Leaders of more than 20 non-NATO nations stretching from Ireland to Uzbekistan were scheduled to join the 19 alliance leaders Friday on the second and final day of NATO's first summit behind the former Iron Curtain.
 
U.S. says it has al-Qaida's Persian Gulf operations chief in custody
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - U.S. counterterrorism authorities hope their interrogation of the newly captured chief of al-Qaida's Persian Gulf operations, Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, will shed light on terror plots still in the works, officials said.
Al-Nashiri, a Saudi, was captured earlier this month in an undisclosed foreign country and is now in U.S. custody, U.S. officials said Thursday, speaking on the condition of anonymity.
A close associate of Osama bin Laden, al-Nashiri is a suspected mastermind of the USS Cole bombing in October 2000. After his capture, he was held briefly in Afghanistan before being flown to an undisclosed location, sources said.
 
Red Cross: Up to 100 killed in religious rioting sparked by Miss World article
 
LAGOS, Nigeria (AP) - Rioting by mobs of Muslims and Christians in the northern Nigerian city of Kaduna has killed as many as 100 people and seriously injured 500 others, Red Cross officials said Friday as thousands of residents sought refuge in army bases and police stations.
Mobs of Christian youths retaliated against Muslims on Friday in the third day of riots triggered by a newspaper article suggesting Islam's founding prophet would have approved of the Miss World beauty pageant.
George Bennet, head of the International Federation of the Red Cross delegation in Nigeria, told The Associated Press that Nigerian Red Cross officials gathering dead and helping wounded in Kaduna had reported a "ballpark figure" of 100 dead by Friday morning, although he stressed an exact figure was impossible to confirm.
Nigeria's Red Cross president said Thursday at least 50 people had been killed. Other Red Cross officials said Friday that more than 500 people had been wounded in the mayhem.
 
Israeli forces invade Bethlehem in retaliation for deadly suicide bombing in Jerusalem
 
BETHLEHEM, West Bank (AP) - Israeli troops reoccupied Bethlehem early Friday, searching homes and deploying tanks outside the Church of the Nativity after 11 bus passengers, including four youngsters, were killed in a Jerusalem bombing.
With troops back in Bethlehem, Israel was again in control of all Palestinian cities in the West Bank except for the quiet oasis of Jericho - mirroring the massive deployment that capped military offensives in April and June.
However, Israel's range of responses is limited; it is under pressure from the United States to keep a lid on Mideast violence while Washington concentrates on its campaign against Iraq. In responding to Thursday's Jerusalem bus bombing, the Israeli military was expected to stick to tried methods, such as hunting down militants and demolishing homes of terror suspects.
Expelling Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, an option previously raised by hardliners in the Israeli Cabinet, was not discussed by Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz in consultations Thursday.
 
Venezuela's opposition calls another general strike against Chavez
 
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - Venezuela's opposition ignored a last-minute plea by the Organization of American States and called a general strike intended to force a vote on President Hugo Chavez's rule.
The strike call on Thursday defied OAS warnings that more labor stoppages would only destabilize this leading oil supplier to the United States.
Labor leader Carlos Ortega said the one-day strike on Dec. 2 could be extended - or begin earlier - if Chavez continues to fight a referendum.
Ortega dismissed a warning by OAS Secretary General Cesar Gaviria that a strike could sabotage talks to end Venezuela's political crisis.
Gaviria said that Chavez's recent takeover of the Caracas police force also threatened the talks, which are backed by the United Nations and the Carter Center based in Atlanta, Ga.
 
Millions of unemployed workers start losing benefits after Christmas
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Nearly 1 million unemployed workers across the country will start losing jobless benefits three days after Christmas because Congress failed to grant an extension before leaving for the year.
Congress passed a 13-week extension in federal benefits in March, on top of the maximum 26 weeks that laid-off workers typically can receive through states. But the extension benefits start expiring Dec. 28. Without congressional action, an estimated 820,000 people will lose benefits that day, with an additional 95,000 each week thereafter.
Democratic leaders made a last-ditch appeal Thursday to the White House, asking President Bush to urge House Republican leaders to pass the Senate's extension plan when they convene Friday. The White House has remained on the sidelines in the debate.
 
CIA concerned about data overload as domestic spying increases
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Broad new surveillance powers granted the Justice Department come with a risk for investigators: There may be such an information overload that agents could overlook a critical fragment of information that would prevent a terrorist attack, a senior CIA lawyer said Thursday.
Provisions of the USA Patriot Act, passed by Congress after the Sept. 11 attacks, permit the FBI and Justice Department to share with the CIA previously off-limits information gathered in secret grand jury proceedings and through wiretaps and other domestic eavesdropping.
This already is producing an avalanche of information that poses new challenges for analysts at the CIA and other intelligence services, said John Rizzo, senior deputy general counsel at the CIA.
 
Two gunmen attack paramilitary barracks in central Srinagar, four killed
 
SRINAGAR, India (AP) - Two gunmen stormed a barracks Friday and fought a two-hour gunbattle with soldiers in the center of this main city of the Indian state of Jammu-Kashmir.
The attackers and two soldiers were killed, said a spokesman for the police force. Thirteen soldiers were wounded as the gunbattle moved through a corridor and the kitchen of the barracks, a former hotel.
The Lashkar-e-Tayyaba, an outlawed separatist group, claimed responsibility for the attack. Islamic militants have waged a 13-year insurgency to merge the Indian state of Jammu-Kashmir with Pakistan or win its independence.
 
No. 1 Miami prevails over No. 17 Pittsburgh, 28-21
 
MIAMI (AP) - Heisman Trophy hopefuls Willis McGahee and Ken Dorsey kept the top-ranked Miami Hurricanes undefeated as McGahee ran 19 times for 159 yards and two touchdowns, and Dorsey led Miami on two second-half scoring drives in a Thursday night 28-21 victory over the No. 17 Pittsburgh Panthers.
Miami (10-0, 5-0) extended its winning streak to a nation-best 32 games, pushed its Big East-record winning streak to 22 games and moved two victories away from a berth in the Fiesta Bowl to play for another national title. The defending champions finish the season at Syracuse and at home against struggling Virginia Tech.
 Load-Date: November 23, 2002

 

End of Document
