

AP News in Brief; Bush sketching an even darker portrait of the threat from terrorists
January 29, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1128 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The White House is telling Americans they face danger from up to 100,000 terrorists trained in Afghanistan and deployed worldwide - a force much larger than outlined before.
The estimate, if correct, points to a network with enduring nerve centers spreading from Asian jungles to European cities, despite the destruction of Afghan bases that had bustled with recruits before the war.
Administration officials, who are pressing for the largest increase in military spending in 20 years, promoted the grimmer synopsis of the terrorist threat in the hours preceding President Bush's State of the Union address.
 
Enron names corporate turnaround expert Stephen Cooper as new CEO
 
HOUSTON (AP) - Enron Corp. picked a veteran corporate turnaround expert Tuesday to guide it through the biggest bankruptcy in U.S. history and a maze of criminal and congressional investigations.
The selection of Stephen Cooper as interim chief executive and chief restructuring officer came less than a week after former CEO Kenneth Lay resigned, saying the investigations would prevent him from running the company effectively.
Cooper said he would start working immediately with Enron's management and others in planning the emergence from bankruptcy.
 
Witnesses tell senators Enron may have manipulated energy prices
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - A sharp drop in long-term electricity prices after Enron declared bankruptcy raises questions about whether the company may have been using largely secret trades to manipulate energy markets, a Senate hearing was told Tuesday.
An energy consultant testified that in the week after Enron announced its bankruptcy, the "forward price" of electricity in the West fell sharply. Enron had been a key trader in this market, which is used as a hedge against future power price changes and is unregulated.
"That certainly raises the question about whether Enron was manipulating the West Coast market" by keeping prices artificially high, said Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., in response to the consultant's testimony.
Robert McCullough, the consultant whose clients include several Northwest utilities, said "the clear implication is that Enron may have been using its market dominance to set forward prices."
 
Anger at military grows as death toll from Lagos explosions and resulting panic rises to 600
 
LAGOS, Nigeria (AP) - Sadness turned to rage against the military about a string of explosions at a huge arms cache set in the middle of a crowded Lagos neighborhood. The blasts and resulting panic left at least 600 dead.
Distraught families searching for missing loved ones blamed the military for storing weapons, including rockets and heavy artillery shells, in the northern Ikeja neighborhood. The governor of Lagos state charged the army with negligence.
Many Nigerians remain distrustful of the military following 15 years of corrupt and sometimes brutal dictatorship that ended with 1999 elections.
President Olusegun Obasanjo on Tuesday declared a day of national mourning.
 
Japan's foreign minister fired over squabble with bureaucrats
 
TOKYO (AP) - Makiko Tanaka, Japan's popular but unpredictable foreign minister, was summoned to a midnight meeting and fired by the prime minister Tuesday for feuding with her deputy and stalling legislation to lift the economy.
The deputy and Tanaka's main rival, Yoshiji Nogami, also was fired.
With her fiery promises to fight bureaucratic incompetence and corruption, Tanaka, 58, has been a key reason Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi has enjoyed high public approval ratings since he swept to power last April.
But the first woman to serve as Japan's top diplomat has also been a polarizing force - snubbing meetings with foreign dignitaries, squabbling with bureaucrats over personnel choices and belittling deputies in public.
 
Drought strikes hard from Maryland to Maine; rivers run low
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Baltimore's reservoirs are so low the city plans to tap the Susquehanna River for drinking water despite complaints about its iron taste. Rivers in Maine have been reduced to a trickle. And in New Hampshire, many of the frozen waterfalls that draw ice-climbing tourists haven't formed this year.
From Maryland to Maine, the East Coast is seeing some of the driest conditions in decades.
More than 100 counties are under drought warnings, watches or advisories. Public officials are urging people to take shorter showers, fix plumbing leaks and wash cars with buckets instead of hoses.
 
Dow tumbles nearly 250 as bookkeeping worries unnerve anxious investors
 
NEW YORK (AP) - The Dow Jones average tumbled nearly 250 points Tuesday on worries that more companies might be vulnerable to bookkeeping scandals of the sort that brought down Enron Corp.
It was the Dow's biggest point drop in three months.
Analysts said Wall Street, already jittery about the timing of an economic recovery, was concerned that companies like the conglomerate Tyco might suffer from the same type of balance-sheet irregularities seen at Enron.
Not even stronger-than-expected consumer confidence numbers could stop the selling.
The Dow closed down 247.51 points, or 2.5 percent, at 9,618.24.
The selling snapped a four-day winning streak and brought the blue-chip index to levels not seen since mid-November.
 
'A Beautiful Mind,' 'In the Bedroom' lead Screen Actors Guild nominations
 
WEST HOLLYWOOD, Calif. (AP) - The math genius drama "A Beautiful Mind" and the family tragedy thriller "In the Bedroom" each had a leading three nominations Tuesday for Screen Actors Guild awards.
Russell Crowe, star of "A Beautiful Mind," received another actor nomination for playing schizophrenic mathematician John Forbes Nash Jr., and co-star Jennifer Connelly, who plays Nash's wife, had a top actress nomination. Both won Golden Globe Awards earlier this month for their roles.
Sissy Spacek had an actress nomination for playing a grieving mother in the dark suburban tale "In the Bedroom," and Tom Wilkinson, as her angry husband, had a best actor mention.
 
Athletic commission denies Tyson a boxing license to face Lewis in Nevada
 
LAS VEGAS (AP) - Mike Tyson was denied a boxing license Tuesday by the Nevada State Athletic Commission, a decision that will force him to reschedule a championship bout against Lennox Lewis.
The denial prevents him from challenging the WBC-IBF heavyweight champion on April 6 at the MGM Grand, but does not kill the fight because Tyson could be licensed by another state or country.
The commission's 4-1 vote came one week after Tyson and Lewis were involved in a melee at a New York news conference to formally announce the fight.
"I'm not Mother Theresa," Tyson said during the hearing. "I'm not Charles Manson either. Just treat me equal."
Tyson left the hearing before the vote was taken, but it was clear by then that he would be rejected.
 Load-Date: January 30, 2002

 

End of Document
