

AP News in Brief; Condoleezza Rice says CIA cleared Bush's State of the Union speech
The Associated Press
July 11, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1421 words
Dateline: ENTEBBE, Uganda
Body




President Bush's national security adviser said Friday the CIA cleared Bush's State of the Union speech in its entirety, including a sentence alleging that Iraq was seeking to buy nuclear material from Africa.
If CIA Director George Tenet had any misgivings about that sentence in the president's speech, "he did not make them known" to Bush or his staff, said national security adviser Condoleezza Rice.
Her comments to reporters aboard Air Force One came a day after other senior U.S. officials said that before and after Bush's Jan. 28 speech, American intelligence officials expressed doubts about a British intelligence report that the president cited to back up his allegations.
Those doubts were relayed to British officials before they made them public, and that word was passed to people at several agencies of the U.S. government before Bush gave that nationally broadcast speech.
But Rice said Friday that "the CIA cleared the speech in its entirety."
The agency raised only one objection to the sentence involving an allegation that Iraq was trying to obtain yellow cake uranium, she said. "Some specifics about amount and place were taken out," Rice added.
"With the changes in that sentence, the speech was cleared," she said. "The agency did not say they wanted that sentence out."
--- Bush touts his $15 billion AIDS initiative in Uganda
 
PRETORIA, South Africa (AP) - President Bush wants Uganda's journey out of the dark scourge of AIDS to serve as a model for his $15 billion global initiative to contain the pandemic.
Bush will meet Friday with President Yoweri Museveni and tour an AIDS clinic in Uganda, the fourth stop on his five-nation tour of the region of the world most seriously affected by AIDS. His trip ends Saturday in Nigeria.
Uganda, an Oregon-sized nation in east-central Africa, is a model for stemming a once spiraling rate of HIV infection. It stands in sharp contrast to Botswana - another stop on Bush's African journey - which is struggling with the world's highest HIV infection rate.
Bush's five-year AIDS plan is modeled after a program in Uganda, which stresses abstinence, monogamy and condom use.
Bush spent several hours Thursday in Botswana, where almost four of 10 adults carry the AIDS virus. The country recently launched a public program to give free AIDS drugs and treatment to anyone who needs them, a first-of-its-kind effort in Africa.
--- Top officials meet despite Palestinian leadership turmoil
 
JERUSALEM (AP) - Top Israeli and Palestinian officials debated issues crucial to a three-month truce long into the night, ignoring for now infighting that has jeopardized Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas' influence.
Israeli Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz and Palestinian security chief Mohammed Dahlan met late Thursday at an Israel-Gaza crossing point to discuss demands that Israel release thousands of prisoners and Israel's insistence that the Palestinians crack down on violent groups during the truce.
Islamic groups called the three-month truce on June 29, and the secular Fatah movement, controlled by Yasser Arafat, declared a six-month cease-fire.
Meanwhile, Israeli officials said Friday that Prime Minister Ariel Sharon will visit Washington at the end of this month as the United States tries to maintain momentum behind the new push for Middle East peace.
--- House backs Bush rules on overtime
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Democrats and union leaders are lambasting President Bush for a proposal they say would cost at least 8 million workers their overtime pay after the House backed his drive to overhaul decades-old rules determining who qualifies for the extra money.
The Republican-led chamber voted 213-210 on Thursday to defeat a Democratic effort to derail the proposed regulations, clearing the way for the administration to impose changes in overtime rules as early as the end of this year.
Though further attempts by Senate Democrats to block the rules are possible - and though the administration can still alter its proposal - new regulations will take effect unless a law is enacted preventing it, giving Bush, the GOP and their business supporters the upper hand.
The proposed rules also would require overtime for as many as 1.3 million low-income workers who now do not receive it for working more than 40 hours a week, the Labor Department said. Democrats did not oppose that change.
--- Questions over advertising possible health benefits in the absence of strong proof
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Food packages may soon advertise possible health benefits before they're fully proved, under a program aimed at speeding information about nutrition discoveries to consumers - but one critics fear will lead to quackery.
Until now, the Food and Drug Administration has enforced a very strict standard about what health benefits could be claimed on food labels. Before oatmeal could boast heart-healthy labels, for example, there had to be significant scientific consensus that oatmeal's fiber helps maintain low cholesterol levels.
Under the new program, to start Sept. 1, the FDA will allow certain foods to make "qualified health claims" - similar to what the courts have allowed for more loosely regulated dietary supplements.
--- Astronomers find oldest, most distant planet ever discovered
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - The discovery of a gaseous planet 13 billion years old and 5,600 light-years away could change theories about planet formation and about the evolution of life, astronomers say.
More than twice the size of Jupiter, the object is the oldest and most distant planet yet discovered, astronomers said Thursday.
The planet orbits two stars, a pulsar and a white dwarf that linked together about a billion years ago. They are in the constellation Scorpius within a globular cluster called M4 that formed billions of years before the sun and the Earth.
The pulsar, a rapidly spinning star, was discovered in M4 about 15 years ago. Astronomers shortly afterward found that it was gravitationally bound to a white dwarf, the remnants of an ancient, sunlike star that had exhausted its hydrogen and helium fuel. There was suspicion that yet another body was orbiting nearby, but the planet was not discovered until astronomers studied data from the Hubble Space Telescope.
--- Shuttle Investigators update progress on accident report
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - The Columbia Accident Investigation Board members, in a final push to complete their report by late August, are reviewing a detailed analysis of a test that one member called the "smoking gun" cause of the space shuttle accident.
The 13-member board is sifting through more than five months of investigation material and writing a report expected to reach more than 100 pages on the causes of the Feb. 1 Columbia accident that killed seven astronauts. The report is expected to make recommendations on what must be done to safely fly the space shuttle.
--- Enron Corp. intends to emerge from bankruptcy as two companies
 
HOUSTON (AP) - Enron Corp., which touched off widespread corporate accounting scandals when it collapsed 18 months ago, intends to emerge from one of the most expensive bankruptcies in history as two companies with new names.
After five deadline extensions, the energy giant was expected to file a 900-page reorganization plan Friday explaining how it will repay more than 20,000 creditors, owed an estimated $67 billion.
Creditors will get only a fraction of their money back, according to figures Enron provided The Wall Street Journal for a story in its Friday editions. Most can expect to see 14.4 cents to 18.3 cents on the dollar, only half of what the newspaper said is being paid to creditors of WorldCom Inc., the only bankruptcy larger than Enron's.
Creditors will split proceeds from asset sales and auctions as well as receive equity in the two new companies - one domestic, the other international.
--- Sausage-suited woman hit by baseball player getting his autographed bat
 
MILWAUKEE (AP) - The woman inside the Italian sausage costume says she'll accept an apology from Pittsburgh first baseman Randall Simon, but all she really wants is the bat he swatted her with as she ran past the Pirates' dugout.
With one swing Wednesday night, Simon sent 19-year-old Mandy Block tumbling to the ground in the heavy costume. A fellow racer dressed as a hot dog also fell.
Simon, cited for disorderly conduct and fined $432, issued a public apology before leaving town after the Pirates' 5-4 victory over the Brewers on Thursday. Block said a team representative told her Simon would call her Friday to apologize.
 Load-Date: July 12, 2003

 

End of Document
