

Architects of a proposed peace accord take their campaign for approval to the Bush administration
The Associated Press
December 3, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 755 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The architects of a far-reaching proposed accord between Israel and the Palestinians campaigned for Washington's approval Wednesday, but the White House said President Bush's blueprint for a Mideast settlement still was the best formula.
"The path forward to peace in the Middle East is the road map," White House spokesman Scott McClellan said, referring to the approach that has the endorsement of the United States, the European Union, the United Nations and Russia.
But McClellan said other approaches could be useful.
Secretary of State Colin Powell and Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz plan to meet Friday with the architects of the alternative, Israeli Yossi Beilin and Palestinian Yasser Abed Rabbo.
Beilin, a former Israeli Justice minister, and Rabbo, a member of the Palestine Liberation Organization's executive committee, also hope to meet with Elliott Abrams, who heads the Mideast desk at the National Security Council, and possibly Condoleezza Rice, the president's national security adviser.
"The decisions of who Secretary Powell meets with are made by the secretary and we support the decision on who he meets with," McClellan said.
Powell publicly has endorsed the attempt by Beilin and Rabbo to prepare a peace accord and said he was open to new ideas. "It seems to me the more people who talk about the prospect for peace, the better off we are," Powell said while traveling in North Africa.
The meetings with senior administration officials will, at a minimum, draw more attention to the plan, which already has the endorsement of former President Carter and several international figures, and give it a measure of legitimacy despite Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's disapproval of the negotiations.
Rabbo, a longtime Palestinian negotiator, said Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat supports the effort, but that formal Palestinian approval depends on "something from the other side."
The deal would give the Palestinians almost all of the West Bank and Gaza Strip and part of Jerusalem, drawing Israel's borders close to what existed before the 1967 Mideast war. It calls for the removal of most Israeli settlements in those areas and limits the "right of return" for Palestinians who fled or were driven out during the 1948-49 war, and their descendants.
Beilin, appearing with Rabbo at a conference sponsored by the Brookings Institution, a private research group, said the plan was "absolutely kosher."
He said that although Israel would yield control of the Temple Mount, the site of the Jewish Temple of the Biblical era, Jews could still dream of rebuilding it there.
Describing the U.S.-backed road map as incomplete, Beilin said it contains Bush's vision of a Palestinian state but does not provide a detailed "endgame" for resolving the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians.
"We could not leave anything open-ended, including Jerusalem," he said.
Rabbo, meanwhile, said, "We have attacked issues that were never approached" in previous Mideast negotiations.
The Palestinian official also said the plan he worked out with Beilin does not call on Israel to make concessions because it was to Israel's benefit to quit the West Bank and Gaza, thereby "getting rid of the burden of the occupation."
The plan provides for Israel to keep a cluster of settlements in the West Bank just beyond Jerusalem in exchange for land to expand Gaza by 25 percent as well as a second parcel of territory also to be turned over to a Palestinian state.
Samih el-Abed, a member of the Palestinian delegation, said "we need to expand" in light of congestion in Gaza and rising birth rates.
Using maps to illustrate the plan's provisions, he said the Western Wall, the only remnant of the ancient temple, and "the Jewish quarter" of Jerusalem would be under Israeli sovereignty and the rest of the city under Palestinian sovereignty.
Alan Solomont, a member of the private Israel Policy Forum executive board, said the plan shows the United States and the world "it is possible for people whose goal is to end the conflict to negotiate a final status agreement that protects the interests of both sides."
Solomont, who also supports the road map, said in an interview "it may be the governments will solve the conflict somewhat differently, but it will look much the same, and there isn't an unlimited amount of time."
By contrast, Morton A. Klein, president of the Zionist Organization of America, said the plan would require Israel to make dangerous concessions in exchange for what he called unverifiable Arab promises.
 Load-Date: December 4, 2003

 

End of Document
