

Argentina's "Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo" mark movement's 25th anniversary
May 1, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 697 words
Byline: By LAURENCE NORMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




A quarter-century ago, 13 mothers gathered in Buenos Aires' Plaza de Mayo demanding to know the whereabouts of sons and daughters kidnapped by Argentina's military regime.
Countless protests later, the group is still looking for answers - and for justice.
On Tuesday, the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo marked 25 years since their first public protest with a rally and concert attended by 1,000 people. Since their first gathering on April 30, 1977, they have come together every week to march around the square wearing their trademark white kerchiefs.
Between 1976 and 1983, at least 8,900 people disappeared in the military junta's "Dirty War" against leftist organizations, according to a government report, although human rights groups place the figure at around 30,000. Hundreds of soldiers also died in attacks by leftist groups.
On Tuesday, supporters of the mothers gathered in the square for music and poetry performed by some of Argentina's leading musicians and actors. Then the elderly mothers were joined by teen-age students and other sympathizers on a march through Buenos Aires to their nearby headquarters.
"Today's our 25th anniversary and we want the younger generation to keep on with our fight, so that when there are no more mothers, there will be young people fighting for life, liberty and justice," said Hebe de Bonafini, the group's president, who lost two children during the military years.
The group had its beginnings on April 30, 1977, when 13 mothers, decided to meet in the square and push their way into the adjoining Government House to demand an official response on the whereabouts of their missing children.
Barred from entering, they decided to meet again the next Friday. But since protests were banned under the regime, police told them to move on, so they started marching around the square.
It was the beginning of a routine that the Mothers, whose numbers gradually swelled as the movement became a symbol of opposition to the military regime, have now repeated more than 1,000 times.
In the early days, theirs was a dangerous activity.
The organizer of the first group of mothers, Azucena Villaflor, disappeared herself just months after the group was set up. The Mothers were later banned and several times, their protests disrupted and the participants arrested.
With the return of democracy in 1983, the march has turned into one of the best known scenes of Argentine life, often watched by groups of tourists who chat with the mothers afterward.
The Mothers went on to gain international acclaim, meeting with Pope John Paul II, South Africa's Nelson Mandela and Cuban President Fidel Castro. Their group has also been nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize.
On Tuesday, some of the mothers expressed pride in what they had done, others frustration in not having achieved more.
"I feel great that all these young people have come out to show their support for our demand for justice," said Elisabeth Schneider, 83, whose daughter was kidnapped in December 1977. "But there is so much we have not achieved in 25 years, above all punishment for those who committed the crimes."
After the return of democracy, top military officers were handed life sentences for their crimes, only to be pardoned by former President Carlos Menem in 1990. Immunity was also granted to lower-ranking officials who committed crimes on the orders of their superiors.
The group has also suffered internal battles over the years.
In the 1980s, the movement split, with some of the mothers charging that Bonafini had become too radical and lost sight of the original goals of the movement.
In recent years, the mothers have outraged many by supporting Colombia's leftist rebel group, the FARC, and refusing to condemn attacks by the Basque separatist group ETA in Spain and the Sep. 11 attacks in the United States.
Despite the controversies, many still laud the group as a symbol of democratic resistance in a country long dogged by military dictatorships and corrupt government.
"I really admire how they've gone on struggling for justice," said Monserrat Gimenez, 22. "They have created a consciousness in Argentina about human rights. They're an inspiration for many young people."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BAI103-104 of April 30
 Load-Date: May 2, 2002

 

End of Document
