

At the Movies: 'Nowhere in Africa'
The Associated Press
March 7, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 793 words
Byline: By JOCELYN NOVECK, Associated Press Writer
Body




Many films have managed to capture the sweeping horrors of war. Fewer, though, have managed to grasp at the same time its less sweeping effects.
One of the most admirable qualities of "Nowhere in Africa," Germany's nominee for this year's foreign film Academy Award, is that it does just that, telling the poignant story of one family's wartime experience as well as providing a piercing look at a struggling marriage, with all its ups and downs.
In director Caroline Link's film, the Redlich family leaves Breslau, Germany, in 1938 to begin a new life on a remote Kenyan farm. Back in Germany, life was privileged, full of dinner parties on fine china. In Kenya, water has to be drawn from a well and lugged home to a modest shack. Meals are mostly cornmeal.
But the Redlichs are the lucky ones. They've managed to escape Germany just as the dark cloud of war is descending. Their parents and relatives back home are in that majority of German Jews who just can't imagine the horrors to come, and are convinced Hitler's rantings will soon be silenced.
When Jettel Redlich arrives in Kenya to join her husband, Walter, she's in her own form of denial. She gazes at the arid land where she's now expected to build a life.
"It's lovely," she tells Walter, "but we cannot live here."
Against his instructions, she's brought along the fancy china from home but left the refrigerator behind. And she's spent her last few marks on a glittery evening gown.
Fed up with the sacrifices, she soon declares she's moving back to Germany. That's when Walter breaks the news he's heard on the radio: the night before, the Nazis looted Jewish homes and businesses in Germany, a night that came to be known as Kristallnacht.
If Jettel is having a hard time adjusting, her 5-year-old daughter, Regina, is thriving. She adores the exotic sights and strange customs of her adopted country. She immediately befriends the farm's cook, and the scenes between these unlikely soul mates are among the most touching in the film.
Meanwhile, Walter, an ambitious lawyer back home, grimly sets about building his family's new life. He alone understands what is happening in Germany. When a letter arrives from Jettel's mother and sister saying they're being taken to Poland, Jettel guesses that maybe they've found a new way to get out of Europe.
Walter knows better. "Poland means death," he tells his disbelieving wife.
Adapted from Stefanie Zweig's autobiographical novel, the movie is directed with a slow, loving hand for the landscape and the people who inhabit it. One wonders, though, if relations between the Europeans and the Kenyan natives were really so rosy all the time. No discord is shown, although Kenya was a British colony until the 1960s.
The family's story is told with the kind of compelling detail that can only have come from someone who lived through it. When war breaks out, for example, the German farm workers are briefly taken prisoner by the British authorities. But this is no normal imprisonment. The women and children are taken to a luxury hotel - the British didn't know where else to bring them - where they enjoy fabulous meals served on china and crystal.
While the film follows the course of the war, it also follows the troubled course of Jettel and Walter's marriage. The two clash dangerously as the pampered Jettel dreams of life in Germany and Walter tries to make her see the reality of war. One of them strays; the other is consumed by jealousy. The relationship is portrayed with the kind of subtle brushstrokes that sometimes get lost in films about war.
Still, one wishes Link, who also wrote the screenplay, had gone even further with the relationship. We see the beginnings of an affair between Jettel and a British officer, for example, but then that plot line is dropped and we're left wondering what happened.
The mercurial character of Jettel is beautifully played by German stage actress Juliane Kohler, and as her husband, Georgian-born Merab Ninidze more than holds his own with a performance of quiet intensity. Perhaps the most affecting work comes from young Lea Kurka, who as Regina gives a totally natural performance as a shy but adventurous girl living through extraordinary upheaval.
"Nowhere in Africa," a Zeitgeist Films release, is unrated. In German with subtitles. Running time: 138 minutes. Three stars out of four.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY682; AP Graphic AISLE SEAT

 

End of Document
