

At the Movies: 'Exorcist: The Beginning'
The Associated Press
August 20, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 603 words
Byline: By DAVID GERMAIN, AP Movie Writer
Body




A new "Exorcist" flick must have seemed like a good idea three years ago, with a director's cut of the original having just pulled in almost $40 million, a huge payday for a re-release.
If there was any life left in the satanic franchise, though, director Renny Harlin has snuffed it with "Exorcist: The Beginning," a cinematic abomination that's about as bad as you could possibly imagine a prequel to "The Exorcist" might be (for good reason, it was not screened for critics until the night before its release).
Three-fourths of the movie is boring as sin, the other quarter is loud, crude and awash in repugnant imagery. There are no true scares, only clatter, commotion, guts and gore served up as a vulgar shock to the system that for all its excess, is not remotely shocking.
Often, what happens on screen is almost dreamlike in its incomprehensibility as Harlin besieges viewers with barbarity after barbarity.
The story - the priest of "The Exorcist" as a younger man in his first encounter with Satan - holds no intrigue compared to the movie's behind-the-scenes tale.
Launched after "The Exorcist" reissue proved a hit, the prequel seemed cursed.
Original director John Frankenheimer left the project and died shortly thereafter, and star Liam Neeson quit.
Stellan Skarsgard replaced Neeson, with Paul Schrader directing, but the producers didn't think the movie he made was scary enough. That version was shelved, Harlin came aboard, the story was tweaked, roles were recast, and the movie was shot again, with Skarsgard still starring.
His Father Merrin, the role originated by Max von Sydow in the 1973 original, has given up the priesthood in the late 1940s, his faith shattered by horrors he witnessed and was forced to participate in under the Nazis.
A British collector seeking a priceless artifact entices Merrin to join a dig in Kenya, where a pristine Roman Catholic church has been discovered, buried in the fifth century at a time when no Christian inroads had been made that far into Africa.
A young priest, Father Francis (James D'Arcy) accompanies him, seeking to lure Merrin back into the fold. Merrin finds temptation of the flesh with a beautiful doctor (Izabella Scorupco) and becomes a protector for a boy (Remy Sweeney) the local tribesmen believe is possessed by a demon.
The performances are wildly inconsistent, either piercingly shrill or hushed to the point of narcolepsy.
Harlin, whose clamorous and abrasive movies include "Driven" and "Deep Blue Sea," tries to emulate William Friedkin's grossly terrifying original, but all his images capture are the gross part. A bird pecking a man's eye socket clean. Crows feasting on other crows' innards. A stillborn baby emerging from its mother's womb coated in maggots.
On top of those, Harlin presents a Nazi officer shooting a girl in the head and a pack of hyenas ravenously tearing a screaming boy to pieces.
This is not horror. It's sadism.
Someone please send for an exorcist to cast Harlin out of Hollywood.
"Exorcist: The Beginning," a Warner Bros. release, is rated R for strong violence and gore, disturbing images and rituals, and for language including some sexual dialogue. Running time: 113 minutes. One star out of four.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NYET680; AP Graphic AISLE SEAT
 Load-Date: August 21, 2004

 

End of Document
