

Atef, a key bin Laden lieutenant, wrote the manual on terror and ran the training camps
November 17, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 553 words
Dateline: QUETTA, Pakistan
Body




Mohammed Atef, a key lieutenant to Osama bin Laden who wrote al-Qaida's terrorism manual and ran the organization's training camps, was killed in a U.S. airstrike, the Taliban confirmed Saturday.
Often seen at bin Laden's left or right hand in photographs and video tapes taken in Afghanistan in the last three years, Atef - an Egyptian - was part of the terrorist leader's Arab command.
Mullah Najibullah, a Taliban official in the southeast Afghan border town of Spinboldak, told The Associated Press of Atef's death but would not identify the location of the airstrike. He said seven other al-Qaida members died with him, but he would not name them. He added that bin Laden was alive.
U.S. officials claimed Friday that Atef had been killed in an airstrike outside Kabul.
Atef, an Egyptian who was believed to be about 57 years old, was related to bin Laden by marriage. Atef's daughter wed bin Laden's son in January.
He is suspected of masterminding the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States and the downing of a U.S. helicopter in Somalia in 1993.
Intelligence reports accuse him of organizing the mob that dragged the body of one of the dead American servicemen through the streets of Mogadishu - which helped persuade Washington to withdraw U.S. troops from Somalia.
Atef, whose real name was Mohammed Sobhi Abu Sitta, was born in Minoufia, about 55 miles north of Cairo. According to some accounts he joined the Egyptian police force; others say he served two years of obligatory service in the Egyptian army.
He joined Islamic Jihad, a militant group that assassinated President Anwar Sadat in 1981, but is not known to have played a leading role in the underground group.
Atef came to prominence after he moved to Afghanistan in the mid-1980s when he met Ayman al-Zawahri, the leader of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad and bin Laden's strategist. Al-Zawahri and bin Laden were then fighting alongside Afghan guerrillas against the Soviet occupation forces.
After the 1989 Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, Atef and bin Laden moved to Sudan where they organized al-Qaida cells in Africa, Egyptian security sources believe.
Atef reportedly directed the training of al-Qaida terrorists and also supposedly wrote a 180-page training manual called "Military Studies in the Holy Struggle against Tyrants."
In the early 1990s, Atef was sent by bin Laden to Somalia to train Muslim guerrillas who were resisting U.S. troops in the United Nations' Operation Restore Hope.
His name next surfaced in the August 1998 when truck bombs blew up the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania within minutes of each other.
Three months later, the FBI accused Atef and other al-Qaida members of instigating the bombing and charged them with conspiracy to murder U.S. nationals.
He was convicted in absentia in Egypt in 1999 on charges of plotting subversion and sentenced to seven years in prison for belonging to an outlawed group, Islamic Jihad, and training its members in exile in the use of explosives.
Days after the U.S began its airstrikes on Afghanistan, Atef warned that U.S. troops would suffer the same fate in Afghanistan as they did in Somalia.
"America will not realize its miscalculations until its soldiers are dragged in Afghanistan like they were in Somalia," Atef was quoted as saying by the London-based Islamic Observation Center.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY18, NY193-194, NY198
 Load-Date: November 18, 2001

 

End of Document
