

Before dawn in Baghdad: Going after the Four of Clubs
The Associated Press
April 17, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 995 words
Byline: By KIMBERLY HEFLING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




Sgt. 1st Class Richard Clinton raised his rifle and took aim. Two rounds were all it took. Boom, bang - the lock on the front door disintegrated.
As Clinton hurtled inside, his radio crackled. It was his commanding officer in the 101st Airborne Division, Lt. Col. Lee Fetterman, with instructions: "Do as little damage as you can."
Clinton, a barrel-chested 32-year-old with a blond crew cut, was hardly a beginner. He'd helped train actors for the movie "Black Hawk Down," about a military operation in Somalia that went awry. He knew what he was doing, and - in Iraq on a Wednesday morning in April - he was doing it.
Inside, they hoped, slept a man named Samir Abd Al-Azia, a leader of the repressive Baath Party - and, supposedly, a relative of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein. In the "most-wanted" deck of cards issued by the U.S. military, he was the Four of Clubs.
Military vehicles had taken up positions along the block, encircling the elegant white stone house. At the ready were 100 infantrymen, who had shut off their vehicles on orders from Maj. Dave Beachman. The neighborhood was still sleeping, and they needed the element of surprise.
As Clinton raised his gun, the infantrymen took up position.
Then, a quick dash to the house. Over the eight-foot wall - and in.
A message boomed in Arabic from Humvee loudspeakers, aimed at Al-Azia's neighbors. The American military is conducting operations in the area, it said. Stay inside, and you won't be harmed.
Birds chirped. It was 6:38 a.m.
---
In times of anarchy and chaos, two commodities are prized above all others - guns and accurate information. The American military has plenty of the former. If it wants to secure the peace, it needs a healthy dose of the latter.
So when a slender man approached 101st soldiers Tuesday, saying he had information about officials from Saddam's regime, they listened.
The man was skittish. Iraqis talking to U.S. soldiers in Baghdad these days can face repercussions, and he was terrified his neighbors might see him.
American soldiers solved this. Over his white tunic, they outfitted him with black goggles, a Kevlar vest and a helmet before loading him onto a Humvee for debriefing.
According to 1st Lt. James Cornett, 20, of Alma, Ga., the battalion's assistant intelligence officer, the man was turning in people who he said stole his car, beat him up and left an ugly gash on his thigh. "His motive," Cornett said, "is revenge."
He gave them four names. The soldiers decided the information about Al-Azia was the most credible. On Tuesday night, they planned to raid at dawn.
They didn't know what they might face. Would Al-Azia be there? Would other Baath leaders be hiding out? Would it be battle or quick surrender?
---
Clinton moved in, scanning for threats. Each room of the house was more opulent than the last - chandeliers, plush furniture. Clinton opened locked doors with rifle blasts.
But no one was there.
Suddenly, gunfire echoed from next door. The infantrymen hit the dirt.
"We have a casualty!" the radio crackled. From beyond the fence, a woman screamed. Then came an American voice: "We've got a man with a white flag. Don't shoot!"
It was Al-Azia's next door neighbor. He had stepped outside moments earlier, encountering Sgt. Steven Woods, 29, of Lenoir, N.C., just off Al-Azia's yard. "Get down and get out of the way!" Woods yelled. The neighbor responded by pointing a pistol at American forces.
Woods and Sgt. Joshua Gaston, 25, of Katy, Texas, fired back low, attempting to disable him and wounding his arm and upper thigh. He ran back inside his house. His teenage son came out with an AK-47 and pointed it at the soldiers.
Gaston had only seconds to decide his next move. "Take him out," he remembers thinking to himself. He opened fire, hitting the boy in the abdomen and the legs. Then he stopped; he knew there were women and children inside the house.
Medics swept in for treatment.
"You're going to be OK," Pfc. Josh Adkins, a battalion medic with a southern drawl, told the older man.
The woman, enraged at American forces, calmed down when she saw medics treating her family. As she stepped into a military ambulance, she thanked the soldiers in English.
And she gave them a valuable tip: Al-Azia was gone, but some of his relatives were just across the street.
---
Outside the house across the way, an American loudspeaker blared: Come out. Soldiers moved in to frisk the man who emerged, wearing khaki shorts and sandals.
"We're going to search the house one way or another. We'd like to do it peacefully," Clinton told the interpreter. "Make sure he knows we don't want to hurt anybody."
The man said he was a gun salesman. Upstairs, he showed off his weapons - "for hunting," he said.
Clinton checked the man's identification. As he did so, another man walked into the kitchen. Clinton decided to take them into custody.
"Tell him to pack a small bag," Clinton said. "Tell them we have reason to believe they need to be questioned. … We have no intentions of hurting them."
Then the men were on their way, headed for questioning at Baghdad International Airport. But the mystery remained: Where, exactly, was Samir Abd Al-Azia?
---
On his way back to the Mauritanian Embassy, where the 101st has set up operations, the commander's mood was dark.
"I'm proud of the guys," Fetterman said. "But I'm not wholly satisfied."
Shortly after the raid, he was told that a former Iraqi general named Ibrahim Abd Al Tilb had approached his forces and asked to speak with him.
Outside the embassy, Tilb told Fetterman he believed Al-Azia was part of a convoy that left Iraq on April 6 in civilian vehicles marked with Red Cross symbols. Tilb didn't know where they headed.
Inside the embassy, Fetterman and others examined a photo they took from Al-Azia's house. In it, Al-Azia was standing alongside another man. They stared into the camera, unsmiling.
The second figure looked strangely familiar. He was, it appeared, the man from across the street - the man in the khaki shorts.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos

 

End of Document
