

Blair says the fight against terrorism does not target Islam; should unite the world
October 11, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 402 words
Byline: By MARIAM FAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




The U.S.-led anti-terror campaign is not directed against Islam or Arabs, British Prime Minister Tony Blair said Thursday, adding that battling terrorism should unite all nations and faiths, not divide them as terrorists have planned.
Blair spoke during a tour of the Middle East to build support for U.S.-British attacks on Afghanistan. Many Muslims see the U.S. war on terror as a pretext for attacking their countries and faith. Most governments in the region gave only careful public endorsements of the military campaign.
"We are determined that this will never be seen as a struggle of Western countries against Islam," Blair told reporters after talks with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. He was in Oman on Wednesday.
He said those who carried out the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States were not only after the loss of civilian lives, but meant to "divide people: Arabs and West; divide people: Muslims and other faiths; divide people across the whole of the world."
The international community should send terrorists a clear message: "We will stand united in our fight to see the international terrorism defeated."
Mubarak, who supports the U.S. campaign, also called for a united stance "against those who are trying to link terrorism to Islam or (the) Arab nation."
His government is believed to be working closely with the United States gathering information on militants who threaten both countries.
"All countries of the world- large or small; developed or developing - should be committed to various ways and means to the international campaign toward the elimination of all forms of international terrorism," he said.
Meanwhile, a Saudi foreign ministry official said his government has asked Blair not to include the kingdom on his tour out of concern it could inflame tensions at home.
The Saudi government has allied itself with Washington, but did bar the United States from using a key Saudi air base to launch anti-terror attacks on other countries in the region.
But British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw denied reports that Blair had not been successful in arranging a visit to Saudi Arabia, Britain's Press Association reported Thursday.
Straw told BBC Radio 4's Today program that "the government of Saudi Arabia has made it clear that it would welcome a visit with the prime minister, but as ever with these things, it is a matter of sorting out a convenient time for both sides," PA reported.
 Load-Date: October 12, 2001

 

End of Document
