

Britain urges Arafat to reform the Palestinian Authority in preparation for statehood
The Associated Press
January 14, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 642 words
Byline: By THOMAS WAGNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Yasser Arafat must step up democratic reforms to get the Mideast peace process back on track, Britain's foreign secretary said Tuesday, opening an international conference on the Palestinians that Israel barred most Palestinian officials from attending in person.
Palestinian representatives from the West Bank and Gaza were addressing the forum by video hookup after Israel banned them from traveling to London. The ban was imposed in retaliation for a Jan. 5 double suicide bombing attack in Tel Aviv that killed 22 bystanders.
The meeting at the Foreign Office opened with delegates from the United States, the United Nations, the European Union, Russia, Jordan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia to discuss the reform of the Palestinian Authority. Egypt was represented by the country's intelligence chief, Omar Suleiman. Two Palestinian officials, including a London-based diplomat, were present.
U.S. Assistant Secretary William Burns, who heads the State Department's Middle East bureau, was representing the United States.
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon spurned repeated requests by London to lift the travel ban. Israel controls Palestinian travel in and out of the Gaza Strip and West Bank and decides who can and cannot leave.
The United States has supported the British-sponsored conference and opposed Israel's decision to prevent a Palestinian delegation from attending.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said the conference is designed to advance President Bush's "vision of two states, Israel and Palestine, living side-by-side in peace and stability."
In an interview with the British Broadcasting Corp., British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw acknowledged Tuesday that the ban on the Palestinian delegation was unhelpful, but insisted it should not distract attention from the principal issues.
He said they include the need for reforms of the authority's finances as well as constitutional issues, such its establishment of a prime minister's office, a cabinet, a proper legislative council and an independent judiciary.
Straw said one goal of the conference is to "accelerate the momentum towards internal reform in the occupied territories - the West Bank and Gaza - for the Palestinian Authority."
Straw said the Israeli travel ban "cannot be used as an excuse to stop the reform process in its tracks. … Precisely because the security situation is so adverse, you need a higher quality of public administration, not a lower quality."
Two Palestinians attended in person: Afif Safieh, the Palestinian representative in London, and Michael Tarazi, a Palestinian legal adviser who was able to travel to Britain because he holds a U.S. passport.
At Arafat's headquarters in the West Bank town of Ramallah, his chief adviser, Nabil Abu Rdeneh, said Tuesday the conference should be seen as "a message to the Israeli government by the British and the international community, a very important political message, that the whole international community is not accepting the Israeli measures against the Palestinian people and leadership."
In keeping with the original plan, Israel wasn't invited to the meeting.
Zalman Shoval, an adviser to Sharon, said in Israel: "The present terrorist-promoting (Palestinian) leadership is not a peace partner, and that is part of the reason why we didn't let these so-called delegates go to London for this conference, because we think it would just be another charade."
Israeli Foreign Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said he doubted the conference would achieve anything, but that the "difference of opinion" between Israel and Britain over Palestinian attendance would not strain the two nations' close relations.
An appeal by Prime Minister Tony Blair to reconsider the travel ban on the Palestinian delegation was rejected by Sharon last weekend. Blair was to meet with the delegates Tuesday afternoon.

 

End of Document
