

Burundi's president removed from power while out of the country
April 18, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 702 words
Byline: By JOCELYNE SAMBIRA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUJUMBURA, Burundi
Body




A group calling itself the Patriotic Youth Front overthrew President Pierre Buyoya and suspended Parliament on Wednesday while he was out of the country for peace talks with the main rebel leader, state radio reported.
In a statement read over Radio Burundi, an unidentified spokesman said the airport was closed and declared a curfew effective at 8 p.m. There were no reports of violence in the capital, Bujumbura.
Buyoya (pronounced boo-YO-yah) was in Libreville, Gabon, for peace talks with the leader of the main Hutu rebel group fighting the government in the country's 7 1/2-year civil war. He was in a meeting with South African Deputy President Jacob Zuma, when news of the coup was broadcast, a Zuma spokesman said. He had been scheduled to return to Bujumbura on Wednesday.
Tutsi hard-liners have opposed talks with the rebels and rumors of a coup have been rampant since Buyoya signed a power-sharing agreement last August with Hutu opposition leaders in Arusha, Tanzania. Subsequent talks - mediated by former South African President Nelson Mandela - did not include the Hutu rebels.
A government spokesman loyal to Buyoya, Luc Rukingama, told the South African Press Agency on Wednesday evening that the coup had been put down, but that report could not be confirmed.
Buyoya, a Tutsi, took power in a coup in July 1996, promising to end the civil war that has left more than 200,000 people dead.
On Wednesday, a group of soldiers arrived at the radio station and a guard there fired two shots at them. After the guard fled, the soldiers played a tape announcing the coup.
The statement, attributed to the previously unknown Patriotic Youth Front, led by Lt. Gaston Ntakarutimana, announced that the Hutu-dominated Parliament had been disbanded. Although the Hutus dominate the national assembly under a 1996 agreement that legitimized Buyoya's presidency, it is powerless and the Tutsis minority actually controls the government.
"As you know the National Assembly was made up of genocidal people and was appointed by the former government and was not representative of the people," the statement said.
The capital appeared calm, with civilians and soldiers walking through the streets. The Front's spokesman said in the radio broadcast that people were welcome to show their support for the coup, but said demonstrations must remain calm.
Ntakarutimana was a commander at the Gakumbo military camp, which is responsible for protecting the airport. The radio station was taken over by soldiers based at Gakumbo camp.
"We call on the armed forces to be vigilant so that the enemy does not take them by surprise, the same goes for the population," the spokesman said on the radio. He said the Front will soon announce who will take over the government.
Buyoya was in Gabon to meet with Jean-Bosco Ndayikengurukiye, the leader of the main Hutu rebel group, the Forces for the Defense of Democracy. The meeting was supposed to encourage the armed rebels to join the power-sharing talks.
There are 17 political parties participating in the power-sharing talks, 10 Tutsi and 7 Hutu.
The power-sharing plan called for an ethnically balanced army and legislature. But Hutu rebels have refused to endorse the agreement and have not attended peace talks.
The spokesman said the power-sharing talks in Arusha will continue.
"We are not opposed to the Arusha peace talks, but we are against the people who say they represent us in the peace talks," the Patriotic Youth Front spokesman said.
Mark Bomani, an aide to Mandela, said he had heard reports that a coup had taken place but had no other details.
Bomani said it was too early to say how the peace process may be affected and it depended on the objectives of those who had overthrown Buyoya
Burundi is in Central Africa, east of Democratic Republic of the Congo. Hutus make up the majority of its population, but Tutsis historically have controlled the army and economy since independence from Belgium in 1962. Tutsis have controlled the government for all but four months of the country's history.
The civil war began in Oct. 1993, when Tutsi paratroopers assassinated the country's first democratically elected president, Melchior Ndadaye, a Hutu, triggering the Hutu rebellion.
 Load-Date: April 19, 2001

 

End of Document
