

Bush, on the defensive, says administration is working hard to prove Iraq weapons
The Associated Press
July 15, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 756 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush, facing questions about his credibility, says the United States is working overtime to prove Saddam Hussein was developing weapons of mass destruction before the United States invaded Iraq.
"When it's all said and done," Bush said Monday, "the people of the United States and the world will realize that Saddam Hussein had a weapons program."
Bush has been on the defensive since the administration acknowledged it could not document his State of the Union claim in January that Iraq had been trying to buy uranium in Africa to develop nuclear weapons.
That claim was based on British intelligence that had been called into question by the CIA, and the agency's director, George Tenet, has accepted responsibility for not seeking removal of the statement from Bush's speech.
House Majority Leader Tom DeLay, R-Texas, dismissed the controversy as "incredibly overblown," and the result of Democratic presidential hopefuls vying for support in advance of their primaries.
"When you listen to the rhetoric, you start to wonder which side won. There is no margin of victory that could satisfy them. They didn't want to fight in the first place and they've spewed more rhetoric at President Bush than they ever did at Saddam Hussein," DeLay said Tuesday.
"They think if they just get a little bit angrier, and a little bit meaner and a little bit louder the American people will start hating the president as much as they do," he said.
DeLay said that Bush "didn't lie. He didn't mislead anybody. His statement was accurate." The majority leader also responded forcefully to a question of whether Tenet should depart the government. "Absolutely not," he said.
Sen. Bob Graham of Florida, a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination, accused Bush of deception. "He deceived the American people by allowing into a State of the Union speech - at a critical point when he was making the case for war with Iraq - a statement that he either knew was wrong or should have known was wrong."
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., appearing on NBC's "Today" show Tuesday, said "there is a broader issue, and that is the failed policy toward Iraq."
For his part, Bush said the United States was reviewing documents and interviewing Iraqis in an intensive effort to support the still unproven claim that Saddam had forbidden weapons.
The embarrassing episode about questionable intelligence forced the administration to concede it did not know the source of the British claims - and, in fact, was not trying to determine the source.
"We don't know if it's true but nobody - but nobody - can say it was wrong," White House press secretary Ari Fleischer said. "That is not known."
Administration officials said Bush's statement was technically correct since he was simply saying that British intelligence said something was true. In the Jan. 28 speech, Bush said, "The British government has learned that Saddam Hussein recently sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa."
Anti-war advocacy groups launched a television advertising campaign accusing Bush of misleading Americans about Iraq's nuclear ambitions. The ad ends with the word "leader" superimposed on Bush's face, and then the word changes to "misleader."
Defending his administration, Bush said, "I think the intelligence I get is darn good intelligence. And the speeches I have given were backed by good intelligence.
The administration said the questionable intelligence claim was simply one piece in a long, documented list of evidence showing that Iraq was trying to acquire material for nuclear weapons.
Said Fleischer, "The fact of the matter is whether they sought it from Africa or didn't seek it from Africa doesn't change the fact that they were seeking to reconstitute a nuclear program."
The White House also drew a distinction between the way Bush handled intelligence claims about Iraq in a speech he gave in Cincinnati last October compared with his State of the Union address in January.
In October, acting on Tenet's suggestion, Bush excised a sentence about Iraq seeking a specific quantity of uranium from Niger, Fleischer said. Yet, several months later, Bush went ahead and raised the claim about seeking uranium in Africa.
Fleischer said it was an apples-and-oranges difference because the Cincinnati speech mentioned Niger while the State of the Union speech talked about all of Africa, and that there was different reporting from the CIA. "So it's an apple in Cincinnati and an orange in the State of the Union," he said. "The two do not compare that directly."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo CDH112
 Load-Date: July 16, 2003

 

End of Document
