

Bush celebrates three birthdays on Fourth of July: the nation's, aviation's - and his own
The Associated Press
July 4, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1246 words
Byline: By JENNIFER LOVEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WRIGHT-PATTERSON AIR FORCE BASE, Ohio
Body




President Bush marked aviation's birth, alongside the nation's and his own, with an Independence Day of gauzy, flag-draped ceremonies and a hearty defense of his repeated use of American military might.
"By killing innocent Americans, our enemies made their intentions clear to us," Bush said from a red-white-and-blue-bedecked stage set up on a sun-soaked field. "And since that September day, we have made our own intentions clear to them."
The United States, Bush said, "will not stand by and wait for another attack, or trust in the restraint and good intentions of evil men."
Bush repeatedly states that the U.S.-led global war on terror will not end any time soon. He also claimed that Iraq's former leader, Saddam Hussein, posed an urgent threat to the United States as justification for a pre-emptive war against that regime.
His administration is facing increasing questions about the United States' postwar occupation of Iraq, the mounting U.S. casualties there and the failure so far to find evidence of weapons of mass destruction.
To the cheers of the thousands of military and civilian revelers who braved intense heat to see the president on the Fourth of July, Bush said: "We will act whenever it is necessary to protect the lives and the liberty of the American people."
The day was a nonstop birthday celebration, as the former pilot from the Texas Air National Guard visited this Air Force base to commemorate the 100th anniversary of powered flight. After spending barely over an hour on the ground here in Dayton, he returned to Washington for festivities honoring the nation's founding 227 years ago - and to attend his own "surprise" birthday party.
First lady Laura Bush summoned a few friends for fireworks-watching from the White House balcony Friday night, in honor of Bush's 57th birthday on Sunday. Though intended as a surprise, Mrs. Bush spilled the beans about her plans during an online chat earlier in the week.
Bush's impassioned case on behalf of American military power became newly relevant even as he spoke. Considering whether to send American soldiers into war-torn Liberia as part of an international peacekeeping force, Bush on Friday dispatched military experts to Africa to help guide his decision.
"Without America's active involvement in the world, the ambitions of tyrants would go unopposed and millions would live at the mercy of terrorists," he said. "With Americans' active involvement in the world, tyrants learn to fear and terrorists are on the run."
Bush, who shed his suit jacket and the red tie that made a patriotic statement against his blue shirt, came here as part of nearby Dayton's almost three-week extravaganza in honor of Wilbur and Orville Wright.
The brothers designed and built the airplane at their bicycle shop in Dayton. Their first powered flight came on Dec. 17, 1903, when Orville piloted the Wright Flyer for 120 feet and 12 seconds along the dunes of what was then part of Kitty Hawk, N.C.
"I wonder what Wilbur and Orville what have thought if they had seen that flying machine I came in on today?" Bush quipped about his impressive jet, Air Force One.
On the unused, flag-lined tarmac behind him stood several potent symbols of aviation's progress and the military Bush came to praise. Bush was flanked by a B1B Stealth bomber, A10 Thunderbolt "Wart
ST. LOUIS - Albert Pujols can take getting snubbed by Barry Bonds, and by fans in the All-Star Game balloting. What he can't take is 0-fers.
The St. Louis Cardinals' star has Triple Crown numbers as baseball nears the All-Star break. Perhaps the most impressive statistic, though, is he's never been held hitless in more than two starts.
BC-BBN--Cardinals-Pujols. MOVED.
By R.B. Fallstrom. AP Photo NY180 of July 3.
After amazing October, Angels sink into summer swoon
ANAHEIM, Calif. - Even the rally monkey and the ThunderStix aren't helping. After their amazing October, the World Series champion Anaheim Angels have sunk into a summer swoon, hovering around the .500 mark.
BC-BBA--Fallen Angels. MOVED.
By Ken Peters. AP Photo CACC101 of July 3.
After Winnebago adventure, Beck's back in the big leagues
SAN DIEGO - It's the ninth inning and the San Diego Padres need a save. "Hells Bells" no longer rings out, the heavy metal song silenced because Trevor Hoffman is hurt.
But wait - here comes an experienced closer trotting out of the bullpen, a barrel-chested veteran with a Fu Manchu mustache and 270 career saves. "Shooter" is on his way to the mound and everything's going to be OK.
BC-BBN--Shooter's Back. MOVED.
By Bernie Wilson. AP Photo GO301 of July 3.
Who's on first, second, third, etc., at All-Star game?
UNDATED - All-Star rosters have expanded from 30 to 32 spots this season, and now players have a vote, too. That doesn't make it any easier to pick between Gary Sheffield and Jim Edmonds in the National League outfield, or Alfonso Soriano and Bret Boone at second base for the AL. Baseball's annual midsummer argument is on - here are our selections. The actual starters and reserves will be announced Sunday.
BC-BBO--All-Star Picks. MOVED.
By Mike Fitzpatrick. AP Photos NYBB101-113 f July 3.
 TOUR DE FRANCE:
That little bike race, a century old, is now glory of France
PARIS - That little bike race devised to save a failing paper at a time of great national anguish is beginning, yet again. But now, 100 years on, Le Tour symbolizes every glory of France.
That the favorite is a Texan seeking a fifth straight win bothers few Frenchmen. For most, the race itself is a triumph, the world's toughest sports event against an unfolding backdrop of natural beauty.
BC-CYC--Le Tour at 100. MOVED.
By Special Correspondent Mort Rosenblum. AP Photos NY185-186 of July 3.
-BC-CYC--Tour-Armstrong-Coach. Second in a series of columns by Lance Armstrong's coach, Chris Carmichael. MOVED.
 AUTO RACING:
Atlanta Motor Speedway tries to lure new fans
HAMPTON, Ga. - From his office high above Atlanta Motor Speedway, track president Ed Clark has a panoramic view of all 124,000 seats in the grandstands, which rarely are filled to capacity. An innovative marketing strategy might help change that. Atlanta and the Henry County Chamber of Commerce are offering packages for October that include two tickets to three days of events, a hotel room for two nights and transportation to and from the track on race day, all for less than $500. There's also coupons for area restaurants.
BC-CAR-NASCAR-Cheap Tickets. MOVED.
By Keith Parsons. AP photo GAATJ501 of July 3.
-BC-CAR--Auto Racing Notes. By Motorsports Writer Mike Harris. MOVED.
 SUNDAY SPECIAL:
Buying into sports
UNDATED - In the high-stakes world of sports sponsorships, nothing is forever and few things are for very long.
BC-Sunday Special. MOVED.
By Hal Bock. AP Photos HTM101 and SPD101 of July 3.
 OLYMPICS:
Athens' stray dogs share city streets with Olympic visitors
ATHENS, Greece - First there was a spate of killings, followed by rowdy street demonstrations, an international salvation campaign and a heated public debate over their fate.
Now, after months of argument and a public outcry by animal rights activists, Athens' thousands of stray dogs will be spared the pound and near certain death. Instead, they will share the streets of the ancient capital with hundreds of thousands of people expected to visit during next year's Olympics.
BC-OLY--Athens' Strays. MOVED.
By Lisa Orkin. AP Photos NY181-184 of July 3.
Also moving:
- BC-AP Sportlight. MOVED.
- BC-BBO--This Date in Baseball. MOVED.
- BC-Quotes of the Week. MOVED.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos OHAB102, JSA104
 Load-Date: July 5, 2003

 

End of Document
