

Chief prosecutor at permanent war crimes tribunal vows to win the trust of doubters, like the United States
The Associated Press
April 23, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 618 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




As the United States and other doubters warily watch the debut of the U.N. war crimes tribunal, its new prosecutor promised firm but responsible investigations - and said he hoped to eventually win over the court's doubters.
A day after his unanimous election to the post, Argentine human rights lawyer Luis Moreno Ocampo said Tuesday he understands "the fears and … the underlying sensitivities" about his powers to launch investigations, but he stressed that the treaty establishing the International Criminal Court contains checks to prevent any abuse of power.
"We have to show how seriously we are working, and slowly people who today are reluctant will start to trust us," he said.
The United States fears that Americans - especially soldiers - will be singled out for frivolous prosecutions simply because of its superpower status.
Moreno Ocampo pledged not to be influenced by any nation and to exercise his power with "responsibility and firmness." The tribunal will only be a last resort when national courts fail to punish war crimes, he said.
"Because of the exceptional character of the court, the absence of trials led by this court as a consequence of the regular functioning of national institutions will be its major success," he said.
Moreno Ocampo helped prosecute the military junta responsible for Argentina's "dirty war" against suspected leftists in the late 1970s and early 1980s and is currently a visiting professor at Harvard Law School.
"I deeply hope that the horror that humanity suffered in the 20th century will serve as a painful lesson, and that the creation of the International Criminal Court will help us prevent those atrocities from being repeated in the future," he said.
In the past, the United Nations has set up other war crimes courts to deal with specific conflicts, like the breakup of Yugoslavia in the 1990s or the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. But the International Criminal Court is the first permanent tribunal.
The court is the culmination of a campaign that began with the Nuremberg and Tokyo trials for World War II's German and Japanese war criminals. It has jurisdiction over war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide committed after July 1, 2002, involving one of the 89 nations adhering to treaty, but it will only step in when states are unwilling or unable to dispense justice.
Still, the United States worries Americans will be prime targets for countries resentful of U.S. power.
It has adopted legislation authorizing the use of "all means necessary" to free U.S. citizens in the court's custody and has so far signed agreements with 27 countries exempting Americans from being handed over to the court.
The court is headquartered at The Hague, the Netherlands, and is expected to start sifting through complaints after the chief prosecutor organizes his staff, which will likely take months. He said he expects to start work on June 16.
Human rights experts said there could be cases stemming from the wars in Congo and Colombia, but Richard Dicker, head of the international justice program at Human Rights Watch, said he knew of no complaint involving the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq.
Moreno Ocampo refused to discuss any cases, but noted that neither the United States nor Iraq have ratified the Rome Treaty establishing the court - so they are not bound by it.
Judge Philippe Kirsch of Canada, chosen to serve as the first president of the court, said the next step is for the tribunal over the next few years to demonstrate that it acts "on the basis of the highest standard of justice."
"As that happens, it is reasonable to expect that those states that still have reservations or hesitations about the court now will later provide their support," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYDB101-102

 

End of Document
