

CNN tape shows bin Laden announcing jihad against the West, vows Americans will die
August 20, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1086 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan
Body




Surrounded by his key lieutenants and masked, gun-toting bodyguards, Osama bin Laden declared "holy war" against the West in a 1998 press conference that was videotaped by al-Qaida and aired Tuesday by CNN.
However, a Pakistani journalist who attended the press conference, held at an al-Qaida camp near Khost in southeastern Afghanistan, recalled that the taciturn bin Laden showed passion only when he spoke on two issues: U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia and Israel's control of Jerusalem.
"Tears were moving down from his eyes when he was talking about al-Quds (Jerusalem) and the presence of U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia," said the journalist, Ismail Khan. Bin Laden claimed he was shipping weapons, including Stinger missiles, to his followers in Saudi Arabia, Khan said.
The tape aired by CNN on Tuesday was the second in a series that the network said it obtained from an al-Qaida archive in Afghanistan. The latest tape showed bin Laden warning of a mission that would "result in killing Americans and getting rid of them."
Bin Laden did not give more details. About two months later, however, nearly simultaneous attacks on U.S. Embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, killed 231 people, including 17 Americans, and wounded about 5,000. The United States blames al-Qaida for the Aug, 7, 1998 embassy bombings.
It appeared that the purpose of the press conference, which was restricted to select Pakistani journalists and one Chinese writer, was to announce a jihad, or holy war, against the United States and its allies.
"By God's grace, we have formed with many other Islamic groups and organizations in the Islamic world a front called the International Islamic Front to do jihad against the crusaders and Jews," bin Laden was heard saying through an interpreter.
"And by God's grace, the men reacted to this call and they are going on this path, and they are doing a good job," bin Laden said. "By God's will, their actions are going to have a successful result in killing Americans and getting rid of them."
CNN said that on Wednesday, it would air video that shows al-Qaida training recruits how to blow up bridges, fire surface-to-air missiles and fight in urban environments.
According to CNN, the tapes indicate that al-Qaida is running an intricate and highly sophisticated network to train its followers. Some of the tapes shows a small mock city of canvas and stone, and others offer instruction on hostage-taking and assassination, CNN said.
Three months before the press conference, bin Laden had announced formation of the "World Islamic Front for Jihad Against Jews and Crusaders," meaning the Christian West. The Front included several Islamic militant groups and declared its intention to attack Americans, including civilians, anywhere in the world.
Both of bin Laden's declarations attracted only modest international attention, even though they served as a harbinger to the devastating attacks of Sept. 11.
"The purpose of our visit, I believe, was to announce the launching of the Islamic jihad or something like that," Khan, the journalist, said. "In between, he talked about issues like the presence of foreign troops in Saudi Arabia, operations in Palestine and what was happening in Chechnya and other places."
Khan said that when bin Laden talked of American forces in Saudi Arabia, birthplace of the Islamic faith, "it was a touchy issue for him and a very moving issue for him." Bin Laden was stripped of Saudi citizenship for his activities and his outspoken opposition to the ruling royal family.
According to Khan, he and the other reporters were escorted across the Pakistan-Afghan border by members of the Pakistani extremist group Harkat-ul-Mujahedeen. He said the group feared being mistaken for smugglers and shot by border guards.
After spending the night at an al-Qaida camp, they were taken to another location after a long, circuitous drive "to confuse us," he said. After waiting there, they saw a cloud of dust in the distance signaling the arrival of bin Laden's party.
"All of sudden there was shooting and firing," he said. "I thought the camp had come under attack from the U.S. Then Osama arrived with two dozen bodyguards, their faces all covered up and in camouflaged outfits."
Bin Laden, surrounded by armed men, appeared relaxed in the video, but in later shots filmed outside, he was seen flinching as he heard what CNN described as a rocket-propelled grenade go off nearby.
Among the others showed on the video were two sons of Sheikh Omar Abdel-Rahman, now serving a life sentence for trying to blow up targets in New York; bin Laden's chief deputy, Ayman al-Zawahiri, whose whereabouts are unknown; and Mohammed Atef, an al-Qaida military chief killed in a U.S. airstrike in November near Kabul.
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said government officials will be reviewing CNN's tapes for any useful intelligence information.
"This is a serious reminder of the type of enemy we're up against and the risks the world faces from people who would use weapons to bring harm to innocents," Fleischer said.
CNN's first report on the tapes, aired Monday, showed grisly images of dogs being killed with poisonous gas and al-Qaida operatives conducting mock ambushes and kidnappings. U.S. officials said the footage did not reveal any unexpected capabilities by the group accused of carrying out the Sept. 11 attacks.
Gordon Johndroe, spokesman for the White House's Office of Homeland Security, said the videos support Washington's view that al-Qaida leaders would use chemical weapons if they had them. But he said there was no credible information that the group had obtained weapons of mass destruction.
CNN spokeswoman Christa Robinson said the network had shared the videos "with the appropriate authorities, because of our concern for the safety of people around the world."
Robinson declined to say which authorities were getting the tapes, but officials said the U.S. government may have already recovered other copies of some of the tapes on its own.
CNN said correspondent Nic Robertson obtained the tapes, which began airing Sunday, from an unidentified source in Afghanistan. CNN said it paid a "modest amount" for the tapes and would air more footage during the week.
Robertson was given access to more than 250 tapes, CNN said. He took about 60 of the tapes out of the country and the network showed them to experts to verify their authenticity.
---
Eds: AP Correspondent Riaz Khan in Peshawar contributed to this report.
---
On the Net:
CNN: http://www.cnn.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY111-112
 Load-Date: August 21, 2002

 

End of Document
