

Conference on Iraq to back the government's war on insurgents
The Associated Press
November 23, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 787 words
Byline: By SALAH NASRAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SHARM EL-SHEIK, Egypt
Body




World leaders gathered in Egypt for an international conference on Iraq focused on another Mideast issue early Tuesday - the peace process between Israel and the Palestinians.
The so-called Quartet of sponsors of a peace plan known as the road map met on the sidelines of the Iraq conference.
Secretary of State Colin Powell, on one of his last trips as secretary of state, went into the breakfast meeting a day after holding talks in Israel and the Palestinian territories.
Powell told Israeli and Palestinian leaders that President Bush is intent on moving "forward on the path of peace, to take advantage of the new opportunities that are before us."
The Nov. 11 death of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat has changed the Israeli-Palestinian landscape. Israel and the United States had refused to talk to Arafat, branding him an unacceptable negotiating partner because of what they said was his support of terror.
The Palestinians are preparing for a Jan. 9 vote to choose Arafat's replacement. On Monday, Israeli leaders assured Powell they will ease travel restrictions in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and take other steps to facilitate voting.
Joining Powell at Tuesday's meeting were U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov.
On Iraq, the gathering of 20 world powers and regional countries, including many opposed to the U.S.-led invasion, represented an acknowledgment of the need for international cooperation to deal with the consequences of the war.
While sharp difference remain on how to proceed, the participating nations and world bodies have committed to supporting the U.S.-backed Iraqi interim government and finalized a draft statement, obtained by The Associated Press.
In it, they gave strong backing to the Iraqi government's war against insurgents but did not set a deadline for withdrawing U.S.-led forces from Iraq, despite a push by France and some Arab countries.
The draft communique for the two-day conference, which ends Tuesday, also says the interim Iraqi government should meet with its opponents to try to persuade them to take part in the general elections scheduled for Jan. 30.
The meeting brought together Iraq's six neighbors - Iran, Syria, Turkey, Kuwait, Jordan and Saudi Arabia - as well as Egypt and several other Arab countries, China and regional bodies such as the Group of Eight, the United Nations, the European Union, the Arab League and the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Syria's foreign minister, Farouk al-Sharaa, had tried to seek support for setting a deadline for the withdrawal of foreign forces in Iraq. But the draft communique allows the Iraqi government to decide when the U.S.-led troops should depart. It does remind them that their mandate is "not open-ended."
For all its bloodshed, the insurgency enjoys a certain support in the Arab world, where many regard the U.S. and other troops as occupiers.
The draft communique says the participants condemn "all acts of terrorism in Iraq" and call for "the immediate cessation of all such acts in order to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people."
In what could be the most contentious part of the conference, Iraq has said it will ask neighboring states to tighten their borders against the infiltration of would-be insurgents and to share information about groups supporting the militants.
Iraq's interim leader, Ayad Allawi, in an interview with the AP on Monday, said neighboring countries haven't pulled their weight against the insurgency.
"Certainly, some brothers and leaders in some neighboring nations did not do enough," Allawi said. "They should have tried to help us at a time when we needed help."
On his arrival Monday, Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari shrugged off calls by some Sunni Muslims for Iraqis to boycott the elections, set for Jan. 30.
"They do not represent all Sunnis. If they want to prove their popularity, the only way is through the ballot box," Zebari said.
In Baghdad, Allawi also dismissed boycott advocates as "the eventual losers," and said his government was determined to hold the elections on time.
France, which opposed the invasion of Iraq, had urged the conference to invite government opponents. Such groups are not attending, but Egyptian Foreign Minister Aboul Gheit said the views of the Association of Muslim Scholars will be aired.
At dinner on Monday night, host Egypt sat Powell next to his Iranian counterpart, Kamal Kharrazi, but a senior State Department official said only polite dinner conversation was exchanged.
No more substantive talks were expected. The Iranian Foreign Ministry said Sunday that Iran saw little need for a meeting in part because Powell will soon be leaving his post.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XAN107-111
 Load-Date: November 24, 2004

 

End of Document
