

Crown Prince Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands marries Argentine economist
February 2, 2002, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 906 words
Byline: By ARTHUR MAX, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMSTERDAM, Netherlands
Body




Crown Prince Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands took a vivacious Argentine economist for his bride Saturday, in a popular union that has deepened the attachment of the normally dispassionate Dutch toward their monarchy.
In a civil ceremony witnessed by kings, queens, dukes and counts but not by the bride's parents, the 34-year-old heir to the throne exchanged vows with Maxima Zorreguieta, 30.
Maxima dabbed tears after saying "Ja" to accepting the prince as her husband, then signed documents registering their marriage.
The royal couple repeated their pledge to "love, honor and obey" in a church ceremony officiated by a Dutch Reformed minister and a Catholic priest.
Queen Beatrix, in a deep purple dress and matching hat, grinned and applauded the marriage of her son, the eldest of three.
The bride's father, Jorge Zorreguieta, was asked to stay away because of widespread discomfort over serving in the repressive Argentine regime of the 1970s and 1980s, when thousands of opponents disappeared or were killed. Zorreguieta and his wife, Maria del Carmen Cerruti, had been expected to watch the ceremony on television in London.
The civil ceremony was devoid of religion, but the union was consecrated two hours later in the 600-year-old Nieuwe Kerk, or new church, next to the Royal Palace, where the Rev. Carel ter Linden conducted a Protestant ceremony.
The Rev. Rafael Braun, an Argentine priest and friend of the Zorreguieta family, read from the Book of Ruth in Spanish.
Maxima has said she will remain a Roman Catholic, but will bring up her children in the Dutch church.
"Your God is my God," intoned ter Linden, also quoting the Book of Ruth. The future king knew, ter Linden said, that Maxima was marrying not only him but his country.
Willem-Alexander, in formal naval uniform, and Maxima, in a white Valentino gown with a 5-yard train, drove 300 yards through an honor guard of soldiers from the palace to the Beurs van Berlage, the 19th-century landmark where the civil ceremony took place.
Police estimated the crowd at 80,000 on a rare day of sunshine.
Royal guests included Britain's Prince Charles and his brother Prince Andrew; the kings of Sweden, Norway and Belgium; the queen of Denmark; Japan Crown Prince Naruhito; and Jordan's Queen Noor. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan and former South African President Nelson Mandela also attended.
In his remarks, ter Linden said the bride's absent parents are "today united in spirit with their daughter and son-in-law." The minister also said the congregation's thoughts were with Maxima's homeland, "which is suffering such painful difficulties" with unrest over its financial collapse.
The streets were a sea of orange, the color of the 450-year-old ruling House of Orange. Youngsters slept overnight in Dam Square in orange sleeping bags. Citizens poured in from around the country wearing orange rubber crowns, hats, scarves.
As the couple emerged on a balcony of the Royal Palace, many in the throng below waved small plastic flags saying, "Kiss." The crowd erupted in cheers when they did. Confetti and streamers floated over the jammed square.
"This makes the Royal Family more alive," 35-year-old Jaap de Bruijn said as he waited for a glimpse of the couple. "Beatrix is a bit distant. But now the monarchy has become more of the people."
The church ceremony was followed by a half-hour ride through the heart of Amsterdam in the gilded carriage that once carried Willem-Alexander's great-grandmother, Queen Wilhelmina, to her wedding 100 years ago.
The procession was led by more than 200 police and royal grenadiers on foot and on horseback, passing through a cordon of hundreds of saluting soldiers and veterans.
About 1,000 protesters jeered and whistled at the carriage. One vessel of a white substance splashed against the carriage but quickly was wiped off.
Some protesters urged dismantling the constitutional monarchy, while others demonstrated against the human rights abuses committed while Zorreguieta served as agriculture minister under former Argentine dictator Jorge Videla.
Dutch television said eight demonstrators were detained.
Since the engagement was announced last March, the Dutch have embraced Maxima - as she is universally known - with an uncommon enthusiasm, prompting many commentators to compare her popularity to that of the late Princess Diana of England.
Maxima was working as an investment banker in New York when she met Willem-Alexander at a party in Spain - reportedly without learning for some time of his royal heritage.
The Royal Palace tried to keep the romance private. But it created an uproar when it eventually leaked that Maxima's father served under Videla.
Before the engagement was announced, the Dutch government asked Zorreguieta not to attend the wedding. In an adroitly managed news conference, Maxima distanced herself from the Videla regime while remaining loyal to her father.
Demonstrations have been the rule at other Dutch royal weddings. Riots accompanied the 1966 marriage of Queen Beatrix and the German-born Prince Claus, who had served in the Hitler Youth before World War II. In 1937, Beatrix's mother, Queen Juliana, also married a German, Prince Bernhard, who had once been a Nazi party member but who fought with distinction in the war with the United States Air Force.
On the Net:
Royal family site http://www.koninklijkhuis.nl/UK/wedding 
Nieuwe Kerk site http://www.nieuwekerk.nl/html/de-nieuwe-kerk-dhtml-uk.html 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos AMS109;115;121;129;132
 Load-Date: February 3, 2002

 

End of Document
