

Delegates from 188 countries agree on agenda to review the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty
The Associated Press
May 11, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 582 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Delegates from 188 nations agreed on an agenda to review the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty Wednesday, ending days of diplomatic wrangling and paving the way for the first serious discussions on improving the treaty's control of nuclear weapons.
Egypt had insisted that the monthlong conference include discussion of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East, and the deadlock was broken when delegates agreed to put a reference to previous conferences where that issue was discussed in a footnote to the agenda.
Ahmed Fatthala, Egypt's assistant foreign minister for international organizations, said agreement means that all three subjects discussed at the 1995 review conference will also be on the agenda at the current meeting - the Mideast, disarmament and nonproliferation.
"These were the three pillars," he said. "We wanted to have a successful meeting, and we couldn't have a successful meeting if we ignored the balanced package we have already agreed upon in 1995."
Daryl Kimball, executive director of the Washington-based Arms Control Association, said the impasse was the result of U.S. insistence that the conference ignore the 1995 and the 2000 treaty reviews and their decisions on disarmament steps, and the insistence of the 116 developing countries in the Nonaligned Movement that the current meeting review and assess progress on past commitments.
Brazilian diplomat Sergio de Queiroz Duarte, president of the monthlong review conference, said the solution to the agenda dispute "accommodates the interest of all delegations, including that of Egypt."
Delegates will meet Thursday to try to resolve the other key procedural issue - allocating items on the agenda to three main committees and determining how the committees will organize their work, he said.
With just over two weeks left for the conference, Duarte said there was still time to reach an agreement that would reinforce the treaty "in all its aspects" if delegates help.
"I continue to be optimistic," he said.
But others are pessimistic, pointing to the lengthy dispute over the agenda language as a reflection of the deep divisions on the treaty itself.
The Nonproliferation Treaty - the cornerstone of global efforts to control the spread of nuclear weapons - went into effect in 1970 and has been signed by 188 countries, though North Korea withdrew in 2003. Three countries have refused to join - India and Pakistan, which conducted rival nuclear tests in 1998; and Israel, which is believed to have anywhere between 200 and 400 nuclear weapons.
Under the pact, nations without nuclear weapons pledge not to pursue them, in exchange for a commitment by five nuclear-weapons states - the United States, Russia, Britain, France and China - to negotiate toward nuclear disarmament. The treaty guarantees countries that renounce nuclear weapons access to nuclear technology for peaceful purposes.
Some nuclear "have-nots" complain that the nuclear-weapons states are moving much too slowly toward disarmament.
The United States insists that its disarmament record is good and that the conference should focus on the transgressions and noncompliance of Iran and North Korea.
Kimball said the agenda adopted Wednesday will allow discussion on all the issues, but whether an agreement is reached remains to be seen.
"For the conference to produce a successful outcome, key states will have to be more flexible in the coming days," he said. "Otherwise the conference will be a squandered opportunity to strengthen the treaty."
 Load-Date: May 12, 2005

 

End of Document
