

Demonstrators from around the country, and the world, join women's march
The Associated Press
April 25, 2004, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 557 words
Byline: By ELIZABETH WOLFE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Tens of thousands of women gathered for an abortion-rights rally Sunday as Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton told several hundred of them the issue is about women gaining full equality.
At a pre-rally breakfast, Clinton said the Bush administration is "filled with people" who view the landmark 1973 Roe v. Wade abortion ruling by the Supreme Court "the worst abomination of constitutional law."
"This administration is filled with people who disparage sexual harassment laws, who claim the pay gap between women and men is phony … who consider Roe v. Wade the worst abomination of constitutional law in our history," said Clinton, D-N.Y.
Several hundred women, joined by a scattering of men, attended the breakfast. Rally organizers hoped the day's protest would draw more people than the estimated 500,000 who demonstrated for abortion rights in 1992.
By midmorning, tens of thousands of marches had already come to the Mall, many carrying brightly colored signs. "It's your choice, not theirs," said one placard.
More than 100 opponents of abortion rights assembled along a portion of the parade route. Among them were women who had had abortions and regretted it; they dressed in black.
Tabitha Warnica, 36, of Phoenix, said she had two abortions when she was young. "We don't have a choice. God is the only one who can decide," she said.
The larger rally, which focused on protecting women's reproductive rights, included men and women from across the country. Joining them were activists from nearly 60 countries including Denmark, Germany and Kenya.
"In our country, it's so important to feel solidarity with the rest of the world on women's rights," said Helena Pinto, president of UMAR, an abortion rights group in Portugal, where legal abortion is limited.
As the list of sponsors, which includes the American Civil Liberties Union and the National Latina Institute for Reproductive Health, attests, abortion rights in the United States is the rallying point but not the only issue at stake for these protesters. Organizers have were fighting, too, for birth control, sex education and better health care for women worldwide.
"We believe it's important to be that broad-based and diverse because the threats to reproductive rights are that broad-based and diverse," said Gloria Feldt, president of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America.
International delegations joined the rally to protest U.S. policies they say harm women abroad, particularly in developing countries.
In the park across from the White House on Saturday, dozens carrying flags of different countries heard speeches about the state of women's reproductive health worldwide, including how the so-called "global gag-rule" has hurt family planning services. Under the rule, which President Bush reinstated when he took office, non-governmental organizations overseas that promote or perform abortions are ineligible for U.S government money.
"Since the global gag rule is affecting family planning worldwide, this is also our cause," said Catherina Hinz of the German Foundation for World Population, based in Hanover.
The rally, said National Organization for Women President Kim Gandy, will "demonstrate that these policies are having an impact on women all over the world."
On the Net: March for Women: http://www.marchforwomen.org 
Operation Witness: http://www.operationwitness.com 
 Load-Date: April 26, 2004

 

End of Document
