

Despite Lockerbie deal Libya's troubles with the world are far from over
The Associated Press
August 31, 2003, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 697 words
Byline: By SALAH NASRAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TRIPOLI, Libya
Body




Libya's deal accepting blame for the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 is being sold to the Libyan public as a triumph for Moammar Gadhafi that has ended a 15-year standoff with the West and opened the way to badly needed foreign investment.
But as the country festoons itself in celebratory banners for the anniversary Monday of the 1969 coup that put Gadhafi in power, indications are that relief is still a long way off, and that the real reason Gadhafi relented was fear that he might meet the same fate as Saddam Hussein.
In August Libya signed a deal accepting responsibility for the 1988 bombing over Lockerbie, Scotland and pledging to pay up to $2.7 billion in compensation to the families of the 270 people killed.
Since then Libya's government-run media have extolled Gadhafi's "wisdom" while reporting few details of the agreement.
Saleh Ibrahim, whose Libyan Academy for Higher Studies researches political and economic issues for the government, links the deal to the toppling of Saddam and the possibility Libya too might become a candidate for regime change.
"The balance of power is tilted, and it is wise to avoid confrontation even before it starts," Ibrahim said in an interview.
Moreover, although the compensation stands to cost Libya one quarter of this year's expected oil revenues, the sanctions imposed on it since the bombing total more than $30 billion in lost business. Investment is especially needed for an oil industry that once made the North African country of about 5 million people a regional power but is now in declay.
Gadhafi has long been accused of sponsoring terrorism and meddling in the affairs of nations from Africa to the Philippines. In recent years he has tried to shed that image, bring his country into the global economy, and be accepted as a statesman ready to solve regional and international crises.
He appeared to score a success when Britain introduced a draft U.N. resolution last week that would lift U.N. sanctions against Libya following the Lockerbie compensation agreement.
The United States says it won't oppose lifting the U.N. sanctions, but will maintain its own sanctions and keep Libya on its list of state sponsors of terrorism. Families of Americans killed in the Lockerbie bombing have lobbied to keep up U.S. pressure on Libya.
And Libya's problems don't end there. France is threatening to block the lifting of U.N. sanctions, saying it wants to renegotiate its 1999 deal with Libya over the bombing of a French jet.
France got $33 million for the families of the 170 people killed in the bombing, but now is under domestic pressure from relatives of the victims to get a settlement closer to the Lockerbie deal.
Then there's the 1986 bombing of a West Berlin discotheque that killed two U.S. soldiers and a Turkish woman and injured 229 people. The German newsmagazine Der Spiegel has reported that since the Lockerbie settlement, Libya has signaled willingness to pay compensation for that attack.
In Lebanon on Sunday, the parliament speaker called on Libya to reveal the fate of a senior Lebanese Shiite cleric who disappeared during a visit to Libya in 1978. He accused Libya of being more interested in healing relations with the West than with fellow Arabs.
In a statement issued in London following the disclosure of the Lockerbie agreement, exiled Libyan opposition leaders said it was tantamount to an admission of guilt by Gadhafi himself and urged "punishment not only for those who perpetrated the crime but also those who made the plans and gave orders to execute them."
That seems unlikely. One thing recent events have underlined is that 34 years after seizing power, Gadhafi, who is either 60 or 61, remains firmly in charge, even though he likes to say that power rests with his people.
"People own the power, the wealth and the arms," says a banner honoring the anniversary. But Gadhafi's image and words are omnipresent on television, posters and monuments.
And Libyans who think otherwise are loath to be identified.
"No one asked us when they bombed the (Pan Am) plane and no one was expected to discuss with us how to clean up the mess," said a Libyan who agreed to be identified only by his first name, Matouk.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XAN102,105
 Load-Date: September 1, 2003

 

End of Document
