

Developments in the news industry for July 26-Aug. 2:
The Associated Press
August 2, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 9111 words
Body



MEDIA FINANCES:
 
- Washington Post Co. reports increase in profits
 
- Time Warner net falls 27 percent in second quarter
 
- Reuters' boosts interim profit but expects limited sales growth
 
- Cox Enterprises announces plan to acquire Cox Communications
 
- Britain's Barclay brothers complete purchase of Telegraph group
 
>+++++ NEWSPAPERS:
 
- Chicago Sun-Times reduces circulation numbers by 23 percent
 
- Decatur (Ala.) Daily to become morning newspaper
 
- Omaha World-Herald Co. buys Iowa newspaper
 
>+++++ POLITICS:
 
- Surge of interest in Kerry propels convention ratings
 
>+++++ FCC-TELEVISION VIOLENCE:
 
- Government takes closer look at violence on television
 
>+++++ BROADCASTING:
 
- Mike Wilson named general manager at KDSM-TV in Des Moines
 
- Denver's KNRC-AM goes off the air
 
- Macon, Ga., NBC affiliate to launch newscast
 
>+++++ COURTS-FREE PRESS:
 
- Rhode Island releases emergency responder tapes from deadly nightclub fire
 
- Judge in Kobe Bryant case apologizes for court mistakes
 
- Massachusetts high court ruling could make record releases easier
 
- Government: Bush's warehoused military records same as released materials
 
- Pennsylvania ban on alcohol ads in college papers ruled unconstitutional
 
- Judge throws out reporter's lawsuit against Rochester, N.Y., newspaper
 
- Judge rules issue moot in Kansas newspaper's request for records
 
>+++++ INTERNATIONAL:
 
- Iranian judiciary: Drop in blood pressure, fall led to journalist's death
 
- New Sunday newspaper to launch in New Zealand
 
- Hong Kong newspaper challenges anti-graft agency after raids
 
- Newspaper editor released from custody in Senegal
 
>+++++ INTERNET:
 
- Craigslist to charge for job ads in N.Y., L.A.
 
>+++++ PEOPLE:
 
- Arwady named publisher of Star Ledger of Newark
 
- Edwards to leave NPR for a satellite radio show
 
- Vancouver editor hired at San Francisco Examiner
 
- Newspaper accuses Moore documentary of using fake front page
 
- Tacy named online editor of Star Tribune of Minneapolis
 
- Benedict retires from Astronaut Scholarship Association
 
>+++++ DEATHS:
 
- Richard Cushing
 
- Robert C. Miller
 
- Tom Misczuk
 
- Joe Layden
 
- Oguz Aral
 
- Mike Lynch
 
- John Stafford
 
>+++++ NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
 
>+++++
MEDIA FINANCES:
 
 
Washington Post Co. reports increase in profits
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Washington Post Co. said July 30 that second-quarter profits rose about 40 percent, aided by strong revenue growth at its Kaplan education division.
Quarterly earnings increased to $84.9 million, or $8.82 per share, for the three months ended in June. That compared with $60.6 million, or $6.32 per share, from the period last year, which includes an early retirement charge of 14 cents a share at the flagship newspaper.
Analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call had predicted the company would earn $8.32 per share in the latest quarter.
Revenue in the quarter rose 16 percent to $818.4 million, from $706.9 million in 2003, paced by a 41 percent increase at the company's Kaplan education segment. Revenue at the company's cable, broadcast and newspaper publishing divisions also increased during the second quarter, while revenues were down slightly at the magazine publishing division.
Kaplan reported operating income for the second quarter of $29.4 million, versus $3.5 million in the second quarter of 2003. About a quarter of the increase is from acquired businesses - primarily in the higher education division and the professional training schools that are part of supplemental education.
Newspaper publishing division revenue increased 5 percent to $234 million from $223.1 million a year ago, while print advertising at The Washington Post newspaper rose 1 percent to $150 million.
---
On the Net:
http://www.washingtonpost.com 
>+++++ Time Warner net falls 27 percent in second quarter
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Time Warner Inc. reported a 27 percent decline in net earnings for the second quarter July 28 compared to a year ago, when the company recorded large gains from the sale of Comedy Central and a settlement with Microsoft Corp.
But profits still came in ahead of expectations.
The giant media conglomerate, whose operations include CNN, Warner Bros. and HBO, earned $777 million, or 17 cents a share, in the three months that ended in June, versus $1.06 billion, or 23 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenues rose a robust 10 percent to $10.89 billion from $9.92 billion, fattened by receipts from the latest "Harry Potter" movie, cable TV services and cable networks. The long-troubled America Online service continued to lose dialup customers, but revenues and profitability both increased thanks to higher advertising.
The results were well ahead of analysts' expectations. Excluding a loss of 2 cents per share from its Warner Bros. music business, which was sold to an investor group in March, the company had earnings of 19 cents per share versus an estimate of 15 cents per share by analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call.
In the year-ago period, the company earned $533 million, or 11 cents per share, excluding the Comedy Central gain, the Microsoft settlement, accounting charges and other one-time items.
For the first six months of the year, Time Warner reported earnings of $1.74 billion, or 37 cents a share, against $1.46 billion, or 32 cents a share, in the comparable period a year ago. Six-month revenues rose 10 percent to $21.01 billion from $19.16 billion.
---
On the Net:
http://www.timewarner.com 
>+++++ Reuters' boosts interim profit but expects limited sales growth
 
LONDON (AP) - Cost-cutting and asset sales helped Reuters Group PLC earn sharply higher profits for the first half, but the financial information and media group said July 27 that competition and a shrinking market for some of its products would limit sales growth in coming months.
Net profit jumped to 286 million pounds ($526 million) in the six months ending June 30, up from 7 million pounds during the period last year, Reuters said. Stricter controls on costs along with proceeds from the sale of its businesses TIBCO Software and GL Trade contributed to the earnings improvement.
The London-based company's interim profit before tax and exceptional items rose to 136 million pounds ($250 million) from 87 million pounds last year, beating a market consensus of 123 million pounds ($226 million).
However, sales - including revenues from Reuters' majority-owned electronic brokerage Instinet Group Inc. - fell 11 percent to 1.44 billion pounds ($2.65 billion) from 1.62 billion pounds. The company attributed the decline mostly to the weakness of the U.S. dollar.
Core revenues, which exclude Instinet's contribution, dropped still further to 1.18 billion pounds ($2.17 billion), down 13 percent from 1.35 billion pounds in 2003.
The company has struggled to increase sales against fierce competition from Bloomberg LP and Thomson Financial. Meanwhile, mergers and consolidations in the banking industry have reduced demand for its financial products among banks.
---
On the Net:
http://www.reuters.com/ 
>+++++ Cox Enterprises announces plan to acquire Cox Communications
 
ATLANTA (AP) - Cox Enterprises Inc. on Aug. 2 announced a $7.9 billion proposal to buy the public shares of Cox Communications Inc. and take the nation's fourth largest cable TV provider private.
Cox Enterprises, a private company that owns newspapers and telecommunications services, already owns 62 percent of Atlanta-based Cox Communications.
Under the deal, Cox Enterprises would purchase the remaining 38 percent and make Cox Communications a subsidiary.
Cox Communications, which has about 6.3 million cable customers, would continue to operate autonomously under the deal, said Cox Enterprises spokesman Bob Jimenez. Cox Radio Inc. will remain a publicly traded company, he said.
Under the proposal, Cox Enterprises would pay $32 a share to take control of the cable provider - 16 percent higher than the $27.58 at which Cox Communications' stock closed on July 30.
The Cox Communications board of directors will form a special committee of independent directors to consider the proposal. The committee will retain its own legal and financial advisers, and directors with Cox Enterprises affiliation will not participate.
Jimenez would not address reports that Cox Communications wants to become a privately held entity so it can compete with more stealth in the fiercely competitive cable industry.
"This deal allows us to focus our business more on the long-term, and not so much the quarterly numbers," he said.
Cox Communications, which operates in 15 states, has managed to transform itself from a traditional cable operator into a provider of TV, telephone and high-speed Internet services. In 1997, it became one of the first cable companies to offer phone service and today sells phone service to more than 1.1 million customers.
---
On the Net:
Cox Enterprises: http://www.coxenterprises.com 
Cox Communications: http://www.cox.com 
>+++++ Britain's Barclay brothers complete purchase of Telegraph group
 
LONDON (AP) - Britain's Barclay brothers said July 30 they have completed their acquisition of The Daily Telegraph from U.S. parent company Hollinger International Inc.
"This brings to an end months of uncertainty for the Telegraph Group, its titles and employees," said a statement issued on behalf of Press Holdings Ltd., which is owned by Sir Frederick and Sir David Barclay.
The statement didn't say how much the Barclays paid for the Telegraph group, which includes The Daily Telegraph, Britain's biggest-selling broadsheet daily, and The Sunday Telegraph.
But The Daily Telegraph reported on its Web site that the Barclays paid 729.5 million pounds ($1.3 billion).
The announcement of the purchase came a day after a U.S. judge dismissed a challenge to the sale from newspaper baron Conrad Black, the controlling shareholder of Hollinger International.
Black has been removed as chairman and chief executive of Hollinger International, which also owns the Chicago Sun-Times, The Jerusalem Post and a large number of community newspapers in the Chicago area, amid a scandal over payments to Black and his associates that shareholders said were unauthorized.
Black retains voting control over Hollinger International through a Canadian holding company called Hollinger Inc., which holds a 68 percent voting interest in Hollinger International through a special class of supervoting shares.
A group of independent directors of Hollinger International has sued Black, claiming he owes the company millions in improper payments he has received that should have gone to the company. That same group of directors is seeking to sell Hollinger International's assets, and reached the deal to sell the Telegraph to the Barclays after conducting a public sale process.
Black had tried to hold up the sale so that it could be subjected to a shareholder vote.
But on July 29, Judge Leo Strine of the Delaware Chancery Court threw out Black's argument that the Telegraph made up "substantially all" of Hollinger International's assets and therefore would have triggered a shareholder vote. Strine noted that Hollinger Inc., Black's Canadian holding company, had itself said earlier that the Chicago group of newspapers was more valuable than the Telegraph group.
Strine also ruled against Black in February, blocking an earlier deal he had reached on his own to sell control of Hollinger International in a side deal to the Barclay brothers.
The Daily Telegraph, a conservative broadsheet daily, had a circulation of 865,014 copies between May 31 and June 27, according to the Audit Bureau of Circulations.
 
NEWSPAPERS:
 
 
Chicago Sun-Times reduces circulation numbers by 23 percent
 
CHICAGO (AP) - The Chicago Sun-Times has reduced its single-copy circulation numbers by 23 percent, about a month after the paper's parent company announced it had inflated the figures for several years.
The 23 percent amounts to roughly 72,000 daily copies, based on the Sun-Times' most recent publisher's statement filed last fall.
Publisher John Cruickshank said July 29 it was too early to determine how much the company would owe advertisers.
Advertising rates are commonly set according to a newspaper's circulation.
Hollinger International Inc., which owns the Sun-Times, said an audit committee has hired an independent accounting firm to "assist in its review" and expects to announce its findings within weeks.
Hollinger International, which also owns The Jerusalem Post, announced the circulation discrepancy June 15. It said the overstatement was discovered when a new leadership team took over there after Conrad Black stepped down as CEO of Hollinger International in November. It did not say how much of the Sun-Times' circulation was overstated.
The current and former executives in charge of circulation for the Sun-Times left their jobs two weeks after the announcement.
Advertisers also filed two lawsuits against the Sun-Times and Hollinger International in response.
Single-copy sales at newsstands account for about 65 percent of the paper's total Monday-through-Friday circulation, which stood at 481,798, according to the paper's latest filing with the Audit Bureau of Circulations.
Another Chicago-based newspaper company also announced in June that it overstated circulation numbers. The Tribune Co. said circulation figures had been inflated at Newsday, a New York paper, and at Hoy, the Spanish-language daily launched by Newsday and owned by Tribune.
>+++++ Decatur (Ala.) Daily to become morning newspaper
 
DECATUR, Ala. (AP) - The Decatur Daily will become a morning newspaper beginning Aug. 30.
The newspaper has been an afternoon paper for all of its 92 years, but now joins the majority of dailies, in Alabama and nationally, that publish in the morning.
"Later deadlines for morning publication will allow our staff more time to produce a better and more complete newspaper," said Barrett C. Shelton Jr., editor and publisher.
Less traffic during early hours also will allow for more efficient and faster distribution by carriers, he said.
Saturday, Sunday and holiday editions were already morning papers.
>+++++ Omaha World-Herald Co. buys Iowa newspaper
 
OMAHA, Neb. (AP) - A subsidiary of The Omaha World-Herald Co., Midlands Newspapers Inc., has purchased the Boone (Iowa) News-Republican.
Terms of the transaction, which took effect July 30, were not disclosed.
News-Republican Publisher Robert Schaub said the newspaper, which is published five days a week, was fortunate to find such a quality owner.
The World-Herald Co. is an employee-owned company that publishes the Omaha World-Herald in Omaha, the Kearney Hub in Kearney, the Star-Herald in Scottsbluff and the North Platte Telegraph in North Platte. It now owns three additional daily newspapers in Iowa and a partial interest in another.
The company also owns 23 weekly newspapers in Nebraska and Iowa.
>+++++
 
POLITICS:
 
 
Surge of interest in Kerry propels convention ratings
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Based on television ratings, Americans were more interested in what John Kerry had to say in his nomination acceptance speech than they were for Al Gore in 2000.
An estimated 24.4 million viewers watched Kerry's speech on the six biggest networks July 29, compared with 21.1 million people who saw Gore four years earlier, Nielsen Media Research reported July 30.
Despite the July 29 surge of interest, the overall television rating for the four-day Democratic convention was the lowest it had been since Nielsen began keeping records in 1960. In terms of viewers, it was roughly on a par with 2000, Nielsen said.
The ratings also reflected the continued erosion in ABC, CBS and NBC's news audience for big events compared to the cable news networks.
Nearly 3 million fewer viewers watched the convention's final night on those three networks than did in 2000. The difference came in the cable networks: 15.6 million people watched Kerry speak on ABC, CBS or NBC, while 8.8 million saw it on CNN, Fox News Channel or MSNBC.
The three broadcasters televised three hours of the convention over four days, skipping the July 27 session entirely.
The broadcasters complain the conventions are stage-managed events with little news, and dwindling ratings over the years justify their decisions to cut back on the hours.
The cable news networks have happily stepped into the breach. Between them, CNN, Fox and MSNBC averaged 5.6 million viewers between 8 p.m. and 11 p.m. during the convention, more than double their viewership in 2000.
CNN claimed an important victory, averaging 2.3 million viewers for its three-hour convention coverage, compared with 2.1 million for Fox and 1.3 million for MSNBC. During prime-time, when nothing unusual is happening, Fox usually dominates with talk show hosts Bill O'Reilly and Sean Hannity.
Still, the Nielsen numbers show how explosively Fox has grown. Its viewer average this convention was 2.1 million compared with only 461,000 during the Democratic meeting in 2000.
Nielsen doesn't include PBS or C-SPAN in its measurements. PBS, which covered the convention for three hours each night, said its viewership was up 20 percent over four years ago.
>+++++
 
FCC-TELEVISION VIOLENCE:
 
 
Government takes closer look at violence on television
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Federal regulators on July 28 began soliciting public comment on whether there is too much violence on television and whether the government should step in.
The Federal Communications Commission wants to hear from parents, the television industry and others about the effectiveness of the V-chip and the television ratings system. The FCC also sought public input on what kind of regulation, if any, might be needed.
The House Energy and Commerce Committee asked the agency to study the issue.
Michael Copps, one of two Democrats on the five-member commission, has railed for years against indecency on the airwaves.
"Hundreds of studies over decades document the harmful impact that exposure to graphic and excessive media violence has on the physical and mental health of our children," he said. "Wanton violence on the people's airwaves has gone unaddressed for too long."
The FCC will take public comment for two months and then report to Congress.
"The kind of violence we see today is unlike any kind of violence we've ever seen before on television. It's getting out of control," said Brent Bozell, president of the Parents Television Council.
A spokesman for the National Association of Broadcasters defended programmers.
"Most people would acknowledge that programming on broadcast television is far less violent than what you would find on cable and satellite," said Dennis Wharton.
He pointed to the creation of the V-chip, which uses the voluntary TV ratings system to allow parents to block specific programs.
The FCC regulates indecency on public airwaves. The agency has stepped up enforcement since Janet Jackson's breast-baring performance during the Super Bowl halftime show in February.
Under anti-indecency rules, radio stations and over-the-air television channels are barred from broadcasting references to sexual and excretory functions between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m, when children are most inclined to watch.
The commission could consider expanding indecency rules to include violence, but may need congressional authority to do that. Also, the FCC is sure to be criticized by those who already complain that the government's definition of indecency is subjective and chills free expression.
---
On the Net:
Federal Communications Commission: http://www.fcc.gov 
Parents Television Council: http://www.parentstv.org 
>+++++
 
BROADCASTING:
 
 
Mike Wilson named general manager at KDSM-TV in Des Moines
 
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) - Mike Wilson, who has spent his broadcast career at KDSM-TV, has been promoted to general manager of the Des Moines station.
The announcement was made July 29 by Steve Marks, chief operation officer of parent Sinclair Broadcast Group Inc.'s television group.
Wilson started at KDSM-TV(Fox 17) in 1987 and served in a variety of sales and sales management positions. Most recently, he was general sales manager.
Sinclair Broadcast Group owns and operates, programs or provides sales services to 62 TV stations in 39 markets.
>+++++ Denver's KNRC-AM goes off the air
 
DENVER (AP) - KNRC-AM ceased operating on July 27, citing problems in attracting enough listeners in Denver's crowded market.
"Metropolitan Denver is one of the nation's most competitive and saturated radio markets for news, talk and sports programming," said Tim Brown, CEO of NRC Broadcasting, which owned the station.
NRC's 11 other radio stations in Colorado are healthy and growing, Brown said.
The other stations are in Denver, Aspen, Glenwood Springs, Vail, Eagle, Breckenridge, Silverthorne, Steamboat Springs and Craig.
>+++++ Macon, Ga., NBC affiliate to launch newscast
 
MACON, Ga. (AP) - Macon's NBC affiliate plans to launch its first news broadcast since 1992 on Labor Day.
WMGT is spending almost $1 million to renovate the second floor of its 105-year-old building, said George Jobin, the station's general manager. Most of the newscast's 15 employees have been hired although the station has not announced its lineup of anchors.
Half-hour news shows are planned to air at 6:30 a.m., 5:30 p.m. and 11 p.m. Neither WMAZ or WGXA, Macon's other local newscasts, has 5:30 p.m. news broadcasts.
The station plans to benefit from promotions during Olympics coverage and hopes to capitalize on the November presidential elections.
CBS affiliate WMAZ has dominated local ratings for years.
WMGT is owned by Morris Multimedia, a communications company headquartered in Savannah.
 
COURTS-FREE PRESS:
 
 
Rhode Island releases emergency responder tapes from deadly nightclub fire
 
PROVIDENCE, R.I. (AP) - The state attorney general's office on Aug. 2 released audio transmissions among rescue personnel the night a fire ripped through a West Warwick nightclub, killing 100 people.
The office also made public a one-page document that states where 96 people who died at the club were found. Most were found at The Station's front entrance, according to the document.
The transmissions include about 165 police and fire calls. They do not include calls by club patrons or family members. They have been edited to delete people's addresses, names and phone numbers.
Superior Court Judge Mark Pfeiffer ordered the release of the tapes, and a one-page police report, about two weeks ago. The order came in response to a lawsuit filed by The Providence Journal seeking more information about what happened at The Station club.
The judge denied a request to release 911 calls made by victims and relatives, calling them "intensely personal." Under state law, 911 calls are not public information.
The Feb. 20, 2003, fire, which also injured more than 200 people, started when the rock band Great White's pyrotechnics ignited highly flammable foam that had been placed around the club's stage as soundproofing.
Thick smoke quickly spread through the one-story, wooden building, trapping patrons as they tried to flee.
The club's owners and the band's former tour manager were indicted on involuntary manslaughter charges. They have pleaded innocent. Several lawsuits have been filed since from the blaze.
The attorney general's office was hesitant to release information because of the criminal cases. A judge has asked all sides to not comment on the legal proceedings.
Last November, the attorney general released about 270 phone calls and audio transmissions, or 3 1/2 hours of recordings, between police, firefighters and other first responders.
The tapes provided insight how events the night of the fire unfolded. Rescue workers arriving at the scene described a "stampede" and "people on fire inside." Screams and shouting could be heard in the background of the recordings.
Some victims' family members have opposed the tapes' release, saying they shouldn't have to relive the events.
>+++++ Judge in Kobe Bryant case apologizes for court mistakes
 
EAGLE, Colo. (AP) - With the parents of the alleged victim in the courtroom, the judge in the Kobe Bryant sexual assault case apologized July 30 for court mistakes that led to the release of sealed information.
During a brief public hearing, District Judge Terry Ruckriegle told the parents he would treat the mistakes as a learning experience.
"For all of those who come through these doors, victims and defendants alike, whose names are never known and never sought, I can only assure you I have learned lessons from these mistakes, and that we will give our best human effort not to let it happen again," he said.
Then he looked directly at the parents of the 20-year-old accuser and said, "Again, I apologize." They nodded in response.
The hearing, one of two scheduled before the trial begins Aug. 27, came one day after Ruckriegle released an edited transcript from a closed-door hearing in June in which defense attorneys claimed the woman was pursuing the case in part because she has received nearly $20,000 from a state victims' compensation fund.
Bryant, 25, has pleaded not guilty to a felony sexual assault charge, saying he had consensual sex with the then-19-year-old employee of the Vail-area resort where he stayed last summer. If convicted, the Los Angeles Lakers star faces four years to life in prison or 20 years to life on probation, and a fine up to $750,000.
>+++++ Government: Bush's warehoused military records same as released materials
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Warehoused personnel records documenting President Bush's service in the Texas Air National Guard 35 years ago are identical to documents already made public, the government told a federal court July 28.
The Associated Press sued the Pentagon and the Air Force in June, seeking access to microfilmed records in the Texas State archives of Bush's military service during the Vietnam War, when he flew fighter jets in Texas.
In a federal court affidavit filed in New York, where the AP has its headquarters, the government said every page from the state archives had already been released by the president in February from a separate set of records kept in St. Louis.
The microfilm covers 49 pages of Bush's records. The AP has a separate lawsuit in state court in Texas seeking microfilm of other portions of records of Bush's service that are under the control of the Texas Air National Guard.
The AP's lawsuit in Texas seeks records that could confirm the circumstances surrounding Bush's service in the Guard in 1972 and 1973.
Controversy surrounds Bush's time in the Texas Air National Guard because it is unclear from the record what duties he performed for the military when he was working on the 1972 political campaign of a U.S. Senate candidate in Alabama.
On July 23, newly released government payroll records supported documents released this year by Bush indicating that he did not report for Guard duty anytime from the end of May 1972 until the end of October of that year.
>+++++ Massachusetts high court ruling could make record releases easier
 
SPRINGFIELD, Mass. (AP) - Newspapers could have an easier time getting sealed documents released after a ruling July 27 by the state's highest court made public some records from a 30-year-old murder investigation.
The decision by the Supreme Judicial Court shifts the burden of proof to the party that wishes to keep the records private, said Jonathan Albano, a lawyer for The Republican newspaper in Springfield, a party in the suit.
"It's more of a clarification than a sea change," said Edward Ryan Jr., a former president of the Massachusetts Bar Association. But it is an important one because now those who are able to persuade a judge to seal records must be able to defend their position against successive challenges, he said.
"Until now, it has been a sort of presumption that the reverse was true and that once an order sealing records had been issued the challengers had the burden of showing that circumstances had changed," said Paul Martinek, publisher and editor in chief of Lawyers Weekly USA.
The only publicly identified suspect in the unsolved 1972 killing of 13-year-old altar boy Danny Croteau was Richard Lavigne, a defrocked pedophile priest now living in Chicopee, who had been friendly with the boy. Lavigne has never been charged in the case.
The Republican newspaper and a lawyer for 46 clergy abuse victims, including 24 who said they were abused by Lavigne, had sued to release the records, which were sealed at the request of the Hampden County district attorney.
Lavigne's lawyer Max Stern has said the documents would point out the weakness of the allegations against his client.
District Attorney William Bennett, who sought DNA tests after Lavigne pleaded guilty to molesting other altar boys in 1992, has said that none of the tests connected Lavigne with the crime scene.
An autopsy report released by Bennett following the court's decision shows that Danny had been drinking heavily prior to his death. But it lists no evidence that he was sexually assaulted.
The remaining files are still sealed. The high court said the names and addresses of witnesses should be stricken before the papers are released.
>+++++ Pennsylvania ban on alcohol ads in college papers ruled unconstitutional
 
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - A federal appeals court ruled July 29 that a Pennsylvania law banning paid advertisements for alcohol in college newspapers is unconstitutional.
A three-judge panel of the 3rd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals said the 1996 law, which was intended to combat underage drinking, placed an unfair financial burden on student-run publications and hindered their right to free speech while doing little to achieve its goal.
The law was challenged by The Pitt News, a student-run paper at the University of Pittsburgh.
Judge Samuel Alito said the state faces a heavy burden anytime it tries to restrict speech but had offered only "conjecture" to support its contention that the ad ban would slacken the demand for alcohol by underage Pitt students.
In its lawsuit, The Pitt News said it lost $17,000 in ad sales after the state stepped up enforcement of the ban in 1999.
>+++++ Judge throws out reporter's lawsuit against Rochester, N.Y., newspaper
 
ROCHESTER, N.Y. (AP) - A federal judge has dismissed a $5 million lawsuit against Rochester's Democrat and Chronicle by a former reporter who claimed the newspaper damaged her reputation by pulling her off an investigation of the district attorney's office.
Michele Locastro Rivoli of Auburn claimed in a lawsuit filed last year that editors discouraged her from writing stories about felony cases being dismissed by the Monroe County District Attorney's Office and the possibility that someone there was manipulating documents.
She also maintained that she encountered resistance after District Attorney Howard Relin complained about her.
U.S. District Judge David G. Larimer, in a July 29 ruling, said that "a reporter has no free-standing First Amendment right to have her articles published by a privately owned newspaper for which she works."
Larimer also ruled that "if a governmental body or official interferes with a newspaper's decisions about what to publish or not publish, that may violate the newspaper's First Amendment rights. But there is no such claim here."
Christopher Thomas, a lawyer representing the Democrat and Chronicle, said, "All along, we believed this suit to be meritless, and the court agreed with us."
Rivoli, who resigned from the paper in September 2002, sought compensatory and punitive damages. Her attorney, David Rothenberg, said his client was "disappointed" with Larimer's decision.
>+++++ Judge rules issue moot in Kansas newspaper's request for records
 
LAWRENCE, Kan. (AP) - A judge has ruled against a newspaper seeking access to dispatch recordings made during a police pursuit that ended in a woman's death last summer.
In a lawsuit by the Lawrence Journal-World, Douglas County Judge Paula Martin ruled July 30 that the recordings made during the Aug. 26, 2003, police chase of Nam Ouk Cho could be kept secret because they were part of a "criminal investigation record."
Cho, of Lee's Summit, Mo., is charged with second-degree murder in the death of Judith Velluci, 56, of Lawrence. His trial is scheduled for Aug. 11. Prosecutors say Cho was driving through city neighborhoods, sometimes at speeds of more than 100 mph, before his car hit Velluci's car.
The Journal-World had twice sought access to the recordings under the Kansas Open Records Act, which is intended to ensure public agencies conduct their business in public. The Lawrence police department and the city denied both requests, prompting the newspaper to sue.
The city eventually released the recording after it was played in open court during Cho's preliminary hearing.
State law allows documents, even those found to be a "criminal investigation record," to be open to the public if the judge finds they are in the public interest. The Journal-World asked Martin to make that finding because of a nationwide controversy over whether police pursuits should be restricted.
But Martin ruled that issue was moot because police had already released the tape.
Mike Merriam, a Topeka attorney representing the newspaper, said that ruling was incorrect.
"If you take the position that Judge Martin takes, we just never can determine the nature of the documents," Merriam said.
Merriam said he had seen a similar pattern in other open records cases in the state.
"We have to file a lawsuit to get an open record. After they get sued, they give us the open record and claim that the lawsuit is moot," Merriam said.
Journal-World Managing Editor Richard Brack said he was disappointed the judge chose not to address whether the public should be given access to information about how its police force works. He said the newspaper was considering its next step.
>+++++
 
INTERNATIONAL:
 
 
Iranian judiciary: Drop in blood pressure, fall led to journalist's death
 
TEHRAN, Iran (AP) - Iran's judiciary claimed July 28 that an Iranian-Canadian photojournalist died in custody from a fall after her blood pressure dropped during a hunger strike, a sharp shift in position on a case that has strained relations between the two countries.
The hard-line judiciary also denounced President Mohammad Khatami's reformist administration, which offered July 26 to help identify the murderer of Zahra Kazemi, accusing it of providing fuel for a "spiteful" foreign media.
"The death of Mrs. Zahra Kazemi was an accident," according to a judiciary statement, a copy of which was obtained by The Associated Press.
A Tehran court on July 24 cleared secret agent Mohammad Reza Aghdam Ahmadi, the sole defendant, of killing Kazemi, who died of a fractured skull and brain hemorrhage in detention last July.
Kazemi, a Canadian freelance journalist of Iranian origin, died July 10, 2003, while in detention for taking photographs outside a Tehran prison during student-led protests against the ruling theocracy.
Iranian authorities initially said Kazemi died of a stroke, but a presidential committee later found she died of a fractured skull and brain hemorrhage. Ahmadi was charged with "semi-premeditated murder."
He denied it, and a team of attorneys representing the victim's mother claimed the real killer was Mohammad Bakhshi, a prison official who was being protected by the judiciary.
Bakhshi was cleared of wrongdoing before Ahmadi's trial.
Nobel Peace laureate Shirin Ebadi, who represents the victim's mother, has rejected the court proceedings as flawed, and has vowed to "work until my last breath" to find the murderer. She threatened to take the matter to international organizations if the appeals court and other legal steps fail.
Abdolfattah Soltani, who is on Ebadi's team, said hard-line Tehran Prosecutor Saeed Mortazavi could be a possible suspect. The Canadian government has blamed Mortazavi for the death, and reformists have accused him of a coverup.
Iran-Canada relations, soured by the slaying and subsequent quick burial of Kazemi in Iran against the wishes of her son in Canada, further deteriorated after Iran rejected the idea of Canadian observers at the trial. The Canadian ambassador was barred from attending the last session of the otherwise open trial.
>+++++ New Sunday newspaper to launch in New Zealand
 
WELLINGTON, New Zealand (AP) - APN News & Media LTD, Australia and New Zealand's largest radio broadcaster and regional newspaper operator, plans to launch a Sunday edition of its flagship newspaper, the New Zealand Herald.
Brendan Hopkins, the APN chief executive, said July 30 in a statement that the company has researched the market for more than a year and is confident readers and advertisers will support The Herald on Sunday.
The new paper will compete against the Sunday Star Times and the Sunday News, both owned by Australian newspaper company, John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
Based in the northern city of Auckland, the Herald is New Zealand's largest circulating daily newspaper, with some 230,000 sold daily.
Hopkins said the country's Sunday newspaper market was underdeveloped compared to similar countries.
APN didn't say when it would launch the paper.
>+++++ Hong Kong newspaper challenges anti-graft agency after raids
 
HONG KONG (AP) - A Hong Kong newspaper on July 28 sought to revoke a search warrant used by anti-graft officials to seize documents and computer files from its office, and demanded that the confiscated items be returned.
The Independent Commission Against Corruption, or ICAC, drew international condemnation after raiding seven newspapers that published the name of a protected witness.
Lawyers for the Sing Tao Daily submitted documents to the High Court, seeking to annul a search warrant and demanding the commission disclose the document used to apply for the warrant, according to a newspaper spokesman who would not give his name.
"We want to see what rights the ICAC has under the law, and whether its actions are legal and reasonable," said Ho Man-kei, a lawyer for Sing Tao, in comments broadcast by Hong Kong network Cable TV.
On July 27, the U.S. government voiced concerns over press freedom in Hong Kong and urged the ICAC to carry out its investigation into the naming of the witness "in a lawful and appropriate manner."
"Our position would be to urge that Hong Kong's civil liberties, including its press freedoms, be protected, as guaranteed," State Department deputy spokesman Adam Ereli said in Washington.
A Chinese official here criticized the State Department's comments as improper meddling in Hong Kong's affairs.
Hong Kong officials have insisted press freedoms were not at risk. But Hong Kong newspapers as well as local and international media watchdog groups have charged that officials are intimidating journalists at a time when critics fear local freedoms are under threat from Beijing.
>+++++ Newspaper editor released from custody in Senegal
 
DAKAR, Senegal (AP) - A Senegalese newspaper editor jailed after publishing articles alleging official corruption was released on bail following two weeks behind bars, local media reported July 26.
Madiambal Diagne, editor in chief of Le Quotidien newspaper, was taken into custody July 9 on charges of disseminating false news, revealing confidential documents and publishing information that could incite public disorder.
Diagne was jailed after his newspaper ran articles alleging corruption by customs officials and complaining of political interference in Senegal's judiciary.
"Throughout my detention, I had never lost faith in my country's legal system," Diagne said in an interview broadcast on private Radio Futurs Medias shortly after his release.
A series of demonstrations had been organized after Diagne's arrest to demand his release. Many private radio stations and independent newspapers joined a one-day news shutdown, and national and international news industry groups condemned the jailing.
>+++++
 
INTERNET:
 
 
Craigslist to charge for job ads in N.Y., L.A.
 
NEW YORK (Dow Jones/AP) - Popular community Web site craigslist has begun to charge a $25 fee to post employment advertisements on its New York and Los Angeles sites to cover the costs of its planned expansion.
The New York area accounts for about 30,000 of the more than 100,000 total new job listings the Web site operator gets each month. The Los Angeles area submits 25,000 listings per month.
Such postings had been free. The latest decision to charge for job ads in New York and Los Angeles represents the company's first new revenue stream since it began charging $25 for job postings on its San Francisco-area site six years ago. The San Francisco ads now go for $75.
By next year, the company could begin to charge for job postings in Boston, its next largest employment market, and for New York apartment listings, according to Jim Buckmaster, the company's chief executive.
The Web site operator, which has a cult following of users who tap its regional sites for everything from jobs to dates, said it plans to add more cities and to offer new services, such as a Spanish foreign-language site, in the next year.
Craigslist began in 1995 as a way to help San Franciscans find "everyday stuff" and cool local events. It now includes nearly 50 sites covering different regions of the United States, Canada and Britain.
Although the privately held company doesn't disclose financial information, it does claim to have been profitable since 1999.
---
On the Net:
http://www.craigslist.org 
>+++++
 
PEOPLE:
 
 
Arwady named publisher of Star Ledger of Newark
 
NEWARK, N.J. (AP) - George Arwady, a newspaper publisher in Michigan for the past 24 years, most recently with the Kalamazoo Gazette, has been named publisher of The Star-Ledger.
Arwady, 56, who grew up in Weehawken, takes the post Aug. 9.
He succeeds Linda Dennery, who will be executive vice president/benefits for Advance Newspaper Group, the Star-Ledger's parent company.
During his tenure at the Kalamazoo Gazette, Arwady also had regional responsibilities for several other Advance newspapers in Michigan. He also was editor and publisher of the Muskegon Chronicle and editor of the Saginaw News.
"George has the creativity, enthusiasm, drive and experience to be another strong publisher of The Star-Ledger," Donald E. Newhouse, president of Advance Publications and The Star-Ledger, said July 26.
>+++++ Edwards to leave NPR for a satellite radio show
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Bob Edwards, who recently was removed as host of National Public Radio's "Morning Edition" after nearly a quarter-century, is leaving the network to start a new morning show for distribution on satellite radio.
Edwards' new program will be distributed through the XM Satellite Radio system, a fee-based, commercial-free digital provider, NPR reported July 28.
His departure from NPR - which he joined in 1974, its third year of existence - wasn't unexpected. On a publicity tour since early May to promote his latest book, "Edward R. Murrow and the Birth of Broadcast Journalism," he said recently that he was considering a number of job offers.
Edwards was host of "Morning Edition" - a daily program offering news, commentary and coverage of arts and sports - from its start in 1979 until April 30, when he was reassigned as an NPR senior correspondent. The change, explained by NPR management as an effort to refresh the broadcast, infuriated many of its listeners, who total 13 million each week.
>+++++ Vancouver editor hired at San Francisco Examiner
 
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - Vivienne Sosnowski, a veteran Canadian newspaper editor, has been hired as executive editor at The Examiner, the paper announced July 30.
Sosnowski has been editor of The Province in Vancouver, British Columbia, since 2000. She also was executive editor at the Toronto-based National Post and managing editor of the Vancouver Sun.
"I can't describe how excited and proud we are to have a person of Vivienne's talent and experience join our company," said P. Scott McKibben, president and publisher of The Examiner. "She has a lifetime of experience in both competitive market situations and high-quality tabloid journalism."
The announcement comes five months after Denver businessman Philip Anschutz purchased the newspaper.
>+++++ Newspaper accuses Moore documentary of using fake front page
 
BLOOMINGTON, Ill. (AP) - Filmmaker Michael Moore's Bush-bashing documentary "Fahrenheit 9/11" apparently has upset more than Republicans.
The (Bloomington) Pantagraph newspaper in central Illinois has sent a letter to Moore and his production company, Lions Gate Entertainment Corp., asking Moore to apologize for using what the newspaper says was a doctored front page in the film, the paper reported July 30. It also is seeking compensatory damages of $1.
A scene early in the movie that shows newspaper headlines related to the legally contested presidential election of 2000 included a shot of The Pantagraph's Dec. 19, 2001, front page, with the prominent headline: "Latest Florida recount shows Gore won election."
The paper says that headline never appeared on that day. It appeared in a Dec. 5, 2001, edition, but the headline was not used on the front page. Instead, it was found in much smaller type above a letter to the editor, which the paper says reflects "only the opinions of the letter writer."
"If (Moore) wants to 'edit' The Pantagraph, he should apply for a copy-editing job," the paper said.
Lions Gate Entertainment did not return phone calls seeking comment July 30.
>+++++ Tacy named online editor of Star Tribune of Minneapolis
 
MINNEAPOLIS (AP) - Will Tacy, former managing editor of the online version of The New York Times, was named editor of the Star Tribune's online edition, startribune.com. He will start Aug. 9.
"We are thrilled to have Will leading startribune.com," said Ken Riddick, the Star Tribune's executive director of interactive media. "He has a great online journalism pedigree and an exciting vision for startribune.com."
In addition to his experience at The New York Times on the Web, he has been editor of MotherJones.com.
>+++++ Benedict retires from Astronaut Scholarship Association
 
CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. (AP) - Howard Benedict, who was The Associated Press' senior aerospace writer for more than three decades, is retiring as executive director of the Astronaut Scholarship Association.
"When you get to be 76, your bones get a little achy," said Benedict, who was honored July 27 in a private celebration at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex.
The foundation, established by more than 40 astronauts, has awarded almost $2 million in scholarships for college engineering and science students. Benedict assisted the original Mercury 7 astronauts in providing aid to students interested in spaceflight-related fields.
Benedict said he will soon begin contributing to a book about the history of The Associated Press, the largest and oldest news organization in the world.
He has written three books about space, and co-wrote the best seller, "Moon Shot: The Inside Story of America's Race to the Moon."
Benedict retired from the AP in 1990 after 37 years. He covered the space program for 31 years, reporting on more than 2,000 missile and rocket launches.
"I worked as a correspondent at Cape Canaveral when space exploration was just being born," Benedict was quoted on a display at the celebration. "I recognized a giant of a story when I saw one.
"I never looked back. I only looked up."
 
DEATHS:
 
 
RICHARD CUSHING, 87, an Associated Press war correspondent in Asia during World War II and later the head of Voice of America, July 23 in Mill Valley, Calif.
Cushing worked for the AP in San Francisco for 15 years. He was sent to the Pacific in the final year of World War II as a correspondent in the Philippines and Japan.
He and two other correspondents were the first Americans to enter Tokyo when the war ended, according to his son, Lincoln. Cushing covered the Japanese surrender to Gen. Douglas MacArthur on the deck of the battleship Missouri and then flew to Shanghai, where he reopened the AP bureau.
Cushing was the acting director of the Voice of America in 1968-69 and served as a foreign service officer in Chile, Cuba, Mexico, Venezuela and Kenya.
>+++++
ROBERT C. MILLER, 89, who covered five wars for United Press International and was its longtime bureau chief in Honolulu, July 26 in Hilo, Hawaii.
Miller covered World War II, fighting in the Middle East, the Greek Civil War, the Korean War and the Vietnam War. He spent 16 years as bureau chief of UPI's Honolulu bureau until he was sent to head the agency's outlet in Australia in 1980.
During World War II, he accompanied U.S. Marines landing at Guadalcanal and for six weeks kept a diary of their missions that he later provided in vivid description for newspaper readers.
In spring 1944, Miller was one of 17 survivors of a U.S. ship sunk by a German submarine in the English Channel. They floated in oily water for six hours before being rescued.
And in 1970, Miller wrote about how his interview skills saved his life after he and a photographer were captured by North Vietnamese soldiers in Cambodia. They were held for eight hours, all the while telling their captors they were there to report on their story - which they did.
>+++++
TOM MISCZUK, 48, an investigative reporter for WTIC-TV in West Hartford, Conn., July 27 in Hartford in his sleep of an undisclosed cause.
Misczuk was a reporter at WTIC for 11 years, covering everything from a paternity scandal involving a former New Haven police chief to the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center in New York.
He also worked as a general assignment reporter for stations in Burlington, Vt., Kingston, N.Y., and for News 12 in Norwalk.
"He was a bulldog. He could always go out and get the story," said Paul Lewis, WTIC-TV's news director. "He was an old-fashioned reporter and believed in the reporter's creed of giving voice to the voiceless and holding the powerful accountable."
Misczuk received an Emmy Award for his investigative reporting and the New York Film Festival Award for documentary reporting and producing.
>+++++
JOE LAYDEN, 67, managing editor of the Daily Journal in Park Hills, Mo., for nearly 30 years, July 26 of natural causes while vacationing in the Virgin Islands.
Layden was managing editor at the Daily Journal from 1971 until the end of 2000. He stayed on at the paper as electronic media manager.
"He cared deeply about journalism and the role of his paper in being a strong advocate for the reader, and he applied that at the Daily Journal," said Paul Stevens, central region vice president for The Associated Press and former AP bureau chief in Kansas City. "I never came away from a visit with Joe without one or two new ideas for the Missouri AP news report."
Jim York, the Daily Journal's publisher, called Layden a "true pioneer."
Layden received the Hoosier Best Series Award from the Indiana State Press Association in 1968, and the Media Excellence Award in 1990 from the Missouri Association of Community Colleges.
>+++++
OGUZ ARAL, 68, an influential Turkish cartoonist whose humor magazine was banned after the 1980 military coup, July 26 after a heart attack while on vacation in the Aegean resort of Bodrum.
Aral, who also trained many aspiring Turkish cartoonists, started his career as a cartoonist in 1950 and founded the weekly magazine Girgir (Fun) with his brother and fellow cartoonist Tekin Aral in 1972.
He was sharply critical of many politicians and opposed the military coup. His magazine was one of Turkey's first publications to be closed after the military takeover.
>+++++
JOHN STAFFORD, 66, publisher of The Daily News of Greenville, Mich., July 31 in Grand Rapids of multiple myeloma.
His 41-year-old son, Robert, succeeds him as publisher of The Daily News and Stafford Communications Group.
In addition to the flagship newspaper, the company owns four weekly newspapers, two radio stations and a commercial printing operation.
John Stafford, who took over the business from his father, was "a great cheerleader for Greenville," his son Michael said.
"My dad never viewed running the paper as a job," he said. "It was a passion. He told me, 'Pick something you'd be willing to do for nothing and make a job out of it.' Clearly he had done that for himself."
>+++++
MIKE LYNCH, 74, who started Wichita, Kan., radio station KFDI and built a company that owned country music-oriented stations in six states, July 29 in Houston of pneumonia.
Lynch and the late Michael Oatman, his longtime business partner in Great Empire Broadcasting, sold their company to Milwaukee-based Journal Broadcast Group in 1998.
Oatman was an on-air personality known as "Ol' Mike," so popular in Wichita and the surrounding area that a street on the Wichita State University campus was named for him earlier this year. Lynch, president and CEO of Great Empire, worked behind the scenes.
Lynch was born in Oklahoma City and worked in radio there for his father, Frank, before coming to Wichita in the early 1960s. In 1962, the elder Lynch purchased what was then KIRL-AM from silent screen stars Buddy Rogers and his wife, Mary Pickford.
Mike Lynch bought the station from his father and hired Oatman as his program director and drivetime anchor. The two decided to change the station from doing "commercial religious" programming to a country and western format that became their trademark at the other stations they later acquired.
The Great Empire operation had included stations KTTS in Springfield, Mo., KVOO in Tulsa, WOW in Omaha, KWKH in Shreveport, La., and KBRQ in Denver.
>+++++
 
NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
 
Satirist-commentator Al Franken will return to his TV roots next month when his radio show begins appearing on cable's Sundance Channel. Beginning Sept. 7, "The Al Franken Show," heard live each weekday from noon to 3 p.m. Eastern on Air America Radio, will go on display in a one-hour edition on Sundance each night at 11:30 p.m. and 2:30 a.m., executives at both networks told The Associated Press. … The son of the late Herb Caen, the San Francisco Chronicle's Pulitzer Prize winning columnist, is following in his father's footsteps with his own newspaper column. Christopher Caen, 39, will be chronicling the city in two weekly columns for the SF Newspaper Co. that will appear in The Examiner on Thursdays and in The Independent on Saturdays. Caen, who runs a software startup in San Francisco, said The Independent column will focus on the city's diverse neighborhoods while The Examiner column will tackle bigger topics such as same-sex marriage, the economy and City Hall. … Shareholders of the E.W. Scripps Co. will receive one additional share of stock for each share they own at the close of business on Aug. 31, under a program approved July 29 by the board of directors. The 2-for-1 stock split will not change the proportionate interest a shareholder maintains in the company.
>+++++
 Load-Date: August 3, 2004

 

End of Document
