

Developments in the news industry for July 12-19:
The Associated Press
July 19, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 14160 words
Body




>+++++ BRYANT CASE-MEDIA:
 
- Colorado Supreme Court bars media from disclosing Bryant transcripts accidentally sent to reporters
 
>+++++ MARTHA STEWART:
 
- Stewart sentenced to 5 months in prison and vows: 'I'll be back'
 
>+++++ AP HEADQUARTERS-MOVE:
 
- AP leaves 50 Rock for West 33rd Street HQ
 
>+++++ BUSH-MILITARY SERVICE:
 
- AP asks judge to order quick release of Bush military records
 
>+++++ NEWSPAPERS:
 
- Newsday, Hoy publishers depart amid circulation scandal
 
- Black, Hollinger Inc. pay $30 million but want money back
 
- Miami Herald drops petition against Yahoo! seeking identities of 'malicious' e-mailers
 
- The Associated Press eliminates digitally altered photo
 
>+++++ SECOND-QUARTER EARNINGS:
 
- Times' profit up 4 percent in second quarter; ad growth slows
 
- Gannett earnings rise 9 percent in second quarter
 
- Media General's second-quarter profit rises on broadcast gains
 
- Dow Jones earnings rise; outlook unclear
 
- Circulation woes, debt restructuring hit Tribune Co.
 
- Cable TV growth, political advertising on TV boosts E.W. Scripps Co.
 
- McClatchy Co. earnings up from year earlier
 
- Lee earnings rise on strong ad growth
 
- Journal Register reports second-quarter earnings up 6 percent
 
>+++++ BROADCASTING:
 
- CBS executive says network will resist Super Bowl fines
 
- Indecency rules must be updated, FCC chairman says
 
- Advocacy groups challenge Fox News' use of 'Fair and Balanced'
 
- Studios spar over anchorman Pat O'Brien
 
- A new documentary, 'Outfoxed,' aims to demonstrate bias on Fox News Channel
 
>+++++ IRAQ-MEDIA:
 
- Iraqi prime minister opens controversial newspaper shut down by coalition
 
- Arab news channel Al-Jazeera pledges honesty, fairness, independence in news coverage
 
>+++++ FREE PRESS:
 
- Media appeal in Jackson case was delayed by court clerk
 
- Lawsuits against Texas AG leave open records requests in limbo
 
- Suit seeks to open Kentucky juvenile court hearings, records
 
- University of Northern Colorado students sue over newspaper funding cuts
 
>+++++ INTERNATIONAL:
 
- Hard-line prosecutor bans Iranian press from full coverage of slain photojournalist trial
 
- Slain American was investigating killings of Russian TV reporter and other journalist
 
- Employee of Armenian magazine killed in Moscow
 
- Newspapers in two West African countries stop the presses to protest editors' arrests
 
- Cameroon frees two journalists detained by military as 'spies'
 
>+++++ PEOPLE:
 
- Buzbee appointed AP's chief of Middle East News, based in Cairo
 
- Convey named managing editor of Boston Herald
 
- Davis named publisher of Patriot Ledger
 
- Einberg named AP's regional picture editor/East
 
- Gallagher named publisher at Ventura County Star
 
- Brown hired as editor at Delta Democrat Times
 
- Newest inductees for Missouri Press Hall of Fame announced
 
>+++++ DEATHS:
 
- Thomas Madigan
 
- Jack Keever
 
- Frances Hansen
 
- Rex Redifer
 
>+++++ NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
 
>+++++
 
BRYANT CASE-MEDIA:
 
 
Colorado Supreme Court bars media from disclosing Bryant transcripts accidentally sent to reporters
 
DENVER (AP) - The Colorado Supreme Court ruled July 19 the news media have no right to publish mistakenly released details from a closed-door hearing in the Kobe Bryant sexual assault case, narrowly backing the trial judge in a First Amendment clash.
The court fight centers on transcripts from a two-day hearing last month that were accidentally e-mailed by a court reporter to seven news organizations, including The Associated Press.
The trial judge quickly issued an order threatening a contempt citation against any news organization that released details from the hearing, which focused on attempts by Bryant's attorneys to have his accuser's sex life and money she received from a victims' compensation program introduced as evidence. Decisions on those efforts are pending.
None of the details has been print or broadcast, but attorneys for the media groups appealed the order from District Judge Terry Ruckriegle.
In a 4-3 ruling, the high court acknowledged the order amounts to prior restraint of a free press, which is barred by the Constitution. However, the court said such a step was permissible given the context of the Bryant case.
"This prior restraint is necessary to protect against an evil that is great and certain and would result from reportage," the court ruled.
Media attorney Chris Beall said no decision had been made on whether to appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Justice Michael Bender, who wrote the dissent, said it was unfair to hold the media responsible if a court failed to do its job to protect confidential information.
"The power the majority authorizes is the power of the government to censor the media, which is precisely the power the First Amendment forbids," Bender wrote.
Bryant, 25, is accused of raping a worker at a Vail-area resort last summer. He has pleaded not guilty to felony sexual assault, saying he had consensual sex with the woman, now 20.
If convicted, the Los Angeles Lakers star could face four years to life in prison or 20 years to life on probation, and a fine up to $750,000. Bryant was in Eagle on Monday for a hearing in advance of his Aug. 27 trial.
The Supreme Court ordered the judge to rule as quickly as possible whether information on the woman's sex life will be admissible at trial. It also suggested the hearing transcripts could be released in edited form.
But the court said there were too many reasons to keep the transcripts from public view to toss out Ruckriegle's entire decision.
Confidential hearings under the rape-shield statute "protect victims' privacy, encourage victims to report sexual assault, and further the prosecution and deterrence of sexual assault," the court said.
Prosecutor Mark Hurlburt had argued against releasing the transcripts to protect Bryant's right to a fair trial and protect the woman from "harm, harassment, intimidation or retaliation."
Bryant's attorneys did not weigh in on the First Amendment dispute. They have claimed the accuser had multiple sexual partners in the days surrounding her encounter with the NBA star and have suggested her injuries could have been caused by someone other than Bryant. They also say she received unusually large amounts of money from the compensation program, suggesting it was an incentive to go forward with the case.
In addition to the AP, the organizations involved in the court challenge are The Denver Post, the Los Angeles Times, CBS, Fox News, ESPN and the television show "Celebrity Justice."
>+++++
 
MARTHA STEWART:
 
 
Stewart sentenced to 5 months in prison and vows: 'I'll be back'
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Choking back tears and pleading for leniency, Martha Stewart was sentenced to five months in prison July 16 for lying about a stock sale. But the woman who saw her gracious homemaking empire crippled over a single transaction smiled boldly into the cameras outside court to denounce her treatment, pitch her company and promise: "I'll be back."
Stewart, who also was ordered to spend five months confined to her home and fined $30,000, was allowed to remain free pending appeal. The sentence was the minimum possible under federal guidelines.
Peter Bacanovic, the stockbroker convicted along with Stewart of lying about her stock sale in December 2001, received the same sentence of five months in prison and five months home confinement.
While she did not admit guilt in court - a move that could have jeopardized her appeal - Stewart took pains to tell U.S. District Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum she was sorry that others had been hurt by the scandal.
"What was a small personal matter became over the last two and a half years an almost fatal circus event of unprecedented proportions spreading like oil over a vast landscape, even around the world," Stewart said.
Cedarbaum accepted a defense request to recommend to federal prison officials that Stewart serve her time at a minimum-security facility in Danbury, Conn., close to her home in Westport.
"I believe that you have suffered, and will continue to suffer, enough," the judge said.
But Cedarbaum, citing nationwide confusion over a recent Supreme Court ruling on sentencings, allowed Stewart to postpone the sentence while her lawyers appeal her conviction - a process that could take months, and that legal experts have called an uphill battle.
Just before she was sentenced, Stewart - who during her trial spoke only to declare her innocence - rose from her seat and told the judge she feared her life would be "completely destroyed."
Then, in an extraordinary change of demeanor, Stewart walked down the courthouse steps, approached a microphone and denounced the scandal as full of "such venom and such gore - I mean it's just terrible."
She even suggested fans could "continue to show your support" by subscribing to her magazines and buying her line of homemaking products.
And she promised: "I'll be back. I will be back. Whatever I have to do in the next few months, I hope the months go by quickly. I'm used to all kinds of hard work, as you know, and I'm not afraid."
Investors sent the stock of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia up 37 percent, or $3.17, to close at $11.81 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Stewart resigned as CEO of the company when she was indicted last year and gave up her seat on the board after she was convicted. She remains its leading creative force and holds the title of founding editorial director.
>+++++
 
AP HEADQUARTERS-MOVE:
 
 
AP leaves 50 Rock for West 33rd Street HQ
 
NEW YORK (AP) - After 66 years in its Rockefeller Center headquarters, The Associated Press launched a new era July 17 with its move to a newer and far more expansive space on the west side of Manhattan.
The first shift in the new building arrived around 7:30 a.m., with Kathleen Carroll, senior vice president and executive editor, greeting staffers on the 14th floor of 450 W. 33rd St.
Fred Lief of the Sports Department filed the first story from the new headquarters at 8:28 a.m. - a story on American rider Tyler Hamilton pulling out of the Tour de France.
"We've had many happy years at Rockefeller Center, but we're excited to be moving to a newsroom that pulls all of AP's news departments together on one big floor," Carroll said. "The newsroom was designed by journalists to be collaborative, energetic and creative - a great showcase for an international news organization in the 21st century."
The new space stretches for two blocks south along Tenth Avenue, two blocks west of Madison Square Garden. It's the sixth Manhattan address for the world's oldest and largest news organization, and the first since it moved into The Associated Press Building at Rockefeller Center in 1938.
The news cooperative's first office opened in lower Manhattan in 1848.
The "News" sculpture by Isamu Noguchi will remain above the 50 Rockefeller Plaza entrance, a reminder of the news service's long run at one of journalism's most recognizable addresses. City landmark regulations require that the sculpture stay.
"50 Rock," as it was known to thousands of AP employees, was the place where the news service swapped typewriters and keypunch operators for new technology.
For more than six decades, editors, photographers and reporters inside provided the world with news 24 hours a day, seven days a week. It was there that the AP launched the first news agency wire dedicated entirely to sports, entered the digital age, sharply increased the speed of story and photo transmission, broadened its investigative and enterprise reporting, and launched numerous other initiatives.
Rockefeller Center, hailed by critics as the 20th century's greatest urban development, included the AP as an original tenant. The Associated Press Building was a fixture in the complex, along with the towering GE Building, the skating rink and Radio City Music Hall.
The midtown space became the nerve center for the AP's ever-expanding worldwide operations.
However, the Rockefeller Center building became inadequate for housing all of the AP's operations and meeting its technology needs. In addition, its design separated news departments, instead of making it easier for them to work together. With its lease expiring, the AP took the opportunity to move to a newer building, with lower rent, that will put all its news divisions in a newsroom the size of two football fields. The goal is to better coordinate the work of all AP services - text, photos, video, graphics, radio and online.
Terms of the lease weren't made public.
The new headquarters building, constructed in 1967, is a squat pyramid with views of the Hudson River to the west and the Empire State Building to the east. Other tenants include the New York Daily News, U.S. News & World Report, and public broadcasting station WNET-TV.
The move will consolidate AP's 950-person New York staff at a single location, rather than in two buildings in Rockefeller Center and two more on Broadway. All employees should be moved into the 33rd Street location by Aug. 2.
AP will lease a total of 290,773 square feet at 33rd Street. The AP's four New York offices, including Rockefeller Center, totaled about 207,000 square feet.
There's been no word on a new tenant for the AP's space at 50 Rockefeller Plaza.
The AP's first Manhattan headquarters opened in 1848, a sparse office up 78 stairs at 150 Broadway - about a block away from the future home of the World Trade Center.
The news cooperative stayed there for 27 years, moving two blocks north on Broadway in 1875. Headquarters No. 3 was downtown on Chambers Street, and the AP moved to midtown in 1924 with offices at 383 Madison Ave.
---
On the Net: http://www.ap.org 
>+++++
 
BUSH-MILITARY SERVICE:
 
 
AP asks judge to order quick release of Bush military records
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - The Associated Press asked a federal judge July 16 to order the Pentagon to quickly turn over a full copy of President Bush's military service record.
The White House has released partial documentation of Bush's military service in the Texas Air National Guard but has not complied with the news service's Freedom of Information Act request for any record archived at a state library records center in Texas, the AP said in a court filing.
Records released so far do not put to rest questions over whether Bush fulfilled his National Guard service for a period during the Vietnam War, the AP argued in papers filed in federal court in New York.
Those records came from federal records clearinghouses. Texas law requires separate record keeping for state National Guard service, and those records should exist on microfilm in Austin, the AP said.
"A significant, ongoing controversy exists over the president's military service during the Vietnam War, specifically whether he performed his required service between May and October 1972," lawyers for the AP wrote.
There also are allegations that potentially embarrassing material was removed from Bush's military file in 1997, when he was running for re-election as Texas governor, the AP said.
"The public has an intense and legitimate interest in knowing the facts concerning the president's military service. Reviewing the microfilm copy of the personnel file at the Texas Records center could well answer the questions that have been raised," the lawyers wrote.
The news service asked U.S. District Judge Harold Baer to hear arguments in the case and to direct the Pentagon to comply with the FOIA request within three days.
AP first sought the Texas records in March, and sued the Pentagon in April over the allegedly slow response.
The Pentagon said in June that military payroll records that could more fully document Bush's whereabouts during his service in the Texas Air National Guard were inadvertently destroyed. And microfilm containing the pertinent National Guard payroll records was damaged and could not be salvaged, according to the Defense Department.
>+++++
 
NEWSPAPERS:
 
 
Newsday, Hoy publishers depart amid circulation scandal
 
CHICAGO (AP) - The publishers of two New York newspapers, Newsday and Hoy, were replaced July 19 as Tribune Co. grappled with a continuing circulation scandal.
The announcements came days after Tribune, the newspapers' owner, disclosed further circulation misstatements at Newsday of Long Island and Spanish-language Hoy of New York. The company revealed the inflated circulation numbers last month.
Raymond Jansen, who has served as publisher of Newsday since 1994, will retire in mid-August, according to a statement released by Tribune Publishing, the company's newspaper unit.
Jansen said in a letter to employees that he had planned to leave at the end of the year, according to the Tribune.
"But understanding what our management has to do to repair the damage to our circulation credibility, it became apparent that my departure date should be sooner than anticipated," he said.
Louis Sito, who has served as publisher of Hoy since 1998, also mentioned the circulation issues in a statement released by the company in its announcement. Both departures were called retirements by the Tribune.
"In view of Hoy's recent circulation issues, I do not want to be a distraction to the great work being done at the newspaper on a daily basis. It is time for me to move on," Sito said.
Jansen will be replaced effective Aug. 15 by Timothy Knight, Newsday president and chief operating officer. Digby Solomon Diez, currently vice president/general manager of Hoy, Chicago, has been named interim publisher of Hoy, effective immediately.
Tribune's holdings include 14 dailies papers, more than two dozen television stations and the Chicago Cubs.
In June, Tribune said circulation numbers for Newsday and Hoy had been inflated. Last week, the media company disclosed further circulation misstatements, saying they occurred in the same period as the earlier reported problems - the 18 months that ended in March. Misstatements affecting 2001 and 2002 numbers also were discovered.
The Audit Bureau of Circulations, a trade group, punished the two papers for breaking circulation rules and condemned their "deceptive and fraudulent circulation practices."
When the Tribune released second-quarter earnings last week, it said it was moving aggressively to address the problems, including nearing an estimated $35 million settlement with advertisers who claim they were overcharged based on the faulty numbers.
Top company officials said while they have confidence in the accuracy of circulation numbers at their other newspapers, they are now verifying them and have imposed additional controls. Every Tribune publisher, chief financial officer and circulation vice president must now certify the accuracy of reported figures and that ABC rules were followed.
>+++++ Black, Hollinger Inc. pay $30 million but want money back
 
CHICAGO (AP) - Embattled publisher Conrad Black and his Hollinger Inc. have complied with a court order to pay some $30 million to Hollinger International Inc.
But Black and Hollinger Inc. are appealing the ruling in a bid to get the money back, Black said in a press release July 16.
The Toronto-based Hollinger Inc., which Black controls, owns a large stake in Hollinger International and the two sides have been locked in legal dispute for months.
The litigation began after Black was forced out last year as CEO of Hollinger International, which owns the Chicago Sun Times and other major newspapers, amid accusations that he and his associates had received millions of dollars in unauthorized payments.
On June 28, a federal judge in Delaware ordered Black to repay $7.2 million and Hollinger Inc. to repay $16.55 million, plus interest, to Chicago-based Hollinger International.
Black and Hollinger Inc. filed separate appeals of that decision Friday, Black said in the release.
>+++++ Miami Herald drops petition against Yahoo! seeking identities of 'malicious' e-mailers
 
MIAMI (AP) - The Miami Herald has dropped its demand that Yahoo! reveal identities of three subscribers of the Internet provider who allegedly sent defamatory e-mails to the newspaper's employees about their bosses.
The Herald filed for dismissal June 25 in circuit court in Miami, a month after seeking the identities.
Herald general counsel Robert Beatty would not say whether the paper learned the names.
"We're very satisfied with the outcome," he said July 14. "The matter is over."
He did say that since filing the petition, no similar e-mails have been received.
The e-mails were sent between January 2002 and last March. One of them was titled "stupid management tricks" and referred to a management employee as a "Psycho," the original filing alleged.
The Herald called the statements malicious and defamatory.
Yahoo! spokeswoman Mary Osako declined to comment Wednesday.
The Internet provider does not disclose personal information without a subscriber's permission unless it is responding to a court order, among other reasons, according to its Web site.
>+++++ The Associated Press eliminates digitally altered photo
 
NEW YORK (AP) - The Associated Press inadvertently moved a digitally altered photograph of flooding in China on July 15 and advised its members July 16 not to use it.
The photo showed residents of China's Shaanxi province trying to get through flooded streets on tricycles and bicycles.
Alerted by a reader in Finland who had seen the picture in a newspaper, editors checked and it became clear that the picture had been manipulated to show the water was higher than it actually had been.
The AP's policy is not to transmit photos that have been digitally altered, except in circumstances where it cannot be avoided, said Santiago Lyon, director of photography.
The AP sent an advisory to subscribers of its photo service that the photo should not be used, and killed it from its system. The advisory moved more than 24 hours after the picture had been sent.
The photographer, a stringer who was not identified, will no longer be permitted to supply the AP with pictures, Lyon said.
"Nothing is more important than our journalistic integrity and moving digitally altered photographs clashes with that," Lyon said.
>+++++
 
SECOND-QUARTER EARNINGS:
 
 
Times' profit up 4 percent in second quarter; ad growth slows
 
NEW YORK (AP) - The New York Times Co. posted higher second-quarter earnings July 14 on stronger advertising revenues, particularly in help-wanted ads, but the company said the pace of ad growth was slowing.
The company, which also owns The Boston Globe and The International Herald Tribune, lowered its estimates for full-year growth in advertising revenues and said it would reduce expenses accordingly, keeping its forecast for growth in full-year earnings per share unchanged.
The Times earned $75.7 million in the three months ending in June, up 4 percent from $72.8 million in the same period a year ago. Per-share earnings were 50 cents, up from 47 cents a year ago and meeting the expectations of analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call.
Revenues rose 3 percent to $823.9 million from $801.9 million a year ago. Advertising revenues in the company's newspaper group rose 2 percent, largely because of higher rates, and circulation revenues were approximately the same as last year.
Russell T. Lewis, the company's CEO, said in a statement that while advertising revenues rose in the period, the pace of growth slowed, a trend that continued into July. In response, the company cut back on costs and will continue to do so throughout the year.
The Times now expects ad revenues to grow in the low to mid single digits for the year, down from its previous estimate of mid single-digit growth. With expense growth also expected to be lower, the company still expects to report earnings per share growth in the low to mid-single digit percent range over the $1.98 it reported in 2003.
>+++++ Gannett earnings rise 9 percent in second quarter
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Gannett Co., the largest newspaper publisher in the country, reported a 9 percent increase in second quarter earnings July 13, largely from higher advertising revenues as well as acquisitions and favorable exchange rates.
The McLean, Va.-based company earned $354.4 million, or $1.30 a share, in the three months ending June 27, compared with $324.3 million, or $1.20 a share, in the comparable period a year ago. The results were in line with analysts' estimates according to Thomson First Call.
Revenues for the period rose 10 percent to $1.87 billion from $1.71 billion.
Douglas McCorkindale, Gannett's CEO, said in a statement that the company benefited from strong advertising growth, especially in help-wanted ads, as well as acquisitions. But he also cautioned that the company's expenses continued to be affected by higher newsprint costs and certain employee benefits.
Gannett's operations in the United Kingdom also contributed to the bottom line, including a benefit from the continued appreciation of the British pound against the dollar. Broadcasting revenues also rose on political advertising as the election nears.
Excluding the effects of three acquisitions - SMG Publishing, Clipper Magazine Inc. and NurseWeek - revenues at Gannett's newspaper division rose 9 percent in the quarter, including a 12 percent rise in classified ad revenues and a 10 percent increase in national advertising revenues.
However, newspaper expenses also rose 10 percent, reflecting the cost of acquisitions, expenses for medical and other benefits and newsprint costs, which increased 13 percent in the quarter compared with the same period last year. Advertising revenues at its flagship newspaper USA Today increased 16 percent.
>+++++ Media General's second-quarter profit rises on broadcast gains
 
RICHMOND, Va. (AP) - Media General Inc. said July 13 its second-quarter earnings rose 6 percent as political and classified ad sales increased, but the company still fell short of Wall Street's expectations.
The Richmond-based communications company reported net income of $18.5 million, or 78 cents a share, in the quarter ended June 27. That's up from $17.5 million, or 75 cents a share, in the comparable period a year ago.
"Media General's second-quarter results reflected an outstanding profit performance by the Broadcast Division … driven by robust political advertising and increased local time sales," said J. Stewart Bryan III, chairman and chief executive.
Bryan said the publishing division, which includes the Richmond Times-Dispatch, continued to benefit from growth in classified advertising, particularly help-wanted ads.
Income from continuing operations rose nearly 8 percent to $18.5 million, or 79 cents a share, in the quarter from $17.2 million, or 75 cents a share, in the year-ago period. Last year, the company sold Media General Financial Services.
Analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call had anticipated income from continuing operations of 84 cents a share. The company previously had forecast earnings below 85 cents a share.
Revenue for the quarter rose nearly 7 percent to $224.9 million from $210.7 million.
Continued softness in department store advertising hurt revenue, with the company's three metropolitan newspapers - the Times-Dispatch, The Tampa (Fla.) Tribune and the Winston-Salem (N.C.) Journal - reporting year-over-year declines.
Corporate expenses, as expected, were higher in the quarter in part due to costs associated with employee benefits and information technology improvements. The company also absorbed higher legal costs associated with compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
Equity earnings from Media General's one-third ownership of SP Newsprint, while improved, "were well below our expectations," Bryan said. So far this year, increases in newsprint prices have not appeared as quickly as anticipated, he said.
>+++++ Dow Jones earnings rise; outlook unclear
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Financial news publisher Dow Jones & Co. reported a 10 percent rise in second-quarter profits July 15, but the company cautioned that advertising remained "well below" normal levels at The Wall Street Journal.
Dow Jones, which also publishes Barron's, Dow Jones Newswires and several stock market indicators, earned $34 million in the three months ending in June, up from $30.8 million in the comparable period a year ago.
Per-share earnings were 41 cents, above the 38 cents forecast by analysts polled by Thomson First Call and above the year-ago results, which were also 38 cents per share.
Revenues rose 11 percent to $437.8 million from $393.6 million.
CEO Peter Kann said that while Dow Jones was encouraged by improving revenues and profits across the company's business segments, "we still see inconsistent trends in monthly Wall Street Journal advertising and ad levels, and results remain well below what we consider normal levels."
The company will continue to keep tight controls on costs and other factors in order to "maximize financial results in any advertising environment," Kann said.
>+++++
 
Circulation woes, debt restructuring hit Tribune Co.
 
CHICAGO (AP) - Tribune's net earnings tumbled 58 percent due to a debt restructuring and the cost of an anticipated $35 million settlement with advertisers over circulation misstatements at Newsday and Hoy.
The company also found new misstatements for the same period where earlier problems were detailed - the 18 months that ended in March - in addition to misstatements affecting 2001 and 2002 numbers. CEO Dennis FitzSimons on July 15 called the misstatements "unacceptable and wholly out of character."
Tribune earned $96.4 million in the second quarter, or 29 cents a share, compared with $229.5 million, or 67 cents a share, for the same period a year earlier.
Charges also included a pretax total of $17 million for the elimination of 375 positions, about half of them at the Los Angeles Times.
Excluding the charges, Tribune said operating earnings were 62 cents a share - a penny higher than the consensus estimate of analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call.
Revenues rose 3 percent to $1.5 billion from $1.45 billion.
FitzSimons said that aside from the charges, Tribune's broadcasting group and the majority of its newspapers posted solid operating results.
Tribune officials told analysts that while they have confidence in the accuracy of circulation numbers at their other newspapers, they are verifying them and are now requiring that every publisher, chief financial officer and circulation vice president certify the accuracy of reported figures.
>+++++ Cable TV growth, political advertising on TV boost E.W. Scripps Co.
 
CINCINNATI (AP) - Rapid advertising growth in its cable television networks and increased political advertising on broadcast TV stations helped raise Scripps' second-quarter earnings by 34 percent.
Scripps said July 15 it earned $86.4 million, or $1.05 per share, compared with $64.7 million, or 80 cents per share, in the same period a year ago.
Profits at Scripps Networks increased 56 percent to $87.5 million, up from $55.9 million a year ago. Scripps Networks includes the Home & Garden Television, Fine Living, Food Network and DIY - Do-It-Yourself cable channels.
Excluding special gains on sale of real estate in a relocation of the company's Cincinnati television station, Scripps earned 97 cents per share, a penny less than the estimates of analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call.
Revenues increased about 15 percent to $547.3 million, up from $474.8 million in the second quarter of 2003.
>+++++
 
McClatchy Co. earnings up from year earlier
 
SACRAMENTO, Calif. (AP) - McClatchy Co. earned $40.1 million, or 86 cents per share, in the three-month period ending June 27, compared with $37.5 million, or 81 cents per share, a year earlier.
Revenues rose 7 percent to $296.3 million from $276.4 million. Advertising revenue rose 8.1 percent to $248 million, and circulation revenue rose 1.7 percent to $42 million.
The revenues reflect the purchase in January of the Merced Sun-Star and related non-daily newspapers. Excluding the Merced Group's revenues, McClatchy's revenues were up 6 percent - with advertising revenue rising 7 percent in the second quarter.
CEO Gary Pruitt said July 15 the earnings were "somewhat stronger than we had expected."
>+++++ Lee earnings rise on strong ad growth
 
DAVENPORT, Iowa (AP) - Lee Enterprises saw third-quarter earnings increase 12.5 percent behind strong advertising sales, the media company said July 19.
Earnings for the period ended June 30 increased to $24.5 million, or 54 cents per share, up from $21.5 million, or 48 cents per share, a year ago.
Earnings met analyst expectations of 54 cents a share, according to Thomson First Call.
Total operating revenue grew 6.7 percent to $176 million from $165 million a year ago, with total advertising revenue up 8 percent to $131.4 million, the Davenport-based company said.
Lee saw its largest jump in national ad revenue, which rose 15 percent to $4.5 million, while classified ads increased 10 percent to $49.5 million and retail ads grew 4 percent to $71.2 million.
Lee Enterprises owns 38 daily newspapers and joint interest in six others, along with associated online services. Lee also owns nearly 200 weekly newspapers, shoppers and classified and specialty publications.
>+++++ Journal Register reports second-quarter earnings up 6 percent
 
TRENTON, N.J. (AP) - Journal Register Co. posted a 6 percent increase in second-quarter profit, with advertising revenues in the Philadelphia area and in Connecticut up compared with a year ago.
The publisher of the New Haven (Conn.) Register, The Trentonian and 21 other dailies said July 16 that net income for the three months ending June 27 was $14.8 million, or 35 cents per share, up from $13.9 million, or 34 cents per share, in the year-ago quarter.
The latest results matched the forecast of analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call.
Revenues rose 3 percent to $107.7 million. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Robert M. Jelenic said the results reflect strong growth in advertising revenues, which were up 4.8 percent, to $81.5 million.
"Our advertising revenue growth continues to be driven by classified advertising, particularly in the employment and real estate categories," Jelenic said. "Growth in our retail and national advertising revenue categories also contributed to our strong quarter."
Journal Register's national advertising revenue performance was its best since the fourth quarter of 2001, company officials said.
Circulation revenues, however, dipped slightly, to $22.1 million from $22.2 million a year ago. Newsprint expenses increased 7.5 percent, excluding new acquisitions during the two quarters.
The company said it reduced its debt by $16.6 million in the second quarter.
Journal Register publishes 23 dailies in New England, upstate New York and the Cleveland and Philadelphia areas. It also produces 240 other publications.
The company also recently announced it will acquire 21st Century Newspapers Inc., headquartered in Michigan. The deal will add four dailies, 87 non-daily publications and 24 Web sites to Journal Register's holdings.
>+++++
 
BROADCASTING:
 
 
CBS executive says network will resist Super Bowl fines
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - CBS will fight any fines leveled against its television stations over Janet Jackson's startling Super Bowl performance, a top executive of parent company Viacom Inc. said.
CBS could face a Federal Communications Commission fine of $550,000 or a maximum penalty of $27,500 for each of 20 CBS-owned stations, The Associated Press reported last month. An FCC staff recommendation did not call for fining CBS affiliates that aired the Super Bowl halftime show but are not owned by Viacom.
A fine would be "grossly unfair," Leslie Moonves, Viacom co-president and co-chief operating officer, told the Television Critics Association on July 18.
Although the network regretted the Jackson incident and has added a five-second precautionary delay for live events, Moonves said, such an approach is not feasible for news or sports.
"We think the idea of a fine for that is patently ridiculous and we're not going to stand for it," he said. "We're going to take that to the courts if it happens. … It's perilously dangerous."
Since the Super Bowl, the network's standards and practices department that monitors program content is "is being maybe a little bit tougher, especially on things that we feel are gratuitous," he said.
CBS hasn't set new guidelines for its producers but has told them, according to Moonves: "Look, be aware of what's going on in the world … and let's just be smart about it."
But, he added, "in no way, shape or form have we changed any story lines. We still encourage our producers to walk the edge and tell edgy stories."
The MTV-produced Feb. 1 Super Bowl show watched by some 90 million featured Jackson and singer Justin Timberlake in a duet that ended with Timberlake ripping off part of Jackson's top and exposing a breast.
The FCC, hit by more than 500,000 complaints, stepped up its anti-decency enforcement after the incident. The U.S. Senate and House have gone on record seeking higher penalties for indecency.
Asked if he thought the issue would fade after the presidential election year, Moonves said he was unsure but expressed doubt.
"It seems to be a fairly easy issue, because who out there isn't against indecency? So it's clearly a lightning road in Washington right now, and we have to pay attention to it."
Viacom has more at stake in the debate. Its Infinity Broadcasting unit owns the majority of stations that airs Howard Stern, the radio shock jock who generated record fines for both Infinity and another broadcaster, Clear Channel Communications.
>+++++ Indecency rules must be updated, FCC chairman says
 
STANFORD, Calif. (AP) - Politicians who refuse to overhaul the nation's broadcast television regulations - particularly regarding indecency - are "ignoring reality," Federal Communications Commission Chairman Michael Powell said.
FCC statutes - which prohibit radio and television stations from airing offensive material that refers to sexual and excretory functions between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m - were last modified in 1948, Powell emphasized July 13 in a speech to venture capitalists and entrepreneurs at a conference at Stanford University.
Such regulations don't reflect the fact that 82 percent of Americans regularly watch cable television, he said. Few viewers distinguish between cable and broadcast stations, and TiVo, Internet programming and streaming media on other devices will increasingly blur the lines between media, he said.
"My child has no idea what a broadcast channel is - no idea what the difference is between channel five and channel 105," Powell said during a question and answer session with Stanford legal scholar Larry Lessig and venture capitalist Steve Jurvetson. The idea that "broadcast ethics changes with each channel is off - and it's dangerous."
Faced with public ire over racy language, explicit scenes and skin-baring outfits, the Senate overwhelmingly agreed last month to fine radio and television broadcasters and personalities as much as $3 million a day for airing indecent entertainment.
After the uproar stoked by Janet Jackson and Justin Timberlake's "wardrobe malfunction" at this year's Super Bowl, the Senate rushed the bill through on a 99-1 vote without floor debate. Under the measure, the maximum fine for both broadcasters and entertainers would increase to as much as $275,000 per indecent incident, up from $27,500 for license holders and $11,000 for personalities.
However, the legislation must be approved as part of a broader bill.
Powell said his agency has been strapped to respond to a torrent of complaints from viewers since the Super Bowl incident. In 2000, the agency received 111 complaints about indecency on television. In the first three months of 2004, it received more than 500,000 complaints.
"It's the most uncomfortable area you'd ever want to work in, enforcement," Powell said at the symposium. "I'm a big believer in the First Amendment, but often I'm incredibly uneasy about lines we have to draw. No one takes pleasure in trying to decide whether this potty-mouth word or that potty-mouth word is a violation of the law."
---
On the Net:
Federal Communications Commission: http://www.fcc.gov/ 
>+++++ Advocacy groups challenge Fox News' use of 'Fair and Balanced'
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Fox News' use of the slogan "Fair and Balanced" constitutes deceptive advertising, two political advocacy groups claimed July 19 in a petition filed with the Federal Trade Commission.
Liberal MoveOn.org and historically nonpartisan Common Cause assert that Fox News' reports are "deliberately and consistently distorted and twisted to promote the Republican Party of the U.S. and an extreme right-wing viewpoint."
Alleging consumer fraud, the complaint calls for the FTC to order Fox News, consistently the highest-rated cable news network, to cease and desist from using the slogan.
Irena Briganti, a Fox News spokesperson, told The Associated Press that "while this is clearly a transparent publicity stunt, we recognize all forms of free speech and wish them well."
James Kaminski, a former FTC lawyer currently practicing advertising law with Arent Fox Attorneys, sees little chance for the petition, noting that the FTC does not wade in political waters.
"Whether (Fox is) biased or not … it's a freedom of speech issue," he said.
But Chellie Pingree, president of Common Cause, said the legal actions were consistent with the First Amendment. "Fox has no obligation under the law to be fair and balanced, just not to market itself as fair and balanced," he said.
After a press conference announcing the petition, members of MoveOn.org and Common Cause marched to the Fox News Headquarters to hand out DVDs of the recent documentary "Outfoxed," which alleges a pattern of right-wing biases in the network's reporting, citing statements by former Fox employees and internal memos.
The documentary is "Exhibit A" in the FTC petition.
At the press conference, Common Cause's Pingree said the petition was consistent with the 34-year old citizen advocacy group's history, and a response to the "growing firestorm about what's going on with the media."
The Federal Trade Commission, which hears all consumer complaints, will now judge whether the complaint has merit, a process that could take months.
Mitch Katz of the FTC's Office of Public Affairs would not comment directly on the petition, but did acknowledge that a label like "fair and balanced" may be inherently subjective.
Fox has sought to trademark its "Fair and Balanced" motto, which also has been met with legal action.
Independent Media Institute, a not-for-profit promoter of independent journalism, filed a petition last December with the US Patent and Trademark Office challenging Fox's trademark request.
The IMI's petition claims that the term "fair and balanced" is so prevalent as to be generic, and is "entirely mis-descriptive" when it comes to Fox News.
Last summer, Fox News Channel tried to block publication of liberal humorist Al Franken's book, "Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them: A Fair and Balanced Look at the Right," saying it made unauthorized use of Fox's "fair and balanced" slogan.
The judge dismissed Fox's case, saying it was "wholly without merit," and the trademark "Fair and Balanced," registered by Fox in 1998, was weak. He also said the network was "trying to undermine the First Amendment."
>+++++
 
Studios spar over anchorman Pat O'Brien
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Two studios are in a court fight over whether anchorman Pat O'Brien can promote his upcoming TV news magazine "The Insider" while still under contract to competing "Access Hollywood."
NBC Universal Television Distribution wants to bar O'Brien, former co-host of its "Access Hollywood," from promoting Paramount's "The Insider" until September.
NBC's request for a temporary restraining order was denied July 13 in Superior Court but a judge agreed to set a July 23 hearing on the matter.
O'Brien's contract with "Access Hollywood" expires Aug. 31. "The Insider" debuts in syndication Sept. 13.
"In court papers we filed today, we sought to enforce the terms we had in place with Mr. O'Brien, who still remains under contract with 'Access Hollywood,"' NBC Universal said in a statement Tuesday.
Patty Glaser, an attorney representing Paramount, said O'Brien "is not doing anything now that in our view is remotely in violation of his limited obligations to NBC Universal."
>+++++ A new documentary, 'Outfoxed,' aims to demonstrate bias on Fox News Channel
 
NEW YORK (AP) - A new documentary backed by liberal political groups aims to document that the Fox News Channel is anything but "fair and balanced," despite the cable-news network's motto.
The film, "Outfoxed: Rupert Murdoch's War on Journalism," draws on clips compiled during weeks of round-the-clock taping of the network to demonstrate what the filmmakers believe is a pattern of right-wing bias and support for the Republican agenda.
"What we found is not that Fox is a conservative network, but that it's a network that follows the party line of the Bush administration," said "Outfoxed" filmmaker Robert Greenwald, a Hollywood producer-director whose credits include the 2003 documentary "Uncovered: The Whole Truth About the Iraq War" and such TV films as "The Crooked E: The Unshredded Truth about Enron" and "Blonde," a biopic of Marilyn Monroe.
Greenwald said he decided to make the film after hearing numerous journalists refer to the "Foxification" of the news. That approach, he says, has served the 8-year-old Fox News Channel well, and "put pressure on many of the other networks to move in the same direction: cheap news, ranting and raving, pseudo-patriotism."
Greenwald's 75-minute film includes complaints from several Fox News staffers about the workplace climate at the outlet of the global Murdoch media empire. They say their bosses promote a conservative slant.
"We weren't necessarily, as it was told to us, a newsgathering organization so much as we were a proponent of a point of view," says Jon Du Pre, a former Fox News correspondent.
The film also quotes internal memos from a top network executive that seem to call for pro-Bush coverage.
"Ribbons or medals? Which did John Kerry throw away after he returned from Vietnam?" wrote senior vice president for news John Moody in an April memo to the staff. "His perceived disrespect for the military could be more damaging to the (Democratic presidential) candidate than questions about his actions in uniform."
In a statement Monday, the network dismissed the whistleblowers as "former low-level Fox employees" who are "hardly worth addressing." It challenged other media organizations to make public their own employee memos, whereupon "Fox News Channel will publish 100 percent of our editorial directions and memos, and let the public decide who is fair."
The film also draws on a study commissioned by Fairness & Accuracy in Media, a national media watchdog group. The study found conservatives accounted for nearly three-fourths of ideological guests on the network's marquee news program, "Special Report with Brit Hume," between June and December 2003, and that Republicans outnumbered Democrats five to one.
"Outfoxed" was compiled during the past seven months in association with liberal political organizations Center for American Progress and MoveOn.Org, as well as the citizens' lobbying group Common Cause.
Budgeted at $300,000, the documentary will initially be distributed through private "house party" screenings and DVD sales.
At a news conference to introduce the film July 12, Greenwald called Fox News Channel "an opinion station, not a news station."
When former White House terrorism coordinator Richard Clarke testified before the 9-11 commission, he apologized to the American people for the government's failure to protect them.
The film displays a flurry of Fox pundits blasting Clarke, often in similar terms. "It was almost like Fox News was working off of the playbook coming out of the White House, that he had to be torn down," FAIR co-founder Jeff Cohen says in the film.
Fox host Bill O'Reilly is seen on his show insisting he has told a guest to shut up "only once in six years," after which he is seen in clips telling one person after another with whom he disagrees to "shut up."
The documentary also includes a rapid-fire succession of clips of more than a dozen Fox hosts using the phrase "some people say" - which the filmmakers say is a way to insinuate opinion disguised as reporting into on-air discussions.
"There's no smoking gun," Greenwald admitted in explaining what his film set out to reveal - "just a pattern."
---
On the Net:
Film: http://www.outfoxed.org 
Fox News: http://www.foxnews.com 
>+++++
 
IRAQ-MEDIA:
 
 
Iraqi prime minister opens controversial newspaper shut down by coalition
 
BAGHDAD, Iraq (AP) - Iraq's interim prime minister issued a decree July 18 allowing a controversial newspaper to reopen after U.S. officials closed it in March, setting off months of fighting between U.S. forces and militants loyal to radical Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr.
Meanwhile, after a two-month absence, al-Sadr showed up in Najaf in an unannounced visit to the Imam Ali shrine, one of Shiism's holiest sites. The mercurial cleric was ushered into the mosque as guards and aides cut a path through hundreds of chanting and cheering supporters.
The weekly Al-Hawza was the mouthpiece of al-Sadr's "Sadrist" movement, routinely carrying his fiery sermons on its front page along with articles sharply critical of the U.S.-led occupation, which formally ended June 28.
Iraq's former American governor, L. Paul Bremer, ordered the newspaper closed for two months on March 28 for allegedly inciting violence against coalition troops.
Bremer's closure order expired May 28, but al-Hawza's editor in chief, Abbas al-Robai, has said that trying to resume publication then could have exposed the newspaper's editorial staff to arrest.
The closure and the arrest a few days later of a close al-Sadr aide in the holy city of Najaf set off an anti-coalition uprising by militiamen loyal to al-Sadr in Baghdad and across Shiite areas in central and southern Iraq. The fighting raged on and off for two months.
Interim Prime Minister Iyad Allawi, himself a Shiite, ordered the paper reopened in an effort to show his "absolute belief in the freedom of the press," his office said in a statement.
Al-Sadr's representatives welcomed the move, but said it was an effort by the new leaders to win favor with the group.
"Closing the newspaper was according to our will, and opening the newspaper will also be according to our will," said Ahmed al-Shaibani, the cleric's spokesman in the holy city of Najaf. "The issue is not in the hands of Allawi or others."
He said the newspaper's slant will remain unchanged and will still be "directed against the occupation."
Bremer's decision to close al-Hawza had drawn condemnation from members of the now-defunct Governing Council, who said it ran counter to talk of securing freedom for Iraqis. Privately, some officials of Bremer's now-disbanded coalition authority also criticized the decision, arguing that it had unnecessarily angered a large segment of Iraq's Shiite majority at a time when the U.S. military had its hands full fighting an insurgency in Sunni areas.
The order to reopen al-Hawza appears designed to broaden Allawi's base of support.
Al-Sadr and his top aides have repeatedly called Allawi's unelected government illegitimate, but said their movement was prepared to adopt a wait-and-see policy as the country prepares for a general election due in January. Al-Sadr also said he wanted to see how much influence the United States has on government decisions.
>+++++ Arab news channel Al-Jazeera pledges honesty, fairness, independence in news coverage
 
DOHA, Qatar (AP) - The popular Arab news channel Al-Jazeera, which the United States has accused of bias, has issued a code of ethics, promising to "uphold journalistic values" and to be sensitive to the victims of the wars and disasters it covers.
The code, issued in a statement at the end of a two-day international media forum that concluded July 13, said the station will "strive to reach and deliver the truth, respect our audience."
Al-Jazeera often has been criticized for its coverage of the war on Iraq, especially by the United States.
The statement pledged to "take into account the feelings of the victims of crime, wars, oppression and disasters, and the feelings of their families and the viewers."
In June, U.S. National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice accused Al-Jazeera of "purely inaccurate" reporting and suggested it was presenting a biased account of developments in the Middle East.
In February, U.S. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld branded Al-Jazeera and fellow Arab satellite station Al-Arabiya "violently anti-coalition" and accused them of turning Arabs against America.
Al-Jazeera also has been accused of being an outlet for al-Qaida terror network, broadcasting videotapes and audiotapes purportedly from Osama bin Laden or his aides.
The station said it will distinguish between news, analysis and commentary to avoid "falling in the trap of propaganda and speculation."
It also promised to "acknowledge any mistake as soon as it is made and take the initiative to correct it and avoid repeating it."
Recently, Al-Jazeera has begun reading statements from militant groups instead of broadcasting their tapes. It also has been editing out particularly graphic segments of militant videotapes.
>++++
 
FREE PRESS:
 
 
Media appeal in Jackson case was delayed by court clerk
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - An appeal by news media wanting access to court information in the Michael Jackson child molestation case went unheard for a week because a clerk refused to place it on the court docket, according to court papers.
Attorney Dominic Lanza, who filed the first appeal notice earlier this month, said he checked five days later to make sure the matter was scheduled to be heard by Superior Court Judge Rodney Melville but was told by the appellate clerk it was not filed.
Lanza, who is part of the legal team headed by Theodore Boutrous Jr., said the clerk told him: "The court is not recognizing you as a party."
He said it took until July 15 to get a clarification from the presiding justice of the California Second District Court of Appeal, who instructed the clerk that the notice of appeal should be filed.
Melville has imposed extraordinary rules of secrecy in the singer's case and 11 news media organizations, including The Associated Press, are suing for access to court files on behalf of the public.
"It's clear that we have standing to appeal," Boutrous said. "So we were surprised to find out that our notice of appeal was not on the docket."
He noted that during court hearings, "Judge Melville has allowed us to participate fully in arguing to unseal documents. We have briefed and argued more motions than anybody."
In a 27-page brief filed July 15, Boutrous asked the appeals court for an expedited schedule, saying "The public's First Amendment right of access to judicial proceedings and documents is one that is exceedingly time-sensitive."
He asked that the secrecy issues be resolved before a major series of hearings begins Aug. 16 on defense motions to dismiss the indictment of Jackson.
Melville has ordered all documents in the case filed under seal for his consideration of release later.
To date, he has released only heavily edited portions of motions and search warrants and has kept secret key details of the indictment, the grand jury transcripts and even a motion by Jackson's lawyers to change the trial date.
It was impossible to tell from the motion notice how long a delay is sought.
In May, the judge set a trial date of Sept. 13 but acknowledged the parties might not be ready by then. He called the date "a bull's eye that we're shooting at" after noting complaints from Jackson's attorneys about the volume of evidence they still had to examine.
The defense and prosecution are under orders to file every document in the case under seal and then let the judge decide if it should be made public. In some instances the judge has released heavily edited documents including a motion to dismiss the charges. But he has kept secret many details of the indictment and the transcripts of grand jury hearings.
Lawyers in the case are under a court-imposed gag order preventing them from commenting on when the trial might start.
Jackson, 45, is charged with committing a lewd act upon a child, administering an intoxicating agent and conspiring to commit child abduction, false imprisonment and extortion.
Boutrous, who represents a coalition of news organizations including The Associated Press, has filed an appeal of about a dozen decisions by Melville sealing information from public view.
>+++++ Lawsuits against Texas AG leave open records requests in limbo
 
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) - A disagreement between Texas' attorney general and two state agencies on how a federal medical privacy law affects requests for information under the Texas open records law has left at least six such requests in limbo.
The agencies have sued Attorney General Greg Abbott, claiming that some information he has ordered them to make public is private under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act passed by Congress last year.
The lawsuits, four of which were filed by the Texas Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation, have delayed the release of information about assaults at state mental facilities, the Austin American-Statesman reported July 17.
The other two lawsuits were filed by the Texas Department of Human Services, Abbott spokesman Tom Kelley said.
The Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation filed one lawsuit after a reporter for KDFW-TV of Dallas-Fort Worth asked for statistics related to sexual assaults at state mental health hospitals.
The department gave the reporter statewide statistics but did not break the numbers down by individual hospital, said Frances Kendall, the agency's open records coordinator.
"What we would not provide, and we feel like is confidential based on HIPAA, is the actual name of the facility," Kendall said. "While (patients) are there, this is their address, and HIPAA says we can't release their address."
Abbott's office ruled in February that, despite HIPAA, state agencies must release medical information required to be disclosed under the state's open records law.
His office cited that opinion when it told the department in a February letter that it must release the breakdown of sexual assault cases by hospital. The agency sued Abbott in March.
Because of the pending lawsuit, the attorney general has decided not to rule on a similar open records request filed by the American-Statesman regarding the death of an Austin State Hospital patient, Kendall said.
>+++++
 
Suit seeks to open Kentucky juvenile court hearings, records
 
FRANKFORT, Ky. (AP) - The Kentucky Press Association filed a lawsuit July 15 seeking to open juvenile court proceedings and records shielded by state laws. The suit asks a federal judge to strike down the laws and issue an injunction to open the hearings and records to public scrutiny.
The association claims the laws violate the state and federal constitutions. Named as defendants are the state and the Franklin County Circuit Court clerk.
The suit said the current system for juvenile court proceedings "deprives KPA and its members of their First Amendment rights to gather and publish news and deprives the public of its First Amendment right of access to information related to court proceedings and records."
KPA President John Nelson said juvenile courts have been allowed to conduct business in the "public's blind spot."
"They are there, but we can't see them," Nelson, managing editor of The Advocate-Messenger in Danville, said in a statement. "We can't be the judge of how effective they are. We can't debate their actions. And, therefore, as a community, we can't offer educated input on the process."
Mary Rafizadeh, an attorney with the Department of Public Advocacy's office in Covington, said the closed juvenile hearings are justified.
"It's important because the attitude of juvenile court is to rehabilitate, to help the family fix the problems that they're facing," she said in a telephone interview. "The attitude of adult court is to get retribution, punishment and rehabilitation."
State law allows only a select few to attend juvenile court hearings. They include a juvenile's relatives or guardian, witnesses in the case, the victim, a probation worker and a state juvenile justice official.
The law also denies public scrutiny, in most instances, of law enforcement and court records regarding juveniles.
The suit contends that the laws violate the separation of powers provisions in the Kentucky Constitution as well as a section saying that all courts shall be open.
David Thompson, executive director of the KPA, said it was the first time in his long tenure that KPA had initiated a lawsuit, though it has joined suits filed by other media organizations.
The closed juvenile hearings and records have "been something that's frustrated the news media," Thompson said.
Nelson, the KPA president, said that opening juvenile courts wouldn't preclude certain proceedings or records from being closed or sealed.
>+++++ University of Northern Colorado students sue over newspaper funding cuts
 
DENVER (AP) - A federal lawsuit filed by University of Northern Colorado students alleges that UNC student leaders cut funding for the student newspaper this year because they were upset about the paper's articles.
The students who filed the suit July 14 all work for The Mirror, the newspaper.
Managing editor Christopher Marcheso, news editor Andrew Rosenthal and editor in chief Heath Urie allege that cutting the paper's funding because of its content is a violation of their First Amendment rights to free speech.
The lawsuit lists members of the UNC Board of Trustees as defendants because trustees approved the Student Representative Council's funding decision.
In the year before the funding cut, Mirror reporters wrote about a student council member's arrest for drunken driving and the council's alleged violations of open-meeting laws. The Mirror also sued the council and its president over the alleged violations.
Urie said July 14 he believed the funding cuts were retaliatory.
University president Kay Norton disagreed.
"From what I know of it, we do not agree with their characterization of how the funding decision was made," Norton said, adding that she had not seen the lawsuit.
The lawsuit alleges that when the student council discussed The Mirror's funding, one council member objected to the paper's content and urged other members to vote to cut the paper's funding for that reason.
The council later cut The Mirror's funding by 40 percent to $22,151.
Jory Taylor, a former vice president on the Student Representative Council, explained that the paper essentially got paid twice through student fees - once during the normal allocation process and a second time when groups funded with student fees bought advertising in the paper.
The newspaper's funding from student fees has been cut steadily from $74,473 in 2001 to $22,151 today.
The newspaper uses student fees to help cover printing costs and has had to raise some advertising rates since its funding was cut.
The lawsuit asks the court to restore student-fee funding to last year's levels and to award attorney's fees.
>+++++
 
INTERNATIONAL:
 
 
Hard-line prosecutor bans Iranian press from full coverage of slain photojournalist trial
 
TEHRAN, Iran (AP) - A hard-line prosecutor has ordered Iranian newspapers to censor their coverage of a trial of a secret agent accused of murdering an Iranian-Canadian photojournalist, journalists said July 19.
Speaking to government spokesman Abdollah Ramezanzadeh after his weekly press conference, several reporters said Tehran prosecutor Saeed Mortazavi called their offices and told them to not report on parts of the trial, which ended abruptly July 18.
One journalist said Mortazavi told him: "It's in your interest to consider the murder trial over and avoid publishing things that you should not."
Hard-liners were angered after a legal team representing the mother of slain photojournalist Zahra Kazemi accused prison official Mohammad Bakhshi of inflicting the fatal blow on Kazemi, and accused the hard-line judiciary of illegally detaining her.
Most Iranian newspapers have not published the accusations against Bakhshi and the prosecution, apparently fearing retribution.
"I was afraid to publicly put this to you during the press conference because I was afraid of possible punishment from Mortazavi," one journalist told Ramezanzadeh.
"Mortazavi called our newspaper Sunday to say we have to delete parts of the trial where lawyers implicated Bakhshi in the murder," she said.
Ramezanzadeh said imposing such restrictions on newspapers was against the constitution.
The judiciary ordered two reformist publications to shut down July 17, when the trial opened. Sources at the newspapers said officials appeared upset with an article one of them published last week about Kazemi's death.
Mortazavi, a former judge, is widely seen as the man behind the closure of more than 100 pro-democracy publications the past four years.
The agent charged with murdering Kazemi, Mohammad Reza Aghdam Ahmadi, pleaded innocent July 17. It was not known when a verdict would come.
Lawyers for Kazemi's mother, led by Nobel Peace Prize laureate Shirin Ebadi, walked out of court in protest after the abrupt closing of the trial and threatened to take the case to international organizations if the court didn't summon several top officials.
The Canadian government has blamed Mortazavi for the death, and reformists have accused him of a cover-up. The bill of indictment, which has cleared Bakhshi of any wrongdoing and implicated Ahmadi in the murder, was prepared by the Tehran prosecutor's office.
Kazemi, a Canadian freelance journalist of Iranian origin, died July 10, 2003, while in detention for taking photographs outside a Tehran prison during student-led protests against the ruling establishment. Iranian authorities initially said she died of a stroke but a presidential committee later found she died of a fractured skull and brain hemorrhage.
Iran-Canada relations deteriorated after Iran wouldn't allow Canadian observers to attend the trial.
>+++++ Slain American was investigating killings of Russian TV reporter and other journalist
 
MOSCOW (AP) - In the weeks before Paul Klebnikov was shot to death on a Moscow street, the American journalist had begun investigating the 1995 killing of a Russian TV reporter, a publisher said July 16, while a newspaper said he may also have been looking into a second slaying.
The new information indicated Klebnikov may have been vigorously inquiring into one of Russia's most sensitive issues. The Committee to Protect Journalists has listed Russia as one of the world's 10 most hazardous countries for reporters.
In the first days after the July 9 murder of Klebnikov, relatives and associates of the editor of Forbes magazine's Russian edition said they were unaware he was looking into matters that could have prompted violent retaliation.
However, Valery Streletsky, head of a publishing house that issued two books by Klebnikov in Russian, said July 16 the American was investigating the shooting death of TV journalist Vladislav Listyev with the aim of possibly publishing a book on the case.
Streletsky told The Associated Press he believed Klebnikov was at least two to three years away from putting the book together and said he thought it unlikely the fledgling investigation was the motive behind the killing near Forbes' Moscow office.
"He had gathered very little material," said Streletsky.
But the newspaper Moskovskiye Novosti indicated he could have been casting his net wider.
The newspaper cited lawyer Karen Nesirsian as saying he had received a call from Klebnikov in early July in which the American "said that he intended to prepare a series of stories about the killings of journalists in Russia." It identified Nesirsian as an attorney for a suspect in last year's killing of Alexei Sidorov, editor of a newspaper in the Volga River city of Togliatti.
Sidorov's predecessor was shot to death a year earlier.
Klebnikov, widely known for a book about controversial tycoon Boris Berezovsky, was well regarded for his knowledge of Russia's often-murky business sphere.
Berezovsky sued Forbes for libel over a 1996 article by Klebnikov, complaining it connected him with the murder of Listyev. The suit was withdrawn after Forbes acknowledged there was no evidence of Berezovsky's involvement.
Listyev became highly popular as host of a news and talk show that exemplified Mikhail Gorbachev's perestroika reforms. Two months before his killing, he was named executive director of Russia's most widely watched broadcast channel; he was in charge of reforming its advertising, where millions of dollars allegedly had been skimmed off.
Media speculation on the motive for the killing focused on Forbes' publication this spring of a list of the 100 richest people in Russia, saying that could have brought unwelcome attention to figures who had become wealthy by shadowy means.
Klebnikov was described by relatives and colleagues as optimistic about Russia's development, but his killing underlined the violence that still troubles its business circles and drew attention to the country's shabby medical services.
Russian news reports said the ambulance that came to the scene had no oxygen supplies and quoted a colleague who accompanied him to the hospital as saying the elevator to the operating room was stuck for several minutes.
>+++++ Employee of Armenian magazine killed in Moscow
 
Eds: 'Pail' in graf 2 is correct
 
MOSCOW (AP) - An Armenian magazine employee died after being stabbed and beaten in Moscow, the magazine's chief said July 19.
The death of Pail Peloyan on July 17 came little more than a week after American Paul Klebnikov, editor of Forbes magazine's Russian edition, was likely to raise concern about journalists' safety in Russia.
However, the magazine for which Peloyan worked was much lower-visibility than Forbes - its last issue appeared at the beginning of 2003 - and covered topics less controversial and sensitive than Klebnikov's reporting on Russia's often-violent business sphere.
The Russian-language magazine, Armyanskii Pereulok (Armenian Lane), focused on Armenian cultural, historical and religious issues, editor Valentin Filoyan said. Peloyan was chief administrator for the magazine and had written several articles, he said.
Asked whether he believed the 37-year-old Peloyan's death was connected to the magazine's work, Filoyan said "I don't think so." But what the motivation might have been was not clear, he said.
Peloyan's body was found on the fringes of the expressway that circles Moscow's outskirts, near a pedestrian overpass, Russian news reports said.
Filoyan said money and documents including Peloyan's passport were found on the body, an apparent indication that robbery was not the motive. The newspaper Moskovsky Komsomolets, citing unspecified sources, said the killing could have been the result of a fight following an argument.
Russia was rated by the Committee to Protect Journalists as one of the world's 10 most dangerous countries for journalists, with a number of killings and beatings reported in recent years.
Klebnikov reportedly had been looking into the 1995 killing of a prominent TV journalist and was interested in doing a series of articles about journalist murders.
>+++++ Newspapers in two West African countries stop the presses to protest editors' arrests
 
DAKAR, Senegal (AP) - Newspapers in two West African nations suspended publication July 19 to protest the jailings of leading journalists.
In Senegal, many privately owned radio stations joined most independent newspapers in the one-day news shutdown. A separate but similar protest played out in the Central African Republic.
Both cases concerned newspaper editors jailed after exposing alleged embezzlement by officials.
Authorities in Senegal jailed Madiambal Diagne, chief editor of Le Quotidien daily, on July 16, after calling him in for questioning the previous day.
In the Central African Republic, all private newspapers suspended publication to protest the arrest of Maka Gbossokotto, editor of Le Citoyen daily.
Journalists said the shutdown there would continue until the editor is released.
>+++++ Cameroon frees two journalists detained by military as 'spies'
 
LIMBE, Cameroon (AP) - Cameroon freed two journalists working for the British Broadcasting Corp. after detaining them for six days on suspicion of spying in the disputed, oil-rich Bakassi peninsula.
South African Farouk Chothia and Cameroonian Ange Ngu Thomas were released from house arrest in the West African country's Atlantic Coast town of Limbe on July 16, said Jean-Davis Mihamle, another BBC correspondent in Cameroon.
The BBC said the two were covering the upcoming Nigerian withdrawal from the peninsula and had been traveling with the knowledge of the Cameroon authorities.
Bakassi, a heavily militarized, petroleum-rich peninsula, has seen deadly territorial battles between Cameroon and neighboring Nigeria.
Nigeria is to withdraw from the peninsula by Sept. 15 under a 2002 ruling by the International Court of Justice.
Neither of the journalists could be reached for comment, but Mihamle said they were both in good health.
>+++++
 
PEOPLE:
 
 
Buzbee appointed AP's chief of Middle East News, based in Cairo
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Sally Buzbee, assistant chief of bureau for news in the Washington bureau of The Associated Press, has been appointed AP's chief of Middle East News, based in Cairo.
The appointment was announced July 14 by Deborah Seward, AP's international editor.
Buzbee, 39, has been a reporter, news editor and World Services supervisor in the Washington bureau. She joined the AP in Topeka, Kan., in 1988, worked in Kansas City and Los Angeles and was correspondent in charge in San Diego.
Buzbee is a native of Walla Walla, Wash. She has an undergraduate degree from the University of Kansas and an MBA from Georgetown University. She has lived in Saudi Arabia and Tunisia.
Buzbee replaces Earleen Fisher, who retired.
>+++++ Convey named managing editor of Boston Herald
 
BOSTON (AP) - Kevin R. Convey, a longtime reporter and editor for the Boston Herald, was named managing editor.
Convey had been the editor in chief of Herald Media Inc.'s Community Newspaper Co., overseeing the editorial direction of four suburban daily newspapers and more than 89 weekly and specialty publications. In his new position, he will be responsible for the editorial operations of the Herald and will report to editorial director Kenneth Chandler.
"This is a job I have been working toward my entire career," Convey said.
The announcement was made by Herald Media President Patrick J. Purcell.
Convey has worked for the Herald since 1981, except for a brief period when he worked for Boston magazine.
He started as a business reporter, and was appointed assistant managing editor in 1984. After returning from the magazine, he was named in 1990 as editor of the Sunday Boston Herald, then was named managing editor for features in 1994. He took over at CNC in 2001.
>+++++ Davis named publisher of Patriot Ledger
 
QUINCY, Mass. (AP) - Kirk A. Davis, a veteran newspaper manager, has been named chief executive and publisher of The Patriot Ledger.
Davis, 43, will take the helm of the Quincy-based Patriot Ledger, Enterprise NewsMedia's biggest newspaper with a daily circulation of more than 60,000.
He replaces current publisher and CEO James F. Plugh on Aug. 16. Plugh becomes vice chairman of Enterprise NewsMedia and will concentrate on potential acquisitions. Plugh also is part owner of Enterprise NewsMedia.
Davis also will oversee operations at The Enterprise of Brockton, a 37,000-circulation daily, and the MPG Newspapers group, whose publications include the Old Colony Memorial, a twice-weekly paper in Plymouth.
Davis led the Community Newspaper Co., a chain of more than 100 daily and weekly newspapers, from 1998 through mid-2001. He left the group to buy and run Holden Landmark Corp., which now publishes two weeklies and a parenting magazine. He continues to own Holden Landmark.
>+++++ Einberg named AP's regional picture editor/East
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Melissa H. Einberg, an Associated Press sports photo editor, has been named the AP's regional picture editor/East.
The appointment was announced July 14 by Deputy Director of Photography J. David Ake.
Einberg, 39, has been a photo editor in New York since 1988, helping direct coverage of major events such as the Olympics, World Cup soccer, the World Series and the Stanley Cup finals. In her new post, she will be based in Boston with responsibilities overseeing the AP's photo report throughout the East from Maine to Virginia.
She previously worked in the AP's New York City metro bureau as an assignment editor, and as a multimedia journalist with the AP's online service.
Einberg graduated from Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass., in 1986 with a bachelor's degree in economics.
>+++++ Gallagher named publisher at Ventura County Star
 
VENTURA, Calif. (AP) - Tim Gallagher has been promoted from editor to publisher of the Ventura County Star. He was succeeded as editor by managing editor Joe Howry, the paper said.
Gallagher, 48, has been the paper's editor since 1995. He has spent his entire career with E.W. Scripps Co., which owns the Star. He is a graduate of the University of New Mexico with degrees in journalism and English.
Howry, 56, has been the Star's managing editor since 1993. He began his career in 1974 and was an editor for Gannett Co. newspapers in Reno, Nev., and Salem, Ore. He graduated from the University of Montana with degrees in history and political science.
Gallagher's first act was to promote Frank Moraga, diversity director for the Star's newsroom, to diversity director for the entire company.
The paper has begun a search to replace Howry as managing editor.
>+++++ Brown hired as editor at Delta Democrat Times
 
GREENVILLE, Miss. (AP) - Frank Brown, a veteran Mississippi newsman, has been hired as editor of the Delta Democrat Times.
Brown, 51, replaces Donald Adderton, who left earlier this year to become assistant managing editor at the Hattiesburg American.
Brown is moving to Greenville from The Clarion-Ledger in Jackson, where he worked for the last 23 years in several positions, including news editor, page 1 editor and features editor.
Previously, Brown worked at the Tuscaloosa (Ala.) News, The Decatur (Ala.) Daily, The Huntsville (Ala.) Times and The Pensacola (Fla.) Journal.
He is a native of Decatur, Ala., and a 1975 graduate of the University of Alabama School of Communications.
>+++++ Newest inductees for Missouri Press Hall of Fame announced
 
COLUMBIA, Mo. (AP) - Five publishers and editors will be the newest members of the Missouri Newspaper Hall of Fame.
The 2004 honorees are Allen Black, retired publisher of the Malden Press-Merit; Kenneth Cope, former publisher of the Neosho Daily News; Dale Freeman, former executive editor of the Springfield News-Leader; Kirk Powell, publisher of the Pleasant Hill Times, and Jack Watters, former publisher of The Marshfield Mail.
They will be inducted into the Hall of Fame on Sept. 10 at the Missouri Press Association's annual convention and trade show in Springfield.
The association of daily and weekly newspapers established the Hall of Fame in 1991. Past honorees include Mark Twain and Joseph Pulitzer.
>+++++
 
DEATHS:
 
 
THOMAS MADIGAN, 85, an Emmy Award-winning producer of television documentaries and director of corporate underwriting departments at several public television stations, July 8 in New York of complications from heart surgery, his family said. He was 85.
Madigan won an Emmy in 1980 for producing "The Hunter and the Hunted," a PBS documentary about Nazi war criminals. "The Adams Chronicles" (1976), about one of the nation's most prominent political families, won four Emmys.
He produced a 1969 documentary about Salvador Dali, titled "Salvador Dali: A Soft Self-Portrait," that won the best documentary prize at the Venice Film Festival.
Madigan headed corporate underwriting departments at several PBS stations, including WNET in New York, WGBH in Boston and WQED in Pittsburgh.
>+++++
JACK KEEVER, 66, who covered sports, the Legislature and the deadly shootout at the University of Texas clock tower during three decades with The Associated Press, July 18 at his home in Austin of cancer.
Keever joined the AP in Dallas in 1961 before transferring to Austin, where he remained until his retirement in 1992.
In addition to covering Charles Whitman's shooting spree in 1966 and covering the University of Texas Longhorns, Keever covered 15 legislative sessions, 11 governor's races and other political campaigns.
Keever began his journalism career as managing editor of the Daily Texan in 1959 and graduated from the University of Texas in 1960. After retiring from the AP, he returned to the classroom, teaching journalism at Austin Community College until 2000.
Keever also wrote several books. He was co-author of a biography of former Gov. John B. Connally called "Portrait in Power."
>+++++
FRANCES HANSEN, 85, a prolific crossword puzzle creator known for designing puzzles whose answers formed original poems, July 16 in New York of complications of a stroke.
Hansen's puzzles were published in newspapers including The New York Times, The Washington Post and the Los Angeles Times and by such book publishers as Dell and Simon & Schuster.
Eighty-two of her puzzles were published by The New York Times, and the 83rd was scheduled to be published in the Christmas issue of the newspaper's Sunday magazine, the newspaper said in its July 16 editions.
Hansen wrote every Christmas puzzle since 1995, and she was the newspaper's fourth most published crossword puzzle creator, the Times said.
Hansen's first attempt to write a puzzle was rejected by the Times; her second, based on the Lewis Carroll book "Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice Found There," was published in December 1964, the newspaper said.
>+++++
REX REDIFER, 71, a journalist who wrote for newspapers in Bloomington, Fort Wayne, Franklin and Indianapolis during a 40-year-career, July 16 in Franklin, Ind.
Redifer, who attended the Indiana University School of Journalism, began his reporting career at The Bloomington Herald Telephone in 1957. He worked briefly at the Fort Wayne Journal Gazette before moving to Franklin in 1963 to become the first sports editor at the new Daily Journal.
In 1972, following stints as a cartoon editor for the Newspaper Enterprise Association syndicate and editor of a magazine, Redifer became a reporter at The Indianapolis Star, where he worked until his retirement in 1996.
Though he covered a variety of news events, Redifer probably was best known for his human interest stories.
>+++++
 
NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
 
 
Al Franken's radio show, "The O'Franken Factor," is changing its name to "The Al Franken Show." Franken's daily three-hour show on the liberal talk radio network Air America Radio was dubbed "The O'Franken Factor" in a jab at Fox News host Bill O'Reilly. The 53-year-old comedian said he's changing the name because "no matter how hard we tried, conservative entertainer Bill O'Reilly wouldn't sue us." O'Reilly had no comment. … Vincennes (Ind.) University officials refused to reinstate a college newspaper adviser who said he was removed because the weekly criticized the administration. The faculty senate voted 21-3 against reinstating professor Michael Mullen as coordinator of the school's journalism program. Officials repeated July 13 that Mullen was removed from the Vincennes Trailblazer to fill a vacancy in the English department, not as retaliation. … The nation's largest radio station chain announced July 19 that it will reduce the number of air minutes devoted to commercials, effective Jan. 1. San Antonio-based Clear Channel Communications said limits on the length of commercials per spot break will be reduced. The chain also will reduce and limit the amount of promotional breaks on all of its radio stations. … Plans to evict reporters from Maryland State House press rooms for up to three years have been put on hold while renovation plans are reviewed by the State House Trust. News organizations had received letters last month telling them they had until July 15 to vacate rooms on the ground floor of the State House that have been used by the news media at least 50 years. … A computer problem delayed production of the Chicago Tribune for 5 1/2 hours July 19 and forced elimination of a number of pages. Dick Malone, Tribune senior vice president and general manager, said technicians installed a computer upgrade July 18 and thought the system was working properly, but initial attempts to print the July 19 editions failed. The newspaper that eventually got out was 24 pages smaller than planned, he said.
>+++++
 Load-Date: July 20, 2004

 

End of Document
