

Developments in the news industry for Feb. 7-14
The Associated Press
February 14, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 13196 words
Body




>+++++ NEWSPAPERS:
 
- Judge dismisses Baltimore Sun's lawsuit against Maryland governor
 
- Case goes to jury after closing arguments in Boston Herald libel case
 
- Reporter for black paper in Kansas City accepted money from congressional candidate
 
- Enterprise NewsMedia acquires four newspapers south of Boston
 
>+++++ IRAQ:
 
- CNN news executive quits following controversy over remarks
 
- Militants gun down Iraqi journalist from U.S.-funded television station
 
- Militant group claims to have executed Italian journalist kidnapped in Iraq
 
>+++++ BROADCASTING:
 
- Study: Local TV news spends little time on local politics
 
- "Nightline" facing crossroads as it approaches 25th anniversary
 
- Racy ad pulled from second showing during Super Bowl
 
>+++++ INTERNET:
 
- Online newsman resigns amid questions about his credentials
 
>+++++ EARNINGS:
 
- Belo has higher fourth-quarter results
 
- Sinclair Broadcast reports fourth-quarter loss
 
>+++++ FCC:
 
- FCC commissioners ask for easing of open government law
 
- FCC: Cable companies don't have to carry multiple digital channels from local stations
 
>+++++ FREE PRESS:
 
- Mass. high court overturns part of award in story on writer's death
 
- Media seek end to secrecy in Michael Jackson case
 
- Tabloid publisher wants subpoena thrown out in Kobe Bryant case
 
- AP, newspapers seek access to sealed court records in Illinois
 
- News organizations fight to have Utah county group open records
 
>+++++ INTERNATIONAL:
 
- British Broadcasting Corp. journalist killed in Somalia
 
- Polanski wins right to testify from France in libel suit
 
>+++++ PEOPLE:
 
- Diaz named publisher of Miami Herald
 
- Kirkland leaving as top editor of Fortune; Pooley to replace him
 
- Talbot, founder of Salon online magazine, leaves executive posts
 
- Ron Reagan will be host of new MSNBC show
 
- Karpowicz named to head broadcasting group at Meredith
 
- Leicester named AP bureau chief in Paris
 
- Rubinkam promoted to AP correspondent in Allentown, Pa.
- Armas named AP correspondent in State College, Pa.
 
- Ferson named publisher in Aberdeen, S.D.
 
- Hachadorian named editor in West Chester, Pa.
 
>+++++ CORRECTIONS:
 
>+++++ DEATHS:
 
- George Herman
 
- Derick Daniels
 
- Ross Thompson
 
- Robert L. Jones
 
- Kerwin Plevka
 
- Frank Winfred "Wint" Capel
 
- Russell H. Brantley Jr.
 
- Fred Byrod
 
- Art Reid
 
- Ron Franklin
 
- Sally Wagner
 
>+++++ NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
 
>+++++
NEWSPAPERS:
 
 
Judge dismisses Baltimore Sun's lawsuit against Maryland governor
 
BALTIMORE (AP) - A federal judge on Feb. 13 dismissed a lawsuit challenging Gov. Robert Ehrlich's order barring state employees from contact with two writers from The (Baltimore) Sun.
U.S. District Court Judge William Quarles said the newspaper was seeking more access to government officials than that accorded a private citizen.
"The right to publish news is expansive. However, the right does not carry with it the unrestrained right to gather information," the judge said in his eight-page order.
"The Sun seeks the declaration of a constitutional right that neither the Supreme Court nor the Fourth Circuit has recognized."
Sun Editor Tim Franklin called the ruling "scary."
"If any citizen was not paying attention before, I hope they're paying attention now," Franklin said. "Essentially, what the court is saying is that it's OK for a politician to create an enemies list."
Franklin said the paper was preparing an appeal to the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals and would seek an expedited hearing.
"We're going to fight this," Franklin told The Associated Press. "It's not only unconstitutional, it's undemocratic."
Ehrlich said he would not comment until he could review the ruling.
The Republican governor issued his order last fall, barring state employees from talking to The Sun's State House bureau chief David Nitkin and columnist Michael Olesker.
"Effective immediately, no one in the Executive Department or Agencies is to speak with David Nitkin or Michael Olesker until further notice," said the e-mail to approximately 225 government officials, which was quoted in Quarles' order. "Do not return calls or comply with any requests. The Governor's Press Office feels that currently both are failing to objectively report on any issue dealing with the Ehrlich-Steele Administration. Please relay this information to your respective department heads. ..."
In December, The Sun filed suit in federal court, asking that the order be lifted because it violated the First Amendment rights of the two journalists by denying them the same opportunities to seek information as other news organizations and citizens.
The newspaper subsequently asked Quarles for a preliminary injunction to lift the ban while the newspaper's case against the governor proceeded. The state had asked for the case to be immediately dismissed.
In his decision, Quarles said The Sun could not demonstrate irreparable harm or the likelihood of success in the case on its merits.
Attorneys for the paper told Quarles Feb. 9 that "thousands upon thousands" of state employees are covered by the governor's order barring contact with the writers.
That estimate contrasted with that of attorneys for Ehrlich. They said recently that only top state officials in confidential and policymaking positions are subject to the governor's order. The state estimated the order covers about 225 people.
The governor has said the two writers were not covering his administration objectively. The order was sent by e-mail to 25 department heads, 65 public information officers and 135 employees on the governor's State House staff.
>+++++ Case goes to jury after closing arguments in Boston Herald libel case
 
BOSTON (AP) - A jury began deliberations Feb. 14 in a judge's libel lawsuit against the Boston Herald over stories depicting him as lenient with criminals and insensitive to victims.
Judge Ernest Murphy sued the tabloid and four of its reporters after the Herald published the series of articles, including one in which Murphy is quoted as saying, "Tell her to get over it," in reference to a 14-year-old rape victim.
Murphy, 61, insists he never made the comment. The newspaper has stood by its reporting.
Jurors deliberated for just over half an hour and were scheduled to reconvene Feb. 15.
Murphy, a Superior Court judge based in New Bedford when the articles were published in 2002, claims the reports by David Wedge and others were malicious.
The Herald's attorney, M. Robert Dushman, told the jury in his closing argument that freedom of the press is a carefully protected right, and that any distress that the Herald articles caused Murphy should not sway their decision.
Dushman acknowledged "minor errors" in some of Wedge's reporting, but said he did a solid job overall.
Because Murphy is a public figure, the jury must be convinced that the Herald maliciously reported material its reporters knew was false, a higher standard than the requirement a nonpublic figure must meet to win a libel case.
Murphy's attorney, Howard M. Cooper, said Wedge's work was shoddy and that he fabricated a "sensationalized, supermarket tabloid story" with the goal of getting public exposure and selling more papers.
Cooper said Wedge knew that what he was reporting was wrong, opted not to check his stories with people who could debunk them, and relied on sources in the Bristol Country prosecutor's office who had a "vendetta" against Murphy.
>+++++ Reporter for black paper in Kansas City accepted money from congressional candidate
 
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) - A reporter and columnist for a black Kansas City newspaper accepted $1,500 from the congressional campaign of the Rev. Emanuel Cleaver, the former mayor elected to the House in November.
Eric Wesson reported on the campaign for The Call and also wrote editorials that praised Cleaver, who is black, and criticized his Democratic primary rival and later his Republican opponent.
Kansas City's alternative weekly, The Pitch, reported on the payment in October. The Washington Post ran the story Feb. 14 after news that the federal government paid three conservative columnists to promote Bush administration policies.
Both papers said Cleaver's campaign paid $1,500 last summer to One Goal Consultants, a company that Wesson owns, according to state records.
Wesson declined Feb. 14 to comment to The Associated Press. He told the Post he wrote scripts for Cleaver's phone banks and did "other miscellaneous things" for the campaign.
"It had nothing to do with the job I do for The Call," Wesson said. "The Call has always written articles favorable to African-American candidates. We're an advocacy newspaper."
Cleaver issued a statement Feb. 14 saying his campaign would not have other such arrangements with reporters.
"I am committed to upholding the highest ethical standards," he said.
The Call has endorsed Cleaver for every political office he has sought in his 30-year political career, which included two terms as the city's first black mayor.
>+++++ Enterprise NewsMedia acquires four newspapers south of Boston
 
BOSTON (AP) - Enterprise NewsMedia LLC, which owns several newspapers south of Boston, said Feb. 14 it is acquiring The Norwood Bulletin and a group of three other independently owned papers.
Enterprise NewsMedia, owned by the Boston-based private equity firm Heritage Partners Inc., said it also has secured $100 million in financing as part of a restructuring.
Enterprise NewsMedia did not disclose terms of its deal to buy The Call Group, three papers serving Taunton, Raynham and Lakeville. The paper in Taunton is a monthly; the Raynham and Lakeville papers publish every other week.
Terms also were not disclosed for the separate acquisition of the Bulletin, a weekly.
The acquisitions expand a list of Enterprise NewsMedia holdings that includes two dailies, The Patriot Ledger of Quincy and The Enterprise of Brockton.
Kirk Davis, Enterprise NewsMedia's chief executive, said the acquisitions "are consistent with our strategy of being the dominant player in the south of Boston market."
Enterprise NewsMedia said the $100 million financing package underwritten and arranged by Wachovia Securities will allow it to refinance existing debt, provide a dividend to existing shareholders, finance the two new acquisitions and provide cash for future growth.
>+++++
IRAQ:
 
 
CNN news executive quits following controversy over remarks
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Worried that CNN would be "unfairly tarnished" over remarks he made about journalists killed by the U.S. military in Iraq, one of CNN's most visible executives chose to quit.
With the resignation of chief news executive Eason Jordan, CNN hopes to end a distracting controversy that had threatened to rival the Internet campaign last fall against Dan Rather for a CBS story about President Bush's military service.
During a panel discussion at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, last month, Jordan said he believed several journalists who were killed by coalition forces had been targeted.
Jordan quickly backed off his statements, both at the Jan. 27 panel and afterward. He said he meant to distinguish between journalists killed because they were in the wrong place when a bomb fell, for example, and those killed because they were shot at by American forces who mistook them for the enemy.
"I never meant to imply U.S. forces acted with ill intent when U.S. forces accidentally killed journalists, and I apologize to anyone who thought I said or believed otherwise," Jordan said in a memo to CNN staff members.
But the damage had been done, compounded by the fact that no transcript of his remarks has turned up.
A Web site, Easongate.com, was created and distributed a petition calling on CNN to find a transcript and fire Jordan if he said the military had intentionally killed journalists.
The Web site on Feb. 11 had been preparing to post information to help its supporters contact CNN's advertisers. A message posted on the site after Jordan's resignation said its authors were pleased but still want a videotape of his comments released.
"To every reader, commentator, e-mailer and blogger that committed to this cause, thank you," the Web site said. "This is a victory for every soldier who has honorably served this nation. To you we devote this victory."
After several management restructurings at CNN, Jordan actually had no current operational responsibility over programming. But he was CNN's chief fix-it man overseas, arranging coverage in dangerous or hard-to-reach areas.
"I have decided to resign in an effort to prevent CNN from being unfairly tarnished by the controversy over conflicting accounts of my recent remarks regarding the alarming number of journalists killed in Iraq," Jordan said.
Jordan joined CNN in 1982 as an assistant assignment editor on the national desk. He has won Emmy, duPont and Peabody journalism awards.
"Eason's service to CNN and support of the people at every level of our organization is legend," said Jim Walton, chief of the CNN News Group. "He leaves us with our gratitude, respect and best wishes."
>+++++ Militants gun down Iraqi journalist from U.S.-funded television station
 
BASRA, Iraq (AP) - Gunmen killed an Iraqi journalist working for a U.S.-funded television station as he and his 3-year-old son left their home Feb. 9 in the southern city of Basra, an Iraqi official said. The boy also died.
The victims were identified as Abdul Hussein Khazal al-Basri and his son, Mohammed.
His station, Al-Hurra, or "The Free," was launched in February 2004, and was tailored for Arab audiences to compete with other regional stations such as Al-Jazeera and Al-Arabiya. Some Muslim clerics have denounced the TV station as propaganda.
President Bush said it was created to "cut through the hateful propaganda that fills the airwaves in the Muslim world."
"We are deeply saddened," said Mouafac Harb, network news director for Al-Hurra.
Harb said al-Basri, 40, had been a correspondent for Iraq's Radio Sawa for nearly two years before joining Al-Hurra.
Al-Basri was also a member of the political office of the Islamic Dawa Party, an influential Shiite movement, and the editor of a local newspaper in Basra, Iraq's second-largest city.
He also served as the head of the press office at Basra City Council, said Nazim al Moussawi, a spokesman for the local government administration.
>+++++ Militant group claims to have executed Italian journalist kidnapped in Iraq
 
CAIRO, Egypt (AP) - A Web posting in the name of a militant group in Iraq claimed Feb. 8 to have executed an Italian journalist, but there was no way to determine the report's credibility.
The posting was signed by a different group than the one that had earlier claimed to have kidnapped Giuliana Sgrena. Both statements were posted on a Web site used as a clearing house for militants.
The Jihad Organization had earlier claimed responsibility for the kidnapping the previous week of Sgrena, 56, but the Feb. 8 statement was signed by the Mujahedeen Brigade in Iraq.
"Your brothers in the Mujahedeen (holy fighters) Brigade have executed the Italian journalist Giuliana Sgrena after making sure that she has spied on the mujahedeen for the American Crusade troops," said the statement.
It said the killing was a message to the American government "that this would be the destiny of agents and spies." It was also warning to Italy against continuing with America in its war on Iraq and a message to the holy fighters to "carry on that path until the liberation of the last spot from Muslim land, and know that the occupation of Iraq is the beginning of the end of America, God willing."
In Rome, the Foreign Ministry declined to comment on the claim but pointed out that the ministry has generally had doubts on claims appearing on these militant Web sites.
On Feb. 7, a Web posting in the name of the Jihad Organization pledged to release Sgrena in a few days because an investigation determined she was not a spy and after an appeal for her freedom by Sunni clerics.
Sgrena, a reporter for the communist daily Il Manifesto, was kidnapped Feb. 4 by gunmen who blocked her car outside Baghdad University. An earlier posting by the Jihad Organization gave Italy 72 hours to withdraw its troops from Iraq.
On Feb. 14, the pope appealed for the safe release of Sgrena and others held hostage in Iraq.
>+++++
BROADCASTING:
 
 
Study: Local TV news spends little time on local politics
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Despite its windfall from political advertising last fall, local TV news in 11 major markets spent little time covering local politics, a study concluded.
More than 90 percent of newscasts examined last fall had no news about campaigns for the House of Representatives, local or state governments. They devoted eight times the amount of coverage to people injured in accidents, said the Lear Center Local News Archive.
"If you want to get on local news, it's easier to be in a freak accident than to run for local office," said Marty Kaplan, professor at the University of Southern California's Annenberg School, which worked with the University of Wisconsin on the study. Researchers looked at all the evening and late-night newscasts in 11 cities for the 29 days before the Nov. 2, 2004 election.
The study is being released Feb. 15 in Washington by the Lear Center, which has encouraged local television news to be more aggressive in covering politics. Their findings this time mirror similar studies done in 2000 and 2002.
Local stations took in an estimated $1.6 billion in political advertising in 2004, according to the Alliance for Better Campaigns. That more than doubles the $770 million the stations got four years earlier.
More than half of those local news broadcasts contained a story on the Bush-Kerry presidential race, compared with 8 percent that had a local political story.
One reason local political races may be avoided is the broad geographic reach of some stations. A New York City station, for example, may not want to risk spending two minutes on a Brooklyn race for fear of turning off viewers in Manhattan or New Jersey.
"That's a challenge," said Barbara Cochran, president of the Radio and Television News Directors Association. "It isn't to say you don't do that, but it's a challenge."
Cochran also noted that a vast majority of local races are not particularly competitive.
Kaplan agreed it was a challenge to cover these races, but that local stations have promised to do so in order to get their licenses to operate.
The time spent on the presidential race may have also taken time away from local races, he said. While national news broadcasts and cable news are also outlets for presidential news, there's usually no other TV outlet for the local stories.
Since there are many viewers who watch local newscasts and don't read a newspaper or watch national news, it's important for those stations to keep on top of the presidential race, Cochran said.
The study also appeared to give no credit to stations like those in Seattle that sponsored candidate debates because they weren't shown within the newscasts, she said.
In U.S. Senate races, the amount of time spent on commercials outnumbered that for actual campaign news by a 17-to-1 ratio, the study said.
As with many national newscasts, the study criticized the stations for spending more time on campaign strategy than issues. But it said the stations did a generally good job in informing viewers where to vote and if there were any polling problems.
The markets included in the study were New York; Los Angeles; Philadelphia; Dallas; Seattle; Miami; Denver; Orlando; Tampa; Dayton, Ohio, and Des Moines, Iowa.
Researchers singled out a handful of stations for doing a particularly good job covering local politics: KXAS and WFAA in Dallas and KCCI in Des Moines.
>+++++ "Nightline" facing crossroads as it approaches 25th anniversary
 
NEW YORK (AP) - When George Stephanopoulos filled in as anchor to talk about the Iraqi elections recently, it may have been a peek into the future at "Nightline."
In its 25th anniversary year, Ted Koppel's ABC News program is at another crossroads. While the situation may not be as dramatic as the high-stakes survival game when ABC courted David Letterman in 2002, the changes contemplated this year will probably be more far-reaching.
One of the intriguing ideas being talked about at ABC is a swap, where Stephanopoulos takes over "Nightline" and Koppel lands at the struggling Sunday morning show "This Week."
It's an issue now because the network wants to decide the show's future by the end of the year, when Koppel's contract expires.
The Letterman flirtation proved ABC wouldn't hesitate to replace "Nightline" with a program that could generate higher profits. If news is abandoned, ABC's entertainment or sports divisions could be enlisted.
Ratings for "Nightline" are slightly up this year, countering a longtime trend. The show averages 3.8 million viewers a night, down from 6.3 million viewers 10 years ago, according to Nielsen Media Research. In that same stretch, Letterman's "Late Show" dropped from 6.3 million to 4.6 million. NBC's dominant "Tonight" show averaged 5.7 million viewers a decade ago and is now at 5.8 million.
Once a relative novelty, "Nightline" now competes in a television environment saturated by news. People are also going to bed earlier and getting up earlier, as the increasing viewership for local early-morning news shows indicates.
According to people at ABC who spoke on condition of anonymity, network executives prefer an hourlong show in that 11:35 p.m. time slot. ("Nightline" is now 30 minutes, followed by Jimmy Kimmel).
But there's actually reason to believe ABC News may have an advantage in keeping the time slot to itself.
For one thing, news represents a clear contrast to ABC's rivals at that hour. A late-night talk show would be a potential goldmine, but there are few proven commodities on the open market. Letterman, Leno, Conan O'Brien and Jon Stewart aren't available, and Kimmel's ratings make moving him up a half-hour risky.
A sports highlight show would be extremely attractive to young men, a demographic advertisers pay a premium to reach. But would ABC parent Walt Disney Co. want to undermine one of its other properties, ESPN, with a "SportsCenter" competitor?
Whether news hangs on to the time slot could depend on a new "Nightline."
Many companies have tensions between headquarters and satellite offices, and that's frequently been the case with ABC News' New York office and the "Nightline" Washington base. It seemed ominous when "Nightline" co-executive producer Leroy Sievers resigned in November, saying the company was considering fundamental changes to the show and "we were unable to agree on those changes."
Within the past few weeks, ABC has taped some partial test runs in its Times Square studios of a potential new "Nightline," reportedly lighter in tone and containing multiple stories.
The "Nightline" crew, in turn, plans to make its own hourlong prototype and hopes to reach some common ground.
Koppel's reduced workload in recent years has hurt the show's identity, said Tom Rosenstiel, director of the Project for Excellence in Journalism. Koppel regularly works three nights a week, a schedule designed to pave the way for a successor but now widely considered a failure.
ABC's New York office is said to favor bringing "Nightline" back to its live roots. It is now live only occasionally; people on the show say it's easier to book guests for a late afternoon or early evening taping than close to midnight.
At issue, it seems, is the very identity of "Nightline."
"If the notion of doing a single subject deeply in an authoritative way was lost, if they give that up to do a live magazine that is mostly talk, something will be lost in television," Rosenstiel said. "Because 'Nightline' stands apart in a culture that is mostly hot air."
In an age when many managers equate live television with excitement, "Nightline" and the evening news programs are old school. They give time to prepared reports with craft and editing. "Nightline" also takes pride in reporting on important topics that get relatively little attention on TV news. One example was last week's story about Rwanda, although the participation of "Hotel Rwanda" actor Don Cheadle gave it a Hollywood twist.
An hourlong show that runs live every night is a grueling new workload that would seem to freeze out Koppel, who turned 65 this month. The show could be saved at the expense of the man who has been its sole full-time host.
That adds logic to the idea of a potential Stephanopoulos-Koppel swap, first reported by Newsday's Verne Gay. Koppel would add instant gravitas to a Sunday political show now third in the ratings behind NBC and CBS. Stephanopoulos would have room to grow on "Nightline," and face a younger, more open-minded audience each night.
Neither man was willing to talk about it recently. Those involved say all of the talk is very preliminary.
"We're thinking about something that is basically a year off and a lot can happen between now and then," said Tom Bettag, "Nightline" executive producer.
>+++++ Racy ad pulled from second showing during Super Bowl
 
NEW YORK (AP) - A racy ad for a vendor of Web site names was pulled at the last minute from a second showing during the Super Bowl telecast after NFL executives objected that the spot made light of Janet Jackson's "wardrobe malfunction" incident in last year's halftime show.
The ad for GoDaddy.com Inc. featured a buxom woman appearing before a "broadcast censorship" hearing making her case that she wanted to appear in a commercial, when suddenly she suffers a malfunction of her own as a strap breaks on her already skimpy top.
One of the elderly committee members reaches for an oxygen mask, while a woman suggests that the woman put on a turtleneck. The logo of the fake news channel was "G-Spin," and the hearings were supposedly being held in Salem, Mass., the town made famous by witch trials.
Although the spot was initially approved by Fox executives prior to airing Feb. 6, a decision was made during broadcast not to air the spot a second time later in the game. Brian McCarthy, a spokesman for the NFL, said that the NFL's chief operating officer, Roger Godell, expressed his "disappointment" to Fox executives after seeing the first airing of the ad.
McCarthy said the NFL had not reviewed the ad prior to its airing, and was not aware that it had been scheduled to be repeated later in the game. Jon Nesvig, the president of advertising sales for Fox Broadcasting Co., a division of News Corp., said in a statement that when the commercial ran in the first half, "it became obvious to us that its content was very much out of step with the tenor set by the other ads and programming broadcast by Fox on Super Bowl Sunday, so Fox made the decision to drop its repeat airing."
A spokesman for Fox declined to elaborate beyond the statement. Fox had already rejected a second ad from GoDaddy.com prior to the broadcast.
The NFL was determined not to have a repeat of last year, when Jackson's right breast was exposed after singer Justin Timberlake ripped off a piece of her costume.
Warren Adelman, chief operating officer of GoDaddy.com, said the company was "very disappointed" that the ad was pulled, and received no advance warning from Fox. The Scottsdale, Ariz.-based company is still in discussions with Fox about what kind of restitution would be made, he said.
"The irony is that a parody of censorship was itself censored," Adelman said.
>+++++
INTERNET:
 
 
Online newsman resigns amid questions about his credentials
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - A conservative writer who attracted attention by asking President Bush a loaded question at a news conference last month has resigned amid questions about his identity and background.
James D. Guckert, who wrote under the name Jeff Gannon, said on his Web site that he is leaving "because of the attention being paid to me." He had been Washington bureau chief for Talon News, a conservative online news outlet associated with another Web site, GOPUSA.
Guckert frequently attended White House press briefings over the last two years and asked pointedly conservative questions. Called on by Bush at a Jan. 26 news conference, Guckert said Senate Democratic leaders were painting a bleak picture of the economy and he asked Bush how he would work "with people who seem to have divorced themselves from reality."
The question prompted scrutiny, particularly from liberal bloggers. Guckert was linked with online domain addresses suggestive of gay pornography. Guckert, a former resident of Wilmington, Del., told The (Wilmington) News Journal that he had registered the domain names for a client while he was working to set up a Web hosting business.
White House press secretary Scott McClellan said Guckert did not have a regular White House press pass but was cleared on a day-by-day basis to attend briefings and used his real name.
"He, like anyone else, showed that he was representing a news organization that published regularly and so he was cleared two years ago to receive daily passes just like many others are," McClellan said. "In this day and age, when you have a changing media, it's not an easy issue to decide, to try to pick and choose who is a journalist. It gets into the issue of advocacy journalism. Where do you draw the line? There are a number of people who cross that line in the briefing room."
He said he had been was unaware of Guckert's affiliation with any sexually oriented domain addresses.
>+++++
 
EARNINGS:
 
 
Belo has higher fourth-quarter results
 
DALLAS (AP) - Heavy political advertising on its television stations helped Belo Corp. post a 26 percent increase in fourth-quarter profit despite continuing weakness at its flagship newspaper, The Dallas Morning News.
Belo said Feb. 10 that it earned $53.5 million, or 46 cents per share, in the October-December period, compared with $42.4 million, or 36 cents per share, a year earlier.
Excluding an after-tax severance charge of $1.3 million, or 1 cent per share, the company would have earned 47 cents a share. On that basis, analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call had forecast 43 cents per share.
Revenues rose 6 percent to $412.7 million from $387.8 million a year earlier.
Belo said political advertising on its 19 TV stations was a surprisingly strong $28.4 million in the quarter, about one in every seven dollars of TV revenue, which rose 13.5 percent from a year earlier.
Newspaper revenue gained less than 1 percent, as weak revenue in Dallas offset strong results at The Press-Enterprise in Riverside, Calif.
Belo is still working to settle an overstatement of circulation in Dallas, which resulted in millions of dollars of payments to advertisers who were overcharged based on false figures. Advertisers used $6.9 million in advertising credits in the fourth quarter and are expected to cash in another $6 million worth in the first quarter.
Dallas-based Belo said earlier this month that Dallas circulation fell 11.7 percent on Sundays and 5.4 percent on other days for the six months that ended Sept. 30. The decline will cut revenue from preprinted ads by $2 million in the first quarter, the company said.
For all of 2004, Belo earned $132.5 million, or $1.13 per share, compared with $128.5 million, or $1.11 per share, in 2003. Revenue rose to $1.51 billion from $1.44 billion.
>+++++ Sinclair Broadcast reports fourth-quarter loss
 
BALTIMORE (AP) - Television-station operator Sinclair Broadcast Group Inc. reported a fourth-quarter loss that it attributed to a $44.1 million write-down of goodwill.
The company also said it expects first-quarter revenue to fall below year-ago levels amid a continued slowdown in automobile advertising, its largest advertising category, as well as declines in telecommunications and movie advertising.
The Baltimore-based television broadcast company on Feb. 10 said it lost $2.59 million, or 6 cents a share, on revenue of $188.1 million in the fourth quarter, Dow Jones reported.
Last year, it earned $18.6 million, or 19 cents a share, on revenue of $179 million in the fourth quarter.
Sinclair posted a quarterly loss from continuing operations of $6.1 million, or 10 cents a share, down from income from continuing operations of $14.7 million, or 14 cents a share, a year ago.
Analysts were expecting earnings of 11 cents a share, according to Thomson First Call.
Sinclair increased its annual dividend to 20 cents a share from 10 cents, in anticipation of proceeds of about $254 million from the pending sale of a California station. The deal is expected to close in April.
In December, the company agreed to sell CBS affiliate KOVR-TV, of Sacramento, Calif., to Viacom Inc. for $285 million.
In the year ended Dec. 31, the company earned $24 million, or 16 cents a share, on revenue of $708.3 million.
In the previous year, it earned $24.4 million, or 16 cents a share, on revenue of $688.4 million.
Sinclair found itself at the center of several controversies during the year. The company refused to air an episode of the ABC News show "Nightline" because anchorman Ted Koppel planned to read the names of U.S. soldiers killed in Iraq.
Sinclair also created a furor when it announced plans to show a special devoted to allegations against presidential candidate and Vietnam veteran John Kerry from a group calling itself Swift Boat Veterans for Truth.
Also, Sinclair joined other station owners in refusing to air the movie "Saving Private Ryan," explaining that a few swearwords in the Oscar-winning film might get it in trouble with the Federal Communications Commission.
>+++++
FCC:
 
 
FCC commissioners ask for easing of open government law
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Congress should enact changes to open government laws to make it easier for political appointees on the Federal Communications Commission to discuss issues in private, two FCC members said.
FCC Chairman Michael Powell, a Republican, and fellow Commissioner Michael Copps, a Democrat, said the law hinders communication between individuals on the five-member FCC because only two members at a time can talk face-to-face outside the confines of a commission meeting.
Powell and Copps, in a letter to Senate Commerce Committee Chairman Ted Stevens, R-Alaska, said they supported the goal of open government laws, but added that Congress should change the law to let more than two commissioners meet privately "in appropriate circumstances."
Otherwise, commissioners must communicate via their staffers, or through letters and e-mails.
"These indirect methods of communicating clearly do not foster frank, open discussion, and they are less efficient than in-person interchange among three or more commissioners would be," Powell and Copps wrote in the letter last week to Stevens and released Feb. 9.
Newspaper groups and free speech advocates bristled at the request and said it would lead to less transparency.
"It's basically arguing that it is inconvenient for them to have open meetings," said Steve Sidlo, managing editor of the Dayton (Ohio) Daily News, and chair of the First Amendment Committee for the Associated Press Managing Editors Association.
"If you are going to have a transparent government that's accountable for decision-making, that allows people to understand why decisions are made, then you have to have open meetings," Sidlo said.
The open government law requires deliberations be public when "the least number of individual agency members required to take action" are meeting.
On the five-member FCC, three votes are needed to conduct official business. Therefore, any meeting of three commissioners, whether by chance or on purpose, must be open to the public.
Powell, who is leaving the FCC next month, and Copps said it was an appropriate time to address the issue because Congress is expected to tackle a host of telecommunications issues this year, including how to regulate Internet phone calls and digital television rules.
Safeguards could be added to the law to ensure a private meeting of three commissioners would not "jeopardize the goal of open government," they said.
"Commission decisions are in some cases less well informed and well explained than they would be if we each had the benefit of the others' expertise and perspective," they wrote.
The purpose of the open government law is to avoid "back-room deals and mischief" among public officials, said Andrew Jay Schwartzman, chief executive officer of the Media Access Project, a Washington-based public interest law firm.
"It is inconvenient to operate in the public eye, but it is a good thing," Sidlo said. "Inconvenience isn't a good reason."
---
On the Net:
Federal Communications Commission: http://www.fcc.gov 
Associated Press Managing Editors: http://www.apme.com/ 
>+++++ FCC: Cable companies don't have to carry multiple digital channels from local stations
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Federal regulators have rejected a request by broadcasters to require cable and satellite operators to carry multiple digital channel offerings from local television stations.
The 4-1 vote by the Federal Communications Commission on Feb. 10 upheld a 2001 FCC ruling that said cable companies only must carry one digital channel per station.
Digital broadcasts offer sharper pictures than the traditional analog transmissions used in most TV sets in American homes. A digital signal also can carry more information without using any more space on the broadcast spectrum.
Some stations have chosen to use their digital signals for crystal-clear, high-definition broadcasts, while others have established multiple channels.
Cable operators have voluntarily agreed to carry multiple digital channels in some cities, but broadcasters say making it a requirement would benefit the public by giving them more programming choices. They contend that cable companies are afraid of the competition that more free, local "over-the-air" channels would give popular cable-only movie and sports networks.
The head of the National Association of Broadcasters, an industry group, called the FCC decision "anti-consumer" because it doesn't deliver more free channels and vowed to continue fighting in Congress and the courts. "Consumers deserve more," Edward Fritts said.
The cable and satellite industries have argued that the First Amendment gives the operators, and not the government, the power to decide what channels to carry. Requiring up to six digital channels would take up valuable space because there is room for only a limited number, cable operators say.
They also fear that broadcasters might use the extra capacity to carry nothing but shopping shows or infomercials.
Robert Sachs, president of the National Cable & Telecommunications Association, a trade group, praised the FCC decision as "a major victory for consumers," leaving open space that viewers want for popular programming.
The cable companies also said the decision would force broadcasters to provide better quality programming that cable companies will want to carry.
"Cable operators want to carry high-definition TV and other compelling digital TV content, especially if that content addresses local needs," Sachs said.
The four commissioners who sided with cable questioned whether they had the authority to force cable operators to carry extra channels and were skeptical of the need.
"This test is not whether multicast content is beneficial," Republican Commissioner Kathleen Abernathy said. But the evidence "cannot justify a conclusion that multicasting is necessary to the continued preservation of the benefits of broadcast television."
The only dissenting commissioner, Republican Kevin Martin, contended the ruling would hamper the ability of small, independent minority and religious broadcasters to get on the air.
"The public could have benefited from more free programming," he said.
Congress has told broadcasters to convert entirely to digital by December 2006 or when digital TV reaches 85 percent in a market, whichever comes later.
Some local stations are offering an all-weather digital channel in addition to a channel showing regular programming.
The two Democratic commissioners, Michael Copps and Jonathan Adelstein, voted against the broadcasters, but said the FCC also should have considered guidelines on what public service obligations local stations have when broadcasting multiple digital channels.
The FCC also rebuffed another request from broadcasters to require cable companies to carry both digital and analog signals of local stations as they switch to the new technology.
---
On the Net:
Federal Communications Commission digital TV site: http://www.fcc.gov/dtv/ 
>+++++
FREE PRESS:
 
 
Mass. high court overturns part of award in story on writer's death
 
BOSTON (AP) - The Boston Globe and a former reporter must pay more than $2 million to a doctor who said she was wrongly blamed in the paper for the death of the newspaper's health columnist, the state's highest court ruled Feb. 9.
Dr. Lois Ayash had sued the newspaper and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, claiming she was singled out as the "leader of the team" of doctors caring for columnist Betsy Lehman when she died in 1994 from an overdose of experimental cancer drugs.
The Supreme Judicial Court upheld the $1.68 million award against the Globe and a $420,000 award against a former Globe reporter. The newspaper had argued the damage awards, which were imposed after the paper refused to reveal its sources, were excessive.
Globe spokesman Al Larkin called the ruling "disappointing." The decision to uphold the judgment "as punishment for refusing to disclose the identity of a confidential source is particularly troublesome," he said.
While upholding the judgment against the newspaper and reporter, the high court did throw out much of a damage award against the hospital itself.
A jury had ordered Dana-Farber to pay Ayash $1.25 million for unlawful retaliation, invasion of privacy and breach of contract in relation to Lehman's death. But the high court threw out the privacy and breach of contract allegations. Another jury will be asked to determine the damages Ayash should be awarded for the remaining allegation, unlawful retaliation.
The high court also threw out an $840,000 damage award against Dana-Farber's former chief of staff, Dr. David Livingston. Ayash alleged that Livingston wrongly persuaded Dana-Farber not to renew her contract after conducting a one-sided investigation, but the court ruled Ayash hadn't proved Livingston acted maliciously.
"We have always felt that the institute treated Dr. Ayash fairly and properly and we are very pleased that the (court) has overturned two counts against Dana Farber and the finding against Dr. Livingston," said Dana-Farber spokesman Steven Singer.
Lehman died after she received four times the proper dosage of an experimental and highly toxic breast cancer drug. Her husband sued Dana-Farber and several doctors, nurses and pharmacists for malpractice, and won a $2.4 million settlement in 1995.
Ayash's libel claim focused on a 1995 Globe story that said she had countersigned an erroneous medical order that resulted in Lehman's death. The Globe published a correction saying Ayash had not countersigned the order, but it stood by its claim that she was the head of the treatment team that was using the experimental chemotherapy regimen.
Another patient also was given an overdose but survived. Following an investigation, the hospital reprimanded Ayash for not finding the overdoses sooner. A year later, she was laid off.
The Globe refused to identify its sources for the story, even though a judge ruled their identities were central to Ayash's libel suit. That led to the default judgment against the Globe and former reporter Richard Knox, meaning the jury's only task in that phase of the case was to assign damages.
>+++++ Media seek end to secrecy in Michael Jackson case
 
VENTURA, Calif. (AP) - An appeals court considering whether to lift some of the secrecy in the Michael Jackson child molestation case questioned lawyers about how to balance the pop singer's right to a fair trial with the public's right to know.
The three-judge panel of the state's 2nd District Court of Appeal focused Feb. 9 on whether releasing details of a criminal case involving a high-profile defendant could poison the jury pool, and on how to release some information while withholding such details as the name of the accuser, who is a minor.
Jackson, 46, is accused of molesting a 13-year-old former cancer patient and giving the boy alcohol and conspiring to hold him and his family captive.
Key documents in the case - including a November 2003 search warrant for Jackson's Neverland ranch, transcripts of the grand jury proceedings that led to his indictment, and the indictment itself - have not been released.
The documents that have been released were heavily edited, rendering them incomprehensible, said attorney Theodore J. Boutrous, who represents The Associated Press and other news organizations covering the case.
Santa Barbara Superior Court Judge Rodney S. Melville has said he is keeping some information secret to avoid influencing prospective jurors and to ensure Jackson a fair trial. He said he will release the indictment and grand jury transcripts once a jury is selected, a process expected to take several weeks.
Questioning of potential jurors began Feb. 14.
Boutrous said close screening of prospective jurors would ensure that no one with strong biases would make the jury. He also argued that the public had a right to follow the allegations and Jackson's responses to them to gauge whether prosecutors and defense attorneys were acting properly and making valid arguments.
Robert Sanger, an attorney for Jackson, said the superstar didn't want special treatment but was entitled to a fair trial. Sanger said he was worried about the jury pool being contaminated if some of the information was released before a jury is seated.
>+++++ Tabloid publisher wants subpoena thrown out in Kobe Bryant case
 
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. (AP) - A tabloid publisher has asked a federal judge to throw out a subpoena demanding the company turn over documents and testify in the lawsuit filed by the woman accusing Kobe Bryant of rape.
American Media Inc., publisher of The Globe and other tabloids, has printed the woman's picture and stories about her 2003 hotel encounter with the NBA star. Bryant's attorneys said last month that the company reached a financial settlement with her, but the company has not confirmed that.
The Boca Raton-based company was served with the subpoena Jan. 10 from Bryant's lawyers seeking testimony and records of communication between the company and the woman, according to court papers filed Feb. 7 in federal court in West Palm Beach.
Company attorneys insist Bryant failed to show "substantial need" for the information or that it was relevant to the woman's lawsuit.
The woman's complaint seeks unspecified damages for mental injuries, humiliation and public scorn that the former hotel worker said she has suffered since her encounter with Bryant in June 2003 at a resort near Vail, Colo.
The woman sued Bryant in August, three weeks before the criminal case against him collapsed when she decided she could not take part in a trial. Bryant, a married father of one, issued an apology but insisted the sex was consensual.
>+++++
AP, newspapers seek access to sealed court records in Illinois
 
CLINTON, Ill. (AP) - Three news organizations filed petitions Feb. 8 seeking access to sealed documents and to open meetings between the judge and attorneys involved in the upcoming trials of a woman and her former boyfriend accused of drowning her three children.
The Associated Press, the Herald & Review of Decatur and The Pantagraph of Bloomington contend meetings between attorneys for Amanda Hamm and Maurice LaGrone Jr., prosecutors and DeWitt County Circuit Judge Stephen H. Peters have been improperly held in secret. Some court records also have been sealed without hearings, said the news organizations' attorney, Scott B. Sievers.
Peters scheduled a hearing on the petitions for Feb. 28, Sievers said.
"There are two issues here," said James Reindl, chief of bureau for The Associated Press in Illinois. "First, open court proceedings are an important means for a community to deal with crime, so motions and hearings should be closed only for the most compelling reasons. Second, if there are compelling reasons to seal motions or close proceedings, then that has to be done on the record, not by agreement behind closed doors."
LaGrone's attorney, Jeff Justice, said defense attorneys and prosecutors are guarding against disclosure of information that could possibly prejudice potential jurors.
"My take on this is that when you are seeking to execute someone, the right to an impartial jury trumps the curiosity of your readers," he said.
Hamm's attorney, Steve Skelton, and special prosecutor Roger Simpson did not return calls for comment. The judge has said he will not discuss the case outside court.
Hamm and LaGrone are each charged with nine counts of first-degree murder in the deaths of 6-year-old Christopher Hamm, 3-year-old Austin Brown and 23-month-old Kyleigh Hamm.
The children were inside a car that slid down a boat ramp into Clinton Lake on Sept. 2, 2003. Hamm and LaGrone were at the scene and told authorities the car accidentally slid into the water and they were unable to rescue the children.
Hamm's trial is scheduled to begin April 4, and LaGrone's is expected to begin this fall. Prosecutors are seeking the death penalty in each case.
There has not been an open court hearing in either case since Sept. 14, when Peters announced the trials would be moved from Clinton to Urbana, 45 miles away, because of news coverage and the relatively small jury pool in DeWitt County.
Attorneys for Hamm, LaGrone and the prosecution have met privately with Peters twice since that hearing, explaining to reporters that they dealt with administrative details and were intended only to speed the process of preparing for trial.
However, at the most recent meeting last month, attorneys for all sides agreed that several pretrial motions - many dealing with the possible testimony of witnesses - would stay sealed, at least until they are argued in court.
Simpson, the prosecutor, said after that meeting that he supports anything that would keep facts of the cases from coming out before trial.
Justice said Feb. 8 that he would file his motions into the public record but submit the facts supporting those motions to the judge in a sealed envelope.
>+++++ News organizations fight to have Utah county group open records
 
SALT LAKE CITY (AP) - Several news organizations have joined a legal effort to compel the Utah Association of Counties to open its records.
The National Society of Professional Journalists, that group's Utah Headliners Chapter, the Utah Press Association, Deseret Morning News and The Associated Press have asked to become co-plaintiffs with The Salt Lake Tribune in a lawsuit against the association.
The lawsuit argues that since the UAC is funded with taxpayer money and conducts public business, it falls under the legal definition of a "government entity" in the state's open records law.
The Government Records Access and Management Act, or GRAMA, requires that governmental entities open their financial and other records to the public.
The Tribune filed its complaint in December after the association denied a November request to see the group's operating budget.
UAC argues it is not a "governmental entity," which GRAMA defines as one that "is funded or established by the government to carry out the public's business."
But there are at least 14 state laws that give UAC considerable influence to affect public policy, primarily through the power to appoint people to state committees.
GRAMA further requires that a "public association" - defined as an association whose membership is 50 percent or more composed of public officials and gets money from the government - to make its financial records public.
UAC is funded almost entirely with taxpayer money, but officials have balked at discussing its member rolls.
>+++++
INTERNATIONAL:
 
 
British Broadcasting Corp. journalist killed in Somalia
 
MOGADISHU, Somalia (AP) - A British Broadcasting Corp. journalist died Feb. 9 after a militiaman shot him in the back outside a hotel in the Somali capital, the broadcaster said.
Kate Peyton, 39, an Africa producer for the BBC, was shot while accompanied by BBC reporter Peter Greste outside the Sahafi Hotel in Mogadishu. Greste was not injured.
Peyton underwent surgery at a Mogadishu hospital and died after suffering complications, said Dr. Abdi Ibrahim, who operated on her. The BBC said she died from internal bleeding.
Peyton and Greste had just arrived in Somalia for a series of reports on the country. Peyton, who was based in South Africa, joined the BBC in 1993, the broadcaster said.
"Kate was one of our most experienced and respected foreign affairs producers who had worked all over Africa and all over the world. She will be greatly missed, both professionally and personally," said Helen Boaden, BBC Director of News.
The reason for the shooting was not immediately known. Many militiamen are stationed around the Sahafi Hotel to protect Somali lawmakers staying there as they assess conditions for relocating the government from neighboring Kenya, where it is currently based.
The assailant got into a car and was chased by other militiamen guarding Peyton, witnesses said. He later abandoned his car and escaped, they said.
"I am profoundly shocked and saddened by the news of Kate Peyton's death today," BBC Director-General Mark Thompson said. "All our thoughts are with her family and friends at this time."
President Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed said Peyton's death "is extremely shocking and extremely tragic," his spokesman, Yusuf Ismail, said in Nairobi, Kenya. "It is a cowardly act and if the message was to scare the new Somali institutions or the international community, definitely the killers made a very significant mistake."
Somalia has had no effective central government since warlords ousted dictator Mohamed Siad Barre in 1991. They then turned on each other, plunging this nation of 7 million into anarchy.
Mogadishu is in southern Somalia, where aid agencies have posted few international staff because of security concerns.
>+++++ Polanski wins right to testify from France in libel suit
 
LONDON (AP) - Britain's highest court ruled Feb. 10 that filmmaker Roman Polanski can give evidence by video-link from France in his British libel suit against a magazine.
The Polish-born director, who has lived in France since fleeing child-sex charges in the United States in 1978, is seeking to sue Vanity Fair magazine over a 2002 article that accused him of seducing a woman while on the way to the funeral of his murdered wife.
Five judges in the House of Lords ruled that Polanski should not be denied access to justice because of his unwillingness to come to Britain for fear of being arrested and extradited to the United States, with which Britain has an extradition treaty. He cannot be extradited under French law.
Polanski is the acclaimed director of "Chinatown," "Rosemary's Baby" and "The Pianist," which drew on his childhood experiences escaping the Holocaust and won an Academy Award for best director in 2003. But his life has been shadowed by tragedy.
Polanski's pregnant wife, Sharon Tate, was brutally murdered by Charles Manson's followers in Los Angeles in 1969.
Polanski is seeking to sue Vanity Fair publisher Conde Nast over an article that claimed he propositioned a woman in a New York restaurant while on the way to Tate's funeral.
The publisher is contesting the action. Conde Nast is based in the United States, but libel actions concerning the international media are often brought in British courts because they are considered friendlier to claimants than their American counterparts.
Polanski faces arrest in the United States since pleading guilty to having sex with a 13-year-old girl. He was charged with rape and five other felonies in 1977.
As part of a deal with prosecutors, Polanski pleaded guilty to having unlawful sex with a minor, but fled Los Angeles for Paris soon after, out of fear the judge would disregard his plea bargain and sentence him to 50 years in prison.
The charge to which he pleaded guilty is not an extraditable offense in France.
After announcing his libel action, Polanski sought and obtained a High Court order allowing him to give evidence via video link from France.
That decision was overturned by the Court of Appeal, but restored Feb. 10 by the law lords - members of the House of Lords who constitute Britain's highest court of appeal - in a majority 3-2 ruling. They issued their ruling following a hearing in November attended by Polanski's lawyer.
"Despite his fugitive status, a fugitive from justice is entitled to invoke the assistance of the court and its procedures in protection of his civil rights," said Lord Nicholls, who voted with the majority.
>+++++
PEOPLE:
 
 
Diaz named publisher of Miami Herald
 
MIAMI (AP) - Jesus Diaz Jr., general manager of The Miami Herald Publishing Co. since 2002, will take over this summer as publisher of The Miami Herald and its Spanish-language sister newspaper, El Nuevo Herald, the newspapers' owner announced Feb. 8.
Diaz, 44, also will become chairman of Miami Herald Publishing when the appointment becomes effective in July, Knight Ridder said.
Diaz succeeds Alberto Ibarguen, the Herald's first Hispanic publisher, who announced in January he is leaving this summer to become president and chief executive officer of the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation.
Before joining the Herald in 2002, Diaz was managing partner of the Miami office of the Ernst & Young financial services firm. He worked previously for the Herald from 1993 to 1996 and was with Ernst & Young for 14 years before that.
Diaz has had "broad exposure to the local business community" and understands the needs of Herald advertisers and readers, including Internet users, said Hilary Schneider, Knight Ridder senior vice president of newspapers.
Diaz, a native of Havana, Cuba, who came to the United States in 1970, said his goal is "keep the momentum going" at the newspaper.
Knight Ridder also announced that David A. Landsberg, advertising vice president at the Herald, will become the general manager of the publishing company. Landsberg's post will be filled by Alexandra Villoch, the newspaper's director of retail advertising and event marketing.
>+++++ Kirkland leaving as top editor of Fortune; Pooley to replace him
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Rik Kirkland is stepping down as managing editor of Fortune magazine, where he spent 26 years, the last four as its top editor.
Kirkland told his staff in a memo Feb. 7 that he would give up the post April 1, saying he wanted to return to writing. Time Inc. announced Feb. 8 that Kirkland would be replaced by Eric Pooley, 45, the editor of Time magazine's editions in Europe, Africa and the Middle East.
Kirkland, 53, worked for many years alongside John Huey, a Time Inc. veteran who went on to become the editorial director of Time Inc.'s giant stable of magazines, which includes Time, Sports Illustrated, People, InStyle and Entertainment Weekly.
Kirkland took over at Fortune in 2001 as the dot-com bubble was bursting, an event that shook up the business magazine world and led to several casualties, including Fortune's own spinoff magazine eCompany Now, which was folded into another magazine, Business 2.0.
However, Fortune has been on a rebound, reporting an 11.5 percent increase in ad pages sold in 2004 over 2003, following annual declines over the past three years, according to the Publishers Information Bureau.
In an interview, Kirkland said he had approached Huey as well as Time Inc.'s editor in chief, Norman Pearlstine, in December about handing over control of Fortune. Kirkland said he had no plans to lead another publication: "The parts of the job that aren't fun were getting to be more of a pain - managing folks, living through budgets, planning meetings," Kirkland said.
"I think I'm going to not manage anything ever again," he said. "It was a joy to play the organ and know how it all worked. But having done that, what I want to spend the next part of my career doing is writing for Fortune and other parts of Time Inc., speaking and moderating panels, and writing books."
Time Inc., the nation's largest magazine publisher, is a unit of Time Warner Inc.
>+++++ Talbot, founder of Salon online magazine, leaves executive posts
 
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - David Talbot, founder of the online magazine Salon, stepped down as editor in chief and as the publishing company's chief executive Feb. 10, the same day the struggling company reported its first profit ever.
Talbot, a pioneer of online journalism, remains chairman of the board of Salon Media Group Inc. He relinquished the chief executive role to Elizabeth Hambrecht, who joined Salon in April 2003 as chief financial officer and was named company president seven months later.
Joan Walsh, Salon's former senior vice president and managing editor, is the new editor in chief.
"It's an excellent time for me to move into a new role," said Talbot, who is working on a book about John and Robert Kennedy. "Betsy and Joan have been part of the leadership team that brought Salon new fiscal and editorial life, and I'm proud to be able to leave Salon in their hands."
Talbot founded Salon in 1995 and helped steer the seminal and unabashed, liberal-leaning online publication as it rode the dot-com wave and launched its initial public offering of stock in 1999. It then struggled to remain a viable business, shifting from being a free online magazine to a hybrid subscription-based, advertising-sponsored one.
Leading up to its earnings breakthrough, Salon had lost a total of $91.1 million.
Salon claims it has about 3.4 million readers who visit the site each month for free after watching a short commercial. At the end of the third quarter, the number of paying subscribers totaled about 89,100, up from 73,700 a year ago. Advertising sales in the quarter more than doubled to $1.3 million from about $600,000 last year, the company said.
>+++++ Ron Reagan will be host of new MSNBC show
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Ron Reagan will co-host a new daytime talk show scheduled twice a day on MSNBC.
Reagan, son of the late president, will do "Connected: Coast to Coast" with Monica Crowley, who joined MSNBC from Fox News Channel last year.
It will feature topical debate on issues including politics and pop culture, the network said Feb. 9. The first hour will air at noon Eastern; the second, at 5 p.m.
"'Connected: Coast to Coast' is part of the new era of political talk on cable - smart, respectful and engaging," MSNBC President Rick Kaplan said.
While Crowley is based at MSNBC headquarters in New Jersey, Reagan will be at an MSNBC facility in Redmond, Wash., bringing the network back to its formative days when it was announced as a collaboration between Microsoft and NBC.
The 46-year-old Reagan, who has frequently appeared as a political analyst on MSNBC, delivered a speech on stem-cell research last summer at the Democratic National Convention.
>+++++ Karpowicz named to head broadcasting group at Meredith
 
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) - Meredith Corp. named Paul Karpowicz, vice president of television and director of LIN TV Corp., as president of its broadcasting group.
Karpowicz, 51, who has 30 years of broadcasting experience, oversees 23 properties in 14 markets for LIN TV, based in Providence, R.I.
"Paul is one of the most experienced and respected broadcasting executives in the country and we are extremely pleased to have him lead our growing broadcast operations," Meredith Chairman and CEO William T. Kerr said Feb. 7.
Karpowicz, 51, began his career with LIN in 1976 at WIL Radio in St. Louis. He left and returned to the company twice.
Meredith owns television stations in Atlanta; Phoenix; Portland and Bend, Ore; Greenville, S.C.; Flint-Saginaw, Mich.; Las Vegas; Springfield, Mass.; Hartford, Conn.; Kansas City, and Chattanooga, Tenn.
The Meredith publishing group features 17 subscription magazine brands, including Better Homes and Gardens and Ladies' Home Journal.
>+++++
Leicester named AP bureau chief in Paris
 
NEW YORK (AP) - John Leicester, correspondent for The Associated Press in Paris, has been promoted to chief of bureau.
The announcement was made Feb. 14 by Deborah Seward, AP's international editor.
Leicester will be responsible for directing coverage in France and North Africa.
Leicester, 37, joined the AP in 1993 in Hong Kong. He transferred to Beijing in 1996, serving six years as correspondent and later as news editor there. He was named correspondent in Paris in 2002.
Leicester is a graduate of the University of Leeds, England.
>+++++ Rubinkam promoted to AP correspondent in Allentown, Pa.
 
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Michael Rubinkam, an Associated Press reporter in Philadelphia, has been appointed the AP's first correspondent in Allentown.
The promotion was announced Feb. 14 by Chief of Bureau Sally Carpenter Hale.
Rubinkam, 31, joined the AP in 1998 in Philadelphia after working for the Times Leader in Wilkes-Barre.
A native of Harleysville, Rubinkam graduated from Elizabethtown College in Pennsylvania with majors in communications and political science.
Allentown becomes the fifth Pennsylvania city with an AP bureau. In addition to Philadelphia, the AP has reporters in Pittsburgh, Harrisburg and State College.
>+++++ Armas named AP correspondent in State College, Pa.
 
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Genaro Armas, an Associated Press reporter in Washington, has been promoted to correspondent in State College, Pa.
The appointment was announced Feb. 14 by Chief of Bureau Sally Carpenter Hale.
Armas, 32, joined the AP in Albany, N.Y., in 1996. He transferred two years later to Philadelphia, where he covered general assignment news and professional and college sports.
Armas moved to Washington in 2000 to cover demographics. He also covered politics, housing and telecommunications.
Armas, who was born in New York, is a graduate of Syracuse University.
>+++++ Ferson named publisher in Aberdeen, S.D.
 
ABERDEEN, S.D. (AP) - Jerome Ferson, vice president of administration for the Duluth (Minn.) News Tribune, was named publisher of the Aberdeen American News. Knight Ridder owns both papers.
Ferson has managed the Duluth News Tribune's day-to-day operations "with the same focus and energy required of a publisher in any challenging market. He has a knack for pulling together the right people to do a job," said Paula Ellis, Knight Ridder vice president of operation.
Ferson has worked at the Duluth daily since 1999.
He grew up in Rochester, Minn., and started working at the Rochester Post-Bulletin when he was 16.
>+++++ Hachadorian named editor in West Chester, Pa.
 
WEST CHESTER, Pa. (AP) - Andrew Hachadorian, a longtime editor at suburban Philadelphia newspapers, has been named editor of the Daily Local News, Publisher Edward S. Condra said Feb. 9.
Hachadorian, 47, has worked at the Main Line Chronicle, where he was managing editor, and at the Times-Herald in Norristown and at The Mercury in Pottstown, where he was city editor and then managing editor.
For the past six years, he has been the editor of an online health care publication.
>+++++
 
CORRECTIONS:
 
 
An obituary of John L. Hess, a former reporter and food editor for The New York Times, that appeared in the Jan. 24 edition of Industry News misstated the cause of death. He died of pneumonia; he did not also suffer from congestive heart failure.
An obituary of James L. Ogle Sr., a sports writer, that appeared in the Feb. 7 edition of Industry News misstated the year he was hired to direct the New York Yankees' alumni association. It was in 1976, not 1974, the team said.
>+++++
DEATHS:
 
 
GEORGE HERMAN, 85, longtime political reporter for CBS News and the longest serving moderator of the network's Sunday talk show, "Face the Nation," Feb. 8 in Washington of heart failure.
Herman began his career in political reporting from Washington as CBS' White House correspondent during President Eisenhower's first term. He held that post during President Kennedy's administration as well.
He was host of the network's Sunday morning show on television and radio from 1969-1983, the longest tenure in its 50-year history.
Herman joined CBS as a radio newswriter in 1944 and was affiliated with the network for 43 years. He was quick to embrace television and made his first appearance analyzing caucus declarations at the 1948 Democratic Convention in Philadelphia, the first to be televised.
In 1949, he traveled to Asia as a stringer with a 16mm camera and audio recorder and provided CBS News with its first sound and film reports from abroad. Later, CBS sent him as a correspondent to cover the Korean War, during which he landed with U.N. troops at Inchon.
In the United States, he covered political conventions, traveled with presidential candidates Adlai Stevenson in 1956 and Lyndon Johnson in 1964 and delivered the first broadcast report of a break-in at Democratic party headquarters in the Watergate office building in 1972.
"George Herman was a terrific reporter and an even better person," said CBS News correspondent Bob Schieffer, moderator of "Face the Nation." "He was … smart, thoughtful, fair and courageous."
>+++++
DERICK DANIELS, 76, an award-winning newspaper editor and executive who became president of Playboy Enterprises, Feb. 5 in Miami of cancer.
Born in Washington, Daniels was the grandson of the late editor and publisher Josephus Daniels, founder of The News & Observer in Raleigh, N.C.
He was a reporter, editor and corporate vice president for Knight Newspapers before being named president of Playboy Enterprises in 1976.
He was credited with helping lead Playboy out of financial problems, pulling the company out of its movie theater and music publishing ventures as stock prices and profit margins grew. He stepped down in 1982.
Daniels attended the University of North Carolina before working as a reporter at the St. Petersburg Times and The Atlanta Constitution.
He joined The Miami Herald in 1955, working as a copy editor, assistant city editor and city editor. In 1961, he moved on to the Detroit Free Press. He was executive editor when the paper won the Pulitzer Prize for its reporting of the 1967 Detroit riot.
He left in 1973, when he was named vice president for news for Knight Newspapers, which later became Knight-Ridder Newspapers.
>+++++
ROSS THOMPSON, 87, co-owner and editor of the Rocky Ford (Colo.) Daily Gazette for 50 years, Jan. 29 in Rocky Ford of complications from hip-replacement surgery.
Ross Thompson grew up in Lamar and attended the University of Colorado and Kansas State Teachers College.
He entered journalism after he applied for a printer's job at the now-defunct Lamar Sparks newspaper but was offered a reporting job instead.
He married Anne Marie Sheely in 1949 when he was state editor of the Pueblo Star Journal and Chieftain and she was editor of the La Junta Tribune.
The couple first owned the Baca County Banner in Springfield and then bought the paper in Rocky Ford, 160 miles southeast of Denver.
>+++++
ROBERT L. JONES, 83, who led the University of Minnesota's journalism school for two decades, Feb. 8 in Minneapolis after a long illness.
Jones arrived at the university after World War II and earned graduate degrees including a doctorate in psychology. He became head of the research department of the journalism school in 1952 and was named director of the school in 1958. He ran it for 20 years.
Phil Tichenor, professor emeritus of journalism and mass communication at the university, said Jones' training as a psychologist and his training in human measurement were critical in developing a form of scholarship that went beyond practical training for newspaper, magazine and broadcast people.
"He was just the right person to get research going on the content of newspapers and readership," Tichenor said.
Jones returned to teaching for several years after stepping down as head of the journalism school in 1978. He retired from Minnesota in 1985 and returned to academia at the University of South Carolina at Columbia, where he taught advertising from 1986 to 1993 and directed graduate studies.
>+++++
KERWIN PLEVKA, 54, assistant director of photography for the Houston Chronicle, found dead Feb. 11 at his home in Houston. No cause of death has been determined.
"Kerwin was a dedicated photojournalist who always met the challenges of daily newspapering with grace and good humor," said Ernie Williamson, a Chronicle assistant managing editor.
Among his many honors were National Headliner Awards, Texas Associated Press Managing Editor Awards and a Katie Award. His subjects ranged from Jimi Hendrix to Pope John Paul II to political conventions and sports, including the NBA Finals and World Series games.
Plevka came to the Chronicle in 1988, following stints at United Press International and newspapers and a magazine in Missouri. A native of Concordia, Kan., he graduated from Kansas State University.
>+++++
FRANK WINFRED "WINT" CAPEL, 82, whose newspaper career across North Carolina was anchored by almost three decades at the helm of the Thomasville Times, Feb. 9 in Raleigh, N.C.
He began his career in 1946 as a writer for the Times, then a biweekly paper, and was the Thomasville correspondent for the High Point Enterprise, which owns the Times.
Over the next 11 years, he wrote or was editor for several newspapers including the Enterprise, the Greensboro Record, the Morning Star in Wilmington and the trade publication Furniture South.
Capel returned to the Times in 1958 as its first editor. He retired in 1987 as editor emeritus and continued to write columns until 1989.
His writing earned 11 awards, including five first-place prizes, from the North Carolina Press Association.
Born in Greensboro in 1922, Capel also was an author or editor of 10 books including a history of the city of Thomasville.
Capel graduated from the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill in 1943 with a degree in journalism, then served in Europe during World War II.
>+++++
RUSSELL H. BRANTLEY JR., 80, a former journalist who spent 34 years as communications director at Wake Forest University, Feb. 13 in Winston-Salem, N.C.
In 1953, Brantley left his job as managing editor of the Durham Morning Herald to join the staff of his alma mater. When he retired as director of communications in 1987, he was named director emeritus and given the Medallion of Merit, Wake Forest's highest award for service to the university.
After his retirement, Brantley served as a special consultant to Wake Forest President Thomas K. Hearn Jr.
Brantley published a novel in 1962, "The Education of Jonathan Beam," and a book of poetry, "Fetch-Life," in 2000. The second title refers to a spirit sent to fetch the life of a dying person, and was dedicated to his late son, William Russell Brantley.
Survivors include his son Ben Brantley, chief drama critic of The New York Times.
>+++++
FRED BYROD, 94, who was sports editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer for almost two decades before retiring in 1976, Feb. 13 in St. Augustine, Fla.
He began working at the Inquirer while still a student at Temple University in a career that spanned nearly 40 years. His favorite sport was golf, and he covered 69 major championships.
He was sports editor from 1958 until his retirement.
>+++++
ART REID, 78, a longtime outdoors writer for the Southern Illinoisan of Carbondale, Feb. 9 in Spokane, Wash., of pneumonia after a series of strokes.
Reid, who joined the Southern in 1964 and retired before moving to Washington state in 1981, also hosted a television show that launched in 1970 called "Outdoors With Art Reid."
Reid, a 6-foot-4 former high school athlete, was a city policeman in Urbana, Ill., when he first began to write part-time. Writing soon blossomed into a full-time career.
Reid's columns about fishing, hunting and other outdoor activities appeared in other Illinois newspapers and helped draw tourists to the southern part of the state, said Dick Carter, a former Southern Illinoisan photo editor.
>+++++
RON FRANKLIN, 65, a retired senior editor at USA Today, Feb. 8 in Panama City Beach, Fla., of a kidney ailment.
Franklin, who also worked at newspapers in Panama City and Pensacola, helped launch Virginia-based USA Today in 1982. He was in charge of the newspaper's state section when he retired three years ago.
>+++++
SALLY WAGNER, 47, a former radio newscaster, Feb. 10 in Columbus, Ohio, of colon cancer.
Wagner had worked as a news reporter and anchorwoman at Columbus radio station WTVN for 16 years. She also worked as the news director at WBNS radio.
Most recently, Wagner served as a public information officer for the state fire marshal.
>+++++
 
NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
 
 
The battle for Ohio in last year's presidential campaign came with a price tag of $100 million for television advertising alone, according to a new study. John Kerry and his Democratic allies spent $61 million on television ads compared with $39 million by President Bush and Republican groups. Together, the two campaigns spent as much on television ads as Bush spent nationwide to win the 2000 Republican nomination, according to the study by five political science professors from the universities of Cincinnati and Akron. … Cartoonist Garry Trudeau didn't let a broken collar bone get in the way of receiving an award at the U.S. Comedy Arts Festival in Aspen, Colo. The "Doonesbury" creator suffered the mishap Feb. 10 while skiing on the slopes. That left festival organizers scrambling to find a way to proceed with the show the following night. At Trudeau's suggestion, the award ceremony was revamped to work in his injury - with emergency medical technicians carrying him in on a gurney. And so he received the group's Freedom of Speech Award. It acknowledges artists who speak out on social issues. … Updates on the trial of ousted HealthSouth CEO Richard Scrushy can be seen in the Birmingham, Ala., area on a cable television station purchased last month for $2 million by a group headed by Scrushy's son-in-law. "The Scrushy Trial With Nikki Preede" airs weekdays in the morning and at night on WOTM TV-19, a low-powered station on Charter Cable systems. U.S. Attorney Alice Martin told Scrushy's lawyers at his trial that the TV program is "giving your versions of the facts." But Scrushy's spokesman said the former CEO isn't involved in the station. Scrushy attorney Jim Parkman said the defense also is not involved in the show's production. … The University of Southern California's Annenberg School for Communication is establishing an institute to study sexual orientation and other diversity issues in the news. The Leroy F. Aarons Summer Institute on Sexual Orientation Issues in the News is named for the founder of the National Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association, who died last year. He was also a pioneer in developing journalism courses in covering diversity in the news. The institute will provide training to college professors teaching courses in sexual orientation and diversity in the media and develop resource materials that can be made available to instructors nationwide.
>+++++
 Load-Date: February 15, 2005

 

End of Document
