

Diamond monopoly hands obscure Israeli firm the key to Congo's economy
March 12, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 1754 words
Byline: By BRUCE STANLEY, AP Business Writer
Dateline: RAMAT GAN, Israel
Body




Diamond traders still talk about how Dan Gertler, in his mid-20s, managed to capture exclusive rights to Congo's production. Not all the talk is pretty.
Some point to signs that Gertler, a third-generation trader, may have clinched the deal - potentially worth hundreds of millions of dollars a year - by arranging military training for the army of Congo's recently assassinated president, Laurent Kabila.
Some also contend he promised profits to Congo that haven't materialized and that he has unfairly exploited his monopoly.
Congo's new government, run by Kabila's son, appears to agree, and some Congolese officials are seeking a way out of the contract.
The dispute provides a rare window on the enormously lucrative but shadowy business of finding and buying the coarse lumps of carbon that, once cut and polished to crystalline brilliance, become the world's most coveted jewels.
It is unfolding amid rising global concern about the role so-called "blood diamonds" play in financing or prolonging African wars, many of which have been tied to government corruption in managing the continent's mineral riches.
Gertler, now 27, argues that the 18-month contract, signed last summer, has been as good for Congo as it has been for him. He calls the allegations against him baseless, blaming jealous competitors who suddenly found themselves cut off from the African country's vast diamond wealth.
"They cannot understand how such a young guy got a monopoly," he said in an interview at his offices in the Tel Aviv suburb of Ramat Gan, the heart of the Israeli diamond industry.
Getting at the truth often is harder than discerning the sparkle in one of the honey-colored nuggets that are Gertler's stock in trade.
Kabila, a portly ex-Marxist and career guerrilla, took control of Africa's third-largest country in 1997 at the head of a rebel army backed by Uganda and Rwanda. He received some of his financing by signing contracts with mineral companies during his eight-month march across the country, formerly known as Zaire.
Gertler, with boyish looks and a fondness for sacred Jewish texts, entered the diamond business after a stint in the Israeli army. He says he learned all he knows from his grandfather, Moshe Schnitzer, now 80 and chairman of the guild that oversees Israel's diamond industry. An uncle, Shmuel Schnitzer, is president of the Israel Diamond Exchange, one of the world's leading trading centers.
Gertler says he impressed Kabila's government with his credentials.
"They saw that I'm serious," he said. "They checked up on me and saw that I have a good company and that I am someone they could trust."
Gertler could have joined the family's polished diamond business, but instead he struck out on his own as a trader in unpolished, or rough, stones.
The task of securing reliable supplies of rough diamonds is a secretive and sometimes cutthroat business that belies the refined beauty of the finished product, industry sources say.
Many trading companies are family-owned and based in one of the diamond industry's five hubs: Israel, Belgium, Russia, India and the United States. Buyers travel to some of the world's most politically unstable and volatile regions to haggle with leaders not known for their respect for written contracts.
Rough diamonds are sold to manufacturers that cut and polish them into gem-quality stones. Israel buys 50 percent of the world's rough production and exports two-thirds of its polished diamonds to the United States.
Keen for his own source of "rough", Gertler and his assistants set their sights on Congo, one of the world's largest producers. Its capital, Kinshasa, was already home to more than a dozen buying offices for rough diamonds.
"I myself certainly didn't have any knowledge of them before they came on the scene last year," said Tim Weekes, spokesman for the Diamond Trading Co., a London-based marketing arm for rough diamonds for the De Beers cartel. Weekes worked for five years for De Beers in Kinshasa.
When Gertler arrived, Kabila was embroiled in Africa's biggest civil war and he desperately needed cash to finance it. Gertler's company, International Diamond Industries, sweetened the deal by offering an undisclosed upfront payment.
Gertler said other diamond traders there had been "undervaluing" their stones and "cheating" the Congolese government under a competitive buying arrangement.
As Congo's civil war raged, he spent eight months lobbying Kabila, eventually convincing him that a monopoly under IDI's control would be more fruitful.
"I proved to the government that they were losing lots of money on diamonds," Gertler said. He made what he calls a "down payment" and Kabila awarded him exclusive rights.
Whatever sum Gertler paid - analysts' estimates range from $2 million to $20 million - it proved a good investment. Now, more than a month after Kabila was gunned down by a bodyguard, Gertler retains rights to a flow of diamonds that could be worth $600 million or more a year.
Details of the arrangement remain secret, but Kabila's special investments adviser, Nkere Ntanda Nkingi, said in September it included an understanding that Israeli military experts would help train a Congolese anti-smuggling force. The government formally denied his comments the very next day, and Nkingi is now in the custody of Congolese authorities for reasons that haven't been made public.
The Israeli military has a history of involvement in Congo. Israeli advisers helped train security forces in the country when it was known as Zaire, during the despotic rule of Kabila's predecessor, Mobutu Sese Seko. Gertler insisted he agreed merely to give Kabila the names of some Israeli security experts and said nothing ever came of the information.
He also denied suggestions by some of his competitors that he encroached on Angolan territory to shop for diamonds and that he possibly bought stones from UNITA, the rebel group waging a 25-year-old war against the Angolan government.
Diamonds accounted for 68 percent of Congo's official export earnings in 1999, and a lot of people want a piece of the business - even the country's allies. The Namibian government admitted last month for the first time that it operates a diamond mine in Congo, something it had long denied.
Namibia, along with Zimbabwe and Angola, sent troops to Congo to support the Kabila government in the civil war that began in August 1998. Rwanda and Uganda back the insurgents, who themselves have earned an estimated $55 million annually from diamonds mined in areas they control.
The global trade in polished diamonds, estimated to be worth $13.5 billion at wholesale prices, has been tarnished by revelations that rebel groups in Sierra Leone and Angola have bought arms through diamond sales and then committed atrocities in their fights against elected governments.
Congolese rebels are believed to be exporting their stones eastward through Uganda and Rwanda. Gertler denied that any conflict diamonds have found their way into his supplies, which are routed westward toward Kinshasa.
Gertler contends his contract has benefitted Congo by generating higher tax revenue, but others dispute the claim.
Douglas Mason, a Congo analyst at the Economist Intelligence Unit in London, calls the Gettler-Kabila deal "disastrous," saying the monopoly has generated only a fraction of the hard currency that it pledged to earn for Congo.
"It used to be a semi-competitive situation," Mason said. "Right now, IDI can pay whatever it wants."
Competitors claim that IDI is cherrypicking the best Congolese diamonds and offering below-market prices for the rest, frustrating many producers who then smuggle their stones across the border for sale in the neighboring Republic of Congo.
Gertler acknowledges that smuggling occurs, but attributes it to the slightly higher prices that buyers in the Republic of Congo, which produces few diamonds of its own, can offer because they don't pay taxes like he does.
Discontent among some diamond producers in Congo may have emboldened Kabila's enemies to act against him.
After Kabila's assassination, Congolese soldiers detained 11 Lebanese citizens in Kinshasa and later killed some of them, government officials say. There are some 1,000 Lebanese living in the capital, and many are active in Congo's diamond trade. Justice Minister Mwenza Kongolo said the soldiers had heard that some Lebanese were involved in Kabila's death, although the occupations of those killed is not clear.
With Kabila's son, Joseph Kabila, now taking steps to end the conflict in Congo, the prospects for peace have raised Gertler's hopes of expanding his supply sources to include eastern and northern territories now held by rebels.
But in his first speech as president, Joseph Kabila said he wants to liberalize Congo's diamond industry. Although short on details, the speech implied a threat to Gertler's privileged position.
Congo's deputy minister for mines, Ambroise Kawaya Swana, was more specific: "I can't give my own opinion, but we are trying to find our way out from our contract with IDI," he said in Kinshasa.
Swana said there were clear signs that more Congo diamonds were being smuggled out of the country, depriving it of valuable revenue. Shipments of rough diamonds from Brazzaville, capital of the Republic of Congo, to buyers in Belgium have soared from $1.2 million a month before Gertler's monopoly to $25 million a month, he said.
Gertler's buying rights are to expire in January, but he exudes confidence. "I'm sure the contract is going to be extended," he said.
IDI operates at least a dozen storefront offices in Kinshasa, each with a company sign emblazoned with a large diamond. From the street outside, many seem to consist of no more than a few plastic chairs and a desk in the lobby.
At his office in Ramat Gan, Gertler's desk is crowded with the tools of his trade: tiny metal scoops for sifting through diamonds, calipers for measuring them, a folded magnifying glass, a set of electronic scales.
The walls are adorned with portraits of prominent rabbis, and Jewish holy books line a set of shelves. A larger-than-life photograph of Gertler and his grandfather hangs on a wall behind his desk.
Gertler described plans to enlarge his supply network to Canada and other countries, but Congo remains central to his empire. He maintains that his contract is legally binding, even though he sealed it with the now-dead Laurent Kabila.
"I didn't make the deal with him," Gertler said with a smile. "I made it with the government."
End advance for release Monday, March 19
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo JRL1124 of March 12
 Load-Date: March 20, 2001

 

End of Document
