

Diplomats believe Palestinian tactics at United Nations undermine the peace process
September 5, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 634 words
Byline: By DAFNA LINZER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Diplomats and American Jewish leaders believe that Palestinian efforts to condemn Israel through the United Nations are hurting the organization's credibility and undermining Washington's efforts to quell Mideast violence.
The Palestinians argue that nearly one year into the fighting, they have nothing left to lose and nowhere else to go.
"The United States, at this point, has put itself on the side of Israel. There is nothing left for us to risk," said Hassan Abdel Rahman, the Palestinian's top official in Washington.
During the last 11 months, the Palestinians have tried, with some success, to insert references to their plight in U.N. documents and made several attempts to get resolutions blaming Israel for the conflict.
But the United States - Israel's closest ally and the only long-time Mideast mediator - blocked nearly every effort, arguing that the United Nations is the wrong forum to address the conflict.
When the U.S. blocked a third attempt to get a Security Council resolution earlier this month, the Palestinians announced they would focus their efforts on U.N. racism conference in Durban, South Africa.
On Monday, Israel and the United States withdrew their delegations to the conference because of attempts to single out Israel as racist and condemn Zionism, the movement that founded the Jewish state.
Former U.S. Ambassador Richard Holbrooke said years of American efforts to repair shaky U.N.-Israel relations damaged by decades of anti-Israel resolutions "came to a gigantic train-wreck in Durban."
Tactics at the conference "set back the cause of peace in the Middle East … and hurt the United Nations as an organization."
American Jewish leaders agreed. They applauded the U.S. decision to leave the conference, condemned those that stayed and criticized U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan for remarks they interpreted as suggesting Israel was using the Holocaust as an excuse for the crisis with the Palestinians.
Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel, who counts Annan among his friends, said he felt betrayed by the secretary-general's speech in Durban, which he called "outrageous."
"How can we expect Israel to trust the United Nations now?" he asked at a news conference in New York.
Robert Malley, who served as former President Clinton's special assistant on Arab-Israeli affairs, said the experience at Durban could erode trust on all sides.
"I don't think this helps - not Israel with the Palestinians, the Palestinians with the Americans, U.S.-U.N. relations, or Israel and the United Nations," he said.
Still, the Palestinians need the involvement of Israel's closest friend.
"There is a feeling that the United States is the only party that can help them and the only one that has failed them and when they're feeling let down, the Palestinians revert to international forums," said Malley, now with the New York-based Council on Foreign Relations.
Abdel Rahman said the Palestinians feel much more than let down. "You resort to the court when you have nothing left. The only reason there are objections to us going to the United Nations is because that's where we have support and Israel and the Americans know it."
In June, a U.N. conference on urban living went into overtime when Arab countries, on behalf of the Palestinians, tried to insert references to Israeli settlements in the conference document.
Similar language singling out Israel tied up negotiations at the AIDS summit 10 days later, at the conference on small arms in July, and during preparations last week for an upcoming U.N. summit on children.
Pointing to the summer gatherings, Holbrooke said the United Nations risks being turned into a "terrain to extend racism and anti-Semitism."
He urged Annan to address the situation when he returns to New York later this week. "All of us are going to be watching," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NYR115
 Load-Date: September 6, 2001

 

End of Document
