

Editorial Rdp.   By The Associated Press 
The Associated Press
March 31, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Commentary
Length: 3349 words
Body




Excerpts from recent editorials in newspapers in the United States and abroad:
 
March 31
San Diego (Calif.) Union-Tribune, on American censors:
The closing of the Baghdad newspaper, Al Hawza, is a case of egregious bad judgment by the American occupation authority; it should be reversed. The Bush administration wants to create democracy in Iraq. Democracies include newspapers of all stripes, good and bad, those that support governments and those that don't.
One can make a case against public speech that incites violence or insurrection … but that was not the charge against Al Hawza, a Shiite weekly. The charge rather was that it was anti-occupation, printed unsubstantiated rumors and occasional lies.
As to printing unsubstantiated rumors and lies, we suggest the checkout stand of your local supermarket for an assortment of scandal sheets published in this country. …
Al Hawza supports Moktada al-Sadr, a fiery cleric who has no use for the American occupation. Unlike Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, a fellow Shiite whose opposition to the occupation is more subtle (and, many would argue, more dangerous), Sadr's views are expressed openly and defiantly. He is anti-occupation, anti-American and unreliable. Al Hawza reflects those positions and qualities.
But should it be censored and closed? Does it make sense to drive such sentiments, which clearly exist, underground? Does censorship ever do anything but create more interest in what has been censored and more anger in those who, denied the pen, are left with the sword?
Under Saddam Hussein, the world knows, there was no dissent. …
Americans should never compromise the free press principle, so vital to democracy, whether at home or in nations that fall temporarily under our control. As long as Al Hawza does not incite public violence, its freedom to print should not be curtailed.
---
March 30
The Post-Standard, Syracuse, N.Y., on AIDS and the United States:
With all the complications involved in getting medication to millions of HIV-infected people in poor countries, the least the United States should do is deliver on the pledges it has made.
President Bush made a bold, compassionate promise in his 2003 State of the Union address when he said the United States would provide $15 billion over five years to fight AIDS in poor countries of Africa and the Caribbean. The administration's requests to Congress, in the $200 million range, have not come close to matching that promise.
The World Health Organization reports that lifesaving drugs are reaching only 8 percent of the 40 million people worldwide who are infected with HIV/AIDS.
The United States could help further by agreeing to allow its contributions to be spent on lower-cost generic versions of anti-AIDS medicines. That would just about double the number of people who could receive the medications. But members of Congress expressed concerns last week that the pharmaceutical industry has pressured the White House to insist on more expensive patented medicines.
Stephen Lewis, the United Nations special envoy for HIV/AIDS in Africa, is speaking of hopeful developments in recent months. That hope is pinned to the hundreds of millions of dollars needed from wealthy countries to train people in developing countries and organize supply lines.
The United States is primarily responsible for raising hopes of those trying to help countries hard hit by AIDS. Now it's up to the government to deliver on its promises in a timely manner.
---
March 30
The Palm Beach (Fla.) Post, on the 9/11 Commission:
Apparently, the Bush administration is so threatened by information that it assumes everyone is afraid of public disclosure. Republicans sent out last week to discredit former anti-terror chief Richard Clarke thought they could scare him by threatening to declassify his 2002 testimony before a bipartisan congressional committee.
But the truth, the whole truth and the public truth seems not so intimidating to Mr. Clarke and others, such as Sen. Bob Graham, D-Fla., who was co-chairman of that committee and was demanding release of needlessly classified material long before Mr. Clarke made headlines.
Most notably, Sen. Graham objected last year when the White House classified an entire section of his committee's report on Saudi Arabia's ties to the 9/11 attacks. Mr. Clarke, who says President Bush let Al-Qaeda slip in priority and damaged the war on terror by invading Iraq, on Sunday embraced the Bush administration's "threat."
He called for release of his 2002 testimony as well as memos he exchanged with national security adviser Condoleezza Rice prior to Sept. 11, 2001. Sen. Graham last week said that he didn't think Mr. Clarke's testimony before the congressional committee conflicted with Mr. Clarke's recent testimony before the 9/11 commission. …
The Bush administration threatens to tell what it knows. Why is that a threat? It should be a promise.
---
March 25
The Cincinnati Enquirer, on the Pledge of Allegiance:
We hope the U.S. Supreme Court uses the Pledge of Allegiance case to restore some balance to the culture war over public acknowledgments of God. California atheist Michael Newdow sued a suburban Sacramento school district over the words "under God" in daily pledges recited at his 9-year-old daughter's school. The 9th Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco ruled in Newdow's favor in 2002.
The Supreme Court should reverse that three-judge ruling as a wrong-headed overreaction to claims that any reference to God in public life violates the First Amendment. Defenders of the phrase "under God" argue that the pledge makes no attempt to establish any particular religion and is a voluntary, harmless, ceremonial acknowledgment of a supreme being. Anyone objecting can simply omit those two words from the pledge.
The appellate judges claimed the pledge swears allegiance to God, not to the republic.
The judges also said it sends a message to unbelievers that they are "outsiders, not full members of the political community" and that believers are favored "insiders." Newdow has it wrong. The "under God" pledge is philosophical, not religious. It testifies that our liberties are God-given, not from the state, and therefore cannot be taken away by the state. The phrase doesn't put anyone's freedom of religion, or freedom from religion, at risk.
---
 
March 25
Herald-Journal, Spartanburg, S.C., on Medicare:
The investigative arm of Congress should look into whether administration officials intentionally withheld the correct figures on the cost of the new Medicare prescription drug benefit. …
Recently, an actuary in the Health and Human Services Department claimed that he had correctly calculated the cost at more than $500 billion before the bill was passed, but his supervisor within the department prohibited him from sharing that information with Congress.
That kind of secrecy can't be tolerated. Lawmakers and the public should have known the cost of the program. The correct cost should have been part of the debate over the bill. It probably would have changed the outcome. …
Federal lawmakers are using this as an excuse and as a cover for their own duplicity. Members of Congress knew that they had underestimated the cost of this new Medicare program. But they were eager to pass it and create the appearance that they were helping elderly citizens afford their prescriptions.
Now, it is helpful for them to have someone else to blame for the low cost estimates they used to justify the program. …
That kind of thing happens all the time. But if investigators find that employees were threatened to keep the cost information secret, that behavior crosses the sometimes fuzzy line between spinning the political debate and lying to the nation.
Congress should investigate and take action against any violation of federal law.
---
March 25
The Denver Post, on gays in the military:
It's not surprising that the number of gays dismissed from the armed services has reached its lowest level since the Pentagon adopted its "don't ask, don't tell" policy nine years ago.
The explanation is simple: The armed forces are struggling to maintain troop strength in Afghanistan and Iraq. Discharging soldiers because of sexual orientation doesn't make sense.
The Servicemembers Legal Defense Network reports that the military kicked out 787 gays and lesbians in 2003, down 17 percent from 2002 and 39 percent from 2001.
Under the "don't ask, don't tell" policy, gays may serve if they don't reveal their sexual orientation.
Long after homosexual conduct between consenting adults was legalized by individual states (and by a recent U.S. Supreme Court ruling), it's still verboten under Article 125 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice.
The military has justified its homophobia by claiming that gays are prejudicial to "good order and discipline." (That echoed the British armed forces, institutional ancestors of the American military.)
But on both sides of the Atlantic, homosexuals have always been in the ranks and have served with honor, often giving their lives for their countries. In times of grave national crisis, sexual orientation doesn't seem to matter as much as combat skills.
"When they need people, they keep them," C. Dixon Osborn, executive director of the Servicemembers group, told The Associated Press. "When they don't, they implement their policy of discrimination with greater force."
Britain rescinded its ban on gays in uniform in 1999, and no one can disparage the outstanding performance of U.K. troops in the Iraq war.
It's time for Congress to do the same and excise this outmoded affront to individual liberty from military law - and sound Taps for "don't ask, don't tell.
---
March 30
South Bend (Ind.) Tribune, on gasoline prices:
When you buy gasoline, keep in mind that these "all-time-high" prices really aren't record highs at all, if you consider the effect of inflation. In 1981, the price of gasoline, adjusted for inflation, was $2.94 per gallon.
No, there's nothing pleasant about paying prices approaching $2 per gallon for gasoline. But in terms of purchasing power, American drivers don't actually have it that bad.
It would be wise to consider that until relatively recently, most Americans didn't limit their forms of transportation to only cars and trucks. Consider biking and walking to get around, using public transportation, or at the very least carpooling. Finding alternatives will help improve your health, the contents of your wallet and the environment - and might even help bring down those gasoline prices a bit.
---
March 29
The Dallas Morning News, on Sudan's genocide:
Ten years ago, the world stood by while the Hutu government of Rwanda and its extremist allies tried to exterminate the country's Tutsi minority. About 800,000 Tutsis and politically moderate Hutus died in what author Samantha Power called "the fastest, most efficient killing spree of the 20th century."
Once the extent of the pogrom became clear, world leaders regretted their failure to respond. During his 1998 visit to Rwanda, President Bill Clinton even went so far as to apologize.
In Sudan, the warning signs of a similar tragedy are evident. The crisis has nothing to do with the long-simmering civil war in southern Sudan, which pits the mostly Arab and Muslim central government against Christian and animist blacks. That war is winding down, thanks in large measure to U.S. diplomacy. Rather, the crisis emanates from the western province of Darfur, where government-backed Arab Muslim militiamen are carrying out a scorched-earth campaign against the region's Muslim blacks.
Roger Winter of the U.S. Agency for International Development recently told Congress that the war there is "arguably the most serious humanitarian crisis on the African continent." Half of Darfur's 6 million people have been affected, and a sixth of them are on the run. The militiamen's method of operating, Mr. Winter testified, "is to rape, loot and burn villages with total impunity."
Humanitarian organizations have difficulty getting through with food and medicine. Even when they do get through, the militiamen steal their supplies.
The central government has a right to attack Darfur's rebels. It doesn't have a right to murder and chase out civilians. There's oil in Sudan, but that isn't why the United States should involve itself. No, the United States should involve itself so that another president won't feel obliged to apologize for having ignored genocide.
As a presidential candidate, George W. Bush said he agreed with the decision not to intervene in Rwanda. As president, he should realize that the United States and the rest of the world have a duty to mankind that transcends self-interest.
---
March 31
The Hindustan Times, Delhi, India, on Sino-India relations:
There's a subtle but sure shift taking place in Sino-Indian relations: from political grandstanding to a sort of quiet pragmatism. Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee's six-day sojourn in China last year was clear enough indication of this. And now the visiting Chinese Defense Minister General Cao Gangchuan thinks aloud about China and India becoming "eternal good neighbors, good partners and good friends". And establishing defense ties. …
China's wish for a multipolar world where it occupies prime position in a unipolar Asia was never a best-kept secret. So the post-9/11 U.S. war on terrorism must have made Beijing uneasy. Beijing must also be concerned by the growing Indo-US military partnership.
China must be banking on military cooperation with India to be a counterweight in such an eventuality. And, Gen. Cao may add, even if there's little political progress made, trade relations that include defense establishments never hurt anyone.
---
March 30
Egyptian Gazette, Cairo, on the postponed Arab summit:
Surprised at a unilateral Tunisian decision to scrap an Arab summit hours before its scheduled opening, Egypt, being the country of the Arab League's headquarters, has stepped in to offer to host the deferred gathering. The Egyptian offer has drawn warm welcome from an Arab world disappointed at the inability to convene a prescheduled summit under such crucial circumstances.
Contacts are under way between Cairo and other Arab capitals to set the scene for this urgent conference, which will be aimed, among other things, at undoing the damage wrought by the sudden decision to postpone the Tunisian gathering indefinitely. The Palestinian-Israeli dispute, Iraq and a controversial U.S. plan for reforms in the Arab world topped the agenda of the aborted Tunisian event.
The Palestinian problem was moved to the top of the agenda after Israel's cold-blooded slaying of Sheik Ahmed Yassin, the spiritual leader of the resistance movement Hamas. The killing of the wheel-chair-bound Yassin in an airstrike in Gaza last week fired up sentiment across the Arab nation.
---
March 29
The East African, Nairobi, Kenya, on challenges for Rwanda:
Rwanda next week commemorates 10 years since the 1994 genocide in which more than 800,000 people were killed in the space of 100 days. The government will spend $7 million on the weeklong festivities that will see several heads of state and government converge at Kigali from April 7.
… In the past 10 years, the country has made giant strides toward economic revival, which even critics of President Paul Kagame's government cannot ignore.
Growth rates averaging 6 per cent have been recorded, inflation kept under 5 per cent and the exchange rate brought under control. Tea output has increased and the privatization process is described as a success. …
Peace has returned to the nation of 8.2 million and thousands of troops that had been deployed to the Congo are back in the country. Some Interahamwe commanders have also given up their rebellion and returned to Kigali.
However, we urge the government in Kigali to use the celebrations to reflect on the challenges ahead. Among these are the high level of poverty, which currently stands at 60 per cent; the incidence of HIV/Aids, which is estimated at more than 13 per cent; unemployment; and the issue of returning refugees from neighboring countries like Tanzania and Uganda.
---
March 29
The Daily Telegraph, London, on Ireland's smoking ban:
Most of the articles written about the ban on smoking in the workplace, introduced in Ireland last night, have been lighthearted in tone. They have focused on the sheer incongruity of imposing such a ban in the homeland of James Joyce and Flann O'Brien, where the smoke-filled bar is so much a part of the national culture.
Britons would be foolish, however, to laugh too heartily about the ban. What has happened in Ireland is a very serious assault on the civil liberties of a substantial minority of the population. Many hundreds of thousands of smokers - a quarter of the adult population, according to the Irish government's own figures - are being denied one of the great pleasures of their lives by nannying politicians who have paid not the slightest heed to their wishes.
---
March 27
The Age, Melbourne, Australia, on Australian forces in Iraq:
The consequences of the US-led coalition's invasion of Iraq for the wider war against terrorism remain a matter of contention. What ought to be beyond contention is that, having taken part in that invasion, members of the coalition have thereby incurred an obligation to the people of Iraq.
When Australian troops return from Iraq should be determined by when that obligation is fulfilled. Civil order must be restored and essential infrastructure rebuilt, and the Iraqi people must be supported in establishing democratic structures of government.
It has been generally recognized that this process will not be completed by the time Iraqi sovereignty is restored. … Now, however, Opposition Leader Mark Latham has pledged that if Labor wins office later this year he will ensure that the remaining Australian troops in Iraq are home by Christmas.
Perhaps Mr. Latham believes that the popular mood is shifting, and that the Howard Government is increasingly vulnerable because of its commitment to the Iraq war. That may be so, but it does not remove Australia's responsibilities in Iraq.
… The time to go will become clear as events unfold in Iraq. So Labor's policy used to be, and so Mr. Latham should have left it.
---
March 30
Dagens Nyheter, Stockholm, Sweden, on Chirac's election setback:
So, he has three years ahead of him, Jacques Chirac, with a challenging left opposition.
Is he going to sack the prime minister or order him to change course?
The basic forecast after the left's victory was that the head of government would be allowed to stay on after all.
Jean-Pierre Raffarin has certainly lost some of his credibility as the man from the countryside who understands the common Frenchman, but he still retains his by far greatest advantage - that he is not a presidential candidate next time.
Jacque Chirac wants to decide on this issue himself. And as long as he can do that, he's in control also of French politics.
---
March 29
The Times, London, on faster travel:
Not six months after the consigning of Concorde to the great hangar in the sky, NASA scientists have inaugurated a new generation of whiz-bang fast things that makes old big nose look like a slow coach. …
Whether or not it is entirely positive for human beings to be able to hurl themselves from one side of the earth to another in the blinking of an eye is another matter entirely. This is not to suggest that readers should emulate the kind of naive fears about progress that encouraged many eminent Victorians to view the train with loathing. And regular trans-Atlantic commuters would happily dispense with the jet lag that accompanies "red eye" flight. However, there are many among us for whom life moves rather too speedily as it is. …
Necks may crane when jets pass over, mobile phones may have replaced birdsong as the soundtrack to our lives. But that does not mean that their owners should not also pore over novels, nod over cricket and refuse to watch pots boil. After all, many's the hare that ends up as roadkill. Tortoises more often than not see out their three score years and ten.
---
 Load-Date: April 1, 2004

 

End of Document
