

Egyptian Chemistry Nobel Laureate reflects on his journey to the Nobel
March 14, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 809 words
Byline: By RAWYA RAGEH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DISUQ, Egypt
Body




The lab is 4-by-4 yards. The school has just one microscope - its prized possession.
"Who could believe that this small school is where a Nobel Laureate once studied?" teacher Hanem Sheta said as she guided a visitor through the halls of el-Nagah Preparatory School.
Ahmed Zewail, the Egyptian-American who won the Nobel for chemistry in 1999, studied here in his early teens.
In a new autobiography called "Voyage Through Time … Walks of Life to the Nobel Prize," Zewail narrates his journey from this small village on the west bank of the Nile Delta to the California Institute of Technology. He teaches physics and chemistry there now and directs the Laboratory for Molecular Sciences.
"I had never dreamed of the Nobel Prize as a child or youth, I never thought that one day I will work with lasers or that I'll be in America, I never even dreamed to own a car," Zewail said in an interview in Cairo, where he launched the book published by the American University in Cairo Press.
Zewail was born in Damanhur, southeast of the Mediterranean port of Alexandria, in 1946. He was nicknamed "Shawqi" - "my desired one" - because he was the first child after five years of marriage. His family later moved 12 miles northeast to Disuq.
At 10, he wrote a fan letter to then-President Gamal Abdul Nasser, who had led the revolution that overturned the monarchy.
Nasser's response now seems prophetic: "I ask you to continue with patience and passion in harvesting science, armed with good behavior and good thought so you can participate in the future of building the great Egypt."
Zewail said he has always had a passion for learning. Childhood friends like Ahmed Berairi, now a school headmaster, said that sometimes got him in trouble. An early experiment at the young Zewail's house almost set the house on fire, Berairi said.
Zewail owns up to the incident in his autobiography, saying it started innocently with an eager young boy burning a piece of wood in a tube to figure out how matter transforms from one substance to another.
"He was always so meticulous, and his school notes that were the epitome of accuracy were a model for my sister and me," Siham Zewail, his younger sister, said.
He's also a man who pays attention to details and retains them. He still remembers paying 27.45 Egyptian pounds - just under $6 - for excess baggage when he first left for the United States.
Zewail graduated from the faculty of science at Alexandria University as the top honors student. For graduate studies, he was accepted at the University of Pennsylvania and left for Philadelphia in 1969.
He describes the United States upon his arrival as a vast ocean. "It was big and overwhelming, but beautiful, stretching as far as the eye could see," he wrote. He had never even heard the word laser before, he recalled.
Zewail completed his doctorate in 1973 and, looking for a place to do postdoctoral studies, said he was drawn by what he called California gold - "the gold of cutting-edge science at Berkeley." He landed at Caltech, where he works now.
He lives in San Marino, Calif., with his wife, Dema. They have four children.
Zewail's research led to the discovery of the femtosecond - a millionth of a billionth of a second. He was awarded the Nobel prize for developing femtochemistry, which enables scientists to see how atoms move during chemical reactions in slow motion.
"A femtosecond to the minute is like one minute to the age of the universe, which is 12 billion years," he said.
Zewail was the first Egyptian and Arab scientist ever to receive the chemistry Nobel. In his autobiography, he notes that in the past 100 years, only two people from the Muslim world have received Nobels for science - Abdus Salam, the 1979 physics co-winner from Pakistan, and himself.
Zewail is concerned that the Arabic and Muslim world is falling behind in science and technology. He dedicated his autobiography to "Egypt; you lit the beacon of civilization; you deserve a brilliant future; may my voyage light a candle of hope for your youth."
He said that although Egypt possesses the manpower, it needs to rethink how to teach science and foster research.
"The concept has to be embedded in the fabric of the society as it is in the U.S., supported by the culture, respect for time, determination and resoluteness," he said.
He has proposed and laid the corner stone for the University of Science and Technology near Cairo. He said the institute is meant to be the first step to contribute to "Egypt's scientific renaissance."
In his book, Zewail also points out problems in the United States, his adopted country. He said public schools in the United States lack the resources private ones enjoy and media coverage of science is minimal. Dogmatism endangers the country's advancement, he said, citing conservative Christians who object to teaching Darwin's evolution theory in schools.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY423 of March 14
 Load-Date: March 15, 2002

 

End of Document
