

Egyptian reformer remains a challenge to the regime even after dropping presidential bid
The Associated Press
July 19, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 855 words
Byline: By NADIA ABOU EL-MAGD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




Though he's given up his bid to run for president, outspoken human rights activist Saad Eddin Ibrahim still intends to challenge Egypt's regime by returning to election monitoring, an activity that landed him in trouble in the past.
On Monday, Ibrahim - a sociologist who had little political backing - called off his candidacy "in solidarity with the national coalition of democratic forces that are calling for a boycott of this political farce."
Instead, he said, he would concentrate on monitoring the September vote, which many fear will be plagued by the same allegations of fraud and rigging as past elections.
Ibrahim, who holds both Egyptian and American citizenship, spent a year in prison after his last run-in with the Egyptian government. His imprisonment was a source of tension between Cairo and Washington, and after his release in 2003 he went to the United States to write a prison memoir. He returned to Egypt only late last month.
When he left, he was one of a few aggressive voices for democratic reform in Egypt. Now he rejoins a political scene alive with reform movements. The groups are noisy but appear to have little chance of shaking President Hosni Mubarak's 24-year hold on power.
Ibrahim, a 66-year-old academic, remains an outsider even among reformists. Many democracy advocates are suspicious of his ties to the United States and reluctant to associate with him after government media painted him for years as simply a tool of Washington.
But he says he has been "vindicated" by the growth of the reform movement over the past year.
"Much of my agenda for the past quarter of a century was finally being adopted regionally and worldwide," he said in an interview with The Associated Press. "Things are moving forward far beyond big expectations of many observers, including my expectations. So I'm very pleased with what I did and what I was part of."
In October, Ibrahim was the first to announce he would run for president - even before Mubarak said the next presidential elections would be open to competitors for the first time. The open election is the centerpiece of the government's program of political reform, but the opposition has dismissed it as an empty gesture.
Al-Tagammu, a leftist party that is one of the three major opposition parties in Egypt, decided Tuesday to boycott the elections "because the regime is upholding its despotic status and standing against any political or constitutional reform."
Other opposition groups have also called for a boycott, claiming the constitutional amendment that allowed for multiple presidential candidates has stipulations that made it too difficult for anyone outside of Mubarak's party to run.
"I will throw my energy and support into a serious and objective election (monitoring) process, to be conducted by national and international volunteers," Ibrahim said Monday. "Mubarak may have deceived some in the outside world with these cosmetic, token changes, but he has failed completely in deceiving his own people."
Ibrahim claims his past election monitoring activity is what led to his arrest.
His think tank, the Ibn Khaldoun Center for Development Studies, published reports accusing the government of rigging 1995 parliamentary elections. After he set up a committee to monitor the parliament vote in 2000, he and several associates from his center were arrested.
That led to a protracted legal battle. A security court convicted him in May 2001 of tarnishing Egypt's image, embezzlement and accepting foreign money without government approval. He was sentenced to seven years in prison, appealed and - after U.S. pressure on Egypt to allow a retrial - was tried again only to be found guilty a second time.
Egypt's highest court finally acquitted him in March 2003. In all, he spent more than a year in prison.
His center has already returned to election watching, studying the May referendum on the constitutional amendment allowing open elections. The center and five other organizations estimated the turnout in that vote at 12 percent, far lower than the 54 percent announced by the government. The amendment was approved overwhelmingly.
A judicial report released earlier this month challenged the government's turnout figure, saying no voters came to the polling stations overseen by judicial officials and that other stations did not exceed 3 percent.
The United States is pressuring the Mubarak government to accept international monitors for the presidential vote and a parliament election that will follow. So far, the government has said only that it is considering the issue.
Ibrahim said the issue of monitoring will be a test for the government's sincerity in reform.
Judges have the role of watching over balloting in Egypt, but the judiciary has itself protested recently that it is not given the powers to ensure a clean vote.
Speaking to The Associated Press at his center, Ibrahim said he would continue to advocate reform.
"Egypt can be democracy tomorrow, if they let it, even (including) the Islamists," he said. "People who say otherwise are deep down autocrats who live off fear."
-----
On the Net:
Ibn Khaldun Center: www.eicds.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XAN106
 Load-Date: July 20, 2005

 

End of Document
