

EXPLORING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY; After attacks on U.S., world counts the costs of a globalized economy
September 16, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 748 words
Byline: By BRUCE STANLEY, AP Business Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Shipping fresh fish to the United States is an even trickier business than usual after the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington.
After U.S. airports closed last week, icy boxes of Shetland Islands salmon sat idle at London's Heathrow Airport as their shippers waited anxiously for flights to resume.
The stench of rotten fish offered just a hint of the potential problems ahead for companies across the world that do business with the United States.
As jitters from Tuesday's attack set in, fears are growing that the world's already weakening economy could skid into a recession. And in an increasingly globalized market, the ties of trade and finance binding companies and countries could transmit the economic pain more widely than ever before.
"We are already feeling the effects," said Marcelo Faria de Lima, a partner in the Brazilian advertising agency EugenioMFL. "We've had no cancellations yet but clients are stopping to think, to reflect, to analyze the impact the attacks in the United States will have … on their business and their advertising needs."
The pain could spread if U.S. consumer confidence collapses in the aftermath of the attacks.
Companies and nations that could be hurt include those that trade in commodities such as wheat from Canada, oil from Nigeria and tulip bulbs from the Netherlands. Manufacturers of finished goods such as Taiwanese VCRs and German cars might take a hit, as could international banks, travel agencies and other service companies.
If consumer spending and trade dry up, Russia, Argentina and other precarious economies will find it harder to raise international loans they need to pay for imports and to create jobs for their armies of unemployed.
Michael Saunders, a senior economist at Salomon Smith Barney in London, believes globalization has boosted the odds that a U.S. downturn will hurt Europe. Closer trading and financial links between American and European businesses could spread the suffering.
Japan, the world's largest economy after the United States, is mired in a recession stemming largely from domestic problems and might not be dragged down as quickly as Europe by a U.S. slowdown.
However, Saunders argued that globalization would not by itself accelerate, or deepen, a recession. "I don't think it increases the sum of misery," he said.
Economic interdependence gives companies unprecedented flexibility for sourcing supplies and selling their wares.
J. Sainsbury's, one of Britain's biggest supermarket chains, imports Spanish oranges, New Zealand apples and American corn.
"If these stocks started to become a bit sparse, we would just source them from a different country," spokeswoman Catherine Rees said.
U.S. aviation authorities are expected to tighten security at airports and inspect cargoes more closely, and firms shipping there are likely to face longer delays, increased paperwork and higher transportation costs.
If these hurdles become insurmountable, salmon producers in the Shetland Islands off northern Scotland could peddle their fish in continental Europe.
Still, globalization has created a host of potential losers.
Trade-dependent countries of Southeast Asia are already reeling from pinched demand for their manufactured goods in the United States and Japan. Daily rates for container ships plying the Pacific have slumped as a result to $8,950 from $15,000 this time last year, said Steve Willcox, a market analyst at the shipping broker H. Clarksons & Co.
German industrial group Siemens, which spent $9 billion to acquire U.S. businesses over the past three years, now faces a crippled American market for its software and other information technology.
"I would never say we're doing great," said Siemens' spokeswoman for North America, Doris Larmann.
Hotel chains could take a beating if business travelers and tourists stay at home. Accor, France's biggest hotel operator, might have a harder time filling its luxury Sofitel hotels - even as business slumps at its Red Roof and Motel 6 economy chains in the United States, said Jennifer Guest-Cagirtekin, a stock strategist at London brokerage Gerrard.
Yet a global economy in recession also offers opportunities.
Tandberg, a Norwegian maker of videoconferencing equipment, foresees sharp growth in demand after last week's attacks in the United States.
"Business will carry on, and people do need to meet and talk," said Tandberg's chief financial officer, Terje Rogne. "If you can't travel, what is the next alternative? It's videoconferencing."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY190, AP Graphic GLOBAL LOGO
 Load-Date: September 17, 2001

 

End of Document
