

Explosions shake edge of Liberian capital as thousands flee; Taylor vows to fight 'to the last man'
The Associated Press
July 19, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1109 words
Byline: By ALEXANDRA ZAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MONROVIA, Liberia
Body




Heavy explosions and machine-gun fire shook Liberia's war-battered capital Saturday as rebels punched into the city, sending tens of thousands of panicked residents and weary fighters streaming downtown.
Many more civilians surged toward the fighting waving leafy branches and demanding an end to more than a decade of turmoil.
Warlord-turned-President Charles Taylor vowed to "fight street-to-street, house-to-house" until the rebels are defeated.
"I will never desert the city, I will never desert my people," he told The Associated Press. "I will stand and fight to the last man until they stop killing my own people."
Cupping three bullets in his hand and wearing a gray safari jacket, Taylor spoke on the balcony of his executive mansion overlooking the sea. He repeated his pledge to step down and accept asylum in Nigeria, but only after international peacekeepers arrive in sufficient numbers. He did not specify what that number should be.
The rebel assault - the third against Monrovia since last month - shattered hopes that a speedy deployment of international peacekeepers could avert fresh bloodshed in a country where hundreds of thousands have died in two savage civil wars.
As the battle intensified, fighters wearing shorts and flip-flops traded grenade and machine-gun fire on the two bridges leading into downtown Monrovia from the port area.
"This is where the last fighting will take place. We will not allow them to cross the bridges," Liberia's military chief Gen. Benjamin Yeaten said by phone.
The thud of mortars and crackle of machine guns reverberated behind him.
A French news photographer, Patrick Robert, was shot in the chest and arm covering fighting at one of the bridges. Robert, who was on assignment for Time magazine, suffered life-threatening injuries and was being treated at an International Committee of the Red Cross trauma unit in Monrovia, a Time spokesperson said.
Attempts were being made to evacuate Robert.
As mortars exploded downtown, residents loaded the wounded into wheelbarrows and pushed them to clinics run by international aid groups.
Rebel officials, in nearby Ghana for peace talks, said government forces provoked them into fighting.
"You lock onto the enemy and when you do, you push him. But he provoked us. We are talking to our commanders and want to stabilize the situation and halt our men," said Joe Wiley of the Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy, or LURD, rebels.
As night fell, mortars slammed into the neighborhood surrounding the U.S. Embassy compound. It was not immediately clear whether there were any casualties.
U.S. Ambassador to Liberia John W. Blaney urged LURD rebels not to advance further into Monrovia and to refocus on the Ghana talks, which seek to reach agreement on a transition government to oversee elections.
"Any lasting peace must be based on a broad political understanding and fighting government forces in Monrovia does not change that fact," Blaney said.
He also urged rebels to avoid reprisals and appealed to all sides to cease fire.
Furious residents demanded to know what was keeping a long-promised peacekeeping force they hoped would be led by Americans.
President Bush has repeatedly promised to support West African nations who plan to send 1,500 soldiers to enforce an often-violated June 17 cease-fire. But he says he is still deciding whether to send troops to the country founded in the 19th century by freed American slaves.
Bush has tied any deployment of American troops to Taylor's departure.
"If Americans want to help us, this is the time," said Varney Gbassay, as truckloads of fighters armed with AK-47s and grenade launchers raced past his house and explosions echoed in the distance. "They must not wait until everyone dies."
He said he was afraid to leave in case his house was looted and added he had nowhere to run anyway.
Taylor also blamed a U.N. arms embargo for the country's plight. The embargo was imposed to punish Taylor's regime for trading guns for diamonds with rebels in neighboring Sierra Leone. Taylor has been indicted by a U.N. tribunal for alleged war crimes there.
"President Bush must take some of the responsibility and the United Nations Security Council for preventing Liberia from being able to defend itself adequately," Taylor said.
Long columns of people hurried toward the city center and eastern neighborhoods with rolled-up mattresses, bundles of clothes and pieces of furniture balanced on their heads. Among them were pro-government militia fighters - some wearing amulets they believe will protect them in battle.
"I don't want to fight. I want peace," said Moosa Kamara, a 23-year-old in a Spider-Man T-shirt who said he had been fighting with one faction or another since he was 11.
The retreat of hundreds of militia fighters reflected growing unease within Taylor's forces, many of them young men who say they fear being abandoned by the president.
But Taylor said, "My men must understand now that I'm going no place, nowhere, until the international community has sufficiently deployed troops in this country."
In the afternoon, there was frantic looting in the city center as long-unpaid pro-government fighters helped themselves to what they could find.
Meanwhile, thousands of residents streamed through the streets of a neighborhood housing diplomatic compounds seeking shelter behind their gates. The air was steamy and people, beads of sweat rolling down their brows, lugged their belongings from compound to compound, desperate for help.
The U.S. diplomatic residential compound already is crammed with some 10,000 refugees from the two recent rounds of fighting which saw rebels again fighting their way into the city.
Mary Warren, 28, a baby strapped to her back, was among those desperate for entry.
"Anywhere we go they say the place is full. I don't know what to do. Please help me," she said.
When the explosions started going off downtown her 10-year-old daughter fled their house.
She is now lost in the crowds.
The crackle of machine-gun fire echoed in the background as Warren trudged on.
As some government fighters fell back from the fighting, others surged forward, piling into pickup trucks, raced in the direction of the fighting.
Later, thousands more residents came streaming back toward the fighting, chanting, "We want peace! No more war!" Many were buoyed by rumors that West African peacekeeping troops had arrived in the country.
Defense Minister Daniel Chea, a pistol on either hip, told the crowds this was not true and urged them to turn back.
Some protesters turned around, returning toward the city center. Others were chased away by police wielding whips and firing shots into the air.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos DKB101-110
 Load-Date: July 20, 2003

 

End of Document
