

Eye on the prize: Nobel Peace Prize shrouded in myth, mystery and misconceptions
The Associated Press
October 9, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 577 words
Byline: By DOUG MELLGREN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OSLO, Norway
Body




An award that generates as much interest as the Nobel Peace Prize is bound to be surrounded by mystery, myth and misconceptions. The 2003 prize, which will be announced Friday in Oslo, is creating its share of speculation, wishful thinking and guesses.
Geir Lundestad, secretary of the secretive committee that awards the prize, addressed some of the most common misunderstandings in an interview Monday with The Associated Press:
-Myth 1: The awards committee announces a list of possible winners.
Wrong. The committee, with a strong tradition of not leaking, does not release the names of any candidates, and keeps records sealed for 50 years. Any "Nobel short list" most likely stems from speculation by the news media and others.
- Myth 2: A campaign for a particular candidate can sway the awards committee.
Wrong. It could have the opposite effect on the fiercely independent committee, which does not want to appear to have been influenced by public pressure.
- Myth 3: Candidates can be nominated until the last minute.
Wrong. The nomination deadline is eight months before the announcement, with a strictly enforced deadline of Feb. 1. The committee wanted to include Former President Jimmy Carter in the Nobel in 1978 for his work on the Camp David peace agreement, but couldn't because of the deadline. Last year, Carter won the Nobel for his many years of peace efforts.
- Myth 4: Anyone can nominate a person or group for the Peace Prize.
Wrong. Nobel statutes state who may make nominations. They were slightly broadened in 2003, and now include former laureates; current and former members of the committee and their staff; members of national governments and legislatures; university professors of law, theology, social sciences, history and philosophy; leaders of peace research and foreign affairs institutes; and members of international courts of law,
- Myth 5: The prize can be revoked if a laureate does not live up to the standards of the peace prize.
Wrong. There are no provisions in the Nobel statutes for revoking the prize. The committee says the prizes are awarded for efforts up to the moment of the announcement, and does not comment on activities after that.
- Myth 6: The prize can be awarded posthumously.
No. The prize was award posthumously only once in 1961 to former U.N. Secretary-General Dag Hammerskjold after he was killed in a plane crash in Africa. The rules were amended in 1974 to prohibit posthumous prizes. But someone can still be receive the Nobel if they die between the October announcement and the Dec. 10 award ceremony.
- Myth 7: The prize is awarded to recognize efforts for peace, human rights, and democracy only after they have proven successful.
More often, the prize is awarded to encourages those who receive it to see the effort through, sometimes at critical moments in a process despite the risk of failure.
- Myth 8: The Nobel Peace Prize is awarded by the Norwegian government.
Members of the Norwegian government and parliament are barred from the committee. Under the terms of the 1895 will of the prize's creator, Swedish industrialist Alfred Nobel, the five members of the Peace Prize committee are appointed by the parliament, but are independent and do not answer to lawmakers.
- Myth 9: The Nobel peace prize is awarded in Stockholm, Sweden.
It is awarded in the Norwegian capital of Oslo as stipulated in Nobel's will. The other five Nobel prizes are awarded in Stockholm.
---
On the Net:
http://www.nobel.no 
 Load-Date: October 10, 2003

 

End of Document
