

FBI takes on major but discreet role in the war against terrorism
November 1, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 953 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




As the fighting winds down in Afghanistan, the focus of the war against terrorism is shifting from the battlefield to a shadowy world where wiretaps, informants, surveillance and forensic evidence have replaced bombs and bullets.
With those changes, the FBI is taking a leading role in the war, bringing high-tech investigative techniques to the search for terrorists far from America's shores.
The work can be tedious: sifting through the wreckage of a car bomb in Karachi, screening records of Middle East students at Asian flight schools, persuading local police to follow someone suspected of terrorist links or tracking down leads that don't pay off.
FBI agents in Jordan have also joined the hunt for the killers of American diplomat Laurence Foley, who was gunned down Monday in front of his Amman home. No arrests have been made, but speculation has focused on Islamic extremists.
"Given the globalization of crime and terrorism, there is no way for the FBI to be effective without agents on the ground outside the United States," said Alfred Finch, a former FBI special agent who was assigned in Egypt in the 1990s.
The effort has paid off in some of the biggest coups of the anti-terrorism conflict - including the capture last March of al-Qaida's No. 3 official Abu Zubaydah and the arrest six months later of Ramzi Binalshibh, one of the masterminds of the Sept. 11 attacks.
Both were arrested in Pakistan during joint operations by FBI and Pakistani security agents.
FBI operations, most of which take place in secret, have not been entirely seamless. Local authorities sometimes grumble about high-handed tactics and gung-ho attitudes in countries where time moves at a slower pace and where politics often block investigations.
"Some rattle off orders and get disappointed if nobody moves," said a Filipino police official on condition of anonymity. "It takes time for them to learn the culture. Some give us information only on a 'need to know' basis, so we also hold back on ours. Sometimes, it's a problem."
Still, many local authorities acknowledge that the FBI provides a level of technical expertise in areas such as electronic surveillance, computers and forensics that few countries can match.
"They have the edge on us due to their access to the latest technology," said an official of Pakistan's InterServices Intelligence agency, who also refuse to be named. "We have benefited from them."
Recent successes against international terrorism have vindicated the expansion of FBI operations overseas undertaken when Louis Freeh ran the agency. He doubled the number of FBI legal attaches, or "legats," posted in U.S. Embassies abroad.
Freeh left the agency last year, but his successor, Robert Mueller, continued the overseas expansion program. Today, the agency maintains 45 legats, which deal routinely with such issues as crimes against Americans overseas, tracking illegal money movements, tracing fugitives and investigating organized drug and crime networks that maintain operations in the United States.
Freeh's expansion plans ran into bureaucratic resistance from the CIA and the State Department, in part over turf issues and also over how much control ambassadors would exert over FBI operations.
Once the ground rules were established, the program began to pay dividends. FBI agents tracked down Mir Aimal Kasi, a Pakistani who killed two CIA employees in 1993 outside the CIA headquarters in Langley, Va., and arrested him in a Pakistan hotel after a four-year manhunt. Two years ago, FBI agents helped convict an extortionist who bombed two Lowe's hardware stores in North Carolina by tracking payments to him in Europe and Central America.
Some of the biggest payoffs have come in the fight against global terrorism. Evidence gathered by FBI agents in Africa led to the convictions of four men in the 1998 bombings at U.S. Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that killed 224 people.
FBI agents rushed to Yemen two years ago after the bombing of the USS Cole, which killed 17 sailors. They are still there, hunting for al-Qaida members in Osama bin Laden's ancestral homeland.
After Taliban rule in Afghanistan collapsed last year, the Pakistanis refused to allow American soldiers to pursue al-Qaida and Taliban fighters who fled to sanctuaries in Pakistan.
However, President Pervez Musharraf's government placed no such restriction on the FBI, whose agents work alongside Pakistani troops in search operations in the semiautonomous border area.
Hundreds of other al-Qaida fugitives sought refuge in Pakistan's teeming cities. By monitoring e-mails and satellite and mobile telephone calls, the FBI was able to trace key al-Qaida operatives to specific towns and cities. With that information, Pakistani security agents identified and raided hideouts, arresting Abu Zubaydah in Faisalabad and later Binalshibh in Karachi.
"Initially, we thought their information was incorrect," a senior Pakistani intelligence officer said on condition of anonymity. "But working with the FBI, we tracked down the hideouts. We bugged telephones of suspects and we put them under watch and in time, things started moving in he right direction."
He said that working with the FBI, Pakistani authorities arrested about 100 al-Qaida and Taliban suspects in March and April, most of whom were handed over to American custody.
"They're quite determined," Adelberto Yap, a Filipino aviation official said of FBI agents who screened records of Philippine flight schools, looking for Middle Eastern students after the Sept. 11 attacks. "They wanted to get all the data, all the minute details."
Eds: Associated Press correspondents Munir Ahmad in Islamabad, Pakistan, and Jim Gomez in Manila, Philippines, contributed to this report.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos ISL101-102
 Load-Date: November 2, 2002

 

End of Document
