

Fifty years after revolution, Arabs ponder the dismal legacy of a dead hero
July 22, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 728 words
Byline: By NADIA ABOU EL-MAGD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




His burning eyes still gaze out from portraits hung in shops and homes. His name recalls the Arab dream of a postcolonial renaissance, and can still electrify a crowd.
But much of the dream has gone sour in the 50 years since the overthrow of Egypt's British-backed monarchy that turned a young lieutenant colonel named Gamal Abdel Nasser into a hero of the Arabs and the Third World.
The July 23, 1952, revolution is cause for yearlong state-sponsored celebrations including seminars, concerts, TV documentaries and a new Nasser museum.
But recent days have also seen the publication of a daring and sobering assessment by Arab intellectuals of the state of their world. The U.N.-sponsored Arab Human Development Report ranks the Arab region of 22 countries and 280 million people lowest in the world when it comes to democracy, civil liberties and media independence. It says this has played a big part in holding the region back.
Nasser was 34 when King Farouk was dethroned. Two years later he was prime minister, and from 1956 until his death in 1970, the all-powerful president. He inspired Arab liberation movements, and was applauded across the region as a force to unite the Arab world under the banners of socialism and anti-Westernism.
"No voice should be louder than the battle cry," was one of his slogans. But among the voices that were silenced were those calling for democracy. Nasser's opponents were tortured and imprisoned without trial. Egyptians were encouraged to spy on friends and relatives and report suspicious political opinions to the authorities. Key figures in the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt's oldest and biggest Islamic fundamentalist group, were executed, accused of trying to assassinate Nasser in 1954.
Nasser's alliance with the Soviet Union made Egypt a cockpit of the Cold War against a U.S.-armed Israel. With Soviet aid he built both a vast army and the Aswan Dam on the Nile. But he suffered two devastating military defeats by Israel, and many of the companies he nationalized are being privatized, a new business class is emerging, and the gap between rich and poor is widening.
"Nasser's legacy has devastating consequences not only for Egypt but also for the Arab world. The most important of all is that Nasser institutionalized and legitimized militarism throughout the Arab world," said Fawaz Gerges, a Mideast expert at New York's Sarah Lawrence College.
Nasser introduced universal education and health care, but the World Bank estimates half the population of 68 million lives on less than $2 a day. The government promises public service jobs for all graduates of its universities, but many have to wait years.
Meanwhile, Muslim groups offer religion as the solution, posing a serious and sometimes violent challenge to the government. Militant Islam has inspired Arabs across the region, from Osama bin Laden in Saudi Arabia to the politicians and generals who tried to build a fundamentalist Islamic state in Sudan.
Hazem Saghyeh, a Lebanese columnist with the respected pan-Arab daily Al-Hayat, believes that "the main reason Arabs didn't reconcile themselves with modernity, in which Nasser played a great role, was because modernity was associated with colonialism, so the people did away with both."
What was left, he said, is Islam, which has supplanted pan-Arabism as the dominant force in Egypt.
Nasser died of a heart attack in 1970 at age 52, and it fell to his successor, Anwar Sadat, to break out of the Soviet orbit, regain some honor for Egypt in battle against Israel, and make Egypt the first Arab state to sign a peace treaty with the Jewish state.
But Nasser's memory lives on. Even now, at anti-Israel demonstrations, Egyptian students wave posters of Nasser and the slogan "No peace with Israel, no negotiation with Israel, no recognition of Israel" - a rebuke to the 1979 peace treaty.
The words Nasserism and Nasserite have entered political parlance across the Arab world to connote Arab unity, socialism, working-class rights, hostility to Israel and Western influence in the region.
Politically they carry little weight in a country dominated by President Hosni Mubarak's National Democratic Party. There's a Nasserite weekly, Al-Arabi, and a political party that is small, divided and short of cash - but not of faith.
Nasserism, insists Gamal Fahmi, who writes for the weekly, "is needed now more than ever."
 Load-Date: July 23, 2002

 

End of Document
