

For Ivory Coast's youth leaders, controlling the streets can mean controlling the country
The Associated Press
February 4, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 817 words
Byline: By AUSTIN MERRILL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast
Body




They call him "My General." He calls them "my guys." Together, Ble Goude and his band of thirty-somethings hold the fragile balance of power in Ivory Coast - whipping up crowds that have West Africa's economic hub teetering on the brink of all-out war.
Rabid opponents of the rebel groups who have captured half the country, the young leaders control the streets - and it is ultimately the streets that may decide Ivory Coast's fate.
On one recent day, loyalists were running riot in the commercial capital - setting roadblocks on fire, threatening foreigners with machetes, and bashing car and shop windows with rocks and metal bars.
"I sent out an official communique to cancel the demonstration," Goude said from his headquarters for the day - a college dorm room, where taped-up photos of Britney Spears and the Backstreet Boys looked down on the 31-year-old Goude. "But they came by the thousands anyway."
By boiling their message down to the simplest of anti-rebel, pro-government slogans, the young leaders have struck a chord across the loyalist south in this former French colony, mobilizing up to 100,000 people at a time for near-daily protests against a French-brokered peace accord signed Jan. 24.
International advocates of the deal see it as a last-ditch attempt to save one of West Africa's leading nations from full-scale war.
Loyalists like Goude see it as a betrayal, and President Laurent Gbagbo seems to be listening, putting the accord's future - and that of his country - in doubt.
The young leaders - often referred to as "warriors" - are among the very same youths who swept Gbagbo to power in a people's uprising following flawed elections in October 2000.
Now they are once again in a position to determine the direction of Ivory Coast.
Goude - never far from the AK-47-toting guards who tower over him - and his cohorts frequently appear on state television and radio. Ads announce the next planned march. News anchors hang on each word in interviews.
"Our marches are always peaceful," said Goude, rejecting responsibility for violence at his demonstrations. "In England, in the United States - rallies can get out of hand anywhere in the world."
But what began as an attempt to coordinate public support for Gbagbo in the early days of the war - ignited Sept. 19 with a failed coup attempt - has lately evolved into chaos on the streets of Abidjan, long one of the most modern and richest cities in Africa.
Thousands of protesters have taunted, slapped and spit on fleeing French citizens as they tried to board planes home to France. French-owned businesses have been trashed and looted. Club-wielding youths harass foreigners at makeshift checkpoints, while government soldiers and paramilitary police turn a blind eye.
Hunkered down at the heart of it all, Goude and his team have enjoyed a meteoric rise to fame.
Tittering young girls and soft-spoken old men alike hail the young leaders wherever they go - pointing at them and whispering in awe.
People "agree with what we're doing," said Goude in a deep voice raspy from time spent on podiums addressing the throngs. "Some leaders have rocks thrown at them, but it's normal to praise the leaders you support."
As popular as all the young leaders are, Goude is the star. He is almost always flanked by heavily armed government paramilitary police and his team members refer to him as "the general."
"I always have the last word," said Goude. "I can veto anything."
In the dorm room - one of many headquarters - Goude sat on the sagging foam mattress of an unmade twin bed.
As the riot surged outside, he wrung his hands and others worked their cell phones to try to calm the crowd.
Before the start of Ivory Coast's war, Goude was living in his own dorm room, studying for a graduate degree in politics and communications at the University of Manchester in England.
He counts Martin Luther King Jr. among his heroes. King "knew how to speak to people," said Goude. "But so do I."
He's right about that. Goude has been known to keep tens of thousands mesmerized with a microphone in his hand. All over Abidjan, people can be heard repeating his rallying cry: "And that's the truth!"
Even in the halls of the presidential palace, Goude turns heads and is thanked for his patriotic efforts.
On a continent where many countries won independence only within the last 40 years, power and access to power for young men is not unheard of.
Joseph Kabila, the president of Congo, is in his early 30s. Valentine Strasser led a military junta in Sierra Leone in the early 1990s at 25. Soro Guillaume, the leader of the rebel movement in northern Ivory Coast, is about the same age as Goude.
In Abidjan, many consider Goude one of the country's most powerful men.
"Gbagbo listens to Ble Goude more than his own ministers," said one young man after a recent demonstration. Ivory Coast "doesn't have a government anymore - it's being run by Gbagbo and Goude."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY190

 

End of Document
