

For Congo's combatants, the quick money is in continuing war
April 28, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 784 words
Byline: By ELLEN KNICKMEYER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GBADOLITE, Congo
Body




The rebel leader held up his movement's black ledger with one hand and pounded it with the other. His voice filled the room as he rebuffed charges he was extracting fortunes out of his share of Congo's territory, and its war.
"See?" Jean-Pierre Bemba demanded. "Everything there is, is here." He paused in his ledger-thumping to run a finger down the rows of territorial import-export taxes that he said are funding his rebel force. A $7 transaction here. Three liters of gasoline taxed there.
The rebel chief's voice pursued his questioner out the door.
"I am clean and transparent," he declared.
A recent U.N. report says otherwise, alleging "mass-scale looting" has turned into "systematic exploitation" by some of the five foreign armies and both major rebel movements - including Bemba's Uganda-backed group - at war in Congo.
Bemba - only as an example, since he is far from the only combatant allegedly profiting - is accused of cornering the multimillion-dollar coffee industry in the northwest corner of the country that he controls.
Child labor is "rampant in the occupied territories' - land held by Uganda and its allied Congo rebel movement led by Bemba in the north, Rwanda and its allied rebels in the east, the report said.
It said children were seen in gold mines in Bemba's Equateur Province. Boys aged 12 to 18 were told they were going to join an "army of development," got an hour of physical training and were sent to the mines, it said.
In all, Congo's conflict "has created a win-win situation for all belligerents. The only loser in this huge business venture is the Congolese people," the report says.
The report indirectly raises a troublesome question for the future: with so much money to be made, why would any of the forces that have carved up Congo want to leave the field?
Even with politics and security removed from the equation, the profit motive will remain a complication, Kamel Morjane, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan's envoy for Congo, acknowledged in an interview with The Associated Press.
In fact, while the occupying armies remain, busily cultivating their business interests, fighting itself has died down. The eight warring parties with their estimated total of 125,000 fighters have waged fewer than a dozen clashes this year along the front lines.
The conflict began in 1998 after Rwanda and Uganda invaded, enlisting Congo dissidents as allies, in a bid to topple Laurent Kabila, the then Congo president. Rwanda and Uganda accused Kabila of harboring militias that threatened their own security.
Zimbabwe, Namibia and Angola joined the war on Congo's side. They stopped the opposing side's advance after it had secured 60 percent of the Western Europe-sized country.
The war is blamed, indirectly, for more than 1 million deaths in the east alone, mostly civilians.
Across Congo today, fighting and levies by occupying armies have disrupted trade and farming and shut many businesses.
In Gbadolite, vendors mainly sell wild fruit pulled off trees and vines. The Lebanese merchant who ran the city's last big store is moving out, his grocery ruined largely by the taxes demanded by the fighters on Bemba's side, international aid workers say.
Wounded former rebels cluster at the hospital in rags of uniforms, begging food, hunched on sticks for canes, sewing shoes from scraps of leather.
"There's very little to eat," says one bomb-scarred former fighter, a plastic raincoat wrapped around his waist in lieu of pants.
In a brief interview at his headquarters, with seven cell phones heaped at his side and uniformed fighters patrolling outside, Bemba denied the U.N. allegation he had grabbed a "de facto monopoly" on the region's coffee crops.
He acknowledged a 5 percent tax on diamonds leaving the area, but defended it as reasonable. He didn't address the charges of child labor but said the whole U.N. report was scurrilous.
Uganda, Rwanda, and Congo's Rwanda-backed rebel movement equally are accused of raking off Congo's riches - especially gold and diamonds.
Uganda and Rwanda aren't known to produce diamonds, yet report millions in diamond exports in recent years - in Uganda's case, a boom period "coinciding surprisingly with the occupation of the eastern Congo," the U.N. report pointedly notes.
The U.N. panel generally looked forgivingly at lucrative mining deals given to all Congo's allies, apparently regarding them as Congo's to dispense as it wishes.
Zimbabwe, which has reaped particularly large rewards for its military help, sees it the same way.
"We came to help the Congo government in the war against Rwanda and Uganda," said Mike Kanku of Mining Business Company, a Zimbabwe-linked Congolese firm. "MBC had to finance the government side in the war."
 Load-Date: April 29, 2001

 

End of Document
