

For Egyptian workers who flocked to Sharm, the dream is crushed
The Associated Press
July 24, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 774 words
Byline: By SARAH EL DEEB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SHARM EL-SHEIK, Egypt
Body




Sameh Abdel Atti loved Sharm el-Sheik: the freedom, the beach - and the money. The 19-year-old waiter from southern Egypt earned enough to build his own house. Like him, thousands of Egyptian workers saw the chance of a lifetime in this flourishing tourist playground.
Now the dream is crushed after the pre-dawn bombings that rocked Sharm el-Sheik, killing dozens.
Along with tourists catching flights home, many Egyptian workers were piling in buses for the long trip home across the desert Sunday. Some had already been let go by their employers; others simply anticipated that foreigners would no longer come to the resort that in 1994 drew nearly a third of Egypt's 8 million tourists.
The country was waiting to learn the extent of the blow to its vital tourism industry, Egypt's largest source of foreign currency. The industry employs 2.5 million people in Egypt, directly or indirectly, and with government goals to double the influx of tourists, employment was expected to soar - crucial in a country suffering from unemployment estimated to be as high as 20 percent.
The Tourism Ministry said some 6,000 tourists left in the hours after the attacks, double the expected amount. There were tens of thousands of tourists in Sharm at the time of the bombings.
Abdel Atti intends to stay, hoping to stick it out, even though he was caught in the bombings' carnage.
He was making sandwiches for his colleagues when one of two truck bombs used in the attack went off Saturday not 8 yards from his coffee shop at Sharm's Old Market.
When the dust settled, he saw bodies and body parts scattered in the street, the wounded crawling to get away. Helping some into nearby vehicles, he found a minibus driver he recognized: The man's stomach was ripped open, his organs hanging out.
"One might be smiling on the outside now," said the bashful, handsome waiter. "But my heart is sick from all the scenes I witnessed."
Sharm has been key to Abdel Atti's future since he came as a 16-year-old from his small village of al-Mansha'a, 250 miles south of Cairo.
It was a gold mine for Egyptian workers, with its beaches, luxury hotels and clubs set at the southern tip of the Sinai Peninsula, a world away from the Nile Valley hometowns of most of the workers. Building was booming and the resort competed with some of the country's most famous tourist attractions, such as Giza's pyramids and the temples of Luxor. Locals estimate the resident population at 150,000.
And with its freewheeling, party atmosphere and relaxed social codes, Sharm almost seemed separate from mostly conservative Egypt.
"When you're young, you want to get out of home and have a change. Any young man gets suffocated in his hometown and family," Abdel Atti said. His initial dream was to go to the Arab oil nations of the Gulf, Egyptian's traditional land of promise for wealth and status.
But Sharm lured him.
"It was not only the money, here, you work, you go out, and you see the world," he said - all at the employer's expense. Egyptian workers get free accommodation and meals in Sharm.
He joined his father, a construction contractor who had been here a decade, then found the job in the cafe. Within three years, the teenager built his own house back home in Sohag on the earnings.
Now his job might not survive the attacks. The cafe owner expects to cut his staff by a third, and Abdel Atti does not know if he will be among the ones to go.
"God was giving us a good living. God knows also what will happen next," he said.
While most high caliber jobs in Sharm are taken by Italians and Russians, the city's backbone is made up of young Egyptian men working in sales, bartending and waitressing, construction and transport.
Many of the "Sharmers," as they call themselves, are still in disbelief over the attacks. Dubbed the "city of peace" by the government, the resort also hosts Mideast peace conferences. Security was considered the tightest in the country because President Hosni Mubarak spends most of the winter and spring here.
"It is like this is all a dream, and we have not yet woken up," said Emad Nasr, a hotel maitre d'.
The Movenpick Hotel, where Nasr works, still buzzed with Arab and European tourists, as well as hundreds of journalists and officials who checked in after the attacks. It faces the wrecked facade of the Ghazala Gardens hotel, hit by the second truck bomb.
"They are not idiots these terrorists. They know what we stand for," said Khaled Sakran, a 42-year old who moved here 10 years ago because of its "peaceful" lifestyle.
After all the attacks in other parts of the world, Sakran said no one was immune now.
"We are not better than anyone else," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XAN104, XJD112, XAN108, 110
 Load-Date: July 25, 2005

 

End of Document
