

Forest fires torment Europe's countryside as tourists sweat in the cities
The Associated Press
August 9, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 774 words
Byline: By TOM RACHMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME
Body




With a heat wave scorching Europe, emergency aircraft swooped over wildfires to disgorge water onto smoldering countryside Saturday, as authorities made house calls for those suffering at home, and tourists hunted for drinks and shade.
Around Europe, about 40 deaths have been blamed on the sizzling temperatures, which have been stuck around 100 degrees Fahrenheit or higher for days.
Wildfires fanned by hot winds have eaten up territory in Italy, France, Greece, Spain, Portugal, Croatia, and the Netherlands.
In Italy, authorities battled 24 fires Saturday, with the worst in the regions of Tuscany, Piedmont, Liguria, Lazio and Campania.
Civil Defense chief Guido Bertolaso has blamed arsonists. "The fact that it's very hot encourages these delinquent pyromaniacs," he said.
The largest Italian blaze burned about 40 miles north of Naples, causing agricultural damage and killing cows stuck in the meadows, the ANSA news agency said.
A 60-year-old woman of Italian-American origin was arrested for allegedly setting a fire in the National Park of Vesuvius, just south of Naples, news reports said. The woman said the fire was intended to scare away some bees, ANSA said. Authorities could not be reached Saturday night to confirm the report.
In Croatia, 22 firefighters flew by helicopter to combat fires on the Velebit mountain range - an area where flames have been hard to tackle due to tough terrain and leftover land mines from war in the early 1990s. The situation was under control, although sporadic fires continued on the Adriatic islands of Korcula and Cres, the HINA news agency said.
In Spain, firefighters also seemed to be getting the upper hand while temperatures took a temporary dip Saturday.
Authorities reported they had controlled blazes on the Canary Island of Hierro and on the Mediterranean Balearic Island of Majorca, where some 200 people were earlier evacuated from a monastery, a hotel and several houses close to the town of Randa.
In southern France, north of Nice, more than 600 firefighters were fighting forest fires, as Portugal reckoned with its massive fire damage. The Forest Service there estimated that at least 400,000 acres have burned over the past two weeks, mostly in rural areas of central Portugal.
While the European countryside battled fires, city-dwellers had their own struggles.
In the Paris region, firefighters are making about 600 calls a day for people suffering because of the heat, said Commander Jacques Kerdoncuff of the Paris firefighters.
In Britain, tourists were disappointed when the London Eye - the big Ferris wheel on the banks of the Thames River - remained closed because of heat that would have made the Eye's glass capsules intolerable.
Sweltering heat didn't halt the annual Zurich Street Parade, however, where scantily clad revelers danced to one of the world's biggest techno-music parties.
After last year's event was drowned in a deluge of chilly rain, the slogan of this year's event was "Let the Sun Shine." Organizers distributed free sunscreen and drinks and fixed a giant shower in one of Zurich's main squares. The fire brigade stood by with hoses.
Italians fled the stifling cities for the mountains and beaches Saturday, causing miles of traffic jams. That left city streets largely to the tourists, who seemed far more merry about confronting the sun with a melting "gelato" - ice cream - in hand.
"The heat will never deter us from coming to Italy," said 54-year-old New Yorker Colin Lamont, at a cafe outside Rome's Pantheon with his wife and two daughters. "I could sit here 12 months a year eating spaghetti or the beautiful gelato."
American 17-year-old Bryan McCutcheon, traveling through Europe with three friends, grabbed some shade under the columns of the Pantheon.
"They call this country sun-kissed, but this is a little extreme," he said.
On the Italian Riviera, tempers were hot, too. A tussle broke out in the town of Ventimiglia when a tourist was deemed to be hogging a public fountain, the AGI news agency reported. People in line rebelled and police intervened, the agency said.
In the southwestern German state of Baden-Wuertemberg, police stopped a truck stuffed with 170 pigs on Friday and found five of the animals dead from heat and lack of water. Police directed the truck into the shade and called the fire department to give the hogs a spray-down. The Dutch truck driver will be fined for mistreating pigs, police said.
No quick relief was coming: Germany is expected to swelter until midweek; France is counting on at least another week of abnormally high temperatures; and weather experts in Italy expect the country to be roasting until September.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: August 10, 2003

 

End of Document
