

Former Clinton insiders offer to spill the beans - on how to manage the president's time
September 25, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 433 words
Byline: By BRIAN SKOLOFF, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LITTLE ROCK, Ark.
Body




When it came to power in the Clinton White House, key players included people like Al Gore, Madeleine Albright, Janet Reno and Stephanie Streett.
Stephanie Streett?
While few might be familiar with Streett, she had an important role as Clinton's director of scheduling. Now she plans to discuss her unique behind-the-scenes view.
Streett and a panel of other former Clinton administration insiders are scheduled to share their thoughts during a Nov. 12 seminar at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock.
The program, titled, "Decision-Making at the White House: The President's Time," will focus on how a president's time is managed, particularly in a time of crisis.
One example was the scramble in the busy White House following the sudden death of Morocco's King Hassan II in 1999.
"We didn't sleep for 48 hours," recalled Streett. "People were up all night long working on a new schedule, working with the secret service, the foreign embassies and the military."
"We had to fly the Secret Service and the advance teams over on the cargo planes that have the limos on them," Streett added. "Obviously, putting those logistics together in less than 48 hours and getting the military and the president over there in such a short amount of time is like nothing you've ever seen."
The Nov. 12 seminar will feature Clinton confidant and counsel Bruce Lindsey, who until now has been virtually silent about his White House experiences.
The panel also will include Maggie Williams, the former chief of staff for the first lady and now the chief of Clinton's office, and former White House chief of staff Thomas F. "Mack" McLarty.
Organizers say the program will be the first in a series of seminars on American presidencies.
"It'll be kind of like the real West Wing," said Margaret Scranton, a political science professor at the university. "The most precious thing a president has is his time. How he uses that time determines his legacy."
"The participants on this panel can offer a unique insider's view of the day-to-day, even minute-by-minute, management of the chief executive's time," she added. "They've seen a schedule go out the window when a crisis hits and a new one devised within a matter of minutes."
Scranton will develop and teach Arkansas' first college class devoted to the Clinton presidency to be offered at the university. Registration for the course opens in November. Classes begin in January.
The course, "The Clinton Presidency," will serve as the prototype for the university system's Clinton School of Public Service at the Clinton Presidential Library.
On the Net:
http://www.ualr.edu 
 Load-Date: September 26, 2002

 

End of Document
