

Frustrated Bush administration presses Israel up graf 3, In the
March 7, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 839 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush is looking for a break in the escalating violence in the Middle East so he can send a peace envoy to the region, the White House said Thursday.
The administration, frustrated over its inability to stop bloodletting in the Middle East, is criticizing Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and urging Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat to call off attacks on Israelis.
Bush has not joined the criticism of Israel, but Secretary of State Colin Powell and White House spokesman Ari Fleischer have begun to jab at Sharon, especially over his declaration of war against Palestinians.
Bush wants to send mediator Anthony Zinni back to the region, but first wants a halt to the fighting, Fleischer said Thursday. In two previous trips, Zinni failed to secure a truce.
"The president would like to see the environment change so there is an opening where a return by General Zinni … would do some good," Fleischer said.
In the meantime, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak could be preparing to intervene to try to halt the fighting by seeking Israel's support for a peace overture by Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia.
The criticism of Sharon, who has warned the Palestinians of unrelenting Israeli attack in response to terrorism against Israelis, came Wednesday from Powell.
He reproached Sharon for declaring war on the Palestinians and advised him "to take a hard look" at his policies.
"If you declare war against the Palestinians and think you can solve the problem by seeing how many Palestinians can be killed - I don't know if that leads you anywhere," Powell said.
Sharon's office responded Thursday with a written statement: "Israel has never declared war on the Palestinians. Israel fights back against terror organizations in the framework of its right of self defense. He who started this war has the power to stop it, but continues to prefer a war of terrorism."
Powell's remarks, in testimony to a House subcommittee, spliced in criticism of Israel's leader with what has been incessant U.S. criticism of Yasser Arafat for not stopping Palestinian violence against Israel.
In the meantime, a senior House Democrat, Rep. Tom Lantos of California, met three times Wednesday with Mubarak and urged him to go to Jerusalem and discuss with Israeli officials the Saudi peace overture.
"He indicated there is great merit in the idea and that he will give it considerable thought," Lantos said afterward.
The proposal is reminiscent of the surprise visit to Jerusalem in 1977 by the late Egyptian President Anwar Sadat, which set in motion peace talks that resulted in a 1979 treaty with Israel. It was Israel's first treaty with any of its Arab neighbors.
Bush met at the White House with senior members of the House and Senate and "was very much interested" in the idea, Lantos said.
Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., chairman of the House International Relations Committee, endorsed the proposal in a meeting with Mubarak and said Bush "thought it was an interesting idea. He thought it was something new."
On Tuesday, Bush cast blame for the current situation solely on the Palestinians, saying peacemaking should start with Palestinian efforts to stop attacks on Israel.
In that vein, Powell said Wednesday: "Mr. Arafat can do more and must do more." He dismissed frequent Arab and European suggestions that Arafat's confinement by Israel to his compound in Ramallah on the West Bank made it impossible for him to shackle the suicide bombers and gunmen.
Powell said Arafat could use the telephone to give orders to stop the attacks that have escalated to the point that Sharon told Israel's parliament Monday that Israel was at war.
"We are at war with a bloodthirsty enemy," the prime minister said.
Asked about that by Rep. Dan Miller, R-Fla., Powell said, "Mr. Sharon has to take a hard look at his policies and see whether they will work."
The Palestinians are experiencing "enormous difficulties," he said, unable to get to their jobs. And, he said, "everybody is a second-class citizen, where you cannot go out for an evening walk" because of fear of attack.
Both Israelis and Palestinians are in tragic situations, Powell said: "Both sides are following policies that lead to more violence."
At the White House, Fleischer jabbed at Israel more subtly. He said Bush worried about the loss of innocent Israelis and innocent Palestinians "and is working very hard to somehow break and make the violence stop."
Bush understands the right of self-defense, Fleischer said, "but the president wants it to be toned down so people do not believe this becomes a matter of war."
Mubarak has offered to bring together Sharon and Arafat to talk peace, but with Palestinian attacks continuing Sharon has dismissed the notion of seeing Arafat. Mubarak refuses to see Sharon without the Palestinian leader.
A livelier prospect is Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah's offer of peace, security and trade to Israel if it would give up all the territory the Arabs lost in the 1967 Middle East war.
On the Net:
Powell testimony: http://www.state.gov/secretary/rm/2002/8655.htm 
 Load-Date: March 8, 2002

 

End of Document
