

Global travel on the rebound as travelers discount security fears
The Associated Press
November 8, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 657 words
Byline: By JANE WARDELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Global tourism is on the rebound as world travelers gain confidence from a long-awaited economic recovery and downgrade their fears over international terrorism and health scares, according to a report released Monday.
More than three years after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States spooked many travelers, the World Travel Market 2004-05 report said tourists are returning to the skies in large numbers.
"We live in a new world," Dawid de Villiers, deputy secretary general of the World Tourism Organization, said at the World Travel Market in London. "People have come to live with insecurity. Tourism will continue to grow, barring any worldwide catastrophe."
De Villiers said the number of worldwide arrivals rose 12 percent to around 526 million in the first eight months of 2004, adding that he expects the figure to remain in double digits for the entire year.
The report showed growth across the board - instead of one region at the expense of another - for the first time since the Sept. 11 attacks.
It was driven by greater numbers of U.S. travelers, a return in the popularity of long-haul destinations and the easy booking of low-cost flights over the Internet.
"What we are seeing is a resurgence globally," said Douglas Baker, a tourism and finance spokesman for the U.S. Department of Commerce. "I think the trend is that travel has returned globally. I think 2005 and 2006 are positioned for growth."
Travelers are also unperturbed, so far, by the avian influenza scare in Asia - a contrast to the massive travel downturn in the region in 2003 that resulted from the SARS outbreak.
A total of 28 people have died from the H5N1 strain of the avian influenza virus, which ravaged poultry farms earlier this year, killing or forcing the cull of about 100 million birds across Asia. It appeared to have disappeared but resurfaced in Vietnam, killing three people, in August and other cases have since been reported in Thailand and Indonesia.
The report said that the Asia Pacific region, up 37 percent to 99 million international arrivals, recorded the most impressive growth for 2004. The Middle East was also a strong performer, up 24 percent to 23 million international arrivals, due in large part to continued strong growth in intra-regional tourism demand and the popularity of Egypt as a destination.
In Europe, travel to long-haul destinations, which fell by 9 percent from January to August last year, grew by 12 percent during the same period this year.
The report also said outbound trips from the United States will rise by around 8 percent in 2004 to 58.5 million. The total number of outbound trips is expected to reach its previous 2000 peak of 60.9 million in 2007.
In return, Rhianna Quinn Roddy, a spokeswoman for NYC & Co., the private tourism organization that promotes New York City, said she was confident foreign travelers were returning to the city.
"We really believe that in 2005, 2006, 2007, we will beat that 2000 record of 1.1 million visitors to New York City," Quinn Roddy said.
Baker dismissed suggestions that the U.S. requirement for biometric data on all inbound travelers would put off visitors. "The demand for visas to the United States hasn't decreased," he said.
However, the outlook was not so positive for airlines, which have been battling rising costs because of a surge in the price of jet fuel.
The International Air Transport Association, which represents more than 250 airlines, has predicted that airline losses would exceed $4 billion in 2004. Monday's report said that "could approach $5 billion."
Akbar Al Baker, the chief executive of Qatar Airlines, said the carrier did not hedge against rising prices because of its small size and was feeling the pinch.
"Our fuel price has gone up by more than 47 percent in the last six months," he said.
The report said low-cost carriers have been less affected by the high fuel prices because they tend to operate short-haul flights only.
 Load-Date: November 9, 2004

 

End of Document
