

Guitarists from remotest South Africa finally reach the stage
July 22, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 879 words
Byline: By DINA KRAFT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




The sound is a mix of scratch and soul once strummed on guitars made of oil cans and catgut by shepherds, washerwomen, and men walking down lone dusty roads in search of work.
Only now, when it is in danger of dying out, has the music of the Khoisan - indigenous people of southern Africa - come out of the remote nooks of South Africa's Karoo desert and found a national stage.
In South Africa's answer to the Buena Vista Social Club, a group of aging Karoo musicians has embarked on a sold-out national tour, produced a CD, and is exploring plans to make a documentary and tour abroad.
Audiences have been giving standing ovations to their unique tunings, chord shapes, and scratching and picking which produce a bent, melancholy twang.
On a recent night in one of Johannesburg's premier theaters, a sampling of Karoo Blues players shuffled tentatively onto the stage. They are shepherds, retired farm laborers, men who worked on the railroad and women who cleaned homes.
Heads down and hands flying over the guitar strings, the musicians played in a vibrant style merging African cycles and European melodies, mostly borrowed from Dutch settlers, to create a sound that has been compared to Cajun music.
The music's quirky edge sprang from the players' isolation and lack of formal training.
Hans Coetzee, who gathers aloe for a living, developed his talent during the long hours spent alone waiting for aloe plants to drain. With nobody to accompany him on guitar, Coetzee, 58, decided to accompany himself, using a spoon in his mouth to play slide guitar while his hands pluck and strum a complementary rhythm on the same instrument.
Another player, Helena Nuwegeld, 75, sings in a raspy, full voice about her brother-in-law who missed the train to work and stands with a "handful of tears," trying to "raise 12 children with 6 slices of bread."
She garnered huge applause and astonished laughs for another song about a man's lack of sexual prowess.
The musicians came together on the urging of David Kramer, 51, a South African singer and songwriter who toured the tiny towns that dot the wind-swept plains and low mountain ridges of the Karoo, in western South Africa.
As a young man, Kramer was inspired by the father-and-son team of American folklorists, John and Alan Lomax, who traveled the American South collecting and recording blues and folk songs for the Library of Congress. (Alan Lomax, the son, died this month at age 87.)
But under the racist apartheid regime, the South African government had no interest in exploring non-white cultures. And in the 1970s, Kramer feared that exploring black shantytowns with a tape recorder would meet with the wrath of the security police.
"Ach, it was a stupid time," Kramer says, shaking his head. "You were intimidated by the regime … (The music) has never really been acknowledged up until now. Because of the racism and oppression it was not considered worthy."
Last year, while working on a documentary about Karoo guitarists for South African television, Kramer took to the back-country roads to find the musicians who helped shaped South Africa's folk music traditions. The result is a CD, "Karoo Kitaar Blues", distributed by JNS Music in Johannesburg. Kramer also plans to make a feature documentary.
He mourns for the time that has been lost - the talented musicians who died without recognition, and the songs that died with them.
"We are seeing the last generation, just an echo of what the music was. It's quite sad," says Kramer.
The musicians speak of children and grandchildren more interested in pop music on the radio than in the sounds picked out on homemade instruments on store porches and in the fields.
The Karoo musicians say no one really taught them how to play. They looked on as an older brother or father played, and eventually picked up instruments themselves.
Wearing a worn fedora and speaking with a soft lisp, Coetzee speaks of going to the fields with his homemade "blik" guitar and learning from a shepherd who kept one eye on the guitar, the other on a herd of goats.
Coetzee knew he was good, he says, but the tapes he sent out to the cities were all rejected.
"There was a lot of disappointment," he says. "I feel vindicated now, being able to stand before a large audience and get a good reaction … at last there is something like real recognition."
His face breaks into a sheepish smile. "I love the attention," he says.
Nuwegeld, stout with a bright red headscarf, grew up in a musical family. She sings with her brother, sister and husband accompanying her on guitar and accordion. She writes some lyrics, improvises others. Her words speak mostly of the harsh life in the Karoo.
"I just think about my life, my parents and their life. I think about how difficult it has been. I think about it and the words just come out of me," says Nuwegeld.
At this recent concert, the audience of mostly white South Africans responds with wild applause, standing ovations and even some tears.
"They are hungry for it," Kramer says.
The price of neglecting a culture for so many years cuts deep.
"It touches something quite deep inside yourself - the loss of opportunity through oppression," Kramer says. "You think, how could this happen? How could we be part of a process of denial?"
---
On the Net:
www.oneworld.co.za 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY315-7
 Load-Date: July 23, 2002

 

End of Document
