

Haifa Street: The latest Iraqi trouble spot in the heart of the capital
The Associated Press
September 25, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 996 words
Byline: By MARIAM FAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




Haifa Street bears the scars of recent violence: A pockmarked edifice, a blackened facade, a charred car carcass. "Long live the courageous Iraqi resistance," reads a scrawl on a wall. "Death to the traitors," warns another.
This street of high-rise apartments has erupted into the latest trouble spot in Baghdad, the seat of power of Iraq's U.S.-backed interim government and a scene of fierce clashes between armed militants and U.S. and Iraqi troops.
The fact that militants are able to force a showdown in one of Baghdad's main arteries is fueling the anger of some Iraqis at what they think is perhaps the United States' biggest failure: Its inability to bring them security.
It is also a source of embarrassment to government officials trying to downplay the sway of insurgents ahead of elections scheduled for January.
"Before, we used to hear about Fallujah and Ramadi," said street resident Salma Abbas, citing two insurgent strongholds west of Baghdad. "Now it has become Haifa Street."
Iraqi security forces have raided Haifa Street twice in the past two weeks, clashing with gunmen and arresting 90 suspects including Syrians, Sudanese and Egyptians, Interior Ministry officials said. Four "terrorists" were killed in the most recent raid Wednesday, in which U.S. troops also participated.
"It's one of the bases for kidnappings, terrorism, robbery, assassinations and all the known criminal activities," Interior Ministry spokesman Sabah Kadhim said.
While there have been sporadic clashes for months, the street grabbed extra attention Sept. 12 when a U.S. helicopter fired on a disabled U.S. Bradley fighting vehicle as Iraqis swarmed around it, cheering and throwing stones. Thirteen people, including an Arab television reporter, were killed that day.
Maimed and lifeless bodies lay in the street after several young men placed in the barrel of the burning vehicle's main gun the black and yellow sunburst banner of one of Iraq's most-feared terror organization: Tawhid and Jihad.
Kadhim argues the violence on the street mostly comes from "criminal gangs that have no political program" and believe they will thrive in the security vacuum created by fighting police. He said there were also some "Saddamist elements … dressed in religious garb."
Many of the troublemakers are newcomers to the area, he added. "When they know that there's an area controlled by criminals, more criminals come in," he said.
The graffiti, however, casts the battle in nationalist terms. "No USA," screams one. "Death to the government," warns another. "Yes! Yes to the leader Saddam Hussein," reads yet another.
Tawhid and Jihad, lead by Jordanian terror mastermind Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, has claimed responsibility for some of the Haifa Street violence.
From her 13th floor apartment in a towering off-white and orange building, Abbas has watched the changes to the street she has called home for the past 19 years.
Saddam Hussein's government gave many of the apartments in her residential compound to college professors, deducting the price in installments from their salaries. There are also doctors and engineers.
But in recent months, peering out her window, she has started seeing strangers: Men whose faces were covered with black bags with two holes for the eyes.
They fade in and out of the area in their cars and prowl the street, grenade launchers balanced on their shoulders, she said.
As more gunfire and explosions rocked the area, some of Abbas's neighbors moved out. Abbas started spending more time at her parents' and in-law's homes.
Her neighbor, Dr. Maysoun al-Emarah, closed her clinic, deeming the trip to work and back too dangerous. But even staying at home can be perilous.
During a recent raid, Abbas was jolted awake at about 4:15 a.m. by gunshots and explosions. She scurried out of her apartment and huddled with neighbors in the corridor until the clashes ended some nine hours later.
When she returned, she found the floors covered with glass. The walls and a refrigerator were peppered with bullets.
"I won't fix the windows until things calm down," she said.
Al-Emarah said some of the gunmen took over apartments vacated when foreign students fled the country ahead of the U.S.-led invasion in March 2003, or when their owners left to work abroad.
Al-Emarah's apartment overlooks clusters of squat brick houses that some residents say are central to the street's woes. Shielded by Haifa's tall buildings, the houses coated in the drabness of poverty and decay sit amid narrow alleys awash with sewage and trash - the ideal refuge for gunmen bolting away after attacks, some say.
Some of the dwellers are so poor, apartment residents say they see them scavenging trash cans for food. Even under Saddam, the area was said to house some of the city's toughest criminals. More poured in when Saddam granted amnesty to all prisoners in 2002, Abbas said. Some believe support for the ousted dictator runs high in parts of these areas.
U.S. raids and patrols offend the nationalist sentiments of residents here, argues Nabil Mohammed, a political science professor at Baghdad University's Center for International Studies.
"People have close-knit relationships so it's easier for a resistance fighter to hide there … and maybe get protection," he added.
Abbas is no sympathizer with the insurgents - she calls them terrorists. But she blames the insecurity on the Americans.
"When an occupier occupies a country he cannot just destroy it: The army was disbanded … the infrastructure was damaged, the borders were opened," she said. "It took them two days to enter Baghdad, but let's see if they can manage to rule it in 20 years."
Authorities say the raids have weakened militants, but didn't necessarily finish them off.
The word on the street is that the Americans now call Haifa "Hell's way," Abbas said. Residents came up with their own nickname: "Little Fallujah."
"We are living in horror 24 hours a day," Abbas said. "We just want quiet and stability to return to our street."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY107
 Load-Date: September 26, 2004

 

End of Document
