

Improving security the priority as U.N. deadline nears for Sudan to disarm militias in Darfur
The Associated Press
August 25, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 808 words
Byline: By ED JOHNSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABU SHOUK CAMP, Sudan
Body




Mohammed Ismail gently pumped the leather bellows to feed embers glowing in a small pit of sand. After four months in a refugee camp, the old farmer is trying to make a living as a blacksmith while dreaming of going back to his ransacked village 125 miles away.
"When there is no shooting, and one man does not kill another man, God willing, I will return home," Ismail, who thinks he is 80, said Wednesday, sheltered from the blistering sun under a straw and tarpaulin lean-to.
Security remains elusive in the vast Darfur region despite next Monday's deadline that the United Nations set for the Sudanese government to disarm militiamen from nomadic Arab tribes accused of killing thousands of African farmers and looting their villages. Sudan faces the possibility of economic and diplomatic sanctions if it does not bring calm.
At the United Nations on Tuesday, diplomats said U.N. official Tuliameni Kalomoh told the Security Council the Sudanese government has not reined in the Arab militias, known as the Janjaweed.
But Kalomoh also reported during the closed-door briefing that access for relief supplies has improved and that the government is cooperating in identifying havens for the hundreds of thousands of people who have fled their villages to escape Janjaweed attacks, diplomats said.
Sudanese authorities say they are sending thousands more police officers to bring peace in Darfur and end what the United Nations calls the world's worst humanitarian crisis. The government denies charges by human rights groups and others that it backed the Janjaweed as part of a strategy to counter a rebellion by two African groups.
Refugees want reassurance it is safe before going home. The United Nations says about 1.4 million people are living in 147 camps across Darfur, an arid region in western Sudan the size of France, and some 180,000 refugees are across the border in Chad.
"Here we are comfortable," said Ismail, who walked for days with his wife, two sons and seven grandchildren to the Abu Shouk camp in northern Darfur. "We have bread, we have oil. Here, nobody comes to steal or loot. The police are constantly around this place patrolling."
His story is common at the sprawling camp, where more than 40,000 people live on a monthly allotment of U.S.-provided wheat, cooking oil from Denmark and local salt.
Adrian McIntyre, a worker for the Oxfam aid group, said every day he speaks with people who have no confidence that Sudanese authorities will protect them if they go home.
The Darfur conflict began 18 months ago when the rebels rose up against Sudan's Arab-dominated government, claiming discrimination in the African farmers' yearslong conflict with Arab herders over scarce water and arable land.
On Thursday, a team led by U.N. special representative Jan Pronk will begin touring the region, assessing humanitarian access to the camps and security in outlying villages. U.N. Security Council members are expected to await a Sept. 2 briefing by Pronk before determining whether Sudan has done enough to avoid sanctions.
Meanwhile, at African Union-brokered peace talks in Abuja, Nigeria, a government delegate on Wednesday modified Sudan's previous rejection of an international peacekeeping force for Darfur. He said the government had no objections to an African Union force used solely to usher rebels off the battlefield and into their barracks.
The African Union now has 80 observers in Darfur, protected by 150 Rwandan soldiers, to monitor a rarely observed cease-fire. It has proposed sending nearly 2,000 peacekeepers.
Rebel representatives at the talks dropped their objection to addressing how insurgent fighters can be returned to their barracks. They previously said the Janjaweed would first have to begin disarming before the issue could be raised. The rebels still refuse to disarm until the Janjaweed lay down their weapons.
Sudanese Interior Minister Abdul Raheem Mohammed Hussein told The Associated Press his government is committed to the negotiations, despite what he described as repeated truce violations by the rebels.
"I hope that the rebels will continue in the talks so that we can reach a solution and put an end to the suffering of the people in the camps," he said.
The Abu Shouk camp, on the outskirts of the provincial capital, Al-Fasher, is a far cry from Ismail's village, where he says houses lie in ruins and the fields unplanted.
"My village was burned and our cattle were mostly looted," he said. "The men shooting from cars were wearing khaki uniforms and I suspect they were government soldiers. But the rebels also have cars and wear khaki. I saw many people dead. I saw them with my eyes."
He longs to get back to his farm fields, lamenting the lack of dignity in his current state.
"But you tell them, until they build my home, and nicely and properly, and there is no insecurity, I will stay here."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NAI102, XHJ108, XAN110, 111
 Load-Date: August 26, 2004

 

End of Document
