

In Congo, sharing power will be the hard part in a country used to looting, dictators
December 18, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 717 words
Byline: By ELLEN KNICKMEYER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DAKAR, Senegal
Body




After agreeing to divvy up power, Congo's government, rebels and political opposition settled down Wednesday to the tough part of their power-sharing deal: sharing.
Hopes raised by the accord to end the war in Africa's third-largest country were accompanied by a powerful fear that the pact signed Tuesday only guaranteed fighting - at close quarters - over the spoils.
"It carries the seeds of conflict," said Mpoyi Lungeni, a radio political commentator in Kinshasa, Congo's capital, where signing of the peace deal nevertheless brought murmured prayers of thanks to many lips after four years of war.
The accord worked out in Pretoria, South Africa after months of effort aims to end a conflict that has claimed an estimated 2.5 million lives and plundered Congo of millions of dollars in gold, diamonds, uranium and other mineral wealth.
The deal commits the Congo government and the two key rebel groups to a transitional government to lead the nation to democratic elections in about 2 1/2 years.
Under it, Congolese President Joseph Kabila would have four vice presidents - including two ambitious leaders of the two rebel groups.
On Wednesday, delegates to the negotiations in South Africa squared up to the task of starting a government from scratch: Writing a constitution, then slowly putting it into operation.
Progress was expected to be slow - even an agreement on how to pick Cabinet ministers and other key officials isn't foreseen until mid-January.
And, "these are the easy bits - they're sharing out the bounty, the loot," said Filip Reyntjens, an expert on central Africa at Belgium's University of Antwerp.
"They seem by and large to accept that what they got out of it is the best they can get, but that's the easy part," Reyntjens said. "The difficulty is the substance - what do you do in reconstructing the state?"
Former Botswana President Ketumile Masire, chief mediator for some of the earlier unsuccessful, partial deals for Congo, will be asked to oversee the new talks, Congolese participants say.
To work, the deal requires cooperation between the weak government of young Joseph Kabila - in power since the January 2001 assassination of his father, President Laurent Kabila - and two keen and restless rebels: Ugandan-backed Jean-Pierre Bemba and Rwandan-backed Adolphe Onusumba.
The two rebel leaders have turned more than half the country into private, mineral-rich fiefdoms, which they will have to give up for the envisioned united Congo.
By bringing the rebels' arms and ambitions into government, "the international community has brought the war to Kinshasa," worried Elysee Muhimuzi, a human rights activist in the Congolese capital.
There are thousands of armed U.N. forces in Congo; some are to deploy in the capital to try to keep the peace there.
Eventually, Congo, which in four decades of independence has never had a solid army of its own or been able to enforce laws nationwide, will have to forge an armed forces out of former enemies.
Additionally, the accord will require that all of Congo's people benefit from the nation's resources, which would be invested and developed for the citizens.
The norm in Congo - one established under decades of rule by Mobutu Sese Seko - is to neglect most Congolese, particularly in the wild East, and to funnel fortunes into private bank accounts overseas.
When it comes to splitting up the gold, diamonds and foreign aid, "hopefully there will be a strong governance mechanism by the international community so that the pie is not all eaten by the ministers and vice presidents - but is actually used for the reconstruction of the country," said Francois Grignon, Central Africa specialist for the Brussels-based International Crisis Group.
Power-sharing deals have a weak record in Africa, and the two African wars, Angola and Sierra Leone, that ended this year did so because their prime combatants were put out of the way, abruptly and brutally.
Angola's Joseph Savimbi was killed by the army after three decades of war. Sierra Leone's Foday Sankoh was caught, jailed and held for a war crimes trial after waging a vicious 10-year campaign there.
In Sierra Leone, an earlier peace plan pushed by international mediators failed bloodily, with Sankoh and his fighters taking up AK-47s and rocket-launchers again, hungry for more loot.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos CPN101-103
 Load-Date: December 19, 2002

 

End of Document
