

In Liberia's mortar-rocked capital, simple burials mark the toll
The Associated Press
July 28, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 764 words
Byline: By ALEXANDRA ZAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MONROVIA, Liberia
Body




Two stretcher-bearers in white face masks and black rubber gloves pick their way to a vacant lot next to the crashing Atlantic, where holes await two women and a newborn - the latest victims of the carnage engulfing a city besieged by rebels.
Such grim processions have become a daily ritual in refugee-choked Monrovia, where a week of thundering mortar barrages has killed hundreds of trapped and terrified civilians.
"We are just like chickens in a poultry farm," said Francis Wleh Toe, who has lost count of the bodies he has carried to this spot since rebels began their latest drive for the capital. "Anybody can kill us at any time."
Shelling has hit chiefly at densely populated neighborhoods, shattering homes, churches and schools where tens of thousands have sought sanctuary from advancing insurgents.
Embattled President Charles Taylor, fighting a two-month-old attack by rebels battling to drive him from power, has said that up to 1,000 people have been killed in the past week.
Aid groups put the toll at about 400 in government-held parts of the city. But with no access to rebel zones, the exact figure is impossible to determine.
President Bush on Friday ordered U.S. troops into position off the Liberian coast to support the arrival of a West African peacekeeping force. He stopped short of saying the Americans would participate directly in a peacekeeping mission in Liberia.
Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz said Sunday the United States wants Liberia's neighbors and the United Nations to take the lead in dealing with the West African nation's turmoil.
With fighting still raging, there is little time for ceremony for the victims.
Wleh Toe and his colleagues from French aid group Medecins Sans Frontieres, or Doctors Without Borders, tossed a rat out of the first grave and eased in a white body bag.
The victim's husband muttered a brief prayer as her daughter sobbed beside him.
Neighbors spilled from a nearby house as aid workers hastily filled the grave. Covering their noses against the smell, they stood in silent tribute with the grieving family.
The husband then picked up a rock. He pounded into the ground a flimsy cross made of sticks and masking tape.
No relatives were present for the burial of the next two victims - a woman and the baby, wrapped in a white shroud.
Fighting is so intense, many families are too afraid to venture from their homes to claim and bury their dead.
So the task has fallen to individuals like Patrick Broh, a physician's assistant and gospel musician so appalled by the bloodshed that he volunteered for Doctors Without Borders.
When shells rain down on the city, he and his 16-member team race out with wheel barrows, collecting the wounded and returning for the dead.
So far, they have collected 164 bodies.
They bury many of them at Monrovia's rock-lined beaches - digging holes in the sand with their bare hands until the aid group gave them shovels.
Sometimes the families offer them food or a few Liberian dollars for their work.
Other times, all they have to give are their blessings.
"I like that payment best," he said.
Other victims arrive in ambulances, pickup trucks and wheelbarrows at the main hospital, from which the International Committee of the Red Cross takes them to another temporary burial site on the eastern outskirts of the city.
With no electricity to refrigerate bodies, aid workers keep the dead for 24 hours in a tiny shed at their makeshift clinic.
Any unclaimed bodies are buried in the nearby plot, until they can be exhumed by relatives and transferred to a cemetery.
Stakes of wood mark each grave. Attached are white, plastic-coated cards inscribed with the name of each victim and the date on which they died.
Tannah Zawolo, 51, was still in bed the morning a mortar crashed into the crumbling building where she and countless others had sought refuge from advancing rebels, hoping for safety through proximity to the U.S. Embassy.
She died instantly.
Her husband, James, wanted to bury her in the family plot, but it is now in the hands of the insurgents. So for now, she rests among dozens of others in the aid group's graveyard by the sea. "These are very difficult times," her husband sighed, eyes fixed on the freshly dug mound of earth. "We are hiding, we are running, we are in fear all day."
This burial was especially difficult for Wleh Toe, who was related to the victim by marriage.
"See how she is buried - a woman of property, a woman who had a decent life before," he said, waving at rotting vegetable peels, broken bottles and other trash. "Just because somebody wanted to be president."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY107
 Load-Date: July 29, 2003

 

End of Document
