

Internet gives a few Iraqis a small window to the world
December 14, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 839 words
Byline: By MARIAM FAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




Sitting in an air conditioned Internet cafe with an American pop song blaring in the background, Ziad Abdel Hady escapes from Iraq's isolation.
Abdel Hady surfs his way to knowledge about everything from what life is like in neighboring Arab countries to the latest breakthroughs in engineering and medicine.
The 45-year-old engineer, who has never traveled abroad, says he'd sell his car to buy a computer if he could access the Internet from home.
But private links to the Internet have yet to be introduced in Iraq.
Abdel Hady goes to one of the five or so government-run Internet cafes in Baghdad, where browsers can only access government-screened sites, many pages are not available and the connection is slow.
A first-time surfer, Abdel Hady was looking especially for work-related information about pumps.
Iraqis live in a controlled world. Satellite dishes and modems are banned and special permission is needed to install a fax.
Local media is either state-run or sponsored by the ruling party and presents the official version of the news. Internet provides a window to other worlds, albeit a small one and for few people.
Iraq was once a cultural hub in the Arab world. Now decades of war and the U.N. sanctions imposed to punish the country for its 1990 invasion of Kuwait have crippled the economy. Few people visit Iraq and few Iraqis can afford to travel abroad.
The typical hourly fee of 1,000 dinars (about 50 cents) Iraqi Internet cafes charge strains the budget of many, but customers keep coming.
When Iraq's first Internet cafe opened last year, Transport and Communications Minister Ahmed Murtada Ahmed Khalil said the government would screen the sites to ensure those to which Iraqis would have access did not violate "the precepts of Islamic religion" or offend "morals and ethics."
The list of off-limit sites is long. Ziad Mazen, a 15-year-old student, said he cannot access chat rooms; Fawaz Ali, a Yemeni student at Baghdad University, said he was denied entry to the Web site of Al-Jazeera, the Qatar-based satellite TV news station. Setting up an e-mail account requires special registration.
Iraq is not alone in the region when it comes to policing the Internet.
In Saudi Arabia, where censors confiscate foreign publications that criticize the ruling monarchy and black out photos of scantily dressed women in foreign magazines, the government filters out political discussions and pornography on the Internet.
The sole Internet provider in the United Arab Emirates filters selected Web sites related to politics and sex. Syria blocks pornography, voice chat and e-mail links on sites like Yahoo and Hotmail.
In Egypt, although no laws control Internet use, the Interior Ministry monitors the World Wide Web to see if Egyptians are violating the country's moral laws. Police have arrested people for things like touting themselves for homosexual sex on the Internet or posting a poem viewed as obscene.
Users in Iraq browse the Internet under the watchful eyes of government employees and are unlikely to tap into opposition sites or other banned Web pages, no matter how benign their content.
Verginie Locussol, a Middle East expert with Paris-based Reporters Without Borders, said controlling the Internet is typical of all "dictatorships" that "try to keep people in complete isolation from the world."
Iraqi officials blame the war-ravaged state of the country's communications sector on the West.
Abdel-Razzak al-Hashimi, a senior member of the ruling Baath party, said it's the sanctions and the countries that support them, not the Iraqi government, that keep Iraqis behind.
Alan Mauldin of the TeleGeography, Inc., a Washington, D.C.-based Internet and telecommunications consultancy, said Iraq, with 22 million people, is either the last or one of the last countries in the Middle East to join the Internet community.
Iraq's ".iq" Internet domain suffix counts just 225 subscribers, he said.
By the estimates of TeleGeography, Iraq has a tiny amount of international Internet bandwidth, less than 10 megabits per second.
Iraq may have less bandwidth than Syria, whose estimated 4.3 mbps is otherwise considered lowest in the Arab world. Neighboring Jordan hosts about 75 mbps.
Whatever the limitations, the Internet is prized by those Iraqis with access.
Engineering student Talib Dagher Kathim sees the Internet as the only gate to a better future. A Baghdad University senior, Kathim searches the web for Canadian universities that may give him a scholarship to pursue postgraduate studies.
"Sanctions have isolated the country … but the Internet opened a new door for knowledge and my ambition has no limits," said Kathim, who wants to study abroad because of "the scientific development there."
"I wish I could go study there and come back to benefit the country and to bridge the gap between us and other countries," Kathim said.
---
On the Net:
Iraq Ministry of Foreign Affairs: http://www.uruklink.net/mofa 
Iraqi presidency: http://www.uruklink.net/iraq 
Iraq information: http://www.uruklink.net/iraqinfo/earts.htm 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BAG101-103
 Load-Date: December 15, 2001

 

End of Document
