

Israel protests over comment by U.N. envoy that Israel is 'the great poison' in the Middle East
The Associated Press
April 27, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 310 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Israel sent a formal letter of protest to the Secretary-General on Monday, condemning remarks made by the top U.N. envoy to Iraq calling Israel's policy of domination "the great poison" in the Middle East.
Israeli Ambassador Dan Gillerman said Lakhdar Brahimi's comments were "vitriolic and biased" and heightened concerns about the U.N.'s objectivity concerning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The flap erupted last Wednesday when Brahimi, who is trying to help Iraqis agree on a transitional government to take power on June 30, gave an interview to France Inter radio criticizing Israel's repressive policy and U.S. support for it.
He said his effort to help establish an interim government in Iraq was being made more difficult by Israeli policy toward the Palestinians - and that an eventual solution in Iraq was linked to the wider problem of peace between the Israelis and Palestinians.
"There is no doubt that the great poison in the region is this Israeli policy of domination, and the suffering imposed on the Palestinians as well as the perception of all of the population in the region, and beyond, of the injustice of this policy and the equally unjust support … of the United States for this policy," he said.
U.N. spokesman Fred Eckhard tried to distance the world body from Brahimi's comments on Friday, saying "Mr. Brahimi was expressing his personal views."
Brahimi, a former Algerian foreign minister, continued his criticism of Israel Friday in an ABC television interview, which was broadcast on Sunday, but made clearer that he was reflecting views in the Arab world.
"I think that there is unanimity in the Arab World, and indeed in much of the rest of the world, that the Israeli policy is wrong, that Israeli policy is brutal, repressive, and that they are not interested in peace no matter what you seem to believe in America," Brahimi said.
 Load-Date: April 28, 2004

 

End of Document
