

Ivory Coast army rushes troops to the West after rebels seize key cocoa city
November 29, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 682 words
Byline: By CLAR NI CHONGHAILE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast
Body




Stumbling peace talks looked in danger of collapse Friday as Ivory Coast's army rushed to reclaim the West from shadowy new insurgents, who have joined the fighting in the world's leading cocoa producing nation.
Western diplomats, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the western rebels seemed to include supporters of former junta leader Gen. Robert Guei. Two previously unknown groups appeared to be operating in the area, calling themselves the Movement for Justice and Peace, and the Patriotic Movement for the Greater West.
Guei, who led Ivory Coast's first ever coup in 1999 and was shot dead at the start of this rebellion, was from the Man region and was fervently supported in the far West. Some of the northern rebels also helped bring Guei to power.
Soldiers loyal to the government headed through the cocoa-rich western belt Friday, under presidential orders to boot rebels from the key city of Man and nearby Danane - the latest front in an increasingly complex and fractured conflict that started with a rebel uprising two months ago.
Ivory Coast has been split into a rebel-held north and government-held south since insurgents calling themselves the Patriotic Movement of Ivory Coast, or MPCI, launched a failed coup attempt on Sept. 19. Now, shadowy new rebels appear to be taking control of the western region.
The conflict has fanned simmering ethnic tensions. The northern rebels say they are fighting against the discrimination of mainly Muslim northern tribes by Christian and animist southern groups that have traditionally dominated government.
As warring parties girded for battle despite a month-old cease-fire, West African mediators faced the possible breakdown of peace talks to end a conflict that has cost hundreds of lives, sent thousands fleeing their homes and crippled the economy of this regional powerhouse.
After a month of talks in nearby Togo, the government's top negotiator said the rebels' response Thursday to a draft accord was "unacceptable." He said the sides are "back to square one."
Laurent Dona Fologo urged mediators to decide whether to continue the talks, which have stalled on rebel demands that President Laurent Gbagbo resign - a demand the government team refuses to countenance.
The rebel delegation condemned what they called a "flagrant violation" of the cease-fire by loyalist forces, and called on mediators to react.
Rebels "will be obliged to resort to use of arms if nothing is done to stop these attacks against the civilian population and our positions," said their chief negotiator, Guillaume Soro.
A French army spokesman said Friday that rebels had seized Man, about 310 miles northwest of Abidjan, but added loyalists were still in control of the nearby airport.
The town of Danane, near the border of Liberia, was also in rebel hands, said Lt. Col. Ange-Antoine Leccia, a spokesman for the 1,000-strong French force monitoring the cease-fire. Phone lines to Man, Danane and surrounding towns were down Friday.
Leccia said the French army had sent patrols into the region to check on the security of French nationals.
The MPCI rebels, based in the center and north of the country, said they had nothing to do with the fighting in the West. But a spokesman for Gbagbo, Toussaint Alain, said the rebel groups were all working together.
In central Ivory Coast, government forces withdrew to government-held Daloa on Thursday after clashes near the rebel-held city of Vavoua, 35 miles away.
Rebel commander Col. Michel Gueu said loyalist forces had tried to attack Vavoua but had been ambushed.
The fighting in the West created a new wave of refugees. Hundreds of people, mostly Liberian refugees who had crossed into Ivory Coast to avoid clashes in their own country, fled the area around Danane, heading back home, said the U.N. refugee agency in Liberia's capital, Monrovia.
At least 500 people had arrived in the Liberian border town of Loguatuo, 15 miles west of Danane, UNHCR official Moses Okello said. There are about 30,000 Liberian refugees around Danane and Man, and 17,000 around Guiglo, further south, according to UNHCR figures.
 Load-Date: November 30, 2002

 

End of Document
