

Ivory Coast army on the offensive as French troops find mass grave
December 6, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 645 words
Byline: By CLAR NI CHONGHAILE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DUEKOUE, Ivory Coast
Body




Ivory Coast soldiers sped west Friday to join an offensive against rebels holding several towns in the rich, cocoa-producing region, now the fiercest front in a nearly 3-month-old rebellion.
Soldiers in pickup trucks, some with mounted guns, and a truck carrying a tank raced through the center of the former French colony to the mountainous west.
Army spokesman Lt. Col. Jules Yao Yao said Friday that government troops were clearing the rebels with "decisive results," especially around Toulepleu, a rebel-held town near Liberia.
Yao Yao said two soldiers and several rebels had been killed in the fighting in the west.
"Operations to mop up rebel resistance and to consolidate positions are ongoing … Life has gone back to normal in this region," he said.
French forces reported Friday that they found a mass grave in rebel-held territory. Corpses were sticking out of the earth, French Lt. Col. Ange-Antoine Leccia said.
Leccia did not say how fresh the grave was, the number of dead or who the dead were.
French soldiers came across the grave Thursday in Monoko-Zohi, a village 70 miles northwest of the government-held town of Daloa.
Villagers told French troops there were more corpses inside a nearby well, Leccia said. The well was too deep for the French soldiers to see to the bottom, however, he said.
The area saw fighting last week between government forces and rebels based in the north.
A 1,000-strong French force has been deployed in the former French colony to monitor an Oct. 17 cease-fire that was shattered last week by new fighting. The French troops also are protecting their nationals and other foreigners.
Ivory Coast, the world's leading cocoa producer, has been split in three by the fighting. The government holds the south, including the key port and economic hub of Abidjan; the insurgents behind a Sept. 19 uprising hold the north and a newly emerged rebel force is in the west. Both sides accuse the other of also using mercenaries.
Thousands of people have fled the fighting, with some 30,000 crossing into neighboring Liberia - a country shattered by a brutal seven-year civil war and ongoing rebellion.
The rebels and the government traded blame for the mass grave.
"The president has been informed and he is profoundly shocked by this macabre discovery. This can only be a crime committed by the rebellion," said Toussaint Alain, a spokesman for President Laurent Gbagbo.
"It has to be the loyalists who were responsible, because we don't do things like that," said Antoine Beugre, a spokesman for northern-based rebels.
Beugre claimed rebels had no forces in the area of the grave, and said the victims were likely civilians.
Rebels and Amnesty International previously accused loyalist forces of massacring dozens of civilians in one town retaken from the rebels.
Government officials say the rebel forces have also killed people believed to support Gbagbo and the army.
The northern rebels want Gbagbo, who is from the southwest, to quit and call new elections. The western rebels also want the president out.
Both northern and western rebel movements say they are led by former Ivory Coast army officers. Although the western and northern rebel groups say they are operating separately, there are growing indications the two movements are linked.
Many residents who fled rebel-held towns in the west said some of the insurgents came from the north.
On the road to Man, a western city recaptured by government forces this weekend, a truck lay abandoned, its windshield punctured with bullet holes. On the hood, the faint outline of "MPCI" could be seen - the abbreviation for the northern rebels' Patriotic Movement of Ivory Coast.
Residents say they have also seen Liberians among the western rebels, though the insurgents say that is not true. Liberian fighters are especially feared among civilians because of their poor discipline, looting and drug use.
 Load-Date: December 7, 2002

 

End of Document
