

Jordan's Queen Rania protests Israeli incursions into the West Bank
April 9, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 687 words
Byline: By JAMAL HALABY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan
Body




Jordan's Queen Rania led a pro-Palestinian demonstration through the capital, underlining Arab frustration with Israeli incursions into the West Bank and the pressure on moderate leaders to show they share their people's anger.
In Egypt, one student was killed as police clashed with protesters in one of several demonstrations coinciding with Secretary of State Colin Powell's stop in the country as part of his Mideast peacemaking tour.
The student is at least the third person killed in the Arab world in almost two weeks of street protests against Israel and the United States.
In a statement, the Ministry of Interior blamed "leftist elements" for throwing empty bottles and stones at police, after which "a group of police officers was forced to use air guns to stop the riots." The statement said 33 police were also injured. Nineteen security personnel and more than a hundred students were hospitalized, officials said.
The families of Israeli diplomats in Egypt left for home Tuesday amid growing anti-Israeli street protests in the country, airport officials and the Israeli Embassy said. Officials at Cairo airport said 45 family members left for Israel.
A fourth person was reported killed during a violent protest in Yemen's southern port city of Aden. Witnesses blamed police and said two people were injured. It was one of two large protests in Yemen on Tuesday. The other involved 300,000 people in the capital, San'a.
In Yemen, President Ali Abdullah Saleh said he was ready to provide the Palestinians with "money, men, blood and weapons" whenever Arab states surrounding Israel open their borders.
"The battle has started. It will be a decisive battle between us and the Zionist entity when the Arab borders are opened for the Arab youth and Arab and Islamic fighters to reach Palestine," Saleh said.
In Jordan, some 2,000 women activists, children and wives of Arab diplomats joined Rania in the peaceful demonstration, a rare participation by the royal family.
Rania and three other royal family members walked behind the first row of protesters: five Jordanian children in wheelchairs with signs draped around their necks calling on Israel to "stop disabling our children."
Rania, 31, hails from the wealthy al-Yassin family from Tulkarem, one of two West Bank towns from which Israeli troops pulled out earlier Tuesday, a week after taking over the town.
She was silent during the 400-yard march from the Jubilee Square in Amman's suburbs to a U.N. office. But at a benefit for Palestinians earlier in the day, she accused the world of standing idle as Palestinians suffered the "ugliest forms of human rights violations."
She affirmed Jordan's commitment to its 1994 Israeli peace treaty, but urged the international community to "take action to stop (the) massacres being committed on Palestinian soil, against a defenseless people who strive to live in dignity, peace and tranquility."
Jordan is seen as an important mediator in the Arab-Israeli conflict and a key ally of the United States.
Elsewhere in Jordan, at least 2,000 businesses were closed in the capital and Palestinian camps. The opposition called the strike in defiance of the government's public stance against "obstructing daily life."
The student killed in Egypt was shot in the chest as at least 8,000 university students marched to the American Cultural Center in the port city of Alexandria, police said. It wasn't clear who shot him.
More than 100 people were injured as police using tear gas and batons clashed with marchers throwing stones. Police said the injuries were minor.
The students were protesting Powell's stop in the Egyptian capital, where the U.S. secretary of state met with President Hosni Mubarak in an effort to broker a truce between the Israelis and Palestinians.
Thousands of students also staged loud but peaceful protests at Cairo's Al-Azhar University, Tanta University and in front of the Egyptian parliament building.
In Lebanon, several thousand people preceded by religious leaders and lawmakers marched in the southern market town of Nabatiyeh and later gathered in the central square to show support for Palestinians.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos AMM102-104
 Load-Date: April 10, 2002

 

End of Document
