

Lessons of Mogadishu helped U.S. forces in Afghanistan, but may not apply to Somalia; EDITOR'S NOTE: Chris Tomlinson covered the U.S. bombing campaign in Afghanistan and has also reported on Somalia from his base in; ---
January 17, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 794 words
Byline: By CHRIS TOMLINSON, Associated Press Writer
Body




Among diplomats and aid workers, it's known as the Somalia Syndrome: America's reluctance to send troops into foreign conflicts for fear of losing lives.
The deaths of 18 U.S. soldiers on the streets of Mogadishu, the capital, in October 1993 were perceived, rightly or wrongly, as shaping U.S. policy in Rwanda and the Balkans; Osama bin Laden, later to become the chief suspect in the Sept. 11 terror attacks, even cited the rapid U.S. withdrawal from Somalia as proof that the United States couldn't take casualties.
But after the dust of Mogadishu settled, senior military officials took a long, hard look at its lessons and began training U.S. troops to combat irregular forces. The results can be seen in Afghanistan.
While the movie account of the battle, "Black Hawk Down," is in theaters now, U.S. Marines in Quantico, Va., used the book - on which the film was based - to recreate the battle at an urban warfare center in 1999.
Using Marines to play all the parts, officers at first faithfully recreated the battle in Mogadishu's narrow streets using the book as a guide, then fought it two more times, trying out different tactics to see what difference they would have made, according to Col. Gary Anderson, executive officer at the Marine Corps' Warfighting Lab in 1999.
Anderson said U.S. troops needed more and better communications equipment, hand-held global positioning system (GPS) units, and more stealthy tactics when fighting in those environments.
"Cultural awareness of the area is also important. The places we're dealing with now are places we do not have a lot of experience in," Anderson said in an interview at the time.
Two years later in Afghanistan, U.S. Special Operations soldiers each carried radios and GPS devices and worked hard to mix in with the Afghan forces, dressing like them and fighting with them.
Anderson, who served in Mogadishu but was not part of the battle, said his lab developed an urban warfare training program that conventional U.S. Marine forces were put through before their deployment in Afghanistan.
The U.S. troops who went into Somalia were originally intended as peacekeepers charged with protecting food supplies to a hungry, war-torn populace, but ended up trying to eliminate the warlords. Now the Pentagon has named Somalia as a possible target in the war against terrorism. But Somalia poses a completely different challenge.
In Afghanistan, most of the anti-Taliban commanders were veterans of the CIA-financed war against Soviet occupation in the 1980s and had past dealings with U.S. agents. These contacts made it easier to embed U.S. special forces into the Afghan militias.
So far, the United States has no natural allies in Somalia. A U.S. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the Bush Administration doesn't have full confidence in the transitional national government, since it only controls part of Mogadishu and is unable to assert itself militarily.
Critics also say the transitional government includes anti-Western Islamic fundamentalists. Somali President Abdiqasim Salad Hassan denies it and has pledged full support for the war on terrorism.
A group of Ethiopian-backed faction leaders, who oppose the transitional government, includes Hussein Mohamed Aidid, the son of Mohamed Farrah Aidid, whose forces killed the U.S. soldiers in Mogadishu when they tried to capture two of his lieutenants. Many of the other faction leaders, anxious to use the war against terrorism to make themselves Somalia's new rulers, have equally problematic backgrounds.
Over Afghanistan, U.S. pilots easily found al-Qaida bases and troops to bomb. U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld has said groups with al-Qaida links have operated training bases in Somalia, but that they had gone inactive since the United States has been paying attention to them.
Pentagon officials have said their short-term priority is to make sure Somalia does not become a haven for fleeing al-Qaida forces, thus the emphasis on reconnaissance flights and naval patrols off Somalia's coast. If no identifiable terrorist threat emerges in Somalia, direct military action appears unlikely, said the U.S. official, who asked not be named.
"Somalia is a special case because it really isn't a governed country, at all," Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz, told ABC television's "This Week," explaining why U.S. military intervention would be difficult. "It also means there's not much to protect terrorists when they get there."
The only long-term solution to ensure Somalia does not become a terrorist base is the establishment of a friendly government that is capable of policing the entire country.
But with Somalia deeply fractured along clan lines and competing private militias on the streets, that could take years.
 Load-Date: January 18, 2002

 

End of Document
