

Mideast demonstrators protest Powell's first visit to the region as secretary of state
February 24, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 776 words
Byline: By DONNA ABU-NASR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




Iraqi legislators chanted "Away, away Powell," and waved banners reading "Criminal Colin Powell - get out of the region" Saturday, part of a chorus of criticism across the Middle East of the American secretary of state's visit.
Some 100 lawmakers repeated slogans including "Powell's trip is a trip of shame, opposed by all free Arabs" and "Bush, Bush listen well: We all love Saddam Hussein," a reference to President Bush. The protesters said Powell's trip will prolong crippling sanctions against their country.
Palestinians demonstrated against Powell's arrival in Jerusalem on Saturday by burning his picture, the American flag, and chanting "Powell go home."
In Lebanon, 300 protesters carrying Lebanese, Palestinian and Iraqi flags shouted anti-U.S. and anti-Israel slogans at the U.N. offices in downtown Beirut.
In Amman, Jordan, more than 500 Jordanians marched to the U.N. offices to protest the visit, raising portraits of Saddam Hussein and denouncing Powell as a "war criminal" and a "coward." One banner waved by the group read, "Lift the sanctions on Iraq now and stop the war and destruction."
The protest in Baghdad came amid a wave of anti-U.S. rhetoric in the official media, in Friday sermons and in remarks by government officials denouncing last week's U.S.-British airstrikes on the outskirts of Baghdad - and Powell's visit.
Iraq's National Assembly, which organized the protest, which was outside the offices of the U.N. Development Program, had sent a message to Arab parliaments last week urging them to consider the first day of Powell's visit as "a day of rage."
Powell served as head of the joint chiefs of staff of the U.S. armed forces in the alliance that drove Iraqi troops out of Kuwait in the Gulf War 10 years ago this month.
Powell's visit came eight days after the heaviest U.S.-British strike on the outskirts of Baghdad in two years. Three Iraqis were killed and 25 others wounded.
As he flew to the Middle East, Powell told reporters he was open to suggestions on how to make the U.N. sanctions on Iraq both leak-proof and effective, with minimum impact on the Iraqi people.
In Iraq, though, Powell's trip is seen as an attempt by the Bush administration to toughen the sanctions that have already started to crumble and intimidate Arab countries that are clamoring for the removal of the embargo by signing bilateral trade agreements with Iraq.
At Saturday's protest in Baghdad, which took place as Powell was holding his first talks in Egypt, Iraqi legislator Ajeel Jalal al-Yawir said the U.S. official's trip was "a new attempt in an American-Zionist-British conspiracy against the great Iraqi people."
"The trip of the criminal Colin Powell aims at … prolonging the sanctions," said al-Yawir. "It's a treacherous visit."
The legislators met Francis Dubois, the UNDP's representative in Baghdad, and gave him a letter for U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan denouncing the airstrikes as an "unjustified criminal act."
In Damascus, Syria, where Powell will visit Monday, the official state-run media urged Powell and the United States to continue its role in the Mideast peace process, saying a diminished role would lead to more violence.
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat said he hoped Powell's arrival to the region would herald strong American involvement in peace efforts.
"The most important thing is that there is a strong position from the American administration," Arafat told reporters, "President George W. Bush told me recently that he will continue along the path of his father and President Bill Clinton. We hope that Powell's visit will be part of such an American strategy (of involvement)."
On Saturday two anti-Powell demonstrations were held in the West Bank town of Nablus. About 800 people gathered in the streets for a protest organized by the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine. Demonstrators in black masks wielding automatic rifles, hatchets, and firebombs burned pictures of Powell and Sharon as well as American flag.
The crowd chanted, "Powell go home, we don't need you here."
At a second rally in Nablus, some 500 people protested the visit by hoisting pictures of Saddam Hussein in the air and waving Palestinian flags. A group of Palestinian children burned copies of Powell's picture.
"The killer of the children of Baghdad is coming to our Arab lands and we call on our Arab nation to welcome him by demonstrating against his crimes," said Mohammed Safi, the leader of a pro-Iraqi organization in Nablus.
Palestinian shopkeepers were called on to participate in a general strike Sunday afternoon, and about 500 demonstrators burned U.S. and Israeli flags in the West Bank town of Hebron.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BAG102-104; CAI111,114; JRL103,104; AMM103; BEI101,103
 Load-Date: February 25, 2001

 

End of Document
