

Milosevic opens his defense in second half of landmark war crimes trial, claiming Serbs were the real victims in Yugoslav wars
The Associated Press
August 31, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 799 words
Byline: By ANTHONY DEUTSCH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: THE HAGUE, Netherlands
Body




More than two years after his trial opened, Slobodan Milosevic launched his defense against war crimes charges Tuesday, insisting the Serbs he led with an iron fist were the victims instead of the aggressors in wars that tore apart Yugoslavia and destroyed millions of lives.
Milosevic began the second half of the most important war crimes trial since World War II by delivering the opening statement in his own defense. He said Serbia's actions were a response to rebellions by other ethnic groups and outside threats by Islamic radicals who piggybacked on Yugoslavia's tensions to foment mayhem in the Balkans.
Calling the prosecution's case "a distortion of history," Milosevic portrayed the Serbs as victims of a plan supported by the United States and Europe to break up Yugoslavia, of an attempt to wipe out Croatia's Serb minority, and of a Saudi-financed plot to create an Islamic state in Bosnia.
Milosevic, seated alone at the defense table, sometimes turned red in the face as he rushed to complete his opening statement in the allotted time.
The panel of three U.N judges granted him an extra 90 minutes to finish summarizing his case after he complained he was given only four hours while prosecutors took three days to present their case when the trial began in February 2002.
The judges placed the opening of the defense at the top of Tuesday's agenda, concerned that the case had repeatedly been delayed by Milosevic's frail health. Originally set for April, the defense case was postponed five times after doctors determined Milosevic's blood pressure was dangerously high.
Milosevic's health, and the possible appointment of a defense lawyer against his will may be discussed later, the judges ruled.
Milosevic, 63, faces 66 counts of war crimes for allegedly instigating three wars during the violent breakup of the Yugoslav federation in the 1990s when more than 200,000 people were killed. Prosecutors say he was responsible for ethnic cleansing in the former republics to create a "greater Serbia" that united Serbs across Yugoslavia.
Milosevic said tens of thousands of Serbs were killed or driven from their homes in Croatia before the Yugoslav army responded.
"This is a classical example of an armed rebellion against a state," he said. "A state has the right to use all means necessary to control the rebellion."
Later, Milosevic, said mujahadeen fighters flooded into Muslim-dominated Bosnia from Iran, Saudi Arabia, Afghanistan, Lebanon, and Morocco "to support the first Islamic state in Europe." The Afghans came with arms supplied by the U.S. intelligence agency, the CIA, Milosevic said.
Milosevic said the accusations against him were "an unscrupulous lie and also a treacherous distortion of history." He said he had defended his country against a conspiracy to "wipe out Serbia from the map of Europe." He charged that prosecutors had "presented everything in a lopsided manner" to fit their version of events.
The reference to a distortion of history signaled that Milosevic intended to give a politically charged defense, attempting to place his accusers in the dock for what he sees as unjustified attacks on Serbia and the Serbian people in other Balkan countries.
Milosevic studied law, but had never before practiced it. Although he defends himself in the courtroom, Milosevic is assisted by a team of Yugoslav lawyers.
On Tuesday, presiding judge Patrick Robinson cautioned Milosevic he was wasting time with historical arguments that were legally irrelevant and would not be admitted as evidence.
Milosevic insists the Yugoslav tribunal, created in 1993, is an illegal, anti-Serbian institution established by foreign political opponents.
"This tribunal was formed with the sole purpose in mind of covering up the mistakes of failed Western policy," he said. "The fratricidal war in Yugoslavia was instigated and supported precisely by those who established this court of yours," Milosevic told the judges.
A main issue for the judges is whether the defense should be handed over to a court-appointed lawyer to avoid more months of postponements and to keep the proceedings professional.
They also must decide whether his indictment - which covers alleged crimes committed during the wars in Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo - should be broken into separate parts to speed up proceedings.
The first witnesses won't be called before Sept. 7, the tribunal said. Milosevic initially submitted a list of 1,400 names, but only a small portion can be called during the 150 days he has been given to present his case.
His lawyers say he wants to call former President Bill Clinton, British Prime Minister Tony Blair and German Chancellor Gerhard Stirred, among many other foreign politicians. The judges can refuse to call witnesses if they are considered irrelevant to the defense case.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos FRE101-102
 Load-Date: September 1, 2004

 

End of Document
