

Muslims march around the world in protests against French head scarf ban
The Associated Press
January 17, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 841 words
Byline: By ELAINE GANLEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Shouting "The veil is my choice," hundreds of people marched in Paris on Saturday as part of global protests against the French government's plan to ban Muslim headscarves in schools.
Muslims from all over France took part in the Paris rally, which drew at least 3,000 people. Many of the protesters were women wearing a headscarf or "hijab," and bearded men in robes.
"We're here for our liberty," said Fatiha Hossol, from the southeastern city of Lyon. "It's our religious obligation to honor our God."
Algerian-born Kawtar Fawzy, 30, also traveled from Lyon. "When I came here, they told me France was the land of human rights. I found out it's the opposite," she said, amid protesters waving French flags.
From London to Baghdad, people around the world took to the streets Saturday to show opposition to the proposal to ban religious attire, including the headscarf, in French public schools.
The government, worried about the rise of Islamic fundamentalism, intends to enact the law for the start of the 2004-2005 school year in September. It says Muslim scarves and other obvious religious symbols must be barred from schools to keep them secular and avoid religious strife.
But, many Islamic leaders say the law will stigmatize France's estimated 5 million Muslims, who make up 8 percent of the population.
In London, 2,400 people demonstrated across from the French Embassy in the upscale Knightsbridge area, waving signs and chanting: "If this is democracy, we say: 'No, merci!"'
"The (French) government is isolating Muslims and setting a dangerous precedent," said Ihtisham Hibatullah," spokesman for the Muslim Association of Britain. "Muslims see it as an aggravation."
Across the street from the embassy, a small rival group of about 30 demonstrators expressed support for the French ban. "The Islamic hijab is enslaving women, not freeing them," said Sohaila Sharifa, 35.
Dozens of women, veiled in black scarves, marched through the main city of Srinagar, the summer capital of Indian-controlled Kashmir, to express their solidarity with Muslims in France.
"Why should anyone interfere with what I want to wear. If I revolt against this transgression I will be called an extremist. Is it fair?" said Asiya Andrabi, whose Dukhtaran-e-Millat, or Daughters of Faith, is a radical separatist group that demands Kashmir's merger with Pakistan.
Hundreds of others protested outside French embassies and cultural centers in Lebanon, Kuwait, Iraq, Egypt and Syria.
Other protests were expected in the United States and Canada in what would be the biggest coordinated demonstration against a law that would also ban Jewish skullcaps and large Christian crosses in French public schools.
Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy said such protests are not a positive contribution to the debate.
"If there is a protest one day, there will be a counter-protest the next," he said Friday.
Saturday's march through northeastern Paris to the Place de la Nation was called by the Party of French Muslims. Before the rally began, a small group of men pulled out a prayer rug and said prayers at the Place de la Republique.
Dalil Boubakeur, rector of the Mosque of Paris and president of the French council of the Muslim religion, discouraged Muslims from attending, saying the protest would only exacerbate the anti-Muslim climate and create tensions for them in Europe.
He has called for calm among France's Muslims "because we absolutely do not want confrontation." Boubakeur's French Council of the Muslim Faith serves as a link to the government.
Protests in other French cities with large Muslim communities, such as northeastern Lille and southern Marseille, drew 2,400 and 1,800 people respectively.
Demonstrations also were expected outside French consulates and embassies in Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, San Francisco and Washington, D.C., and in Ottawa, Montreal and Toronto in Canada, organizers said.
About 3,000 people took part in a similar protest in Paris on Dec. 21. More than half were women, girls and even young children wearing headscarves. Earlier this month, 700 Muslims also marched through the Danish capital of Copenhagen.
In Iraq, an Islamic group distributed an open letter to Chirac in mosques calling for the government to reverse its position. A demonstration drew fewer than 100 students Saturday at Baghdad's Al Mustansiriya University.
Shaheen Kazi, national office manager at the Muslim Students Association of the U.S. and Canada, said protests were expected to draw a few thousand people.
"The hijab is so central to the Muslim woman's identity," Kazi said. "If we don't stand up for this issue when it happens in a European country or anywhere else, then it could be like a wave that could carry on throughout Europe and then we don't know how far it would spread."
In Berlin, a separate protest concerning a German state proposal to ban Muslim teachers from wearing headscarves in public schools drew about 1,000 people. Earlier this week, Lower Saxony became the third of Germany's 16 states to introduce the legislation.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo IST102, BEI102
 Load-Date: January 18, 2004

 

End of Document
