

Muslims mark the start of feast with prayers, calls to support Palestinians
December 16, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 693 words
Byline: By JASPER MORTIMER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




Millions of Muslims across the Middle East began the three-day feast of Eid al-Fitr on Sunday with prayers, pastries and calls to support the Palestinians.
The day began with huge crowds of people bowing in prayer in the streets outside main mosques. Within two hours, capital cities choked with traffic changed into veritable ghost towns as worshippers went home for festive meals.
Muslims traditionally dine with their closest family at the start of Eid al-Fitr, which follows the fasting month of Ramadan. It is believed the Quran, the Muslim holy book, began to be revealed to man during Ramadan 14 centuries ago.
Before the meals, young Egyptians clapped and danced to music on pleasure boats cruising the Nile. Parents strolled with their children along the river banks, taking in the sun but wearing sweaters and jackets against the chill.
More than 200,000 people packed into the square next to the Mostafa Mahmoud Mosque, one of Cairo's most famous places of worship.
The preacher, Abdallah Shehata, urged Arabs to unite against what he called Israeli aggression in the conflict in the Palestinian territories.
He accused the United States of bias toward Israel, citing the U.S. veto in the U.N. Security Council on Saturday as the latest example.
Washington vetoed a Palestinian-backed resolution that condemned terror acts on both sides and called for a cease-fire to be overseen by international monitors. America said the motion aimed to isolate Israel politically.
Saudi Arabia's grand mufti, Sheik Abdulaziz al-Sheik, told worshippers in the capital, Riyadh, that the Islamic world was going through tough times and was being attacked by "Islam's enemies." That, he said, calls for solidarity among Muslims.
"Here are our brothers in Palestine subjected to the worst kind of suffering, being killed, captured, their houses destroyed and their interests curtailed right in front of the enemies of Islam. That is terrorism in its most profound sense," he said.
In Mecca, one of Islam's holiest cities, the imam of the Grand Mosque, Sheik Mohammed bin Abdullah al-Sobayel, stressed that Islam is a religion of tolerance. His sermon was attended by King Fahd and Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat prayed at a small mosque near his headquarters in the West Bank town of Ramallah as Israeli tanks stood nearby.
"We hope the Arab nation, and hope the Muslim nation, will stand beside us to defend our holy places, the Christian and Muslim holy places," Arafat told reporters. "I call on my people to be patient because, in the end, the Palestinians will achieve what they want."
Last week, Israel accused Arafat of direct responsibility for terror attacks on Israelis, severed all contact with him and stepped up its military crackdown.
"The feast is sad this year," said Fathim Daraj, a Palestinian woman whose son Obei Daraj, 14, died in the fighting. She placed flowers on his grave in a Ramallah cemetery.
"Where is the feast - martyrs and demolished houses," she said, referring to the people killed and buildings destroyed by Israeli airstrikes and shelling.
In Beirut, Lebanon's grand mufti, Sheik Mohammed Rashid Kabbani, told worshippers at the Imam Ali Mosque that it was time for Arab governments to destroy the state of Israel.
"Arab states should take the initiative, and not let things pass as is their custom, to put an end to the Israeli entity that was built by the usurpation of Palestine," he said.
Other Lebanese were in a joyful mood, lighting fireworks to celebrate the Eid. Shoppers stood in lines to buy traditional Arab pastries and sweets to give to friends and relatives. Some city-dwellers took the opportunity of a break in several days of rain to drive up to the mountains to ski or play in the early snow.
In Baghdad, 11 years of U.N. sanctions imposed after the invasion of Kuwait have left many Iraqis too poor to celebrate the Eid.
"I do not have the time or the resources to take my family anywhere to enjoy the Eid," said Salim Ahmed, 43, a taxi driver who spent the day looking for customers.
In Iran, Tehran's parks were filled with picnickers who brought pots of food and flasks filled with hot tea.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: December 17, 2001

 

End of Document
