

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
August 6, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 820 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




HONG KONG (AP) - Yao Ming scored 17 points to lead the Chinese national team to an 85-75 victory over the Melbourne Tigers in an exhibition game on Wednesday.
Yao, the top pick by Houston in last year's NBA draft, also had nine rebounds and four blocked shots before a near-capacity crowd of 10,200 at the Hong Kong Coliseum.
Toronto's Menk Bateer had 11 points and two rebounds for China.
Yao wore a bandage protecting an eyebrow he cut during practice about two weeks ago. He missed five dunks early but led a second-half rally as China overcame a 44-38 halftime deficit for the victory.
---
ADDIS ABABA, Ethiopia (AP) - Three Olympic gold medalists will lead a 6-kilometer run through Addis Ababa next month to draw attention to Ethiopia's entrenched poverty, the coach of the country's national track team said Wednesday.
Wolde Meskel said that double Olympic 10,000-meter champions Haile Gebreselassie and Derartu Tulu will join some 11,000 other runners on the course through some of the poorest neighborhoods in the capital of the country in which more than half the 68 million people live on less than $1 a day.
Kenenisa Bekele, the 22-year-old winner of four world cross-country titles in two years, will also participate.
Ethiopia is currently reeling from widespread, drought-induced hunger that has hit more than 12.6 million people and claimed tens of thousands of lives, according to United Nations agencies and aid organizations.
Organizers hope the run will raise $30,000 for the national Disaster Prevention and Preparedness Commission, the government's emergency relief arm.
---
HONG KONG (AP) - About 2,000 boisterous fans greeted Real Madrid and its new megastar David Beckham as they arrived in Hong Kong on Wednesday.
The Spanish club's all-star lineup arrived from Tokyo on the third leg of its 17-day preseason Asian tour. In addition to Beckham, the Madrid squad includes Ronaldo, Zinedine Zidane and Raul Gonzalez.
Organizers said it cost about $4.7 million to bring Real Madrid to Hong Kong for the exhibition match. Fans paid from $64 to $192 for tickets compared to less than $12 for regular local soccer matches.
Despite the high prices, the match was a sellout within hours, with hundreds of fans camped outside Hong Kong stadium for three days last week in the heat to get a seat.
From Hong Kong, the team will travel to Thailand, where it will play an exhibition against the national team to commemorate Thai Queen Sirikit's birthday.
---
AMSTERDAM, Netherlands (AP) - Ajax Amsterdam, one of the best-known European soccer teams, said Wednesday it has formed a partnership with a youth team in Orlando, Fla.
The U.S. team, formerly known as Orlando Football Academy, will be renamed Ajax Orlando.
Ajax said it will send coaches and players to visit Orlando, and will allow players and coaches to come to Amsterdam for training.
Ajax Orlando players will wear Ajax's red-and-white shirts and use the Ajax logo, a helmeted soldier.
---
PARIS (AP) - FIA's International Court of Appeal will review Ralf Schumacher's role in last weekend's crash at the German Grand Prix in a hearing on Aug. 19.
The BMW-Williams driver was blamed for the crash at the start of Sunday's German GP. Stewards ruled he will have to start 10 places down on the grid from his qualifying spot in the Aug. 24 Hungarian Grand Prix in Budapest.
Schumacher appealed the decision but said he would accept any ruling by the FIA body.
The appeals board will issue its ruling on Aug. 20.
---
PITTSFORD, N.Y. (AP) - Sam Dana showed he hadn't lost a halfback's instincts.
Handed a game ball from the Buffalo Bills, Dana cradled it in his arm with an index finger protecting the tip - just like he was taught some 80 years ago.
There was just one problem for the oldest living former NFL player. "Now if only I could run with it," he said.
Dana, who turns 100 on Thursday, visited the Bills training camp this week and was presented with a team jersey with his name and the number 100 stitched on the back.
"You've made my day. You've made my years," he told Bills coach Gregg Williams.
Dana played alongside Lou Gehrig at Columbia and once caught a pass from Harry Stuhldreher, a member of Notre Dame's celebrated "Four Horsemen."
"I played the old game. I loved it," Dana said. "But I wasn't such a big shot like Red Grange and people like that, you know."
Dana played pro football as far back as 1926 with the Hartford Blues. Known as Sam "Smoke" Salemi (he legally changed his last name in 1945 so his children wouldn't have to put up with "the wisecracks") he earned $100 a game playing for the New York Yankees in 1928. NFL historians lost track of him, probably because of the name change.
Last March, Dana's son was intent on correcting the error, sending a letter to the Pro Football Hall of Fame, informing them that his father was still alive and living in Kenmore, N.Y.
"I didn't even know I was missing," Dana said, smiling. "I'm glad they found me."
 Load-Date: August 7, 2003

 

End of Document
