

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
July 17, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 829 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




SALT LAKE CITY (AP) - Mitt Romney, who took over this city's bribery-tainted Olympic organization, has written a book calling the failed prosecution of two Salt Lake bid executives "inept."
A federal prosecutor said Romney, now Massachusetts governor, was misinformed.
In the book, "Turnaround," Romney assails U.S. Olympic Committee executives for their $600,000 salaries. He said other perks included luxury sedans and elegant offices that were hardly used in Salt Lake City.
Romney said that when it came to protecting perks and privileges, USOC executives were worse than the international Olympic delegates who accepted $1 million in cash, gifts, favors, jobs for relatives, and first-class travel from Salt Lake during its successful bid for the 2002 Winter Olympics.
Despite those extravagances, the International Olympic Committee was "relatively restrained compared to the USOC," he wrote.
"There were many forces that combined to stymie the government's investigation and prosecution over the years," Richard Wiedis, the lead federal prosecutor in the Olympic case, told The Associated Press on Saturday. "I can't imagine how Mitt Romney had any idea about those factors."
The USOC has a new team of executives, none making more than $300,000, USOC spokesman Darryl Seibel said Saturday. Seibel said Romney can claim credit for helping make the 2002 Games a "tremendous success" that netted a record 34 American medals.
"We will not respond to the criticism levied by Governor Romney," Seibel said. "It is important to remember, however, that the USOC is in the final stages of the most sweeping reform of its governance structure in the history of the organization."
"Turnaround," to be published next month, is Romney's account of how he rescued the games from a public-relations nightmare. It's also is a business primer on the nuts and bolts of putting on the Olympics.
---
LONDON (AP) - Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi wants to buy a Premier League team, possibly Crystal Palace, The Guardian reported Saturday.
No official approach has been made by the government-owned Libyan Arab Foreign Investment company, the newspaper said in an unsourced story.
The investment company was used by Gadhafi to buy a 5 percent stake in Italian club Juventus two years ago.
"If Gadhafi's money was able to progress Palace and allow them to compete at the top of the tree and be a successful football club, then one would have to take that under consideration," Crystal Palace chairman Simon Jordan said.
Crystal Palace will play in England's top division this season after winning promotion.
Although Gadhafi has been associated with state-sponsored terrorism, relations with Britain appear to have thawed. In March, Prime Minister Tony Blair became the first British leader to meet Gadhafi since he seized power in 1969.
Gadhafi would be the latest foreigner to own an English club. Last year, Russian oil tycoon Roman Abramovich took over Chelsea.
---
MINSK, Belarus (AP) - Thousands turned out to catch a glimpse of the Stanley Cup on Saturday as hockey's most prestigious trophy came to the Belarusian capital with Tampa Bay Lightning goalkeeper Nikolai Khabibulin.
The Cup was on display outside Minsk's Palace of Sport, where Belarusians lined up to pose with the 3-foot tall trophy.
Khabibulin shared the NHL lead with five shutouts and had a 1.71 goals-against average in last season's playoffs. He told NTV television he was happy to be traveling with the Cup to Minsk.
"People are hospitable," said Khabibulin, whose wife Victoria was born here. "The city is clean, calm, no hassle."
Traditionally, players who win the Stanley Cup keep it for two days. Next week, the Cup is scheduled to travel to the Ukrainian capital, Kiev, with Lightning forward Ruslan Fedotenko.
---
TOKYO (AP) - An outspoken Internet whiz kid threw a curve ball at Japan's stodgy baseball hierarchy by offering to buy the cash-strapped Kintetsu Buffaloes.
Takafumi Horie made a fortune during Japan's Internet boom. He wants to make the Buffaloes profitable, but the team rejected his offer earlier this month.
"Baseball is by far the most popular sport in Japan," the 31-year-old Horie said. "You have to find ways to tap into that popularity and I'm confident I can do that."
With escalating player salaries and lagging attendance, the Osaka-based Buffaloes were losing $36 million a year. In June, the team announced a plan to merge with the Orix BlueWave, another Pacific League team struggling at the gate.
Japan's 10-year economic slowdown and the steady trickle of marquee players like Hideki Matsui to the major leagues has added to the financial woes of many teams.
Horie said he thinks Japan's owners probably feel threatened that someone who wears jeans and a T-shirt wants to infiltrate their cozy, "old boy" network.
"I think they're scared," Horie said. "But they're eventually going to have to sell to someone."
A Japanese sports newspaper reported that Horie's company has an annual revenue of $99.3 million.
 Load-Date: July 18, 2004

 

End of Document
