

Names in the Game Queen Elizabeth II, Paul Tracy, Jacques Villeneuve
April 26, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 1015 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




BOSTON (AP) - In a farewell letter, former New England quarterback Drew Bledsoe thanked Patriots fans, saying their nine years of loyal support made him feel like "more than a number on a field."
The letter appeared as a full-page advertisement in Friday's editions of The Boston Globe and the Boston Herald.
Bledsoe said he was especially grateful for the letters of support he received when he was hospitalized after suffering a serious chest injury in a game last September. That injury led to the loss of his job to Tom Brady, and ultimately to his trade to the Buffalo Bills last weekend.
"You demonstrated to me that I was more than a number on a field. I was a person you cared about," he wrote.
Bledsoe said he was pleased to be a "small part" of the team's evolution from its "doormat status" in the early 1990s to its Super Bowl championship this year.
"As I raise my three little boys, I will share with them stories of your warmth and kindness. Quite simply, you helped me to learn how people should treat other people, and I thank you for that."
The 30-year-old, three-time Pro Bowl selection, who led the Patriots to the 1997 Super Bowl, left as the franchise's top quarterback in completions, attempts and yards for a game, season and career. In last season's AFC championship against Pittsburgh, Bledsoe came off the bench when Brady was injured to lead the Patriots to the victory.
Bledsoe ended the letter saying that although he is excited about his future in Buffalo, he will miss the fans of New England.
"Please know that you have made a profound difference in my life and the way I will live it," he wrote.
---
LAUSANNE, Switzerland (AP) - Billie Jean King was honored by the International Olympic Committee on Friday for her work to promote tennis and women's sports.
King received the IOC's Women and Sport Trophy. The body cited her work as "an advocate for women's rights, within and outside sport."
She was unable to attend the ceremony because of commitments in the United States.
King, who won 71 career singles titles, including 12 Grand Slam tournaments, was the first woman to coach a mixed professional sports team for World Team Tennis.
King's trophy and others were presented by IOC President Jacques Rogge during a ceremony at IOC headquarters. The winners were picked by the IOC Women and Sport Working Group - headed by former Olympic rower Anita deFrantz of the United States - from 44 candidates nominated by national Olympic committees.
The African trophy went to Tsigie Gebre-Mesih of Ethiopia, the first woman from her country to participate at the Olympic Games, while the Americas trophy was awarded to Rafaela Gonzalez Ferrer of Cuba for her work in fencing and in the general development of sport for women in her country.
The Asian trophy was awarded to the Myanmar Women's Sports Federation for promoting the participation of girls and women in sport and physical education, while soccer player Lale Orta of Turkey received the European award.
---
LONDON (AP) - It's official. England soccer captain David Beckham is not doing enough to ensure his broken left foot heals in time for the World Cup.
Who says so? No less a personage than Queen Elizabeth II, according to a British tabloid.
Piers Morgan, editor of The Mirror, reported Friday that during a reception for the media at Buckingham Palace the previous evening, the queen confided to him her concerns about Beckham's recovery.
"I realize it's very important for the country," Morgan quoted her has saying. And she reportedly continued, "I don't know enough about stress fractures to go into any detail, but I do know he is not doing the right things to get it fixed."
Morgan took that as a reference to Beckham's car crash last week. He was at the wheel of his Mercedes at the time and escaped uninjured. Observers were quick to point out that the vehicle has automatic transmission, so Beckham would not have been using his injured foot.
Beckham broke his foot in Manchester United's Champions Cup quarterfinal win over Deportivo La Coruna two weeks ago. He has said he expects to be back in time for England's World Cup opener against Sweden on June 2.
Beckham's foot remains in a cast, and news reports say he has been sleeping in an oxygen tent to speed his recovery.
Morgan said when the queen was asked if she knew any good physiotherapists, she replied, "I do, actually. My granddaughter has just qualified. She helped to get Richard's leg fixed."
The queen was referring to Zara Philips, daughter of Princess Anne, who recently nursed her jockey boyfriend, Richard Johnson, when he broke his leg.
Buckingham Palace traditionally frowns on individuals publishing details of their private conversations with members of the royal family, and a spokeswoman said Friday that the previous evening's proceedings were supposed to be off the record.
---
MOTEGI, Japan (AP) - Canadian CART driver Paul Tracy arrived for the Bridgestone Potenza 500 a little leaner than he's been for past races.
"He was getting up to near 200 pounds, but is back down to around 180 and says he feels so much better," Team Kool Green owner Barry Green said.
Tracy, who ranks second among active drivers in career wins with 18, may have been taking fitness tips from good friend Jason Giambi of the New York Yankees. Tracy is an avid baseball fan and occasionally drops in on the Yankees' slugger between races.
---
BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - Canadian Formula One driver Jacques Villeneuve is determined to stick with his struggling team, British American Racing, until the end of his contract in 2003.
The former world champion denied rumors Friday that he would dump BAR and move to another F-1 team in an interview with Belgian daily Le Soir.
"I have a contract until the end of 2003. I don't see myself leaving," Villeneuve said.
Villeneuve's seventh-place finish at San Marino two weeks ago was the best result this season for the BAR Honda team, which has continued to perform badly since its inaugural season in 1999.
In March, new BAR team chief David Richards fired its top two technical directors over the team's continued poor showing.
 Load-Date: April 27, 2002

 

End of Document
