

Names In The Game
April 25, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 809 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Former Liverpool star Bruce Grobbelaar is determined to return to English soccer as a coach despite being unable to shake off claims that he fixed games for cash.
After a retrial more than 3 1/2 years ago, a jury cleared the Zimbabwean goalkeeper of criminal charges of match fixing. But when he successfully sued the tabloid that first made the accusations, the Court of Appeal overturned that decision and branded his side of the story "incredible."
Grobbelaar, currently working as a coach in South Africa, told the BBC that the Football Association has taken steps to prevent his return to the English game.
"I've been blocked from taking my FA coaching badges in England, so I took them in France and I'll take them in Holland.
"People can't stop me from making a living, and if they think they are going to try and block me from making a living in England, they are sorely wrong."
Grobbelaar faces the possibility of being banned worldwide by FIFA on the basis of the Appeal Court's decision.
"FIFA will never do that because they can't take a livelihood away from a man," Grobbelaar said.
---
MIAMI (AP) - The Florida Marlins filed a lawsuit against Lloyd's of London, accusing underwriters of failing to honor an insurance policy the team bought in case pitcher Alex Fernandez got injured and couldn't play.
The lawsuit, filed Tuesday in Miami-Dade County, said Lloyd's was in breach of contract for not paying $22,664.83 for every regular-season game Fernandez missed in 2000 and this season. The Marlins claim the insurer owes them more than $4 million for last season and roughly $544,000 for this year.
The club paid $731,253 for the policy, which covers 75 percent of Fernandez's annual salary if he cannot play. Under the terms of the agreement, the Marlins can collect if Fernandez pitched fewer than 25 regular-season games or 10 games over 12 straight months.
He missed the entire 1998 season after injuring his shoulder during the 1997 playoffs. He returned to pitch 24 games in 1999 before the injury sidelined him again. Fernandez appeared in eight games last year before being placed on the disabled list in May, and has not pitched since.
The team notified Lloyd's about the injury Sept. 10, according to the lawsuit. Marlins general manager Dave Dombrowski declined to say why underwriters have refused to pay the club.
Officials at Morrison Mahoney & Miller, the Boston-based law firm that was to be served the lawsuit, could not be reached for comment, The Miami Herald reported Wednesday.
Fernandez, who is not affected by the lawsuit, signed a five-year, $35 million contract with Florida in 1997.
---
VALPARAISO, Ind. (AP) - Scott Drew, son of Valparaiso basketball coach Homer Drew and a Crusaders assistant coach the past eight years, has been promoted to associate coach.
"One of the reasons I think Scott has stayed and not left is because of his father," Homer Drew said. "But that will only last so long. It's getting more and more difficult for me to keep him. There's going to be a point in time where he can't turn down some of these opportunities."
Since the end of the past season, Scott Drew has turned down an offer to interview for one Division I head coaching job and rejected an offer to become an assistant at another school at a much higher salary.
"I really didn't know this was coming," Scott Drew told The Times of Northwest Indiana. "It kind of took me by surprise."
The younger Drew was recognized by Court Vision recruiting service as the top recruiter in the nation in 1998-99, and this year's recruiting class has the Crusaders ranked in the top 20 in several recruiting services.
"The biggest thing is, if you look at the eight years Scott has been here, they've had eight of our best records ever," Homer Drew said. "Even though we've had coaches come and go, Scott has been the consistency on our staff that has allowed us to be as successful as we have despite all the turnover on the rest of our staff."
Valparaiso had a streak of five straight NCAA tournament appearances as the Mid-Continent Conference champion, but failed to get a bid to the NCAA or the NIT this year after a loss to Southern Utah in the conference tourney championship.
The elder Drew said someday he would like to see his son become the Valparaiso head coach.
"We sure hope so," Homer Drew said. "Let's just say Scott is very well-prepared for a head coaching position."
Another son, Bryce Drew, went to Valparaiso and now plays for the Chicago Bulls.
---
LYNDHURST, N.J. (AP) - Tony Resch of the Philadelphia Wings has been named the National Lacrosse League's coach of the year.
Resch guided the Wings to a 10-4 record in the regular season. Philadelphia beat the Rochester Knighthawks in the NLL semifinals before losing to the Toronto Rock in the championship game.
Resch, a native of Roxborough, Pa., has a career coaching record of 59-27 in the NLL.
 Load-Date: April 26, 2001

 

End of Document
