

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
September 7, 2003, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 914 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




GREEN BAY, Wis. (AP) - Lambeau Field may be a little taller with its new skyboxes and a little more elegant with its new brick and wrought iron exterior, but it's still the same hallowed stadium for some Packers fans.
"I'll still be sitting on the old aluminum, and there still won't be any backrests," said Tom Bredael, 59, who started going to Packers games at Lambeau Field when the stadium opened in 1957.
Mike Sullivan doesn't think the $295 million in improvements will detract from Lambeau's legacy.
"What you get is the mystique of 40 years of Lambeau Field, with more amenities inside and an elegant and classy look on the outside," he said.
As always, grill smoke filled the air around the stadium. Fans drank beer and chided roving bands of Vikings fans. A few fans took pictures in front of the stadium, but most ate bratwurst and listened to the radio or the Packers Tailgaters Band plucking ragtime tunes.
"This will always be Lambeau," Kathy Schumacher said.
---
BUFFALO, N.Y. (AP) After 37 years with the Buffalo Bills, radio play-by-play man Van Miller will retire after the season.
"I think it's time," he said. "At the same time, it's a hard time to give it up."
Miller, who will turn 76 this year, started his career with the Bills in 1960, calling their first game in the American Football League. Since then, he has become a staple on broadcasts.
Miller announced his plans Sunday before the team's opener, a 31-0 rout of New England.
Miller has never missed a game in his time with the Bills. He called the action from 1960-71 when he took an eight year break. He returned to the booth in 1979 and has been there since.
---
ADDIS ABABA, Ethiopia (AP) - Two world champions from Ethiopia are running to dramatize the prolonged drought and entrenched poverty afflicting their homeland.
Kenenisa Bekele, the 10,000-meter gold medalist, and Tirunesh Dibaba, the women's 5,000 champ, led about 10,000 runners who had each paid about $2 on a course that wound through some of the capital's most impoverished neighborhoods.
"This is a race against hunger, and one we must win," Kenenisa said. "If we are committed, we can beat it, but it will be a tough fight - harder than winning world championships."
Kenenisa and Tirunesh dropped out after the start on orders from coach Woldemeskel Kostre because they are still recovering from their races in Paris.
The government and United Nations say the drought has affected 13.2 million or one in five of Ethiopia's 65 million people, more than half of whom already live on less than $1 a day. About 30,000 people are believed to have died as a direct result of the drought.
"My athletes have known poverty," Woldemeskel said. "That is why they are so keen to take part."
---
BERLIN (AP) - German soccer coach Rudi Voeller was furious after his team's dismal showing against Iceland.
Germany, the runner-up in the World Cup, did no better than a 0-0 tie Saturday in a qualifying game for the 2004 European championship. Fans and media were alarmed after Germany's third tie in its last four qualifiers.
Voeller even threatened to quit during his postgame outburst. The tirade was prompted by a suggestion from a prominent commentator that the result with Iceland marked "a new low point in German soccer."
But the criticism was widespread. The Bild am Sonntag newspaper wrote: "It can't get worse. Germany disgraced itself down to the bones."
Germany is vying with Iceland and Scotland to qualify from its group. Voeller is well-liked in Germany but he is angered by what he sees as constant negativity from critics.
"I've been sitting here for three years and I have to keep listening to this stupidity," he said.
---
PERTH, Australia (AP) - Norway's Petter Solberg won Rally Australia on Sunday, overtaking France's Sebastien Loeb in a race marked by the disqualification of Estonia's Markko Martin for carrying an illegal rock as ballast.
Solberg won three of the last four stages in forests outside Perth in his Subaru to win by 26.6 seconds.
This was Solberg's third win in a world championship rally. He has 48 points and is tied for second with Spain's Carlos Sainz. They are seven points behind England's Richard Burns, who was third in Australia.
Martin and co-driver Michael Park were disqualified before the start of the final day. Officials found the rock under paper in the spare wheel well of Martin's Ford Focus on Saturday.
"It's a blow to our world championship hopes but a decision that we have accepted without appeal," Ford team director Malcolm Wilson said.
---
ESTORIL, Portugal (AP) - Motorcyclist Valentino Rossi won the Portuguese Grand Prix on Sunday, extending his championship lead with his fifth victory of the year.
Max Biaggi led early before being passed by Rossi. He finished second, more than two seconds behind. Loris Capirossi was third for a 1-2-3 Italian finish.
"No fight, no fun but it was a high-level race," Rossi said.
With five races to go, Rossi has a 46-point lead in the standings over Sete Gibernau.
---
ASSEN, The Netherlands (AP) - Neil Hodgson of Britain won the World Superbike championship Sunday, taking first and second place in two tight races with teammate Reuben Xaus of Spain.
He finished second in the first race, enough to give him the championship. Xaus, a distant second in standings, won the first race in 33 minutes, 7.249 seconds. In the second race, Hodgson was timed in 32:57.759.
"I'm so happy; I needed that win," he said. "Winning the world championship but not this race would have been terrible."
 Load-Date: September 8, 2003

 

End of Document
