

Names in the Game Craig Wolfley; Liberia's soccer team; basketball couple; Michael
January 16, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 845 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK (AP) - Perhaps Paul McCartney will sing, "When I'm LXIV" at Super Bowl XXXVI.
McCartney will lead a tribute to the heroes of and since Sept. 11 during pregame ceremonies at the NFL's championship game in New Orleans on Feb. 3.
"As a sports fan, I am thrilled to have the opportunity to be involved in the Super Bowl," McCartney said, "and as a musician, I am honored to add my voice to the message of tribute that this year's Super Bowl will carry."
---
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) - Three-time Tour de France champion Lance Armstrong and Gov. Rick Perry autographed the first "Texans Conquer Cancer" license plate at a ceremony Wednesday.
The plates will be sold to help cancer-related charities.
"The money raised by this plate can help ease the financial burden for many cancer patients and their families," said Armstrong, who overcame testicular cancer.
The plates are available from the Texas Department of Transportation for $30 in addition to regular registration fees, with $25 applied as a credit to the Texas Conquer Cancer account. That will distribute money to Texas nonprofit organizations that provide support services for cancer patients and their families.
The new license plate features a heart-shaped Texas flag on the left side on a bright blue background with the words "Texans Conquer Cancer" printed in white. The words "Support Patient Services" are printed on a red border across the bottom.
On the Net: http://www.texansconquercancer.org 
 
---
PITTSBURGH (AP) - Butterbean is getting a new ex-NFLer to fight.
Former Pittsburgh Steelers offensive lineman Craig Wolfley will box heavyweight Eric "Butterbean" Esch in a four-round bout Feb. 2 at the Grand Casino in Gulfport, Miss.
Wolfley replaces former Chicago Bears lineman William "The Refrigerator" Perry, who initially agreed to fight Esch but then backed out.
Wolfley beating former San Francisco 49ers offensive lineman Jesse Sapolu during a series of bouts featuring former NFL players at Caesar's Palace in Las Vegas.
The 260-pound Wolfley, who helps trains boxers in the Pittsburgh area, will give up about 100 pounds to Butterbean.
"It's my Andy Warhol 15 minutes of fame," Wolfley said. "But in my case, it might last 30 seconds. The real fight will be at the buffet table."
---
ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast (AP) - Liberia's national soccer team was back at practice Wednesday after withdrawing a threat to boycott the African Cup of Nations over pay demands.
The players called off practice Tuesday, saying their $4,000 salaries for the tournament were not enough.
The players originally demanded $15,000 each, but settled late Tuesday for $6,500, said Edwin Snowe, president of the Liberian soccer association.
The deal was reached after five hours of negotiations and a long-distance phone call from Liberian President Charles Taylor, who explained the government's financial constraints to the players, Snowe said. Liberia is still recovering from a ruinous seven-year civil war that ended in 1996.
Last month, Senegal's national team threatened to boycott the tournament if their demands for bonuses of $54,000 each weren't met. They later agreed to accept a government offer of $13,500.
---
HADLEY, Mass. (AP) - For a basketball couple, it was the perfect date.
Brittney Wickles and John Wilkes of Smith Academy share an affection for each other and a deft jump shot. On Monday night, they shared a milestone - both scoring their 1,000th career points on the same night in the same gym.
Wickles hit the mark on a foul shot during the first half of her team's game against Hopkins. Wilkes followed suit two hours later with a second-half layup, also in a game against Hopkins.
---
WOLFHALDEN, Switzerland (AP) - Formula One world champion Michael Schumacher wants to build a home for his family in this village - population 1,764 - on the border with Austria.
He needs permission first.
Architects have designed a house in the local architectural style with 10,760 square feet of living space and an underground swimming pool, plus stables and a riding hall for Schumacher's wife's horse breeding business.
The local council published the plans Wednesday, starting a 30-day period in which opponents may file objections. Villagers are expected to vote on the plan in March.
Schumacher, his wife and two children currently live in Vufflens-le-Chateau, Switzerland.
---
PULLMAN, Wash. (AP) - Washington State quarterback Jason Gesser played in the Sun Bowl with a broken bone in his throwing hand.
The junior said he broke his right hand against Washington on Nov. 17, but didn't tell coach Mike Price.
"I didn't want anybody to know about it," Gesser said. "I didn't want to have an excuse for anything."
The bone is in Gesser's right palm just below the pinky, Washington State trainer Bill Drake said. The break is expected to heal in time for spring drills in April.
Gesser wears a splint on the hand at night. He cannot do any lifting in the weight room with that hand.
He completed 15 of 40 passes for 281 yards, a touchdown and three interceptions in Washington State's 33-27 victory over Purdue in the Dec. 31 bowl game.
 Load-Date: January 17, 2002

 

End of Document
