

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
October 14, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 871 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




WASHINGTON (AP) - President Bush inched his way up the Rose Garden steps Tuesday as he honored the San Antonio Spurs for winning the NBA title four months ago.
"I think you're champs because you understand that serving something greater than yourself is the road to championships," he said.
The president played to the cameras, ascending one step at a time until he stood almost equal with 7-footer Tim Duncan, the league's MVP.
Bush singled out veteran Danny Ferry, the son of former star center Bob Ferry.
"He and I share an interesting relationship," the president said. "We're members of the famous fathers' club." Bush and his father are only the second father-son combination to win the presidency, after John Adams and John Quincy Adams.
After the ceremony, Bush gave the team a look at the Oval Office.
---
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) - Germany's women's soccer team was welcomed home by thousands of fans Tuesday celebrating its World Cup victory.
Captain Bettina Wiegmann raised the trophy as she left the plane ahead of her teammates at the Frankfurt airport.
"We are all overwhelmed," said Wiegmann, who retired after her team's 2-1 victory over Sweden in overtime Sunday in Carson, Calif.
Airline employees gave flowers to the players, who wore gold medals around their necks. The team headed to city hall for a reception.
The ceremony resembled the return of the German men's team from last year's World Cup in South Korea and Japan, where the team lost to Brazil in the final.
In Sweden, the losing women's team was greeted by thousands of fans who waved flags and lined streets in downtown Stockholm. Prime Minister Goeran Persson opened the celebration.
"It's so fantastic," coach Marika Domanski-Lyfors said. "Now it almost feels like gold."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Kenya's Sammy Korir, the second-fastest marathoner ever, will run in next month's New York City Marathon.
He finished the Berlin Marathon on Sept. 28 in 2 hours, 4 minutes, 56 seconds. But he was still runner-up by one second to Paul Tergat, who set the world record.
The previous marathon world record was 2:05:38, set by Moroccan-born American Khalid Khannouchi in London on April 14, 2002.
Korir's decision to run the Nov. 2 race is surprising. He has just five weeks to get ready for the 26.2-mile race through the five boroughs.
"He is set to go, completely," coach Gabriele Rosa said.
Not so for Robert Kipkoech Cheruiyot of Kenya. The winner of this year's Boston Marathon withdrew because of a leg injury.
---
MOORESVILLE, N.C. (AP) - Kerry Earnhardt was released Tuesday from his contract with FitzBradshaw Racing, a Busch Series team partly owned by Terry Bradshaw.
Earnhardt, the oldest son of the late Dale Earnhardt, has not driven the No. 12 Chevrolet since July. But he had continued to fulfill all sponsor requests and attended races in support of the team. Now he will be clear to look for another job.
"Kerry has been a wonderful person to work with," co-owner Armando Fitz said. "Back in July, we felt that we needed to make a driver change to the No. 12 car and now we feel it will be mutually beneficial for both parties to officially part."
Earnhardt signed with FitzBradshaw Racing in 2001 when the team was formed.
---
LEIPZIG, Germany (AP) - Former Olympic swim champion Michael Gross turned down an offer to lead Leipzig's attempt to land the 2012 Summer Games.
In a letter made public Tuesday, Gross said he did not feel up to the challenge. His confirmation had been expected Saturday.
The previous managing director left following revelations he served in a unit of former East Germany's dreaded secret police.
Gross won three Olympic gold medals, five world championship golds and 10 European titles. His decision leaves Leipzig without an internationally prominent bid leader.
"We are going through a difficult phase," Mayor Wolfgang Tiefensee said.
The other Olympic candidates are: New York; Paris; London; Moscow; Madrid, Spain; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Istanbul, Turkey; and Havana.
---
VIENNA, Austria (AP) - Stephan Eberharter is set to defend his World Cup ski title.
"My batteries are fully recharged, and I am more than ready," Eberharter told state broadcaster ORF.
Eberharter has spent only 12 days training on the slopes so far. But the 34-year-old Austrian contends he's in better shape than at the same time last year.
The World Cup season starts Oct. 26 with a giant slalom in Soelden, Eberharter's home region.
Eberharter insists the overall World Cup title is not his main concern.
"Downhill has always been my favorite discipline," he said. "That's the one I want to win most."
---
HONG KONG (AP) - Top-ranked Juan Carlos Ferrero and Wimbledon champions Roger Federer and Venus Williams will headline a January tennis exhibition aimed at boosting an area hit hard by SARS.
The field of four men and four women also will include promising Russian Maria Sharapova, tournament spokeswoman Semeul Shing said. The other players are still to be announced.
The event is part of a $128 million revitalization effort following the SARS outbreak between March and June.
The men and women will play in separate elimination singles, with all competing in mixed doubles. The Jan. 8-10 exhibition will precede the Australian Open, the new year's first Grand Slam.
 Load-Date: October 15, 2003

 

End of Document
