

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
April 30, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 690 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




TEMPE, Ariz. (AP) - A public memorial service has been scheduled Monday in California for former Arizona Cardinals player Pat Tillman, who was killed in combat in Afghanistan.
The afternoon service will be held in Tillman's hometown of San Jose, Calif., at the San Jose Municipal Rose Garden.
Arizona State, where Tillman played during his college career, scheduled a private memorial service for next Friday and a public event on May 8 at Sun Devil Stadium.
The Tillman family on Friday also announced the creation of the Pat Tillman Foundation.
"Pat lived his life dedicated to helping others," Tillman's brother-in-law, Alex Garwood, said in a statement issued through the Cardinals. "This foundation will continue his legacy."
Tillman, who walked away from a three-year, $3.6 million contract offer from the Arizona Cardinals to join the Army in 2002, was killed April 22 in an ambush near the Afghan-Pakistani border.
He was the first NFL player killed in combat since Buffalo offensive tackle Bob Kalsu died in the Vietnam War in July 1970. Nineteen NFL players were killed in World War II.
The Army said this week that Tillman had been promoted posthumously from specialist to corporal.
---
PRAGUE, Czech Republic (AP) - Ottawa Senators forward Martin Havlat is recovering from the flu, but should be healthy in time for the hockey world championship quarterfinals next Wednesday.
Havlat returned home to Brno two days ago to recover, but is expected back in Prague in time for the quarterfinals, if the host Czech Republic qualifies.
"Martin feels much better. He doesn't have a high temperature anymore," national team spokesman Pavel Barta said.
The 23-year-old has yet to play a match at the championships. He only attended one practice session before doctors ordered him to rest.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - World record-holder and Olympic contender Natalie Coughlin has signed with Speedo swimwear.
The multiyear contract runs through 2009. It includes giving 5 percent of the performance bonus money she earns to the swim program at California, her alma mater.
"I really believe in the collegiate experience and enjoyed my four years with the Cal-Berkeley swim program," Coughlin said.
Coughlin continues to train in Berkeley in preparation for the U.S. Olympic trials July 7-14 in Long Beach.
She holds the world record in the 100-meter backstroke at 59.58, making her the first woman to break the one-minute mark in the event. She has won six medals at the world championships and nine U.S. National titles.
---
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) - Former South African president Nelson Mandela took his country's plea to host the 2010 World Cup Soccer championships to Trinidad on Friday.
Mandela and bishop Desmond Tutu, both Nobel Peace Prize winners, represented one of four African nations competing to hold the soccer event.
Representatives from Egypt, Tunisia and Libya will make similar pleas to soccer officials this weekend at the Confederation of North, Central America and Caribbean Association Football, or CONCACAF's annual conference on the nearby island of Grenada.
South Africa is counting on Mandela's celebrity to win the World Cup bid. The country lost the 2006 finals bid to Germany by just one vote.
"I just think Mandela is the greatest!" said Ida Daniels, an elderly member of the congregation at the Anglican Holy Trinity Cathedral, where Tutu delivered Mass to more than 1,000 people on Friday morning.
The decision is expected to be announced May 15.
---
ESTORIL, Portugal (AP) - Tennis Hall of Famer John McEnroe and actress Rachel Hunter will co-host the 2004 Laureus World Sports Awards on May 10.
Among the awards handed out will be Sportsman and Sportswoman of the Year, World Team, World Newcomer, and World Comeback of the Year.
The winners are selected by 41 members of the Laureus Sports World Academy. A panel of over 400 journalists in 73 countries selected the nominees.
Among those scheduled to attend the ceremony are actor Morgan Freeman, world heavyweight champion Vitali Klitschko, Portuguese soccer player Luis Figo, Germany's Women's World Cup winning team star Nia KJunzer and Formula One racing driver David Coulthard.
 Load-Date: May 1, 2004

 

End of Document
