

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
April 6, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 886 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Former South African President Nelson Mandela supports London's bid to host the 2012 Olympics.
"There is no city like London," the 1993 Nobel Peace Prize winner said Wednesday. "It is a wonderfully diverse and open city providing a home to hundreds of different nationalities from all over the world."
"I can't think of a better place than London to hold an event that unites the world. London would offer something very special to the Olympic movement, including great new sporting facilities and a legacy for generations to come," he added.
London is competing against New York, Paris, Madrid and Moscow. The International Olympic Committee will select the host July 6.
Mandela met Monday with British Sports Minister Richard Caborn and Sebastian Coe, the two-time Olympic 1,500-meter champion leading London's effort to land the games.
"In throwing his unrivaled international weight behind London," London Mayor Ken Livingstone said, "Nelson Mandela has summed up one of the main appeals of London's bid - the openness and diversity of our city."
---
BLOOMINGTON, Ill. (AP) - Bob Costas believes steroid-inflated power numbers have put home run records out of reach.
The Emmy-winning broadcaster said baseball has been "ripped from its historical moorings" and steroids have "distorted the game's statistical framework."
And now that major league baseball is cracking down on performance-enhancing drugs, home run milestones are not likely to be topped, he said Tuesday during an American Red Cross fundraiser.
Costas contends the new steroid policy is too lenient. He says players who test positive should be banned for a year rather than 10 days for their first offense. A second positive test should bring a lifetime ban, he said. Still, he said the policy will begin weeding steroids out of the game.
"Even though it seems light and is light, if it's accompanied by immediate public disclosure, that player is branded," he said. "That, I think, will act as a greater deterrent than a loss of pay or games."
He predicted the steroid controversy will intensify once Barry Bonds returns and resumes his chase of Hank Aaron's career mark.
"It's ongoing for Barry Bonds," Costas said. "Every time he hits a home run, he moves closer to (Babe) Ruth and closer to Aaron and the whole debate starts again."
---
WASHINGTON (AP) - Pat Summitt was honored by Congress on Wednesday after becoming the winningest coach in the NCAA last month.
Summitt won her 880th game as coach of Tennessee's women's team on March 22, surpassing the total of Dean Smith, the former North Carolina coach. Her team was knocked out of this year's NCAA tournament in the semifinals.
A resolution sponsored by Tennessee's two senators commends Summitt, who began coaching at Tennessee in 1974 when she was 22, for "three decades of excellence as a proven leader, motivated teacher and established champion."
"We live in a society of televised images in which we see a steady stream of people who are at the top of their game for 15 minutes, or for a few months, or a few years," Sen. Lamar Alexander said. "But for Pat Summitt, it has been 31 years at the top of her game, and there is no end in sight."
Majority Leader Bill Frist acknowledged Summit's "service to her team, the University of Tennessee and the game of basketball."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - When Tina Kroske competes in the More Marathon in Central Park on Sunday, it will be a simple run in the park compared to her first marathon two years ago in Afghanistan.
"The running conditions were treacherous due to the dust storms, land mines and possibility of sniper or small arms fire," Kroske said of the 26.2-mile course in and around the Bagram Air Base where she was stationed in the U.S. Army Reserve.
"I was reminded of the constant threat of anti-tank and land mines since the route was marked with 'Beware of Land Mines' signs. The terrain during the marathon route varied from running on narrow paths past minefields, to running on a bombed-out runway, and to running in soft sand while battling the fine dust which made it difficult to see and breathe."
The More Marathon is the world's only race open only to women over 40, and more than 3,000 participants are expected, New York Road Runners officials said. There is a full marathon and a 13.1-mile half-marathon in which the 41-year-old Kroske of Marietta, Ga., will be running.
"This will be in stark contrast to the race around Central Park, where I can enjoy the scenery without having to worry about where I step," Kroske said.
---
LONDON (AP) - The playhouse at Beckingham Palace is safe.
David Beckham and his wife were told by local authorities they don't have to tear down the 16-foot brick playhouse being built on their property without permission.
The British soccer star now with Real Madrid had been warned he might have to demolish the half-built playhouse as well as a play castle - complete with mock tower, drawbridge, slides and rope swings - at their "Beckingham Palace" mansion north of London.
The East Hertfordshire District Council said Wednesday it had granted retrospective planning permission provided no one lived in the structures. The playhouse for sons Brooklyn, 6, Romeo, 2, and 6-week-old Cruz must not be used for "permanent habitable occupation" or a "separate unit of occupation."
 Load-Date: April 7, 2005

 

End of Document
