

Names in the Game
July 23, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 586 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




GATINEAU, Quebec (AP) - The Quebec government has approved the sale of 47 memorabilia items from Maurice Richard to the Canadian Museum of Civilization.
The announcement by the museum Monday ends a long tug of war between Quebec and the federal government over control of the jerseys, pucks, hockey sticks and other items amassed during the career of the Montreal Canadiens great.
Victor Rabinovitch, president of the Canadian Museum of Civilization, said the sale had the approval of the Richard family.
"We are honored that the family agreed that the best way to preserve the Rocket's artifacts for the enjoyment of all Canadians is to entrust them to the most visited museum in Canada," Rabinovitch said.
More than 200 of the memorabilia items were put on the auction block in April, leading to a race between Quebec and the federal government to protect them from disappearing into private collections forever.
On April 5, Quebec Culture and Communications Minister Diane Lemieux placed 47 of the most precious items - including a Stanley Cup ring and a No. 9 hockey jersey - under protection for 60 days to evaluate whether the artifacts deserved special designation.
In May, Canadian Heritage Minister Sheila Copps gave museum operators the green light to spend $600,000 on the collection.
Richard died of cancer in 2000 at 78. He played for the Canadiens in the 1940s and 1950s and won eight Stanley Cups.
---
DAVENPORT, Iowa (AP) - American runners get ready. The Kenyans will be back at the Bix 7.
That's the hope, anyway.
After one year as a U.S. championship, the seven-mile run through Davenport will return to its open format next year. Race officials will invite the world's best runners, regardless of their nationality.
Bix 7 organizers were criticized when they announced that prize money for this year's race, held last Saturday, would be awarded only to U.S. citizens. Race director Ed Froehlich had insisted all along the change was a one-year deal.
"We're going back to the open format," Froehlich said. "That's what we promised."
African runners had won the Bix 7 nine straight times before this year and seven of those winners were from Kenya. Meb Keflezighi, a naturalized U.S. citizen who was born in Eritrea, won Saturday's race.
Froehlich said he liked the U.S. championship format and would not mind having a similar race in the future. But it won't be next year, he said.
The American championship format produced slower times than usual and less competitive races. Keflezighi won the men's race by 52 seconds. Colleen De Reuck, a South African who became a U.S. citizen in 2000, won the women's race by 41 seconds.
---
LAFAYETTE, La. (AP) - The East Coast Hockey League has approved the sale of the Louisiana IceGators to Orlando Predators Entertainment Inc., so Lafayette will have both hockey and arena football next year.
The sale reunites Predators officer Dave Berryman with the team he helped lead to record-breaking attendance totals in the mid-1990s.
The ECHL's approval was the last hurdle in the sale of the ice hockey team to the publicly traded sports entertainment company, which owns and operates four arena football teams. One of those teams will be in Lafayette next spring.
The IceGators will be the company's first ice hockey team.
Bob Wright, chief executive officer of the IceGators, said lagging attendance prompted the owners to sell. They asked that the sale price remain private, Predators president and CEO Berryman said.
Berryman is a former co-owner and general manager of the IceGators.
 Load-Date: July 24, 2002

 

End of Document
