

Names In The Game Baseball brothers, Linda Formonova, Frank de Boer, Petrushka,
June 14, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 897 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MOMBASA, Kenya (AP) - Alpha Diallo of Guinea was elected president of Africa's continental Olympic body.
Diallo, a member of the International Olympic Committee, received 27 of the 49 votes cast Thursday at a general assembly of the Association of National Olympic Committees of Africa.
He beat incumbent Francis Nyangweso of Uganda and Fidele Waura of Gabon.
Diallo will preside over the organization for four years in what is an important period for the Olympic movement in Africa. For the first time, ANOCA will control the use of funds it receives from IOC organizations.
Previously, the IOC allocated money directly to national Olympic committees for specific projects.
Nyangweso was ANOCA president since 1999.
---
LONDON (AP) - Nick Faldo's plan to build a temple of love as the site of his third wedding has been rejected by his local council.
The $70,000 temple was to have been built on the five-acre grounds of Faldo's property in Old Windsor, west of London.
But the Royal Borough of Windsor and Berkshire said the 13-foot-by-26-foot temple would have clashed with the 18th century mansion.
Faldo, winner of three British Opens and three Masters, was in Tulsa, Okla., at the U.S. Open.
He will need to find another venue for his marriage to Swiss public relations executive Valerie Bercher, scheduled for July 28.
The couple had applied to knock down a wooden hut at the end of the garden to make way for the temple. Faldo bought the pink-colored mansion for $3.5 million. It is next door to pop singer Elton John's home and has views of Windsor Castle.
 
---
SNELLVILLE, Ga. (AP) - It's not unusual for brothers to be chosen in the same baseball draft. When three members of the Bulger family were taken this year, it's believed to be the first time that's happened since the draft started in 1965.
The Arizona Diamondbacks took Jason Bulger with the 22nd overall choice, and the San Francisco Giants took Kevin Bulger (43rd round) and Brian Bulger (49th round).
Jason is a right-handed pitcher who recently graduated from Valdosta State. Brian is a right-handed pitcher who completed two years at South Georgia Junior College, and Kevin is a shortstop from Brookwood High School. Brian and Kevin probably will stay in school. Kevin plans to attend Young Harris Junior College.
Jason Bulger should soon be a millionaire, since last year's No. 22 pick signed for a $1.2 million bonus. The family flew to Phoenix Wednesday to meet with Diamondbacks management.
 
---
PRAGUE, Czech Republic (AP) - World 800-meter champion Ludmila Formanova will miss this season because of a chronic thigh injury.
The injury means she won't defend her title at the World Championship at Edmonton in August.
Since winning the title at Seville, Spain, in 1999, Formanova hasn't won a major competition.
She withdrew from the Sydney Olympics because of an ankle injury and missed the world indoors at Lisbon, Portugal, in March because of inflammation in her right thigh.
 
---
NYON, Switzerland (AP) - UEFA has banned Dutch soccer player Frank de Boer one year for drug use.
The Barcelona defender tested positive for the banned steroid nandrolone March 15 after a UEFA Cup quarterfinal match at Celta de Vigo. A second test from another sample also was positive.
De Boer has admitted failing the tests, but denied taking any banned substance. Last month, he said he might have unwittingly consumed the nandrolone in food.
De Boer had three days to appeal.
---
LONDON (AP) - Champion filly Petrushka has been retired after injuring her right-fore tendon in her season debut at Epsom last week.
The 4-year-old was hurt during the Coronation Cup and now is likely to be sold for breeding at auction later this year.
Petrushka's three consecutive Group One victories in 2000 were in the Irish Oaks at the Curragh, the Yorkshire Oaks at York and the Prix de l'Opera at Longchamp. She also finished in the money in the 1,000 Guineas and the Oaks.
---
BUCHAREST, Romania (AP) - Ladislau Boloni has resigned as coach of the Romanian national soccer team and signed a two-year contract to join top Portuguese club, Sporting Lisbon.
Soccer federation chief Mircea Sandu confirmed Boloni's resignation but did not specify a date.
---
LONDON (AP) - English soccer will have professional referees next season to raise standards and accountability.
But referees still are expected to be a target for angry players and managers despite the new measures introduced by the English Football Association.
Referees in the Premier League and First Division next season will earn a basic salary of $46,200 a year in addition to their $1,260 match payment. Some will receive $84,000, depending how many games they officiate.
"We, as an association, are all for this," said League Managers' Association chief executive John Barnwell. "But just because you go full-time it's never going to stop people disagreeing with decisions."
A total of 24 referees and 48 assistants will be nominated to officiate in the Premier League and top-tier games.
---
NEW ROCHELLE, N.Y. (AP) - Shawn Brennan, assistant commissioner of the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference for 3 1/2 years, will become director of athletics at Iona beginning July 1.
Before joining the MAAC, Brennan spent 3 1/2 years as Iona's assistant athletic director/sports information. Earlier, he was sports information director at C.W. Post and Worcester Polytechnic Institute and assistant SID at Wagner.
 Load-Date: June 15, 2001

 

End of Document
