

Names in the Game Hartford Civic Center, Green Monster
October 24, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 716 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK (AP) - Ireland's Eamonn Coghlan will compete seriously in the New York City Marathon for the first time in more than a decade.
Coghlan, a seven-time Wanamaker Mile champion and former indoor world-record holder in the mile and 2,000 meters, will lead a group of runners from Ireland raising money for medical research for a hospital outside Dublin.
Coghlan, who turns 50 on Nov. 21, intends to finish in approximately 3 hours. In 1991, he finished 40th in 2 hours, 25 minutes, 13 seconds.
"The New York City Marathon has always been a race of champions, whatever their age," marathon director Allan Steinfeld said. "Eamonn is a true champion and we are honored to have him in this year's race."
Coghlan set the world indoor record in the mile at 3:49.78 in 1983, a mark that stood for 14 years before Morocco's Hicham El Guerrouj clocked 3:48.45 in 1997. He also set the 2,000-meter world indoor mark at 4:54.07 in 1987, a mark that stood until 1998 when Haile Gebrselassie of Ethiopia ran 4:52.86.
Coghlan won the Wanamaker Mile at the Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden a record seven times (1977, 1979-81, '83, '85, '87) helping earn the title of "Chairman of the Boards."
The five-borough marathon is scheduled for Nov. 3.
---
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) - Jack Warner, the vice president of FIFA and president of CONCACAF, has become a special adviser to Trinidad and Tobago's soccer federation.
Warner also will serve as chairman of the federation's appeals committee, federation officials said Wednesday. He will continue his duties at FIFA and CONCACAF.
"For the record, Jack is back, in local (soccer)," Warner said.
Warner severed ties with soccer in Trinidad in July after a dispute over government funding for the federation.
Warner is among the main financial supporters of the opposition United National Congress party, which was defeated in general elections Oct. 7. Boynes is a member of the governing People's National Movement party.
Warner visited the sports minister Wednesday to settle their differences.
"I assured him of my fullest support for the betterment of sports in Trinidad and Tobago in general and (soccer) in particular," Warner said.
---
OSLO, Norway (AP) - Olympic slalom champion Hans Petter Buraas is returning to the slopes 18 months after being sidelined by a neck injury, Norwegian state radio network NRK reported Thursday.
Buraas, the gold medalist in the slalom at the 1998 Olympics and fifth-place finisher in the 2001 World Cup slalom standings, fell while training in May 2001 and had surgery to relieve pressure on nerves in his neck.
Buraas said he still feels the injury, but doesn't "think about it when I am skiing." Buraas said he was ready for competition.
Buraas sat out last season to avoid aggravating the injury.
---
HARTFORD, Conn. (AP) - The Hartford Civic Center will host the Big East women's basketball tournament for three years, beginning in 2004.
League officials announced the agreement Thursday and said it marks the first time in Big East history the women's tournament will be held off the campus of a member school.
The last several tournaments have been held either at Connecticut's 10,000-seat Gampel Pavilion or at Rutgers' Louis Brown Athletic Center, which seats just under 9,000. The Civic Center seats more than 16,000.
"It will be a chance to showcase the talents of our nationally recognized programs in a public arena, and in a city with tremendous basketball fan support," Big East Commissioner Mike Tranghese said in a statement Thursday.
The NCAA Women's Basketball Championship East Regional will also be played in the arena.
The 2003 championship will be held at Rutgers.
---
PORTLAND, Maine (AP) - The Double-A affiliate of the Boston Red Sox will be getting its own version of Fenway Park's famed Green Monster.
Construction is set to begin Monday at Hadlock Park, home of the Portland Sea Dogs.
The Sea Dogs recently ended their affiliation with the Florida Marlins and signed a two-year agreement with the Red Sox.
Sea Dogs owner Dan Burke came up with the idea of duplicating the Green Monster, and team president and general manager Charlie Eshbach embraced the concept.
Hadlock is 315 feet down the left field line, while Fenway is 310 feet. The new Green Monster will be 37 feet high, the same as the wall in Fenway Park.
 Load-Date: October 25, 2002

 

End of Document
