

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
January 27, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 642 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Soccer star Ronaldo has appealed to kidnappers for the release of a Brazilian engineer taken hostage in Iraq.
The Real Madrid striker made an appeal to free Joao Jose de Vasconcellos, seized last week as he headed for the Baghdad airport.
The videotaped message was to be delivered Thursday to Al-Jazeera Television. The station reported that the Ansar al-Sunnah Army, a well-known militant group, has claimed responsibility for the kidnapping.
Family members hoped Ronaldo's appeal would succeed where efforts by his employer and the government - including President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva - have been fruitless.
"Ronaldo is well known to the Iraqi people," said Vasconcellos' brother, Luiz Henrique. "He's really admired there."
---
GREENVILLE, S.C. (AP) - Kermit Washington is the new assistant coach of the Asheville Altitude of the National Basketball Development League.
Washington replaces Michael Sanders, who accepted a position with the Players' Association after 3 1/2 seasons with the Altitude.
Washington played for four teams during his nine-year NBA career, including the Los Angeles Lakers and Portland Trail Blazers. He averaged 9.2 points, 8.3 rebounds and shot 53 percent before retiring in 1982.
Washington played for the Lakers when he landed a devastating punch to the face of Houston's Rudy Tomjanovich during a game in 1977. He was suspended for 60 days and fined $10,000 - the heaviest penalty in NBA history at the time.
"I'm appreciative for the opportunity to work in the Development League," Washington said. "It's a privilege."
Washington, who will report to Asheville next week, recently returned from Africa. He is the founder of Project Contact, which provides medical clinics and orphanages in East Africa.
---
MELBOURNE, Australia (AP) - Martina Navratilova is helping an animal rights group in its campaign against an Australian sheep farming practice.
The People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals released the contents of a letter Thursday that it said Navratilova wrote to Prime Minister John Howard over the practice of mulesing.
The procedure - named after inventor and rancher J.H. Mules - involves slicing flesh and wool away from the sheep's rump to prevent blowflies from laying their eggs in the skin.
The animals are strapped on their backs to metal bars while the skin is cut away, usually without anesthetic.
The Australian wool industry has agreed to phase out mulesing by 2010 and is looking into alternatives. But PETA wants the practice ended now, and is trying to rally major clothing retailers for a global boycott of Australian wool.
The 48-year-old Navratilova urged the Australian government to introduce laws to stop mulesing, and said Australians should voice their opposition to the practice.
---
TOKYO (AP) - Former New York Mets reliever Jose Parra will pitch for the Orix Buffaloes in his second stint in Japan.
Parra, who went 1-0 with a 3.21 ERA in 13 games for the Mets last season, was introduced by the BlueWave on Thursday at the Pacific League team's head office.
"I don't know whether I'll start or come on in relief," said the 32-year-old Dominican right-hander. "I just want to contribute to the team."
Parra, who played for the Central League's Yomiuri Giants in 1999, also played for the Arizona Diamondbacks, Pittsburgh Pirates, Minnesota Twins and Los Angeles Dodgers.
---
HONG KONG (AP) - Hong Kong's Olympic silver medalists in table tennis are auctioning off recently won trophies to raise money for tsunami survivors.
Athens doubles partners Li Ching and Ko Lai-chak will sell their trophies from wins in Slovenia and Croatia, the Hong Kong Table Tennis Association said Thursday.
The trophies will be auctioned before the final match of a local tournament on Sunday, along with other items used by the table tennis team. Proceeds will go to the Hong Kong Red Cross.
 Load-Date: January 28, 2005

 

End of Document
