

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
April 17, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 880 words
Dateline: ANAHEIM, Calif.
Body




Tiger Woods has donated $5 million to build a youth education center that's expected to open next year.
The Tiger Woods Learning Center will be free to youths 8-17 and include a 35,000-square-foot education center next to a 23-acre site that will be used for golf instruction. The $25 million center will be open 12 hours a day and will offer math, language arts and science tutoring, as well as character development programs.
Woods plans to open other facilities over the next several years under the umbrella of his foundation that bears his name.
The center will be at the H.G. "Dad" Miller Golf Course in Anaheim, where Woods played as a student athlete at Anaheim's Western High School in the early 1990s.
---
HOUSTON (AP) - Houston police learned a lesson about Islam from former Houston Rockets center Hakeem Olajuwon as part of a program to educate officers about the city's diverse communities.
Olajuwon spoke to officers Wednesday at the Hakeem Islamic Dawah Center, a mosque and Islamic education center built with money provided by the NBA star.
Organizers of the Houston Police Department's program said they wanted someone who could put a face on Islam to dispel cultural stereotypes.
"This type of program is so important in today's world, where Islam has been so misunderstood by so many people," Olajuwon, a native of Nigeria, told the officers. Most Muslims are peaceful and law-abiding, he said.
Representatives of the Islamic Circle of North America also attended, giving officers a history of Islam.
Lt. Bill Hoffman, who's in charge of the department's in-service training, said similar cultural meetings have taken place with Hispanics, Jews, Asians and gays to open dialogue and to help overcome stereotyping.
"It's a chance for us to understand American Muslims better, and it's a chance for American Muslims to understand us better," Hoffman told the Houston Chronicle.
---
BOSTON (AP) - Actor and comedian Will Ferrell and his wife will run in their third marathon in three years Monday in Boston.
The 35-year-old "Saturday Night Live" veteran, best known for his impersonations of President Bush and as an annoyingly spirited cheerleader, has signed up with for the 26.2-mile run.
He has lost 25 pounds since he began running seriously, and has trained with coach Gary Kobat, whose acting clients also include Jim Carrey and Calista Flockhart.
"Whenever I see an old friend or cast member, they say, 'Wow, you look great.' And I feel great, too," Ferrell was quoted as saying in Runner's World magazine. "I have more energy, and I've found that my increased fitness makes me feel better about myself in an overall sense."
The Ferrells also ran in the New York City Marathon in 2001, finishing together in 5 hours, 1 minute and 56 seconds. They also completed last year's Stockholm Marathon in 4:28:02. Ferrell clocked a 1:45:02 half-marathon last year.
---
MILTON, Fla. (AP) - Tom Watson is hoping to end his long Florida winless streak.
Watson has 39 PGA Tour victories and four wins on the Champions Tour, but he has never won in Florida during his 31-year pro career.
"I'm 0-for-84," Watson said while preparing for the Emerald Coast Classic. "I really don't have an answer. Who knows why?"
Watson, who has won eight major championships, including five British Opens, likes his chances on the Scottish-style, 6,832-yard layout at The Moors Golf Club.
"The course has a good design to it and it's fun to play," Watson said. "With the wind on this golf course you have to think your way around it."
Dave Eichelberger will defend his title. He was declared the winner last year when rain washed out the final round.
---
ROME (AP) - Pete Sampras is scheduled to participate in the Italian Open in May, whether or not the 14-time Grand Slam singles winner plays in the tournament is yet to be determined.
Sampras, who won the U.S. Open last year, has entered a number of tournaments in the past two months, only to withdraw. He is on the entry list of the Italian Open, but could still pull out at the last minute without suffering sanctions, organizers said Thursday.
Last week, the 31-year-old Sampras withdrew from the U.S. Men's Clay Court Championships, set to begin April 21 in Houston. He requested and was granted a wild card for the Wimbledon warm-up tournament at Queens Club. The tournament follows the French Open and is the year's first on grass.
The Italian Open is one of the few clay-court events Sampras has won, taking the title in 1994.
Defending champion Andre Agassi and top-ranked Lleyton Hewitt are also entered in the men's field. The women's field includes defending champion Serena Williams, her sister, Venus, Kim Clijsters and Justine Henin-Hardenne.
---
MILWAUKEE (AP) - The Milwaukee Brewers will have an addition to their lineup in July - Bernie Mac.
The comedian and actor will wear Brewers blue for the feature film "Mr. 3,000," which starts filming at Miller Park and other Milwaukee locations in July.
Mac will play a fictitious Brewers player who retires with 3,000 career hits, only to return to baseball a few years later when a statistical error reveals he is three hits short of the milestone.
The film's production crew has told team officials it hopes to film live baseball and crowd scenes on July 23 and 24, when the Brewers play the Houston Astros.

 

End of Document
