

Names In The Game Roberts Jr., Detroit Vipers, Banned soccer players, Romanian soccer
April 5, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 914 words
Dateline: SAN DIEGO
Body




Swimmer Misty Hyman of Stanford, the NCAA champion in the 200-meter butterfly and a member of two NCAA record-setting relay teams, was chosen the top woman collegiate athlete in her sport for 2000-01.
As a freshman, Hyman also won the 1997-98 Honda Award for swimming and diving.
Hyman, a senior from Phoenix, earned seven All-American honors at the NCAA meet, earning the maximum 28 All-American honors over four years. She is a 12-time NCAA champion.
She won the gold medal in the 200 butterfly at the 2000 Olympics at Sydney, with an American-record time of 2 minutes, 5.88 seconds.
---
KUKMA, India (AP) - "Vijay, brother, Vijay, brother," a chorus of young voices rang out from an elementary school in an earthquake-ravaged area Thursday as India's former tennis star stepped out of a jeep.
Vijay Amritraj was making his first stop as a United Nations Messenger of Peace, spending an hour with the children of Kukma, a village in the worst affected district of Gujarat state.
"The world shares your grief. I want to bring the world's focus back to Bhuj and the enormous task of rehabilitation that lies ahead," the winner of 16 professional tournaments told the group of nearly 70 children as he handed out soccer balls to them.
"Getting the children to play outdoor games is the fastest way to erase the unimaginable trauma they have suffered. I want to put a smile back on their faces," Amritraj said.
Hundreds of Kukma's buildings, including the elementary and high school, were flattened by the quake that rocked Gujarat Jan. 26. An estimated 30,000 people died and thousands more were injured. A million people were left homeless.
---
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Hasim Rahman, in South Africa to fight heavyweight champion Lennox Lewis, presented a pair of boxing gloves and a check for $1,400 Thursday to an organization that helps fight pediatric AIDS.
The money, donated by Rodney Berman, promoter of the April 21 fight, was the first sizable gift to The Institute for AIDS Management since its creation 18 months ago.
The gloves will be auctioned off after the title fight.
An estimated 4.7 million South Africans are infected with HIV, the largest number of infected people in any country in the world.
The institute raises money for pediatric care centers across South Africa.
---
SUZUKA, Japan (AP) - Kenny Roberts Jr., the defending world motorcycle champion in the 500cc class, will try to win the Japanese Grand Prix title for the second straight year.
The race Friday through Sunday at the Suzuka circuit is the first of 16 on this year's championship schedule.
"We're in this for the long haul," said Roberts, who won the 2000 world championship in his second year with the Suzuki team, after finishing second the previous year.
Roberts will face several formidable rivals at Suzuka, including Italian Valentino Rossi, the Yamaha pair of Max Biaggi of Italy and Carlos Checa of Spain, and the Australian Garry McCoy.
---
AUBURN HILLS, Mich. (AP) - The Detroit Vipers, once among the most successful franchises in minor league hockey, face the possibility of folding when their season ends this month.
Tom Wilson, president of Detroit Pistons owner Bill Davidson's Palace Entertainment, said consideration was being given to disbanding the team, ending a seven-season run in the International Hockey League.
"We're not certain," Wilson said Wednesday. "It's something we've been looking at all year. Attendance has fallen off. … We've got to sit down and decide if there is a future."
The Vipers had 100 or more points in each of their first five seasons and played in front of large home crowds. For the first five seasons, Vipers home attendance ranged from a franchise-high average of 14,263 in 1994-95 to 11,566 in 1998-99. There has been a steady decline the past two years - to 9,838 in 1999-2000 and 5,122 this season.
The Vipers won the 1997 Turner Cup - the IHL's playoff championship. Now, they are in sixth place.
---
MADRID, Spain (AP) - The Spanish Soccer Federation has withdrawn the licenses of three players because of problems with Italian passports that had entitled them to appear as European Union players.
The three include Argentine Gustavo Bartelt, a striker on loan to Madrid-based first division team Rayo Vallecano from Italy's Roma. His license was suspended Wednesday after the Italian consulate in Madrid informed the federation that while his Italian passport was above board, the documents submitted in Bartelt's name had been falsified.
The federation is expected to make a definitive ruling on the striker by May 20.
The other two players were second-division Tenerife's Brazilian striker Jose Maria Menezes and Argentine Carlos Moya of third division Granada, both of whom were ruled to have false passports.
By holding Italian passports, the players had been registered as Europeans and had skirted the ruling that Spanish clubs were allowed to only register five non-EU players on their teams.
---
BUCHAREST, Romania (AP) - Striker Ionel Ganea has apologized for shouting at the national team coach during a match last month and asked to play for the team again.
Ganea was suspended indefinitely for "unsportsmanlike behavior" after a run-in with coach Ladislau Boloni. The striker vowed never to play for Romania again as long as Boloni remained coach.
Ganea sent a letter of apology to Boloni and the Romanian Soccer Federation, said Sorin Satmari, the soccer federation's spokesman.
The federation has not yet made a decision on whether to end the suspension.
 Load-Date: April 6, 2001

 

End of Document
