

Names in the Game Issa Hayatou; Dan Gurney; Ion Tiriac and Nadia Comaneci
March 15, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 698 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CHICAGO (AP) - James Brown was hired Friday by Sporting News Radio and his new show will start March 25.
Brown, whose show will air from 10 a.m. to noon EST on weekdays, has spent eight years as Fox's Sunday NFL pregame anchor. He won two sports Emmy awards as studio host.
Brown joined CBS Sports as a college basketball analyst in 1984 and was co-host for the NCAA basketball championship from 1984-94. He also was the in-studio host of CBS weekday program during the 1992 Winter Olympics.
---
JERUSALEM (AP) - Cheering fans greeted Hapoel Tel Aviv players on their return to Israel on Friday after a 1-0 upset over AC Milan in the first leg of the UEFA Cup quarterfinals.
"It's the greatest ever victory for Israeli club soccer," Hapoel coach Dror Kashtan said. "This group of players has brought great honor to the people of Israel and a smile to the faces of Israeli public in these times of trouble."
Fans cheered players as they stepped off a plane at Israel's Ben Gurion airport Friday. One radio announcer called the win "lightning on a clear day."
The front pages of Israeli dailies led with news of the victory in Nicosia, Cyprus, publishing banner headlines and photos of fans pumping their fists into the air. The game was beside the usual grim news of conflict and the photos of three young Israeli soldiers killed when their tank drove over a bomb in the Gaza Strip.
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon sent his congratulations to the team.
"You have proven that by determination, fighting spirit, professional capability and faith, it is possible to defeat any team," Sharon said. "You have restored joy and pride to the people of Israel."
The return leg of the total-goals series is scheduled for Thursday at Milan, Italy.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - Jeff Van Gundy is headed back to TV.
The former New York Knicks coach will fill in for Kenny Smith on the NBA studio show Tuesday night for the TBS telecast of the game between the Milwaukee Bucks and Orlando Magic.
Van Gundy made his TV debut in January, joining regular commentators Marv Albert and Mike Fratello for TNT's coverage of an NBA game.
Van Gundy who abruptly resigned from the Knicks in December.
---
CAIRO, Egypt (AP) - Issa Hayatou is moving closer to running against Sepp Blatter in the election for FIFA president.
Hayatou, of Cameroon, has headed the Confederation of African Football since 1988. Before committing to running against Blatter, who took over FIFA from Joao Havelange four years ago, Hayatou wants the CAF executive committee to back him at its meeting Saturday.
Lennart Johansson, the president of the Union of European Football Associations, is expected to attend Saturday's meeting. Johansson lost to Blatter in the 1998 election.
This year's election will take place in Seoul, South Korea, before the start of the World Cup. Candidates must be placed in nomination by March 28.
---
SEBRING, Fla. (AP) - Dan Gurney, one of America's greatest race drivers, now has a turn named in his honor at one of the world's most famous racetracks, Sebring International Raceway.
Gurney, a charter member of the Sebring Hall of Fame, has been further honored by the naming of the famous "Big Bend" portion of the Sebring circuit "Gurney Bend."
The winner of the Sebring 12-hour race as a driver in 1959, and again as a car owner in 1992 and 1993, Gurney remains one of the biggest names in motorsports. He has won in Formula One, Indy Cars, NASCAR and at the 24 Hours of Le Mans.
Despite the numerous honors in his illustrious racing career, the Sebring honor marks the first time that he has had a portion of a race track named for him.
Gurney is one of more than 30 former winners of the Sebring race participating in ceremonies marking the 50th anniversary of the classic sports car event this weekend.
---
BUCHAREST, Romania (AP) - Former tennis star Ion Tiriac was re-elected Friday to second term as president of the Romanian Olympic Committee.
Tiriac won 68 votes, 41 more than Iolanda Balas-Soeter, Rompres reported. Balas-Soeter is a former Olympic and world high-jumping champion who is president of the Romanian Athletics Federation.
Former star gymnast Nadia Comaneci was unanimously elected honorary president of the committee.
 Load-Date: March 16, 2002

 

End of Document
