

Names in the game
The Associated Press
September 21, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1053 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




HAMILTON TOWNSHIP, Ohio (AP) - Michael Munoz, a former All-American at Tennessee and the son of pro football Hall of Famer Anthony Munoz, is running for office.
Munoz, who earned his degree in political science, announced his candidacy Wednesday for township trustee. The former offensive lineman wasn't drafted by the NFL due to several injuries during his college days. Although he had offers to sign as a free agent, he decided to retire from football.
In his announcement, distributed by e-mail, he said he intends to be a "pro-citizen, pro-business trustee who will make wise and thoughtful decisions for the people of Hamilton Township."
His father was listed as the treasurer for the campaign.
 
---
GENEVA (AP) - Top-ranked Roger Federer says more top-level tennis tournaments in Africa would raise awareness of the continent's problems and help promote the sport.
"I think maybe (there should be) more tournaments in Africa, if not exhibitions," Federer said Wednesday. "There's one in Morocco. Maybe we can do some further south."
The Swiss star, who won the U.S. Open earlier this month, added, "What I wish from tennis is that the players unite more than try to do everything individually."
Federer was speaking as an ambassador for the U.N. International Year of Sport at a news conference. The U.N. General Assembly designated 2005 as the year to encourage sport to promote education, health, development and peace.
Federer has set up a foundation in South Africa, where his mother is from, to help children receive a better education and two hot meals a day.
 
---
TURIN, Italy (AP) - Italian ice dancing pair Barbara Fusar Poli and Maurizio Margaglio are returning to competition in February's Turin Olympics.
Fusar Poli and Margaglio have not competed since winning the bronze medal at the 2002 Salt Lake City Games. The pair also won eight national titles, one European title and gold at the 2001 world championships in Vancouver.
"We had already informed the ISU that we were trying, and now we can confirm that we're coming back to the competitions for the 2005-2006 season," Margaglio said Wednesday at Turin's Olympic zone.
"The Olympics are in our country, how could we resist the temptation?" Fusar Poli said. "We are working at our maximum level, are happy with ourselves as there could be nothing more to do, and the response at this stage of our preparation is great.
"The programs are coming together very well, we have found music we're enthusiastic about and we are really, really happy."
 
---
THESSALONIKI, Greece (AP) - Lothar Matthaeus, the former midfielder who captained Germany to victory in the 1990 World Cup, will coach PAOK Thessaloniki.
"We've agreed on everything, and on Monday he will sign a two-year contract," PAOK owner Yiannis Goumenos said.
Financial terms of the deal were not announced Wednesday.
Matthaeus, 44, is currently the coach of Hungary's national team, which failed to qualify for next year's World Cup in Germany.
Former PAOK player Giorgos Kostikos has been acting as coach since Nikos Karageorgiou resigned in March following the team's poor performances in the league and UEFA Cup.
 
---
VIENNA, Austria (AP) - Former NHL player Darby Hendrickson signed a two-year deal to play for Red Bulls Salzburg in the Austrian hockey league.
Hendrickson played in the NHL for 12 seasons with five teams - Toronto, Vancouver, Minnesota, Colorado and the New York Islanders.
"We are very happy to have Darby on board. He is mighty in penalty killing and can also score up front," Bulls press officer Guido Stapelfeldt said. The club finished last in the seven-team league a year ago.
Hendrickson appeared in 518 games, scoring 65 goals and 64 assists. He also played in 46 international games for Team USA.
Hendrickson played for the Latvian team HK Riga 2000 during last year's NHL lockout.
 
---
LONDON (AP) - A lottery scratch-card game has raised more than $3.59 million so far for the 2012 London Olympics.
The "Go For Gold" game has averaged weekly sales of a million tickets since its July 28 inception, National Lottery operator Camelot said Wednesday as a second edition of the game was launched.
The lottery hopes to raise $1.3 billion from Olympic-themed games toward the overall $4.1 billion cost of the Olympics.
"Although we had anticipated the scratch card would prove popular, to find ourselves in the very welcome position of having to produce a second edition, especially so soon, is fantastic," Camelot chief executive Dianne Thompson said.
 
---
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - West Indian cricket star Brian Lara presented former South African President Nelson Mandela with a cricket bat which he had "unfortunately used against South Africa and scored a couple of hundreds."
Mandela, 87, looked relaxed as he joked with Lara in front of photographers, leaning on his walking stick and the arm of his personal assistant for support. The anti-apartheid icon has been ordered to limit his public appearances for the sake of his health.
The signed cricket bat read: "To a man that has inspired the world. I love you president Mandela. My best wishes to a personal hero," according to the South African Press Association.
Lara, a left-handed batsman, holds world records for the highest individual scores in both first-class cricket and test cricket. Lara was in South Africa to play two matches for the Jacques Kallis Benefit.
 
---
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - Indy Racing League champion Tony Kanaan will drive a Formula One car for the first time next week in a training session with BAR-Honda.
Kanaan, the 2004 IRL champion, will join BAR-Honda on Sept. 29 at the team's final test session of the year at Jerez, Spain.
The 30-year-old Brazilian currently drives for the Honda-powered Andretti Green Racing team in the IRL. He is second in this year's IRL standings. Englishman Dan Wheldon has all but clinched the series title and only needs to start Sunday's race at Watkins Glen to officially win the championship.
---
STAMFORD, Conn. (AP) - OLN, the new cable TV home of the NHL, hired John Davidson as its lead analyst Wednesday.
Davidson, a hockey broadcaster since 1983, was a goaltender for 11 seasons in the NHL, first with the St. Louis Blues and then with the New York Rangers.
Davidson joins play-by-play announcer Mike "Doc" Emrick and studio host Bill Clement as part of the OLN team.
 Load-Date: September 22, 2005

 

End of Document
