

Names in the Game Maier, Fuzzy Zoeller, Hicham El Guerrouj-Stacy Dragila, World Club
November 25, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 764 words
Dateline: ADDIS ABABA, Ethiopia
Body




Haile Gebreselassie easily won a 10-kilometer road race in his home country Sunday, an event aimed at raising AIDS awareness.
The double Olympic champion was timed in 30 minutes, 27.2 seconds. Ethiopia's Berhane Adere, the 10,000-meter bronze medalist at the world championships, was the top woman, covering the 6.2 miles in 35:7.95.
Some 10,000 runners, including diplomats, women and children, took part in the "Value Your Life" Great Ethiopian Run. It was the first international 10-kilometer race held in Addis Ababa.
The race, which hopes to raise money for a sports center, was watched by thousands of cheering fans.
"Having a race of this stature here is something I have dreamed about for years," Gebreselassie said. "We have had other events, but never on a scale like this."
Other stars taking part included Kenya's Joyce Chepchumba, Portugal's Rosa Mota, Norway's Ingrid Kristiansen and Mexico's German Silva.
---
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. (AP) - A Florida State music professor sued J.C. Penney Co., accusing the company of copyright infringement of the school's fight song he wrote a half-century ago.
Tommie Wright contends he's not getting paid for products sold by the national department store chain that play his song. One of the items, according to the lawsuit, is a dancing horse emblazoned with the team logo.
Rita Flynn, a spokeswoman for J.C. Penney at its headquarters in Plano, Texas, said she wasn't aware of the lawsuit and couldn't comment.
A music professor at Florida State since 1949, Wright seeks unspecified damages and a court order banning further sales of items that play the song without his permission.
The fight song was first played at halftime during the 1950 homecoming game. The lyrics were written by student Doug Alley.
Wright allows the school to use the song for any university purpose. In exchange, he receives two football season tickets each year.
---
VIENNA, Austria (AP) - Herman Maier has flown to Dubai as part of his recovery from a broken leg in a motorcycle accident in August and says he won't be skiing at the Salt Lake City Olympics.
The Austrian ski star has been undergoing therapy at his national training center in Obertauern in the Austrian Alps.
He had hoped to return to topflight skiing, but this weekend he told German TV he will not compete at the Winter Games next February.
Maier went to Dubai with Heini Bergmueller, who runs the training center.
"It's mostly about getting away from it all," Maier spokesman Knut Okresek told the Austria Press Agency. Okresek said Dubai was ideal because it did not involve a long trip.
"Since the accident, he has been doing the same things practically every day," Bergmueller told the agency. "In Dubai, he'll have a chance to regenerate, but of course we'll still do some work."
Maier has won the World Cup overall title three times, as well as two world championships and two Olympic gold medals.
---
WAILEA, Hawaii (AP) - Fuzzy Zoeller, who turned 50 this month, will make his senior debut in the Senior Skins Game.
Zoeller has yet to hit a shot on the Senior PGA Tour but will join Jack Nicklaus, Arnold Palmer and Hale Irwin in the Jan. 26 event.
For the first time, all 18 holes will be played on the same day, although they will be broadcast on two different days.
Zoeller is being counted on to spark the senior tour, which has been hurt by declining interest and TV ratings in recent years.
---
MONTE CARLO, Monaco (AP) - Hicham El Guerrouj, the 1,500-meter world record-holder, and American pole-vault champion Stacy Dragila were honored Sunday as the IAAF's Athletes of the Year.
El Guerrouj won the 1,500 at the world championships in Edmonton, Alberta, in August. He set the world record of 3:26.00 in Rome in 1998.
Dragila also holds the world record and in August captured her second straight world championship title. She set her world record of 15 feet, 9 1/4 inches in June at Palo Alto, Calif. She won the Olympic gold medal last year.
Last year's winners were Czech javelin thrower Jan Zelezny and American sprinter Marion Jones.
---
MUNICH, Germany (AP) - Bayern Munich is hurting as it heads to the World Club Cup showdown against Argentina's Boca Juniors.
The German team has been reduced by injuries to 14 players for Tuesday's game in Tokyo that pits the European champion against the South American champion.
Bayern Munich on Sunday added captain Stefan Effenberg, Alexander Zickler and reserve Michael Tarnat to its long list of injured players.
Bayern won this event in 1976 when a team led by Franz Beckenbauer beat Brazil's Belo Horizonte. The only other German winner is Dortmund in 1997.
 Load-Date: November 26, 2001

 

End of Document
