

Names In The Game British sports Minister, Champions Cup; Dave Winfield and Ferguson
June 12, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 814 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




WORCESTER, Mass. (AP) - It was the bottom of the fourth with the bases loaded. The only things that could stop a run from scoring were perfect pitching or a great defensive play.
Or two moose trying to get onto the field.
Little Leaguers were forced to stop their game after the animals were spotted roaming near the field. They were followed by state and environmental police packing rifles and tranquilizer darts.
Both teams - the Holmes-Shusas and the Councillors - and parents were cleared from the field Sunday morning after the moose showed up.
"I was helping coach my son's team, and I heard a rustle in the bushes near the third-base line," said Philip Cawley. "I looked and at first I thought it was a horse, then it turned and I saw its head in profile. It seemed to be trying to find a way over the fence."
One moose was captured later that morning.
The game was called with Holmes-Shusas leading 6-5. The teams were to resume the game Tuesday.
---
LONDON (AP) - Two days after winning the Belmont Stakes on Point Given, American jockey Gary Stevens pulled out of next week's Royal Ascot meet because of a knee injury he aggravated at Belmont Park in New York.
Stevens might still could come to the meeting, which is attended every day by Queen Elizabeth II and other members of the royal family, according to Terry Norman, the jockey's British agent.
"Gary rang me this evening to break the news," Norman said Tuesday. "He has sprained his knee and the doctors have told him he should not ride for a few weeks. He still intends to come over for Ascot but he certainly won't be seen on the track."
Two years ago, Stevens scored a major triumph at the royal meet, riding the queen's Blueprint to victory in the Duke of Edinburgh Stakes, named after her husband.
---
ROME (AP) -- Maurice Greene, the world's fastest man, will be the featured competitor at this month's Golden Gala track and field meet.
The American sprinter was in Rome on Tuesday as the participants were announced for the June 29 event, the first this season in the Golden League athletics series.
Along with Greene, the Olympic 100 meters champion and world record holder, the annual Rome meet will feature Sydney silver medalist Hicham El Guerrouj of Morocco in the 1,500 meters.
The Moroccan has set two world records - in the 1,500 and mile - on the Golden Gala's Stadio Olimpico track.
---
LONDON (AP) - The Wembley redevelopment fiasco and clashes with English soccer authorities have led to the downfall of British Sports Minister Kate Hoey, who was dumped in a Cabinet reshuffle.
Her replacement, former Trade Minister George Caborn, said Tuesday he wanted to move sport higher up the political agenda. But one of his first priorities will be to deal with the troubled national stadium project.
Plans to rebuild Wembley were thrown into disarray in May when the cost escalated to $924 million and the British government refused to bail out the project.
Hoey, 54, was largely blamed for the debacle. Her boss, Chris Smith, also a central figure in the Wembley situation, lost his position as secretary of state for the Department of Culture, Media and Sport in Monday's reshuffle. He was replaced by Tessa Jowell.
Hoey said she was very disappointed.
Hoey upset soccer chiefs a day after she took over from Tony Banks as sports minister in 1999, when she criticized Manchester United for abandoning the FA Cup to play in the World Club Championship in Brazil. Banks had persuaded United to play the tournament.
---
NYON, Switzerland (AP) - England will have four teams in the 2002-03 Champions Cup thanks to Manchester United, Arsenal and Leeds all making it to last season's quarterfinals and Liverpool winning the UEFA Cup.
The performances of the four clubs has improved England's position in UEFA's rankings, jumping from fifth to third behind Spain and Italy, who already have four clubs in Europe's most prestigious competition.
In a strange twist, Germany has slipped to fourth in the rankings despite Bayern Munich's Champions Cup triumph on penalties over Valencia in May's final.
Because the Bundesliga, which had four teams last season, had no other teams in the final stages, it will have only three teams in the competition in 2002-03 along with France and the Netherlands.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Baseball fans who would like to chat with retired players from their favorite team, including such Hall of Famers as Dave Winfield and Ferguson Jenkins, can phone them soon, although it will cost $4.95 a minute.
Professional Athlete Systems Inc. of Sherman Oaks will launch its pay-per-call service "Call of Fame" Monday in Los Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, Boston and Chicago. Plans are to expand within six months to the other cities with big league teams.
Fans will be able to speak one-on-one to the first former player available from their favorite team for up to 10 minutes - which would run the bill up to $49.50.
 Load-Date: June 13, 2001

 

End of Document
