

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
October 19, 2003, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 653 words
Dateline: MONTREAL
Body




Jean Beliveau was back on the ice, soaking up applause.
Beliveau, the captain of the Montreal Canadiens in their glory years, was honored Saturday night for his 50-year association with the team.
Beliveau, 72, and wife Elise received a standing ovation at Bell Centre before Montreal played the Toronto Maple Leafs. The teams stood along the blue lines and the Canadiens all wore Beliveau No. 4 jerseys for the ceremony.
A banner of Beliveau from his playing days in the 1950s and 1960s will hang from the ceiling for the rest of the season. His autograph was painted onto the ice.
Beliveau was the NHL scoring champion in 1956 with a career-high 88 points. He won the Hart Trophy as the NHL's most valuable player in 1956 and 1964.
He was a part of two Canadiens dynasties - the first that won five straight Cups (1956-60) and the second with the team that won four in five years in the 1960s.
"He had the charisma," former linemate John Ferguson said. "He was the man. He'd walk into a dressing room and you'd say: 'There's Jean Beliveau.' It was something."
---
ANDERSON, Ind. (AP) - Manute Bol never even got on a horse, but the 7-foot-7 former NBA player enjoyed his brief career as a jockey.
Bol suited up in jockey gear - special riding silks and white pants with a 48-inch inseam - and weighed in with the rest of the riders Saturday night at Hoosier Park, a thoroughbred track near Indianapolis.
Bol was trying to raise money for victims of war in his native Sudan. Money for his foundation was collected during the race through auctions and souvenir sales.
Bol participated in the paddock activities and received an honorary license from the Indiana Horse Racing Commission.
"The jockeys are all great, and we had a good time with this event," he said.
Since leaving the NBA, Bol has raised funds with the Indianapolis Ice of the Central Hockey League and through a bout with William "The Refrigerator" Perry on Fox's Celebrity Boxing.
---
LA GOMERA, Spain (AP) - Sixteen rowboats set off on a 2,900-mile trans-Atlantic race that began Sunday in the Canary Islands and ends in Barbados.
The teams will row an average of 18 hours a day, braving swells the size of houses and dodging container ships.
"They'll be a funny sight," said Rachel Anning of the Challenge Business, which is organizing the race. "Most will be rowing naked to avoid getting salt sores and chafing wounds."
The two-man teams include police officers, students, one farmer, one fisherman and two Royal British Air Force officers.
There are two women among the competitors, who come from Britain, South Africa, New Zealand, France, Holland and Barbados.
A total of 111 people have made the trip across the ocean by rowboat, organizers said.
Many of the teams are trying to raise money for charity. This race was held previously in 1997 and 2001.
---
LINCOLN, Neb. (AP) - The Nebraska football team got a visit from the No. 2 man on Forbes magazine's annual list of richest Americans.
Billionaire Warren Buffett addressed the Cornhuskers at their pregame meeting Saturday, and he was on the sideline during their 48-12 victory over Texas A&M.
"I think we're trying to expose our players to great people who not only will help them in their athletic careers but also will give them some insight on what it will be like down the road in life," offensive coordinator Barney Cotton said.
---
PHILLIP ISLAND, Australia (AP) - World champion motorcyclist Valentino Rossi won his third consecutive Australian Grand Prix on Sunday.
Rossi, who clinched the series championship last weekend in Malaysia, completed the 27 laps in 41 minutes, 53.543 seconds for his eighth win of the season.
"It's the first time I have raced at 100 percent from the first lap to the last lap," Rossi said.
The Italian drew a 10-second penalty for passing under a caution flag. But he still finished 5.212 seconds ahead of Loris Capirossi. Rossi teammate Nicky Hayden of the United States was third.
 Load-Date: October 20, 2003

 

End of Document
