

Names In The Game on President Bush, Lester Pearson Award, Jose De Cauwer, IAFF
May 1, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 745 words
Dateline: OMAHA, Neb.
Body




President Bush can't seem to get enough baseball.
The former part-owner of the Texas Rangers and avid baseball fan plans to attend the College World Series opener on June 8, White House officials told members of Nebraska's congressional delegation.
U.S. Sen. Chuck Hagel extended one of several invitations to Bush and announced Tuesday that the president had accepted.
No president has attended the baseball championship series since it began in 1947. Bush's father was scheduled to attend the series when he was president in the early 1990s but changed his plans.
President Bush threw the ceremonial first pitch last month for the Milwaukee Brewers' home opener. He plans to hold the first White House South Lawn T-ball game on Sunday, featuring two Little League teams from the Washington area.
 
---
TORONTO (AP) - Pittsburgh Penguins linemates Jaromir Jagr and Mario Lemieux and Colorado Avalanche forward Joe Sakic are finalists for the Lester B. Pearson award.
The award is given to the NHL MVP as voted on by members of the NHL Players' Association.
Lemieux, the owner of the Penguins who came out of retirement in December after 3 1/2 years off the ice, scored 35 goals and 41 assists in 43 games. He has won four Pearson Awards (1986, 1988, 1993 and 1996) and would join Wayne Gretzky as a five-time winner.
Jagr, who won the award the last two seasons, captured his fourth straight league scoring title and fifth of his career with 52 goals and 96 assists. The 29-year-old Czech right-winger has compiled 10 straight seasons with 30 more goals.
Sakic tied for second in goals with 54, was second in assists with 64 and second in points with 112.
The winner will be announced June 14 at the Hockey Hall of Fame.
 
---
BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - Belgian cycling federation coach Jose De Cauwer has been suspended pending the outcome of an investigation into his possible role in a doping scandal.
De Cauwer was charged with violating the country's hormone legislation after police said they found a syringe with banned substances during a search at his home. He was questioned over the weekend but was not arrested.
De Cauwer, a former cyclist who was named the federation's head coach two years ago, insisted he has never been involved in a doping case.
 
---
MONTE CARLO, Monaco (AP) - Four candidates will run for the presidency of the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
Senegal's Lamine Diack, who has served as acting president of track and field's world governing body since the death of longtime head Primo Nebiolo in 1999, heads the field for the Aug. 1-2 election in Edmonton.
The others who declared their candidacy by Tuesday's deadline were: Eisa Abdullah Al Dashti of Kuwait, Amadeo Francis of Puerto Rico and Suresh Kalmadi of India.
The election will take place at the IAAF Congress on the eve of the World Championships in Edmonton.
---
GLASGOW, Scotland (AP) - Ernie Els will return to defend the Loch Lomond golf title in mid-July.
Last year, the South African narrowly beat former winners Colin Montgomerie and Tom Lehman on the course that runs alongside the picturesque lake north of Glasgow.
The July 12-15 event, immediately before the British Open at Royal Lytham, was called the Standard Life Loch Lomond tournament when Els won last year. It has been renamed the Scottish Open, a tournament that was last played in 1996 at Gleneagles.
Prize money for the tournament has been doubled to $3.14 million.
 
---
MANCHESTER, England (AP) - English champion Manchester United has signed a 12-year-old soccer player.
Daniel Rowe was signed from first division club Preston, where he was playing in the Premier Academy League under-13s league.
His fee will be paid in installments, with Preston receiving $143,000 if Rowe makes 10 first-team appearances. Rowe has been playing with Preston since he was 6.
English clubs are investing heavily in children in a bid to find the most promising talent at the earliest age. In 1999, Arsenal signed 15-year-old Jermaine Pennant for $2.8 million from Notts County.
---
PARIS (AP) - Colin Montgomerie will not defend his French Open title this week.
Montgomerie, who won last year's tournament with a two-stroke victory, withdrew his entry last Friday. The four-day tournament runs from May 3-6 in Lyon, central France.
The Scot missed the cut in last week's Portuguese Open by one shot, marking the first time since August 1998 that he had failed in two successive outings. Earlier in the month he missed the cut at the Masters tournament.
 Load-Date: May 2, 2001

 

End of Document
