

National Institutes nominee is comfortable in the lab and the administrative labyrinth
March 27, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 660 words
Byline: By RON KAMPEAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Dr. Elias Zerhouni pioneered a better way to look deeply into the human body. Now he will be managing the inner workings of the National Institutes of Health, the nation's largest biomedical research agency.
President Bush nominated the Algerian-born radiologist Tuesday to serve as director of NIH, which has been without a chief for two years.
Friends say Zerhouni's ability to coax reluctant ivory tower colleagues into the real world made him an able administrator at one of the nation's top medical schools, the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, where he has been executive vice dean.
"He's one of these rare people who can actually predict and envision the future of our health care system and what it's lacking," said Nancy Taylor, president of Surgi-Vision, a company Zerhouni helped found based on his patented MRI enhancement technology. "I think part of that comes from his radiology experience … he's got a physician's hands so he can actually feel and see."
Reorganizing the institutes and attracting new talent would be right up Zerhouni's alley, say others who know him. And a demand for talent is a priority at the agency, where six of its 27 institutes need new directors.
Edward Benz, formerly Zerhouni's boss at Johns Hopkins, recalled how Zerhouni's consensus building came into play when he had to allot newly built labs.
"In research environments, space is often more important than money," said Benz, who now heads the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston. "Some got more space and some got less, but everyone was happy.
"He's all you can ask for where there are more calls on resources than resources."
Even so, Zerhouni may face some tough Senate questions about his apparent agreement with Bush's restrictions on embryonic stem cell research and therapeutic cloning, despite the independence scientists expect from the agency.
"If ideological litmus tests are used to cut off promising areas of research, we're heading down a troubled path," said Carl Feldbaum, who heads the Biotechnology Industry Organization, an influential Washington-based umbrella group.
Zerhouni was born, raised and trained in Algeria, and joined Johns Hopkins when he arrived in the United States in 1975. He recently patented an antenna-like insertion that enhances magnetic resonance imaging.
Boating and investments are among his interests.
Zerhouni has distinguished himself as a fund raiser, helping to solicit a $58.5 million gift last year from an anonymous donor for an institute of cell engineering.
He also helped break down the wall between Johns Hopkins scientists and business leaders - the school was one of the last major ones to cross to commercial research.
"He was one of the people who knew we had to be effective in dealings with the outside world, but he helped us retain academic integrity," said Benz.
Zerhouni, 50, has not published his views on Bush's strictures against government-sponsored research using new embryonic cells and against any cloning of human tissue.
But he is evidently comfortable working under those limits.
An open-minded chief is crucial, biotechnologists say, because the industry relies on the agency to conduct the basic research needed for applied commercial research.
"That person should be looking out for the health and well-being of the population, not taking sides on religious or political debates," said Robert Lanza of Advanced Cell Technology in Massachusetts.
Others say his diplomatic skills, honed through years of dealing with touchy scientists, may help him reassure conservatives without explicitly endorsing their views.
"Elias is sensitive to people who have strong opposing ideas about stem cell research," said Chi Dang, a vice dean of research at Johns Hopkins.
The National Institutes of Health pay for more than 43,000 biomedical projects and employ more than 10,000 people. The agency's budget has been steadily rising in recent years and Bush is asking for more than $27 billion for next year.
 Load-Date: March 28, 2002

 

End of Document
