

Negotiators finish World Summit plan as world leaders take the podium
September 3, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 730 words
Byline: By ALEXANDRA ZAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




With world leaders taking the stage and demanding action, negotiators at the World Summit put the finishing touches on a global plan to improve the lives of the poor while preserving the environment.
The first of more than 100 world leaders gathered here opened their portion of the 10-day summit Monday with impassioned pleas for solutions to a litany of problems, including starvation in Africa, European and Asian floods, and financial crises in the Americas.
"Humanity has a rendezvous with destiny," French President Jacques Chirac declared. "Alarms are sounding across all the continents … We cannot say that we did not know!"
Late Monday, negotiators resolved the last main sticking points in a 70-odd page action plan covering a slew of environmental and development woes, including energy, clean water, health and sanitation. Most of the items were geared to helping the world's poorest people without polluting.
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan urged delegates to commit to firm action to solve problems identified a decade ago at the Earth Summit in Rio.
"The focus from now on must be on implementing the many agreements that have been reached," he said.
Though President Bush declined to come - sending Secretary of State Colin Powell in his place - U.S. officials say they are firmly committed to the summit's success.
"We've reached a real breakthrough with the summit in our collective attempt to ensure that this is a successful gathering of the global family," said Assistant Secretary of State John Turner.
After more than a week of bargaining, the European Union lost its push for targets on the use of wind and solar energy - the last major sticking point in the summit's action plan.
The agreed text includes a commitment to "urgently" increase the use of renewable energy sources, but also allows for the expanded use of hydroelectric damns and fossil fuels that are modified to pollute less, diplomats said.
Developing countries had sided with the United States and Japan against including the targets, arguing they were a rich country's luxury.
U.S. officials said the final wording "properly reflects" how a "diversity of clean energy resources" will contribute to sustainable development.
"The document clearly highlights the need to increase access to modern energy services and signals the valuable role renewable energy will play in the future," said Undersecretary of State Paula Dobriansky, head of the U.S. delegation.
Compromises were also reached in three other key areas: climate change, trade and sanitation.
Despite the Bush administration's refusal to ratify the Kyoto Protocol on climate change, it accepted language that says nations backing Kyoto "strongly urge" states that have not done so to ratify it in "a timely manner."
Negotiators agreed to text urging countries to reform subsidies that favor industrialized countries or are harmful to the environment.
They also committed to halving the 2 billion people living without proper sanitation by 2015, diplomats said.
The United States accepted the new timetable despite earlier insistence that the way to get results is through concrete projects, not paper agreements.
Negotiators agreed to emphasize the need for good governance to achieve sustainable development, but did not make it a condition for receiving aid as advocated by the United States, diplomats said.
"The overall outcome of this summit is truly remarkable," British Environment Minister Margaret Beckett said.
But at least one country said it still had concerns about the plan. Canada has been pressing for language requiring the provision of health care in a way consistent with human rights. Without it, the delegation worries that protection against harmful cultural practices like genital mutilation might be weakened.
"We will continue to fight for this," said Kelly Morgan, spokeswoman for Canada's Environment Ministry.
U.N. officials, however, said negotiations were "effectively over."
A host of civic and environmental groups also condemned the compromises, calling some of them a significant step backward from previous commitments.
"Economic interests were allowed to maintain their primacy over other global priorities," said Kim Carstensen, deputy head of WWF International's summit delegation.
World leaders must still formally adopt the nonbinding agreement.
---
 
On the Net:
Main summit site: http://www.johannesburgsummit.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WSSD180, WSSD186, JOB101
 Load-Date: September 4, 2002

 

End of Document
