

North Korea standoff the latest challenge for U.N. nuclear agency
December 30, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 976 words
Byline: By WILLIAM J. KOLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIENNA, Austria
Body




They're the world's nuclear cops, keeping tabs on everything from Saddam Hussein's Iraq to the atomic aspirations of unpredictable African republics.
Now, with North Korea resuming its nuclear program in high-stakes defiance of the West, experts at the International Atomic Energy Agency are being stretched to their limits amid doubts about whether the U.N. watchdog group can keep pace with new threats.
In an interview with The Associated Press, IAEA Director-General Mohamed ElBaradei insisted his Vienna-based organization has what it takes to monitor the use and misuse of nuclear materials worldwide.
But ElBaradei conceded: "We are trying to cope. We're under a lot of pressure dealing with two serious crisis situations at the same time. We need to cover so many fronts all at once."
Those two crises, in Iraq and North Korea, are among the most serious of any the group has faced since the Cold War.
Inspectors are in Iraq searching for evidence of a hidden nuclear weapons program that Washington insists is there but Saddam denies he has.
Two inspectors monitoring a mothballed nuclear complex in North Korea were ordered to leave after Pyongyang said it was bringing the site back online to handle an energy crisis. The United States says the North is trying to produce nuclear weapons.
ElBaradei is tall but soft-spoken, and chooses his words carefully to avoid being caught up in the politics that preoccupy the agency's 134 member nations. On North Korea, though, the circumspect Egyptian has shown an unrelenting and unusually strident side.
This past week, he criticized the Asian nation's reclusive regime for engaging in "nuclear brinkmanship" by reviving its atomic program and expelling the inspectors.
"I'm calling a spade a spade," he told the AP. "I see a very serious crisis - a country that's completely defying the world. The gravity of the situation is enormous."
Born of the late President Dwight D. Eisenhower's landmark "Atoms for Peace" speech to the United Nations in 1953, the IAEA was established in 1957, five years before the Cuban missile crisis brought the nuclear threat to America's back door.
Its logo, a '60s-style nest of overlapping atomic loops cradled in the twin olive branches of the United Nations, underscores the agency's staid, no-nonsense approach to guarding the world against nuclear proliferation.
The mission has gained a new sense of urgency since the Sept. 11 attacks raised fears of nuclear terrorism.
With a budget of about $230 million, field offices in Geneva, New York, Tokyo and Toronto, and laboratories in Austria, Italy and Monaco, the IAEA promotes the peaceful use of nuclear technology and serves as a forum for global scientific and technical cooperation.
Security is tight and news leaks are rare among its 2,200 employees, who work in a warren of cubicles and conference rooms spread over several floors at the IAEA's headquarters.
An atmosphere of efficiency is evident even among the janitors who mop floors and empty wastebaskets in the sprawling U.N. complex overlooking the Danube River in the Austrian capital.
Its inspectors verify whether governments are complying with the Treaty for Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons and other international accords. They regularly visit nuclear facilities to check records that countries keep on the whereabouts and inventories of their nuclear materials, looking for signs that uranium and plutonium at reactors or laboratories might be diverted to military uses.
Although IAEA inspectors have been checking more than 900 facilities in 70 countries, they are now preoccupied with the hunt for nuclear weaponry in Iraq and the struggle to monitor North Korea's aggressive recent steps to restart its nuclear program.
Those twin challenges point up the IAEA's conviction that science alone can determine the truth, and that science - carried out independently, correctly and without regard for political considerations - takes time.
Despite a tough new Security Council resolution that gives it unconditional and unrestricted access to everything in Iraq, the agency contends it will need at least a year to determine whether Saddam has weapons of mass destruction. That timetable doesn't sit well with the Bush administration, which is preparing for a possible military confrontation with Baghdad that could get under way as early as next month.
David Kay, a former IAEA chief nuclear inspector, sees little patience in Washington for the agency's approach.
"The agency moves slowly," said Kay, now a fellow at the Arlington, Va.-based Potomac Institute for Policy Studies. "They're very methodical and traditional, very linear in their thinking. In Iraq, they were very slow to begin interviewing (Iraqi) scientists."
The agency's inspections in Iraq are being carried out alongside a parallel hunt for biological and chemical agents conducted by the U.N. Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission.
Some U.S. officials are critical of the IAEA, and say its work is heavily dependent on intelligence from the United States.
"They're completely reliant on our intelligence. They couldn't work without us telling them, 'You might want to look at that, or you might want to look over here,"' a U.S. diplomat in Vienna told the AP on condition of anonymity.
Decision-making within the agency, the official said, is slowed by frequent consultations with a board of governors that includes representatives of 35 countries, and with the Security Council in New York, to whom ElBaradei reports.
"That's the problem with multilateral organizations. There are so many players involved - too many players involved," the official said.
ElBaradei insists that going slow is crucial to the IAEA's work. He offers this simple entreaty: "Give us time. Bear with us. What we do is the cornerstone of all arms control activities."
On the Net:
IAEA, www.iaea.org/worldatom 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo DV102
 Load-Date: December 31, 2002

 

End of Document
