

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 2, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1057 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Brother Timothy Diener
NAPA, Calif. (AP) - Brother Timothy Diener, who helped shape the California wine industry as longtime cellarmaster for the Christian Brothers' wines and brandies, died Tuesday. He was 94.
Born Anthony George Diener, he worked for more than 50 years at the Mont La Salle Vineyards in the Napa Valley, retiring in 1989 when the Brothers of the Christian Schools sold their wine and brandy-making operation to the Heublein Fine Wine Group.
The Brothers of the Christian Schools, commonly known as the De La Salle Christian Brothers - a Roman Catholic religious order dedicated to education - had run a small business making sacramental and medicinal wines since the late 19th century. The order bought the larger Napa Valley vineyards in 1930.
Diener, then a high school chemistry teacher, was assigned to be "wine chemist" at the winery in 1935. Members of the religious order are not ordained as priests.
Production was then no more than 10,000 gallons a year, but with the help of German immigrant Alfred Fromm, the sales and reputation of Christian Brothers wines grew. Profits went to support the order's schools and programs.
---
Albert Dorskind
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Albert Dorskind, who as a vice president of MCA Inc. helped create the Universal Studios tour and build Universal City, died Sunday of prostate cancer, his son said. He was 82.
Dorskind came up with the idea of allowing tourists to view the Universal Studios lot in 1957 after he negotiated MCA's purchase of 378 acres of the studio lot for its Revenue Productions.
Rides and further attractions were added several years later, and the Universal Studios theme park became a top Southern California tourist draw.
Dorskind, who also was president of MCA Development Corp., redeveloped much of the San Fernando Valley studio property, building the 14-story MCA headquarters. Eventually the site became home to hotels, theaters, the Universal Studios amphitheater, movie center and the Universal CityWalk shopping complex.
An amateur photographer and collector, he helped launch the photography department of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art in 1984. It includes works from Dorskind's own collection by masters such as Ansel Adams, Henri Cartier-Bresson and Edward Weston.
During World War II, Dorskind served in the Pacific with the 32nd Naval Construction Battalion.
---
Angela Leigh
VICTORIA, British Columbia (AP) - Angela Leigh, a founding member and former principal dancer of the National Ballet of Canada, died Tuesday after a long illness. She was 78.
Leigh, an outspoken, chain-smoking dancer, choreographer and interior designer, died at home, her daughter said.
Born in Uganda, Leigh trained with the Royal Ballet in London, where she met her first husband, Clayton Leigh, a Royal Canadian Air Force bomber pilot in World War II.
She became one of 25 founding members of the National Ballet of Canada, danced most of the leading roles in the classical and modern repertoires with the company, taught at its school and was an assistant professor of dance at York University.
Her choreography credits include works for the National Ballet School, Canadian Opera Co. and Ontario Ballet Theater.
Last year Leigh played a key role in the founding of Ballet Victoria, the first professional ballet company on Vancouver Island. At the time of her death she was listed as the company's artistic adviser.
---
Alicia Markova
LONDON (AP) - Dame Alicia Markova, one of the 20th century's greatest ballerinas and a co-founder of the English National Ballet, died Thursday. She was 94.
Markova was working until her health worsened a few months ago, the ballet company said.
Born Lilian Alicia Marks in London, she was 10 when she made her stage debut, billed as "Little Alicia, the child Pavlova," referring to one of the world's best known ballerinas, Anna Pavlova. After training with Serafima Astavieva in London, she joined Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes in 1925 at the age of 14 and adopted the more exotic name of Markova.
She went on to dance with many major companies in Europe and North America, including the Vic-Wells Ballet - forerunner of the Royal Ballet - Les Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo and the Ballet Theater, now the American Ballet Theater.
In 1935, with Anton Dolin, Markova founded the Markova-Dolin Ballet, the first of several companies that led to the foundation in 1950 of the Festival Ballet, later renamed the English National Ballet.
Markova was the company's first prima ballerina and served as its president from 1986 until her death.
After her retirement from dancing, Markova served as director of New York's Metropolitan Opera Ballet from 1963 to 1969 and was a professor at the University of Cincinnati College Conservatory of Music from 1971 to 1973.
She was named a dame, the female equivalent of a knight, by Queen Elizabeth II in 1963.
---
Edwin Shanke
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - Edwin Shanke, a World War II news correspondent who reported from behind Nazi lines for two years and later opened The Associated Press bureau in Sweden as war raged in Europe, died Wednesday of a long illness, his wife said. He was 94.
Shanke had lived in Stockholm since retiring in the early 1970s as chief of AP's Scandinavian Services. The posting was his last assignment in a long career spent as a war correspondent and bureau chief with the international news cooperative.
He started with the AP in Milwaukee in the late 1930s, but was assigned to Berlin in 1937 because he spoke German.
When war broke out in 1939, Shanke followed the invading German army into Poland and France.
Shanke also reported on the Nazi annexation of Austria and the Sudetenland in then-Czechoslovakia.
After U.S. journalists were expelled from Germany in 1942, Shanke worked briefly as a night editor in the AP London bureau.
In 1942, he was posted to Stockholm to open a bureau.
Shanke covered Nazi-occupied Norway and Denmark, and made frequent trips to neighboring Finland to cover the Finnish-Russian war.
After World War II ended, he returned to Berlin to participate in the coverage of war-wrecked Germany, and the Nuremberg trials.
He went back to London in 1948 and covered several major news events, including the 1956 attack by France, Britain and Israel on Egypt when it seized the Suez Canal.
Shanke returned to Stockholm in 1967 and was named chief of Scandinavian Services.
---
 Load-Date: December 3, 2004

 

End of Document
