

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
June 29, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1260 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Ruslan Abdulgani
JAKARTA, Indonesia (AP) - Ruslan Abdulgani, a former Indonesian foreign minister who organized the first summit of the Non-Aligned Movement in 1955, died Tuesday from the effects of a stroke, media reports said. He was 91.
After fighting in Indonesia's war of independence with the Netherlands from 1945 to 1949, Abdulgani joined the foreign ministry and was asked by then-President Sukarno to organize a gathering of 29 newly independent nations from Asia and Africa.
The goals of the 1955 Bandung Conference were to promote economic and cultural cooperation between the states, as well as to oppose colonialism by the major powers.
The meeting grew into the Non-Aligned Movement, which tried to steer a neutral course between the Eastern and Western blocs during the Cold War. It currently numbers over 100 members, though its relevance has declined since the end of the Cold War.
Abdulgani was later named foreign minister and served as a presidential foreign policy adviser.
---
Cecil Baugh
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) - Cecil Baugh, Jamaica's best-known ceramist who helped found the country's school of art and is credited with inspiring a new generation of artists in the 1960s and 1970s, died Tuesday. He was 96.
Baugh died at his home in the capital, said his nurse, Charmain Monteith. He had suffered from Alzheimer's disease.
The best-known studio potter in Jamaica, Baugh learned the art in the 1930s from traditional Jamaican women potters. He enlisted in the British army during World War II and had his first one-man exhibit one year after he returned to Jamaica in 1950.
He is one of the founders of the Jamaica School of Art.
In 1975, the Jamaican government awarded him the Order of Distinction, and in 1984 the Gold Musgrave Award for his book "Baugh, Jamaica's Master Potter." In 1991, the National Gallery of Jamaica opened the Cecil Baugh Gallery of Ceramics to honor his contribution to Caribbean art.
---
Robert Clark
EUGENE, Ore. (AP) - Robert Clark, a college president best known for his support of sprinters Tommie Smith and John Carlos following their civil rights protest on the medal podium at the 1968 Olympics, died Tuesday. He was 95.
Clark died from age-related causes, the University of Oregon said in a statement. Clark was the school's president from 1969 to 1975.
Clark was president of San Jose State College in the 1960s when the two sprinters, who both attended the school, raised their gloved fists and bowed their heads in protest during the playing of the national anthem at the 1968 Olympics in Mexico City - one of the most indelible moments of the modern games.
After the protest, Smith and Carlos were kicked out of the Olympic village and made a target of scorn nationwide. Back at San Jose State, however, Clark called them "honorable young men."
"My father was always opening his door to the angry and saying 'You may be right,"' his daughter, Suzanne Clark, said in a statement. "This was true whether the rebellious one was an eight-year-old or Vietnam protesters carrying torches."
---
Dick Dietz
CLAYTON, Ga. (AP) - Former All-Star catcher Dick Dietz, involved with Don Drysdale in one of baseball's most disputed plays in the 1960s, died of a heart attack Tuesday, a funeral home said. He was 63.
Dietz hit .261 with 66 home runs and 301 RBIs from 1966-73, mostly with the San Francisco Giants. He finished his career with Los Angeles and Atlanta.
He probably was better known, however, for what happened at Dodger Stadium on May 31, 1968.
Drysdale was in the midst of setting a major league record of 58 2-3 scoreless innings and bidding for his fifth straight shutout when the Giants loaded the bases with no outs in the ninth inning.
Dietz came up, and was hit in the elbow by a 2-2 pitch from the future Los Angeles Hall of Famer. But before Dietz could take his base and force home a run that would break Drysdale's streak, plate umpire Harry Wendelstedt ruled that Dietz did not try to get out of the way of the ball.
---
Chris Griffin
DANBURY, Conn. (AP) - Chris Griffin, a member of the acclaimed trumpet section in Benny Goodman's big-band orchestra, died June 18 of melanoma, according to his fiancee. He was 89.
Griffin was a member of what critics called "The Biting Brass" trumpet threesome in Goodman's orchestra, playing alongside Harry James and Ziggy Elman. Duke Ellington once called the three "the greatest trumpet section that ever was."
Griffin played with the orchestra from 1936 to 1939 and performed in the famous 1938 concert in Carnegie Hall. The concert was a critical moment for swing music, because it was the first time the music, popular with youth, played in a hallowed music hall.
After leaving Goodman's orchestra, he went on to play lead trumpet in television orchestras, including the "Ed Sullivan Show" and the "Jackie Gleason Show."
---
Domino Harvey
WEST HOLLYWOOD, Calif. (AP) - Domino Harvey, a model-turned-bounty hunter whose life is being depicted in the upcoming action movie "Domino," died Monday. She was 35.
The British-born Harvey was pronounced dead at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, said coroner's Lt. Larry Deitz. She was taken to the hospital after being found in her West Hollywood home, police said.
British news reports said Harvey was found unconscious in her bathtub.
An autopsy was scheduled Wednesday, but the cause of death likely will not be released until results of blood tests are returned, said Brenda Shafer, a spokeswoman for the county coroner's office.
Harvey, the daughter of the original "The Manchurian Candidate" star Laurence Harvey, gave up a lucrative Ford modeling career and socialite life to become a bounty hunter.
She was arrested in West Hollywood in May on drug charges. She also faced federal charges of conspiring to distribute drugs, crossing state lines for unlawful activity and having property used in or obtained through criminal activity.
"Domino" is scheduled for release on Nov. 4.
---
Edna Kimbro
WATSONVILLE, Calif. (AP) - Edna Kimbro, one of the nation's leading experts on the construction and restoration of historic adobe buildings, died Sunday after battling cancer, friends and colleagues said. She was 57.
Kimbro's fierce campaigns on behalf of historic properties resulted in the creation of the Santa Cruz Mission State Historic Park in the 1980s and the Castro Adobe State Historic Park in 2002.
She also consulted on behalf of the state parks system to help preserve dozens of adobe structures in central California and often worked with local officials for free.
Kimbro was a "walking encyclopedia" who recently completed a book for the Getty Conservation Institute on California's missions, said colleague Julianne Burton-Carvajal. She also led an international study for the same institute on seismic retrofitting for adobes.
---
Leon Toofa
WAILUKU, Hawaii (AP) - Leon "Fafa" Toofa, a master canoe builder from Tahiti, died Saturday after being swept by a large wave into the ocean off Maui. He was 67.
Toofa was credited with helping to revive the tradition of koa canoe building on Maui beginning in the late 1990s, when the Kihei Canoe Club on Maui harvested its first koa log in more than 77 years.
As part of the building ritual, Toofa would bless the trees before they were harvested and then rely on the club members and others to haul the logs out of the forest, said Charles Noland, a Maui resident who apprenticed with Toofa.
"It was an awesome experience for us, pulling the log out with our own hands, going through the ritual, having these men in the mountain, chanting in the forest," said Alika Atay, president of the club.
 Load-Date: June 30, 2005

 

End of Document
