

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
March 11, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 914 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




James Biddle
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - James 'Jimmy' Biddle, who was president of the National Trust for Historic Preservation for more than a decade, died at the suburban family estate where he was born, his daughter said. He was 75.
Biddle, a member of one of Philadelphia's oldest families, died Thursday at the Andalusia estate in Bensalem.
Letitia Biddle described her father as "a sixth-generation Philadelphian" whose ancestors included William Biddle, a friend of William Penn's who came to New Jersey in 1681, and financier Nicholas Biddle, who founded the second bank in the United States.
Biddle was born at Andalusia on July 8, 1929. He studied art and archaeology at Princeton, graduating in 1951, and served in the U.S. Army from 1953 to 1955. He married Louisa DuPont Copeland in 1959.
Biddle was president of the National Trust for Historic Preservation from 1968 to 1980, a time of rapid growth in the scope of the trust's activities. Previously he was a curator of the American Wing of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City.
---
Nicole DeHuff
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Actress Nicole DeHuff, who memorably took a volleyball in the face from Ben Stiller in the 2000 hit movie "Meet the Parents," died of complications from pneumonia. She was 31.
DeHuff had twice visited a hospital shortly before her death Feb. 16 but was sent home both times, the E! Network's E! Online Web site reported Friday.
"Meet the Parents" was DeHuff's first film. A bumbling Stiller, who is dating her sister, accidentally breaks her nose during a volleyball game on the eve of her wedding. The action is one of many that estrange Stiller from DeHuff's menacing father, played by Robert De Niro.
The actress also appeared in the films "Suspect Zero" and "See Arnold Run" and had a starring role in the recently completed movie "Unbeatable Harold," which was directed by her husband, Ari Palitz.
She had a regular role in the 2002 TV series "The Court" and appeared on such other shows as "CSI: Miami," "Without a Trace," "Dragnet," "The Practice" and "Monk."
The Oklahoma native earned a bachelor's degree in drama from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh before moving to Los Angeles.
---
Chawki Deif
CAIRO, Egypt (AP) - Chawki Deif, the head of the Academy of the Arabic Language who was also renowned for his books on Arabic literature, died of severe bronchitis Thursday, Egyptian newspapers reported. He was 95.
Deif drew on his profound knowledge of Arab history and literature, as well as his studies of Islam, to write some 40 books, notably "A History of Arabic Literature." It ran to several volumes, the first appearing in the 1960s and the last in the 1980s.
An Egyptian, Deif received many awards for his work, including the King Faisal Literary Award from Saudi Arabia and the Mubarak High Order for Literature from Egypt. His books were translated into English, French, Chinese and Persian.
Born to a religious family in the Nile Delta town of Dumyat on Jan. 13, 1910, Deif studied the Islamic holy book, the Quran, at a village school before enrolling in a state school. He read humanities at the Cairo University, graduating in 1935.
In 1942 he received a doctorate for his work, "Artistic Genres in Arabic Poetry," a book that became a classic and is still widely read in Arab universities.
He joined the Academy of the Arabic Language, a Cairo-based institute that is the Arab equivalent of the Academie Francaise. Founded in the 19th century, the academy has the job of ensuring that Arabic keeps up with modern concepts. Deif was elected head of the academy in 1996.
He taught Arabic literature at Cairo University for nearly 50 years.
---
George Scott
DURHAM, N.C. (AP) - George Scott, a founding member of the Blind Boys of Alabama gospel group, died Wednesday of complications from diabetes and a heart condition a month after winning his fourth consecutive Grammy Award, the band said. He was 75.
The gospel group won the award of Best Traditional Soul Gospel Album for "There Will Be a Light" with Ben Harper.
Born George Lewis Scott in Notasulga, Ala., on March 18, 1929, he was known for his booming baritone voice.
The Blind Boys of Alabama formed at the Alabama Institute for the Negro Blind in 1936 and have been touring and creating recordings since then. Scott, who was not well enough to tour with the group since last year, planned to rejoin the group for a live show in the spring with the release of a new album, Atom Bomb.
Scott lived in North Carolina for about 50 years, the last nine in Durham.
---
Victor Kassel
SALT LAKE CITY (AP) - Victor Kassel, a pioneering geriatrics specialist, died Wednesday, colleagues said. He was 84.
Kassel lobbied for Medicare reform throughout his career, and during the 1960s was a delegate to the White House Conference on Aging.
Kassel, who was born in New York City in 1920, received his medical degree at the Long Island College of Medicine. He married Freda Eisen, whom he met after returning from service in the South Pacific.
Kassel was particularly critical of treatment for elderly women, who made up 80 percent of his medical practice. During the 1960s and 1970s, he had his own radio talk show, which provided him a platform for expressing his views.
Kassel made headlines in 1966 with a paper published in the medical journal "Geriatrics," in which he suggested that since men die earlier than women, they should be able to have multiple elderly women as wives - so they would have company.
"It was written tongue-in-cheek," he admitted later.
 Load-Date: March 12, 2005

 

End of Document
