

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 22, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1033 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Peter Carter-Ruck
LONDON (AP) - Peter Carter-Ruck, an aggressive litigator who was one of Britain's best-known libel lawyers, died Monday, his daughter said. He was 89.
Carter-Ruck started his career defending newspapers but soon moved to suing them, representing high-profile clients including Winston Churchill's son Randolph.
He died Friday at his home northeast of London, said his daughter, Julie. She did not give a cause of death.
Fleet Street editors grew to fear letters from Carter-Ruck. Among his favorite targets was the satirical magazine Private Eye, which he confronted on Randolph Churchill's behalf in the 1960s after it published a cartoon suggesting Churchill had hired ghostwriters to help him write a biography of his famous father.
He also acted for Princess Elizabeth of Toro, a one-time Ugandan diplomat who filed a number of lawsuits over allegations about her sex life.
He was the author of "Libel and Slander," published in 1953, and "Memoirs of a Libel Lawyer," an account of his life and career published in 1990.
---
David Dickson
TRENTON, N.J. (AP) - David Watson Daly Dickson, the first black head of a New Jersey state college or university, died Dec. 10 at his home in Palm Coast, Fla., family members said. He was 84.
A scholar of Renaissance and biblical literature, Dickson was president of what is now known as Montclair State University from 1973 to 1984. During his tenure, the school's enrollment tripled to nearly 14,000 as he raised academic standards and helped develop 30 new undergraduate and graduate programs.
Eleven buildings also were constructed during that time, and the university's School of Humanities and Social Sciences building is named in his honor. After leaving the presidency, Dickson was named a distinguished service professor and taught until his retirement in 1989.
During an academic career that spanned more than 40 years, Dickson held several teaching and administrative posts at schools across the country. In the 1940s, he became the first black faculty member at Michigan State University, where he taught for 15 years.
---
Irvin Favre
KILN, Miss. (AP) - Irvin Favre, football star Brett Favre's father, died Sunday of a heart attack or a stroke while he was driving, Mississippi state police said. Favre was 58.
The elder Favre went off the road and into a ditch near Kiln, the hometown of Brett, a three-time NFL most valuable player for the Green Bay Packers.
An autopsy was to be performed Monday.
Irvin Favre coached his son at Hancock North Central High School. He followed his son's NFL career closely and considered the Packers' 1997 Super Bowl victory over the New England Patriots in New Orleans among the best events of his life.
"It's hard to believe that the little boy we raised has done all this," Irvin Favre said at the time.
---
Hope Lange
SANTA MONICA, Calif. (AP) - Hope Lange, who starred opposite Hollywood's top actors over a decades-long career and earned an Academy Award nomination for her supporting role in the 1957 film "Peyton Place," died Friday. She was 70.
Lange died Friday after suffering an infection caused by an intestinal inflammation known as ischemic colitis, said her husband, Charles Hollerith.
Lange starred in dozens of films and television shows and captured two Emmy awards in 1969 and 1970, both for lead actress in a comedy series for her role in "The Ghost and Mrs. Muir."
Her big screen credits included "The Best of Everything" in 1959 with Joan Crawford, "The Young Lions" in 1958 with Marlon Brando and "Peyton Place" with Lana Turner. More recently, she was in 1986's "Blue Velvet" and 1994's "Clear and Present Danger."
---
George Owens
JACKSON, Miss. (AP) - George Owens, the first black president at Tougaloo College, died Sunday, the university said. He was 84.
Owens, a Bolton native, became acting president in 1964 and was appointed president in 1965, serving until 1984. He was the school's ninth president and is credited with increasing funding to the school during difficult financial times.
The private, historically black college was established by the American Missionary Association and the United Christian Missionary Society.
Tougaloo was a target of the Mississippi Sovereignty Commission, a state watchdog agency fighting integration in the 1960s. Tougaloo's racially mixed faculty was the commission's proof the school near Jackson was bucking Mississippi's established policy of segregation.
Tougaloo's primary funding source, the Southern Conference Educational Fund of New Orleans, was also targeted.
Owens also established the college as a "safe haven." The state chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union began at Tougaloo while he was president.
---
Oleg Troyanovsky
MOSCOW (AP) - Soviet diplomat Oleg Troyanovsky, whose affable personality ran counter to the Cold War stereotype of the stone-faced Russian official, died Sunday the Foreign Ministry said. He was 84.
Troyanovsky was born on Nov. 24, 1919, in Moscow. His father, Alexander, served as the first Soviet ambassador to the United States from 1934-1938. While living in the United States, Troyanovsky attended Sidwell Friends, a Quaker prep school in Washington, D.C., and spent a year at Swarthmore College in Pennsylvania.
He joined the Russian Foreign Ministry in 1944 after two years of service in the Red Army. He served as ambassador to Japan from 1967 to 1976 - a post once held by his father.
He then served nine years as the Soviet Union's ambassador to the United Nations before being appointed his country's ambassador to China.
When he left the U.N. for Beijing in 1986, U.S. diplomat Herbert Okun praised Troyanovsky as "a virtuoso performer for the Soviet Union at the United Nations; a smart, respected adversary."
He retired and left China in 1990 but continued to keep a busy schedule, writing his memoirs and giving numerous lectures in Russia and abroad, according to the Web site for Russia's premier diplomatic school.
Earlier in his career, Troyanovsky served as an assistant and interpreter for former Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev. On a 1959 visit to the United States, Troyanovsky is reported to have rephrased the former Soviet leader's harsher and provocative remarks into more diplomatic language.
 Load-Date: December 23, 2003

 

End of Document
