

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
March 26, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1241 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Peggy Bauer
SEQUIM, Wash. (AP) - Peggy Bauer, a wildlife and outdoor photographer who published dozens of books with her husband, died Tuesday in an automobile crash, police said. She was 72.
Bauer and her husband, Erwin Bauer, shared a lifetime achievement award from the North American Nature Photography Association in 2000.
They published about 45 books, most recently "The Alaska Highway: A Portrait of the Ultimate Road Trip" and "The Last Big Cats: An Untamed Spirit," both in 2003.
Peggy Bauer was married for seven years with three sons and had done little photography when she met Erwin Bauer, a widely recognized lensman, in Nairobi, Kenya.
Both divorced their spouses, moved to Jackson Hole, Wyo., and married in 1972. She began learning wildlife photography three years later and before long they were shooting together as a team. Erwin Bauer died about a month ago.
---
Joshua Eilberg
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Joshua Eilberg, a former congressman who sat on the House Judiciary Committee during President Nixon's impeachment hearings and was later convicted on federal charges, died Wednesday of Parkinson's disease, a funeral home official said. He was 83.
Three months after his defeat for a seventh term, the Democrat pleaded guilty in 1979 to conflict of interest charges in connection with money he received to obtain a federal grant for Hahnemann Hospital in Philadelphia. He was sentenced to five years probation.
Eilberg was an assistant district attorney before serving six terms as a state representative and six terms as a U.S. representative from Northeast Philadelphia.
He had done court-appointed work for indigent defendants in the past 25 years and had been executive director of the local Brith Sholom, a Jewish fraternal organization.
He also did work for immigrants from Northern Ireland, Israel and the Soviet Union.
---
Mary Goodhue
MOUNT KISCO, N.Y. (AP) - Former state Sen. Mary Goodhue, who was narrowly defeated by George Pataki in the 1992 Republican state Senate primary, died Wednesday after a long illness. She was 82.
Pataki was a protege of Goodhue's and had worked on her staff before his election to the state Assembly in 1984. When Pataki, known at the time to have gubernatorial aspirations, decided to challenge Goodhue in the 1992 primary, she was the only woman in the Senate Republican majority and had the support of the chamber's leadership. It was a bitter campaign.
Goodhue, who had founded her own law firm, retired in 2002.
She was a graduate of Vassar College and the University of Michigan law school.
Governor Pataki ordered flags at the state Capitol and across the state lowered to half-staff in honor of Goodhue.
---
Matthew Gribble
MIAMI (AP) - Matthew Gribble, an Olympic swimmer who once held the world record in the 100-meter butterfly, died Sunday in a car crash, police said. He was 41.
Gribble, an All-American at the University of Miami, won two NCAA titles at Miami, a gold medal at the 1982 World Games in Ecuador, and set a world record for the 100 fly in 1983. He also won three gold medals at the 1983 Pan American Games.
He was a member of the U.S. Olympic teams in 1980 and 1984. The 1980 team did not compete after President Carter pulled the United States from the Moscow Games. Gribble had back problems in the 1984 Los Angeles Games and never made it out of the preliminary round.
---
Ann Lydecker
RIVER FALLS, Wis. (AP) - Ann Lydecker, chancellor of the University of Wisconsin-River Falls, died Thursday in a traffic accident, police said. She was 59.
Lydecker became the university's first female chancellor in April 2001 after serving as an administrator with Bridgewater State College in Bridgewater, Mass.
Before accepting the chancellor's position, Lydecker was provost and vice president for academic affairs at Bridgewater State. She previously was on the faculty at Gustavus Adolphus College in St. Peter, Minn., and Minnesota State, Mankato.
---
Jack Nagel
Spokane, Wash. (AP) - Jack Nagel, a ski coach who was on the U.S. team in the 1952 Winter Olympics and raised two daughters who also competed in world meets, died March 11 while being prepared to undergo surgery, his family said. He was 78.
Nagel made the U.S. ski team for the Winter Games at Oslo, Norway, in 1952.
He coached hundreds of aspiring racers at Stevens Pass and Crystal Mountain, where he also ran the ski school and ski shop.
Among his top students were his two daughters by his first wife, Donna.
The older, Cathy, won three gold medals in the World University Games in Germany. The younger, Judy, won medals on the World Cup circuit.
In later years Nagel expanded his hobbies to flying, aerobatics and building and restoring small aircraft.
---
Franklin Nugent
ST. LOUIS (AP) - Franklin Nugent, who ran as the Libertarian Party candidate for Missouri lieutenant governor in 1992, died Sunday of cardiac arrest, his wife said. He was 79.
Nugent and his wife, Doris, formerly owned and operated an insurance agency in the St. Louis area. They also owned and managed real estate.
In his run for lieutenant governor, Nugent said he would protect both civil rights and property rights. The importance of fully informed juries in court cases became a focus of his campaign and a subject he promoted for the rest of his life.
Nugent co-founded the Missouri affiliate of the national jury rights group, the Fully Informed Jury Association.
---
J. Edward Roush
HUNTINGTON, Ind. (AP) - Former U.S. Rep. J. Edward Roush, a Democrat who represented northeast Indiana in Congress for 16 years before he was beaten by Dan Quayle in 1976, died Friday. He was 83.
Roush had suffered from Alzheimer's disease in recent years, said state Rep. Win Moses.
Roush served six years in the Army, then entered the Indiana University School of Law. He was elected to the Indiana legislature during his final year of law school. He was recalled to active duty during the Korean War and served as a special agent in counterintelligence.
Roush established a private law practice after the war and was elected Huntington County prosecutor before going to Washington in 1958.
After losing to Quayle, who later became senator and then vice president, Roush was appointed by President Carter to head the Environmental Protection Agency's Office of Regional and Intergovernmental Operations.
---
Jan Sterling
LOS ANGELES (AP)- Jan Sterling, the cool, often conniving blonde in Hollywood film noir movies of the '40s and '50s, died Friday. She was 82.
Sterling broke her hip recently and had suffered a couple of strokes from which she never recovered, said Kay Tomborg, a close friend.
Sterling's most remembered role came in 1951 with Billy Wilder's cynical film "Ace in the Hole." Kirk Douglas starred as a ruthless reporter seeking a scoop by prolonging the rescue of a man trapped in a cave (when audiences were repelled by its harsh message, it was re-released as "The Big Carnival"). Sterling played a sardonic observer.
Sterling's beauty and dramatic intensity made her a movie star in such films as "Johnny Belinda," "Caged," "Flesh and Fury," "Split Second," "The Human Jungle," "Women's Prison," "Female on the Beach" and "Slaughter on Tenth Avenue."
In 1954, Sterling played one of the terrified passengers on a troubled flight from Hawaii to the mainland in "The High and the Mighty." Her performance won her an Academy nomination as best supporting actress.
She was the widow of actor Paul Douglas and longtime companion of actor Sam Wanamaker, who died in 1993.
 Load-Date: March 27, 2004

 

End of Document
