

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
January 9, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1430 words
Body




Joan Aiken
LONDON (AP) - Joan Aiken, the author of popular children's books including "The Wolves of Willoughby Chase," "The Whispering Mountain," and "The Winter Sleepwalker," died Sunday, her family said Friday. She was 79.
Born in Rye, southern England, to the American poet Conrad Aiken and his Canadian wife Jessie McDonald, Aiken was educated at home until the age of 12.
At age 16, she completed the manuscript of her first novel while at boarding school.
After failing the entrance exam for Oxford University's Somerville College - where her elder sister, the writer Jane Aiken Hodge studied - she worked for several organizations, including the British Broadcasting Corp. and the short-story magazine "Argosy."
Her first book of short stories, "All You've Ever Wanted," was published when she was 18, followed by "More Than You Bargained For."
Later she read children's stories on the BBC program "Jackanory."
Aiken's 1994 collection of stories, "The Winter Sleepwalker," illustrated by Quentin Blake, is regarded by many as her finest book. She sent her last manuscript, "The Witch of Clatteringshaws," to her publishers just days before her death.
---
Elizabeth Pfohl Campbell
WASHINGTON (AP) - Elizabeth Pfohl Campbell, who founded WETA-TV, the first Public Broadcasting Service station for the nation's capital, died Friday the station said. She was 101.
Campbell was known as a champion of the Washington region's educational as well as cultural life.
She won a seat on Arlington County's first elected school board in 1947 - the only woman in Virginia to do so at the time. She served as chair three times and was on the board until December 1963.
In 1961, she took on the responsibility for assembling the documents that led the Federal Communications Commission to grant WETA the license for the capital area's first public television station. The station went on the air Oct. 2, 1961, with inaugural programming that included a message from President Kennedy.
WETA produces or co-produces numerous programs including "The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer" and "Washington Week."
---
Mamoun el-Hodeiby
CAIRO, Egypt (AP) - Mamoun el-Hodeiby, the leader of Egypt's banned Muslim fundamentalist opposition group, died Thursday, the group said Friday. He was 83.
El-Hodeiby served just 14 months as the general guide, or leader, of the Muslim Brotherhood, which advocates turning Egypt into a strict Islamic state and has been outlawed for 50 years.
While once known for violence, the group says it now seeks change only through peaceful means within the political process and some of its members have been elected to Parliament as independents.
El-Hodeiby was the group's sixth general guide, and the son of its second leader, Hassan el-Hodeiby, who ran the group from 1951 until his death in 1973.
Mamoun el-Hodeiby served as the Brotherhood's deputy leader and spokesman in the 1980s, then was chosen as leader in November 2002 following the death of Mustafa Mashhour.
The Muslim Brotherhood, founded in Egypt in 1928, has grown into a vast movement with tens of thousands of supporters and branches in many other Arab nations.
The Brotherhood was outlawed in Egypt since 1954 and remains banned although it officially renounced violence in the 1970s.
El-Hodeiby was jailed from 1965 until 1971, when the late President Anwar Sadat pardoned political prisoners. El-Hodeiby was then allowed to retain his government job as a leading judge of Cairo's Appeals Court.
He worked for several years in Saudi Arabia, then returned to Egypt to win a seat in the Parliament together with another 35 Brotherhood candidates who won in the 1987 general elections.
The Brotherhood's guiding council, which includes about 90 members, is expected to choose a successor to el-Hodeiby after a three-day mourning period.
---
John A. Gambling
NEW YORK (AP) - Broadcaster John A. Gambling, whose morning radio show, "Rambling with Gambling," was founded by his father in 1925 and continued by his son after he retired, died Thursday, said his son, John R. Gambling. He was 73.
Gambling worked at the New York radio station WOR-AM until his retirement in 1991.
The news and talk show was a New York institution for decades, known for quiet dignity in a market increasingly dominated by shock jocks. It lasted longer than 75 years, and was listed as the world's longest-running radio show in Guinness World Records 2003.
Gambling began hosting it in 1959, taking over from his father, John B. Gambling, who started the program. After he retired, his son John R. Gambling became the primary host.
In 2000, Gambling was inducted into the Radio Hall of Fame.
---
John Poole
LOS ANGELES (AP) - John Poole, an independent broadcasting company owner who founded several radio and television stations, died Dec. 25. He was 86.
Poole, of Corona del Mar, had been in declining health. He died Dec. 25 at Western Medical Center in Santa Ana, said his son, Peter.
A former merchant marine radio operator, Poole launched Santa Catalina Island's first radio station, KBIG-AM, in 1952. The 10,000-watt station identified itself as "the musical isle on your dial." Its signal reached remote areas of the Los Angeles County mainland and was received as far south as San Diego and even in Nevada and Arizona.
Staff used ex-military Jeeps to reach the isolated transmitter, which was fenced to keep out the island's buffalo, goats and wild pigs.
Poole was born in 1917 in Detroit. His father, John, was an Army colonel and his mother, Caroline, was the sister of William Boeing, founder of the aircraft company.
Poole's family moved to Los Angeles when he was young, and his interest in broadcasting also began early. At 16, he ran a live radio broadcast for Los Angeles evangelist Aimee Semple McPherson, his son said.
He was certified as a radio engineer at the RCA Institute in Chicago, went on to operate radios for tuna boats and later with the merchant marine, and served in the Army Signal Corps during World War II.
After the war, Poole bought radio stations in Santa Maria and Pasadena but sold them when he built KBIG.
He later bought KBIF in Fresno, and then founded two TV stations, Channel 53 in Fresno and Channel 22 in Los Angeles, a UHF station now known as KWHY-TV.
He also started KBIQ-FM, which later was called KBIG-FM and went on to become the top-rated FM radio station in Los Angeles.
He also helped found two TV stations in Minnesota, his son said.
In 1969 he sold his media interests and in 1975 launched the Mount Palomar Winery in Temecula.
---
Alfred Pugh
ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. (AP) - Alfred Pugh, the last known combat-wounded U.S. veteran of World War I, died Wednesday, officials at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center at Bay Pines said. He was 108.
Pugh, who often told visitors the key to a long life is "keep breathing," joined the Army in 1917 and fought in France during World War I with the 77th Infantry Division. In 1918, he was wounded during the Meusse-Argonne offensive, one of the war's bloodiest battles.
Born Jan. 17, 1895, in Everett, Mass., Pugh raised 16 foster children, played the organ into his 100s and was an avid football and baseball fan.
He is one of 10 veterans profiled in the book, "The Price of their Blood," published last month and co-authored by Jesse Brown, former U.S. secretary of Veterans Affairs.
He spoke French and was used overseas as an interpreter until the battle in the Argonne forest, when he inhaled mustard gas that left him unconscious and with chronic laryngitis.
After the war he returned to Maine and worked as a railroad telegraph operator for 12 years before delivering mail for 26 years. He came to Florida in 1971.
In 1999, he was named chevalier of the National Order of the Legion of Honor, a prestigious medal bestowed by the French government.
---
Melvin Yahr
NEW YORK (AP) - Melvin Yahr, a doctor and medical researcher who conducted the first clinical trial of a revolutionary treatment for Parkinson's disease, died on Jan. 1, his daughter said. He was 86.
Building upon Dr. Arvid Carlsson's research on the role of the chemical messenger dopamine in Parkinson's disease, Yahr organized a test of L-dopa, a precursor to dopamine, on hundreds of patients.
The drug, which helps to reduce the tremors and loss of coordination caused by Parkinson's, quickly became widely used and is now the leading treatment for the disease.
Yahr earned his medical degree from New York University and served in the Army for three years before joining the neurology department at Columbia.
Yahr, who wrote more than 300 papers, was chairman of the neurology department at Mount Sinai from 1973 to 1992.
 Load-Date: January 10, 2004

 

End of Document
