

Obituaries in the news - Correction Appended
The Associated Press

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1650 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




AMHERST, Mass. (AP) - David Graham Du Bois, former editor-in-chief of the Black Panther Party's weekly newspaper and stepson of the late civil rights activist W.E.B Du Bois, has died. He was 79.
Du Bois died Friday at a hospital in Northampton after a brief illness, according to the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, where he was a visiting professor before he retired in 2001.
Du Bois became involved in the civil rights movement after returning in 1972 from Egypt, where he had lectured in American literature at Cairo University and served as news editor of the English-language daily, The Egyptian Gazette.
Du Bois was editor-in-chief of The Black Panther, the weekly newspaper of the Black Panther Party from 1973 to 1975. He also published a book in 1973 called "And Bid Him Sing," which was based on the experiences of African-Americans in Egypt leading up to the 1967 war with Israel.
Later in his career, Du Bois was appointed a visiting professor of Afro-American studies and journalism at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, where he taught for 18 years.
Du Bois was born in Washington state and grew up in Indiana, earning a sociology degree from Hunter College in 1950 after serving in the armed forced during World War II. He earned a master's degree in history from New York University in 1956.
In 1951, his mother, Shirley Graham, married African-American theorist and historian W.E.B. Du Bois and soon after he legally changed his surname.
---
Anderl Heckmair
BERLIN (AP) - Anderl Heckmair, a German mountain guide who led the first team to conquer the notorious north face of the Eiger in the Swiss Alps, died Tuesday. He was 98.
Heckmair died at a hospital in Oberstdorf, Germany, his publisher, AS Verlag, said Wednesday.
Heckmair already had tackled a series of demanding peaks - such as the northwest face of Italy's Civetta and France's Grandes Jorasses - before he teamed with three others for the attempt on the Eiger in 1938.
The north face, which towers over the resort of Grindelwald, has been dubbed "The Ogre" by climbers. The sheer 5,905-foot wall of crumbling limestone, with the summit at 13,025 feet above sea level, is considered one of Europe's greatest challenges to mountaineers.
Heckmair's four-man rope team reached the summit on July 24, 1938, after a 3 1/2-day climb, propelling him to fame at home. The Nazi regime held up the group's feat as "proof of German superiority."
Although Heckmair took a job as a mountain guide at a Nazi elite school in Sonthofen, he did not join the party. According to biographers, he was classed as politically unreliable by the regime in 1940 and was later sent to the eastern front.
Heckmair recalled his climbing experiences in books including "The Three Outstanding Problems in the Alps" in 1949, and "My Life as a Mountaineer" in 1972.
---
Sami Krounful
BEIRUT, Lebanon (AP) - Sami Krounful, Lebanon's ambassador to the United Nations, has died, the Foreign Ministry said Wednesday. He was 64.
Krounful died of cancer Tuesday in Beirut, two months before he was due to retire, the ministry said in a statement. He returned to Lebanon late last month.
In a long diplomatic career, Krounful served at the Lebanese embassies in Russia, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Morocco and France before being promoted to ambassador to Tunisia.
He also served as ambassador in Morocco, Egypt and the Arab League. He was appointed ambassador to the United Nations in 2003.
Flags flew at half-staff outside U.N. headquarters in New York on Wednesday.
---
Vicki LaMotta
BOCA RATON, Fla. (AP) - Vicki LaMotta, whose marriage to boxer Jake LaMotta was portrayed in the film "Raging Bull," died Jan. 25. She was 75.
LaMotta died at Boca Raton Community Hospital about six months after having open heart surgery, said her son, Harrison Foster.
In the movie, Robert DeNiro plays the boxer who is obsessed with his young wife, played by Cathy Moriarty, and drives her away.
LaMotta posed nude for Playboy in November 1981, when she was 51. At the time, she told the St. Louis Post Dispatch that she posed nude to show that life doesn't end at 30.
She later lent her name to a cosmetics line, made commercials and appeared on television and at fight arenas. LaMotta also divorced her second husband, Tony Foster.
Beverly "Vicki" Thailer was born on Jan. 23, 1930, in the Bronx. She met LaMotta at a community pool and married him as a teen.
---
Dan Lee
BERKELEY, Calif. (AP) - Dan Lee, a lead animator at Pixar Animation Studios who contributed to some of the most successful animated films ever including "Finding Nemo" and "Monsters,Inc.," died Jan. 15 from lung cancer, a friend said. He was 35.
Lee had fought his illness for 17 months, said Andrew Stanton, who directed "Finding Nemo."
Lee began working at Pixar in 1996 and worked as a sketch artist, character designer and animator. Besides "Nemo" and "Monsters," Lee also worked on "A Bug's Life" and "Toy Story 2."
Lee was born in Montreal and grew up in Scarborough, Ontario, a suburb of Toronto. He was the youngest of four children born to Chinese immigrants.
Before working at Pixar, he worked on television cartoons and commercials for several studios, including Kennedy Cartoons in Toronto and Colossal Pictures in San Francisco.
---
Albert Schatz
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Albert Schatz, a soil microbiologist who helped discover the first effective antibiotic treatment for tuberculosis, died Jan. 17 at his home in Philadelphia. He was 84.
Schatz had pancreatic cancer, his wife, Vivian, said.
Schatz was a 23-year-old Rutgers University graduate student when he began experiments that led to the development of streptomycin, an antibiotic capable of fighting a number of diseases that penicillin couldn't cure, including tuberculosis, typhoid, tularemia and pneumonic plague.
Credit for the discovery initially eluded Schatz, even though his name was among those on the 1948 patent for streptomycin.
The public acclaim, and royalties from drugs made with streptomycin, tended to go to his supervisor at the Rutgers lab, the famed microbiologist Selman A. Waksman.
Schatz sued Waksman and a Rutgers research foundation seeking a share of the credit, and was named a co-discoverer of the antibiotic in an out-of-court settlement in 1950. He and other members of the lab, including Waksman, also got a share of the royalties.
Despite the agreement, Waksman alone was awarded the 1952 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for developing streptomycin. Schatz petitioned the Nobel Prize Committee for recognition, but was rejected.
---
Jessica Govea Thorbourne
WEST ORANGE, N.J. (AP) - Jessica Govea Thorbourne, an organizer for the United Farm Workers union who also led key table grape boycotts in Canada and warned of the dangers of pesticides on farmworkers, has died. She was 58.
Thorbourne died Jan. 23 of breast cancer, family members said.
The Bakersfield native started working Kern County cotton fields when she was 4, and by 19 was a full-time laborer with the farmworkers union, where she worked closely for 16 years with union co-founder Cesar Chavez, said her husband, Kenneth Thorbourne Jr.
Thorbourne as a young woman directed crucial boycotts in Canada that helped the union win one of its first contracts with a California grape grower, which ultimately led to contracts with the entire industry.
She also wrote the 2001 book "We Were There, Too," which profiled people who turned to activism in their youth.
Thorbourne's father, Juan Govea, was recruited by Chavez and Fred Ross Sr. to help organize local workers for their Community Service Organization, a precursor to the UFW. She accompanied her father as he listened to people's stories of their struggles.
---
Dorothy McEwen
CARMEL VALLEY, Calif. (AP) - Dorothy McEwen, former wife of software pioneer Gary Kildall who missed the chance to supply IBM with the operating system for its first personal computer, died Monday. She was 61.
McEwen died at home after a long struggle with brain cancer, said Lynette Balestri, the estate manager for McEwen's Holman Ranch.
The story of how Kildall's Digital Research Inc. lost IBM's business at the birth of the PC industry is a Silicon Valley legend.
Kildall had started work on what would be the first commercial operating system, called CP/M, in the 1970s. He and his wife co-founded Digital Research to sell the software that ran early PCs like the Altair 8800.
In 1980, Microsoft founder Bill Gates was in talks with IBM but his fledgling company did not have an operating system to offer them. He referred IBM to Digital Research.
When IBM officials went to talk with Kildall, they were met by McEwen. She didn't feel comfortable signing IBM's nondisclosure agreement and stalled until Digital Research's lawyer could review it. Kildall, McEwen and the lawyer met with the IBM representatives later in the afternoon but could not agree on a price.
In the end, IBM returned to Microsoft, which quickly purchased another operating system company. The acquired company's program became the basis for MS-DOS.
McEwen and Kildall separated in 1983 and later divorced. Kildall died in 1994 after falling outside a Monterey restaurant.
---
Yvonne Sherman Tutt
COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. (AP) - Yvonne Sherman Tutt, a three-time U.S. figure skating champion and member of the U.S. Figure Skating Hall of Fame, died Wednesday. She was 74.
Tutt died at Penrose Hospital in Colorado Springs, according to U.S. Figure Skating. A cause of death was not given.
Tutt began skating in New York City, where she trained. In 1947, along with partner Robert Swenning, she became the U.S. pairs champion, then went on to win U.S. ladies titles in 1949 and 1950.
She also won the gold medal at the 1949 North American Figure Skating Championships, the silver medal at the 1949 World Championships and the bronze medal at the 1950 World Championships. She competed in the 1948 Olympics in St. Moritz, Switzerland, placing sixth in singles and fourth in pairs.
Correction



In a Feb. 1 obituary for the woman whose marriage to boxer Jake LaMotta was portrayed in the film "Raging Bull," The Associated Press misspelled her first name. She was Vikki LaMotta, not Vicki. Correction-Date: February 4, 2005, Friday
 Load-Date: February 3, 2005

 

End of Document
