

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
January 2, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1458 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Renata Babak
SILVER SPRING, Md. (AP) - Renata Babak, an internationally known mezzo-soprano with the Bolshoi Opera who defected from the Soviet Union in 1973, died Wednesday of pancreatic cancer. She was 69.
She died at her suburban Washington home, her daughter said.
Babak gave recitals until last year, singing in a sweet but powerful and well-controlled voice described by critics as among the best in the world. Her last opera was in 1997, when she performed in Tchaikovsky's "Iolanta" with Opera Camerata of Washington.
Babak was an international star with 10 years' experience at the Bolshoi when she defected while the opera company was playing at La Scala in Milan, slipping out of a hotel lobby wearing a wig and dark glasses. She immigrated to Canada and went into hiding for two years.
Babak's U.S. debut at Carnegie Hall in 1975 was met with enthusiastic reviews. She moved to New York and then to Washington in the hopes of working with George London, then general director of the Washington Opera. Babak joined the faculty of the Washington Conservatory of Music when London was disabled by a stroke.
---
David Bale
SANTA MONICA, Calif. (AP) - David Bale, an activist and the husband of feminist writer Gloria Steinem, died Tuesday. He was 62.
He died of brain lymphoma, a family friend said.
Bale, the father of actor Christian Bale, worked as a commercial pilot, with the hope of providing aid to needy communities in Africa.
Bale was once banned from returning to South Africa, where he was born, because he opposed the apartheid government.
He married Steinem in 2000 in a Cherokee ceremony in Oklahoma. It was his third marriage.
Bale was a board member of The Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund International and World Education Inc., a creator of adult learning programs in developing countries. He also was an active supporter of the annual Genesis Awards, presented to news and entertainment media for championing animal issues.
---
Harvey H. Belgin
FLORESVILLE, Texas (AP) - Harvey H. Belgin, a photographer nominated for a Pulitzer Prize for his shot of a farmer celebrating the rain after a severe drought, died Tuesday. He was 91.
Family members said he died of natural causes.
The photo of a San Antonio farmer rejoicing at the first rainstorm after a record-breaking drought in the 1950s earned Belgin, at the time a photographer with the San Antonio Light, a Pulitzer Prize nomination in 1952.
Belgin began his career as a photographer in the Army during World War II. Photos he took as a combat photographer were selected for a special exhibition, "Peace in War," at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
After his discharge from the Army in 1946, Belgin got a job as a photographer with the Light, where he had a 35-year career.
Survivors include a stepdaughter, three stepgrandchildren and eight great-grandchildren.
---
Manny Dworman
NEW YORK (AP) - Manny Dworman, who owned a Greenwich Village nightspot where comedians including Jerry Seinfeld, Ray Romano and Jon Stewart performed, died Sunday, his son said. He was 73.
Dworman, a musician who played the oud, guitar and mandolin, owned the Comedy Cellar and the Olive Tree Cafe upstairs.
The club was previously the site of Cafe Feenjon, a Middle Eastern nightclub that originally opened as a coffeehouse in 1960.
Dworman performed at Cafe Feenjon with his band, the Feenjon Group, which recorded five albums, performed at Carnegie Hall and inspired the radio show "Music From Around the World."
Comedy Cellar, which opened in 1980, also hosted performances by Chris Rock and Colin Quinn. Discussions at the club inspired the Comedy Central show "Tough Crowd with Colin Quinn."
Dworman was featured in the 2002 documentary "Comedian" by Jerry Seinfeld.
---
John Franks
SHREVEPORT, La. (AP) - John Franks, a four-time winner of the Eclipse Award as North America's most outstanding thoroughbred owner, died Wednesday, the hospital said. He was 78.
Franks won the Eclipse Award in 1983, '84, '93 and '94.
A longtime oil man and founder of Franks Petroleum, Franks became involved in racing in 1979, a few years after Louisiana Downs opened in Bossier City.
In 1998, Franks won the Breeders' Cup Juvenile with Answer Lively, the Eclipse winner as the year's champion 2-year-old male. His other Grade 1 winners included Kissin Kris, Halo America, Derby Wish and multiple graded stakes winner Littlebitlively.
Franks owned breeding farms in Louisiana and Florida, and his green and orange silks were familiar to racing fans across the country.
---
Harold Gast
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Harold Gast, a television writer and producer who worked on shows including I Spy" and "Dr. Kildare," died of pneumonia on Sunday, his daughter said. He was 85.
Gast wrote the screenplay for the Emmy Award-winning 1982 miniseries "A Woman Called Golda."
He started his career in New York writing for 1950s radio shows including "Real Stories From Real Life," and later for TV shows such as "Armstrong Circle Theater" and "The Defenders."
Gast moved to Los Angeles in the mid-1960s, and wrote for crime and legal shows including "The Untouchables" and "Judd for the Defense," which he later produced.
He wrote and produced several miniseries, including "The Jesse Owens Story" and "From Here to Eternity."
---
Frank Giuffrida
LYNN, Mass. (AP) - Frank Giuffrida, founder of the Hilltop Steakhouse, whose restaurants are recognized by their huge neon cactus signs and oversized plastic replica cows, died Wednesday of a stroke, family members said. He was 86.
In 1961 Giuffrida invested $7,000 in a Route 1 bar in Saugus and turned it into the well-known steakhouse. The other Hilltop Steakhouse is in Braintree.
For decades, customers flocked to the Saugus Hilltop, easily located by an 80-foot-tall neon cactus sign. Near each restaurant entrance, Giuffrida displayed larger-than-life plastic cows.
The Saugus location once was one of the highest-grossing restaurants in the country. Giuffrida sold the restaurants in 1998.
---
Elma Lewis
BOSTON (AP) - Elma Lewis, often described as "the doyenne of black culture" in Boston, died Thursday. She was 82.
She died of pulmonary complications related to diabetes, her nephew said.
Lewis dedicated much of her life to the fine arts and her community of Roxbury. She helped gain international prominence for the city's African-American arts community by founding the National Center for Afro-American Artists in 1968 and the Roxbury arts school that bore her name.
A fine arts teacher, Lewis opened the Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts in 1950. More than 6,000 students attended the school over the next five decades.
In 1981, she was among the first group of recipients of a MacArthur Fellow "genius" grant. Two years later, President Reagan awarded Lewis the Presidential Medal for the Arts. At the first National Black Arts Conference in 1988, she was declared a Living Legend.
---
Ibram Lassaw
EAST HAMPTON, N.Y. (AP) - Ibram Lassaw, an abstract sculptor whose works are in the collections of the Museum of Modern Art and the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, died Tuesday, the family said. He was 90.
Lassaw, a New York School artist who helped found the American Abstract Artists, was known for his colorful metal sculptures with titles that referenced astronomy and science.
Lassaw lived and sculpted in lofts in Greenwich Village in his 20s and 30s and took work from the Federal Arts Project to support himself during the Depression.
In 1951, Lassaw sold his first major sculpture to Nelson Rockefeller.
---
William S. Sandeson
FORT WAYNE, Ind. (AP) - William S. Sandeson, an editorial cartoonist for 50 years at newspapers in Indiana, Louisiana and Missouri, died Tuesday, the funeral home said. He was 90.
Sandeson was editorial cartoonist for the New Orleans Item-Tribune from 1937 to 1941 and was picture editor, art director and cartoonist at the St. Louis Star-Times from 1941 to 1951.
He joined The News-Sentinel in Fort Wayne in 1951 and retired in 1987.
Survivors include his wife, Ruth; a son, two stepsons, seven grandchildren, five great-grandchildren, and three great-great-grandchildren.
---
Kemal el-Sheik
CAIRO, Egypt (AP) - Egyptian director Kemal el-Sheik, whose critically acclaimed movie career spanned nearly five decades, died Friday, said friends and Egypt's Middle East News Agency. He was 85.
El-Sheik started work in the movie industry in the early 1940s, when he worked on dozens of films. He made his directing debut in 1952 with "House Number 13," based on a true story about a man who practiced hypnotism until one of his patients dies and he is accused of murder.
He went on to direct some 35 films, ending with "Time Conqueror" in 1987.
After his last film, el-Sheik held several senior government positions at the Ministry of Culture. He was awarded the highest state decoration for arts.
 Load-Date: January 3, 2004

 

End of Document
