

On the trail of the West Nile virus; SMITHSONIAN 7-7
The Associated Press
July 7, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 501 words
Byline: By Smithsonian magazine, For AP Weekly Features
Body




During the dry hot summer of 2002, a telltale silence enveloped Chicago and its suburbs like an insidious fog, too subtle to notice at first, too strange to ignore after a while. Residents in the affluent North Shore community and the well-to-do western suburbs noticed it. Folks in the modest suburban enclaves southwest of the city noticed it. Sooner or later, in a gradual and almost dreamlike way, people all around the city realized what was missing: the sound of crows.
Shortly thereafter, hospitals in the region began filling up with people suffering from meningitis, an inflammation of the membrane covering the spinal cord and brain, and encephalitis, an inflammation of the brain itself that can cause permanent neurological damage. "Encephalitis and meningitis are always uncommon in any hospital," Dr. Melvin Wichter of Christ Medical Center in Oak Lawn told Smithsonian magazine's Stephen P. Hall. "Normally, we might consider encephalitis as a diagnosis maybe ten times a year … what was remarkable was we would come into work and see two or three cases a day."
So began the worst year in the encephalitis epidemic caused by the West Nile virus, an insect-borne, or arboviral, pathogen that was first found in humans decades ago in Africa and reached the United States in 1999. In 2002, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported 4,156 cases of illness and 284 fatalities caused by West Nile virus infection. Presently, West Nile has colonized 44 states and the District of Columbia, infecting thousands and killing hundreds each year.
Researchers say the virus is astonishingly nimble, reports Hall. In the past year, health officials have documented that West Nile virus can be spread to the recipient of an organ transplant from an infected donor, from a pregnant mother to a fetus, by a blood transfusion from an infected person and possibly through breast milk. The blood-banking industry is working with the CDC, the Food and Drug Administration and the American Red Cross to begin screening the blood supply for West Nile as early as this year.
If, as most experts agree, West Nile has become established in North America, it may be a disaster for birds and other wildlife. The future of human West Nile virus disease is trickier to assess. "We don't know how to predict human risk with this disease," Yale entomologist Durland Fish told Hall. "We don't even know how to measure its spread. And even if we could, what would we do? We'd spray, and that's a response that's 50 years old!"
Whether West Nile was carried here by an infected person, a bird or a mosquito, no one knows, and probably never will. But some experts believe that West Nile is more important as a wake-up call about the danger of jet-setting microbes than a major health threat. "… We received ample warning, at least six weeks before the first human cases," said Tracey McNamara, a veterinary pathologist formerly of the Bronx Zoo. But because it came from wild birds, she added, "the warning was ignored."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY664
 Load-Date: July 8, 2003

 

End of Document
