

ON THE BOOKSHELF: Book reviews; 'The Shadow of the Sun'
October 24, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 375 words
Byline: By JAMES REINDL, Associated Press Writer
Body




"The Shadow of the Sun" (Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., 325 pages, $25) - Ryszard Kapuscinski
Polish journalist Ryszard Kapuscinski first arrived in Africa more than 40 years ago at the dawn of the postcolonial era. He has witnessed a continent giddy with anticipation at independence, bloody from the turmoil of change and always, ceasingly impoverished, its people struggling through another day of survival.
His latest work, "The Shadow of the Sun," brings that struggle to life, giving voice to the masses otherwise silent in the shadows of the often bellicose leaders of African nations.
Many reporters produce compelling stories based on observation and questioning. Kapucinski reports from a life lived. "The Shadow of the Sun" is not a chronological account of his time spent in Africa. It is more an amalgam of that time. He dips into his experiences to tell about his visit to the market in Onitsha, a small town in eastern Nigeria or provides a portrait of Idi Amin, former dictator in Uganda, or paints a grim picture of Monrovia, capital of Liberia, the nation carved from the African coast by freed U.S. slaves.
The painting is bold. Words hit the reader with the power of heavy brush strokes in brilliant colors.
Here is his description of walking down a street in Monrovia, which at the time was being fought over by rival armies:
"I haven't gone a hundred meters and I'm already surrounded by small boys with swollen faces and bleary eyes, sometimes missing an arm or a leg. They beg. These are the former soldiers from Charles Taylor's Small Boys Units, his most frightful divisions. Taylor recruits small children and gives them weapons. He also gives them drugs, and when they are under the influence, he makes them attack. The stupefied youngsters behave like kamikaze fighters, throwing themselves into the heat of battle, advancing straight into flying bullets, getting blown up by mines. When they become addicted to the point of uselessness, Taylor throws them out. Some of them reach Monrovia and end their short lives in ditches or on garbage heaps, consumed by malaria or cholera, or by jackals."
"The Shadow of the Sun" will consume a reader with its powerful writing and imagery and Kapucinski's unapologetic championing of Africa's masses.
 Load-Date: October 25, 2001

 

End of Document
