

One month after tsunami: a look at the anguished search for the missing
The Associated Press
January 26, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1208 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE: A powder blue school ID card was wedged into a metal fence as the tsunami mowed down a neighborhood. It inspired a search to learn whether the girl survived or took her last breaths as the sea closed in. The hunt became a lesson into the wearying realities of trying to account for a single life amid so much loss.
 
By BRIAN MURPHY
Associated Press Writer
BANDA ACEH, Indonesia (AP) - The power of the sea had twisted the iron fence into crooked angles and plastered it with debris. All was sun-bleached except for a tiny splash of light blue - the corner of a small, laminated card mostly obscured by a jacket of coarse sand and the dried fingers of palm fronds.
From the discovery, details of a life emerged.
Her name: Yeni Sofiana. Born Oct. 14, 1989. That would make her 15 years old.
She's younger in the photo. The school ID was issued September 2002. The picture shows a slim girl in a tidy white blouse, short hair tucked behind her ears. She stares directly into the camera. Why didn't she smile?
Then more questions: Did she survive the Dec. 26 morning, exactly one month ago, when the Indian Ocean turned coastlines into graveyards? Or would she never see her 16th birthday? And, if so, was her body recovered and mourned by someone?
What stories did Yeni have to tell?
---
 
Answers are a precious commodity after the tsunami. Questions are sadly plentiful.
Across a giant crescent of coastal lowlands and islands from Indonesia to East Africa, survivors still claw for any scrap of information about the missing. Their appeals once poured off copy machines: fliers with names, cell phone numbers and photos. School pictures. Wedding poses. Birthday party snapshots. A silent army of those taken without a trace.
The pages are fading along with the hopes.
Some, it seems, will never find their loved ones. So many were pulled out to sea, hastily buried in mass graves or covered by the silt and sand bars that have redrawn coastlines.
Yeni showed there are many paths to hunt for answers, but almost just as many dead ends.
The ID was found in Surien, a table-flat thumb of land near where two rivers wind slowly into the sea. Locals say it was a pleasant place of two-story homes, flower gardens and shops. Now, that's mostly gone, steamrolled by the tsunami, leaving waist-high rubble and a surreal interplay of land and sea. A 90-foot fishing boat sat atop part of a flattened garage.
The Surien survivors faced the same choices as those in other stricken areas: move in with luckier relatives or head to refugee camps. The neighborhood leader, Syahril Amin, was given a single room in an army barracks' storage area in Banda Aceh.
"Let me see her ID," said Amin.
He studied it for a few moments.
"I don't recognize the face or the name," he continued. "But let's look at the list."
He pulled out a paper file. It was a rundown of those from Surien who survived - no more than a few pages long. There was no need for more.
Surien had more than 1,600 people. The new population would be 257. It's much the same story all along the west coast of Aceh province, the first place to feel the fury of the killer waves. A list outside the governor's office keeps track of the boggling figures in Aceh: more than 123,000 missing, more than 94,000 known dead, about 400,000 driven from their homes.
Across the 11 countries lashed by the tsunami, the death toll stands between 143,784 and 178,081. The number of missing ranges from 26,460 to 146,611.
"We still keep this category called missing," Amin sighed. "But we know the truth in our hearts and still refuse to say it. They are dead."
They include Amin's wife, mother and one of his three sons. All were swept away and their bodies were not recovered. He ran his finger down the survivor list, written in solid block letters. Yeni Sofiana did not appear.
"I don't think she lived in Surien," said Amin. "Maybe she was visiting. Maybe the sea carried her ID to us.
"She is just a name to me."
---
 
Somewhere, Yeni's name must have been on a list. But where?
Education authorities had no central database of students in the Aceh province. When schools disappeared under the waves, so did the records.
Yeni's 2 1/2-year-old ID was from a school outside Meulaboh, a port about 110 miles southeast of Banda Aceh, but now virtually inaccessible except by air. The main coastal road may take years to rebuild. If Yeni had moved to Banda Aceh since 2002, there was little way to know, said Ramli Rasyid, an official at the Education Ministry office in Banda Aceh. All phone service to her native village was down.
"We are just struggling to see who is alive and who is dead," said Rasyid. "In many places we have no schools left. We are starting from nothing."
On Jan. 14, the office compiled the human cost from the count known by that point. Rasyid said they checked the numbers three times. It just was too hard to believe. Before the tsunami, Banda Aceh had 73,715 students. More than 18,000 - nearly 25 percent - are dead or missing. Another 38,350 were displaced from their homes. Nearly 680 teachers, about 19 percent, are listed as dead or missing.
These are among the tedious, but necessary, steps to start over. The many separate lists of the dead, missing and living must be consolidated and cross-referenced. International aid groups have begun the process, but it could take weeks or months.
The Indonesian Boy Scouts have one of the most comprehensive tallies. They have canvassed more than 150 refugee camps and noted the names and family details of at least 2,000 survivors. Another important list is with the humanitarian group Save the Children. It holds names of hundreds of children separated from their parents.
Yeni's name was on neither.
"There are so many cases like this girl Yeni," said Bayu Tresna, who coordinates the scout's survivor list program. "People come to us with just a name and a photo. We say, 'We're sorry. If they are not on our list we cannot help.'
"I've stopped looking at the people's faces. I can't bear seeing disappointment after disappointment."
---
 
Inquiries about the girl finally reached Dwi Susilo, an army official stationed near her village, Aluebilie. He was a friend of a teacher in Yeni's old school, he said, speaking from the only working telephone in the area.
From that beginning, the story took shape, piece by piece.
Yeni was always among the top students, recalled the headmaster of her former school, Hasan Basri. Her math scores, in particular, were stellar.
But last June, she quit high school and, for the first time, left Aluebilie, which sits on a piedmont ridge looking over palm groves stretching to the sea. Off in the distance now is the telltale border of the tsunami zone: an abrupt switch from rich greens to muddy browns.
Yeni moved in with her older sister, Heniwati, in a rented room in Surien to study to become a seamstress. "I guess they needed the money," he said. "It happens."
"I'm afraid the tsunami took her," the army official said.
Her sister, too, is missing and presumed dead.
Tuesday, the girls' mother arrived in Banda Aceh after a 20-hour bus trip under the 8,250-foot peaks of interior Sumatra.
There, she began looking for any sign of her only son, Suprantno.
He was visiting his sisters in Surien when the neighborhood vanished.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XSP211,212,214; AP Graphics TSUNAMI LOGO, MISSING GIRL
 Load-Date: January 27, 2005

 

End of Document
