

People in the News
The Associated Press
May 7, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1397 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LONDON (AP) - It didn't require much 007 derring-do, but former James Bond actor Roger Moore came to Queen Elizabeth II's rescue Friday, helping out when technical trouble prevented the monarch from unveiling a plaque.
The queen pressed a button that was supposed to open a set of red curtains in front of a Heathrow airport plaque honoring a charity fund-raising program, but nothing happened.
Moore got up from his seat and crouched down to tug at the drapes, which opened on the second try.
"I wasn't meant to be up there but James Bond has got to do something," Moore said later.
The 76-year-old actor and the queen attended a ceremony commemorating the 10th anniversary of a UNICEF-British Airways program that raises money by asking airline passengers to donate coins and bills of any currency.
Moore, who's an ambassador for UNICEF, the United Nations children's agency, was knighted by the queen last year and said it was great to see her again. "I'm a royalist so I'm always thrilled," he said.
UNICEF uses money from the Change for Good program to help children around the world through efforts such as polio vaccinations in Zambia and aid to street children in Mexico. Officials said it has raised more than $30.6 million.
"It brings hope to children who literally have none," Moore said.
---
LONDON (AP) - The former manager of the band Tears for Fears was sentenced to three and a half years in jail Friday for defrauding investors in a purported cure for drunkenness made from volcanic rock.
Paul King, 52, was convicted of fraud at London's Southwark Crown Court. Prosecutors said he took $823,000 from business partners in Soba International Ltd., a firm set up to market the remedy in Britain.
King told partners he would use his music-industry contacts to help raise money to market the product. Instead, he set up a shadow company with the same name and siphoned off money to start other businesses and maintain a luxury lifestyle.
Judge Michael King, who's no relation, told King he had behaved with "breathtaking dishonesty."
In addition to the jail sentence, he was banned from being a company director for 10 years.
According to backers of the remedy, crushed volcanic rock, ingested as a powder, filters alcohol from the bloodstream. Marketing the product in Britain was the idea of two British rugby players who saw it for sale in South Africa in 1999.
King managed Tears for Fears in the 1980s, when the British duo topped the charts with hits including "Mad World" and "Everybody Wants to Rule the World."
---
EDINBURGH, Scotland (AP) - Kiefer Sutherland, in a tartan kilt and knee-socks, attended the wedding of his former stepdaughter in the Scottish capital.
Sutherland, whose latest role in the TV series "24" has made him a familiar face in Britain, chatted to fans before the ceremony Thursday in Edinburgh's City Chambers.
Michelle Kath, the 27-year-old daughter of Sutherland's first wife, Camelia, married actor Adam Sinclair, also 27.
Sutherland and the bridegroom walked to the ceremony from the hotel where Sinclair was staying, accompanied by about 10 other male friends and relatives wearing kilts in a variety of tartans.
The 37-year-old actor, wearing a green-and-blue Douglas tartan, told reporters his grandparents had come from Glasgow. His father is actor Donald Sutherland.
The bride hugged Sutherland as she emerged from a silver chauffeur-driven car before they went into the chambers.
---
WATERVILLE, Maine (AP) - Ed Harris will return to Maine this summer to collect the Maine International Film Festival's Mid-Life Achievement Award.
The actor spent most of last fall in Maine starring as Miles Roby in HBO's adaptation of Richard Russo's "Empire Falls."
"We always thought Ed Harris was a fabulous actor," said Ken Eisen, an owner of the Railroad Square Cinemas and one of the festival's programming directors. "When he came here, he wowed everybody here, not just with his acting, but with his humanity."
While filming "Empire Falls" in Skowhegan in mid-November, Harris surprised moviegoers by appearing at the Strand Cinema to introduce and discuss "Pollock," the story of artist Jackson Pollock, which he starred in and directed.
The 53-year-old also signed movie posters that were auctioned to benefit the Family Violence Project in Somerset and Kennebec counties.
Eisen said festival organizers are still discussing the date of Harris' arrival. The festival is scheduled for July 9-18.
Harris has been nominated for Academy Awards for his work in "Apollo 13," "The Truman Show," "Pollock" and "The Hours."
Past recipients of the award include actors Peter Fonda and Sissy Spacek, as well as directors Jonathan Demme and Terrence Malick.
---
On the Net:
http://www.miff.org/ 
---
NEW DELHI (AP) - Singapore censors missed the main point of "Final Solution" when they banned it from the city-state's annual film festival, director Rakesh Sharma said.
The film chronicles Hindu-Muslim rioting in India's Gujarat state in February-May 2002. It was banned from this year's festival because it "was potentially inflammatory and could create racial and religious tensions," Wang Chee Yann, spokeswoman for the Singapore Media Development Authority's board of film censors, said Wednesday.
In an e-mail Thursday to The Associated Press, Sharma responded: "If anything, the film specifically addresses the issue of ethnic violence and urges its perpetrators to desist from causing such tragedies.
"I am deeply shocked as the Singapore censors seem to have missed the very central point of the film."
"Final Solution" won two awards at this year's Berlin International Film Festival. It was among three movies banned from the Singapore film festival, which ended Sunday.
Singapore has a majority of ethnic Chinese - mostly Buddhist, Taoist or Christian - and minorities of Muslim Malays and ethnic Indians of various faiths, including Hinduism.
Censors routinely say their decisions are based on the need to maintain ethnic and religious harmony.
---
PORTLAND, Maine (AP) - The Portland Symphony Orchestra's popular conductor is planning to give up his baton.
Toshiyuki Shimada, known by friends and colleagues as Toshi, will leave at the end of the 2005-06 season, when he will have completed 20 years with the orchestra.
"I feel that I have brought the orchestra to an outstanding level - a point where I can say it is in excellent shape artistically. Accordingly, it is the right time for me to look at the larger musical community for the balance of my musical career," Shimada said Thursday.
Shimada refined the sound of the orchestra in its home at the Merrill Auditorium and championed the cause of new music, including the work of regional and female composers.
In 1989, the 85-member orchestra received the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers award for adventuresome programming of contemporary music.
---
On the Net:
http://www.portlandsymphony.com/intro.lasso 
----
SPRINGFIELD, Mo. (AP) - Ron Spigelman, an associate conductor with the Buffalo Philharmonic, is the new music director-conductor of the Springfield Symphony Orchestra.
He was chosen from six candidates to replace Apo Hsu, who resigned after conducting the symphony for eight years. His selection was announced Wednesday.
Spigelman, who signed a three-year contract, will begin his new duties on July 1. He won't move to Springfield until his commitment in Buffalo ends next spring. Until then, he'll commute for concerts.
A native of Australia, Spigelman has conducted symphonies throughout Australia and Great Britain.
Besides his work in Buffalo, he's music director for the Texas Chamber Orchestra and Ballet Arlington.
---
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) - Reggae producer Clement "Sir Coxsone" Dodd will be honored at a trio of tribute concerts in Jamaica later this month.
Dodd, who died Tuesday of an apparent heart attack, was credited with launching the careers of dozens of performers, including Bob Marley and the Wailers.
"Jamaican music was Coxsone Dodd. He set the pace," said Keith Brown, promoter of the concerts, which will honor Dodd by playing music from his famed Studio One label.
The concerts will take place in Ocho Rios on Saturday, Kingston on May 15 and Negril on May 22.
Dodd opened Jamaica's first black-owned music studio in 1963. Four days before his death, city officials honored the 72-year-old producer by renaming the street where his studio is located as Studio One Boulevard.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo LON107, LON826, LON827, NYET192, NY109
 Load-Date: May 8, 2004

 

End of Document
