

People in the News
The Associated Press
March 7, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News; Entertainment News
Length: 1833 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK (AP) - Senegalese singer Youssou N'Dour has canceled his seven-week tour of North America to protest a threatened U.S.-led war on Iraq.
N'Dour, who had planned to embark on a 38-city tour on March 26, issued a statement Friday saying a tour of the United States would be "inappropriate."
"It is my strong conviction that the responsibility for disarming Iraq should rest with the United Nations. As a matter of conscience I question the United States government's apparent intention to commence war with Iraq," said the 43-year-old singer, who is also Muslim.
"I believe that coming to America at this time would be perceived in many parts of the world - rightly or wrongly - as a support of this policy, and that, as a consequence, it is inappropriate to perform in the U.S. at this juncture."
The Grammy-nominated N'Dour is a superstar in Senegal, a predominantly Muslim country. He is also a world music star in the United States and Europe.
---
LONDON (AP) - Yusuf Islam, formerly known as pop singer Cat Stevens, has recorded two songs to express his opposition to a U.S.-led war on Iraq.
One song is a rerecording of his '70s hit "Peace Train." The other, "Angel of War," reworks his melancholy love song "Lady D'Arbanville."
"As a member of humanity and as a Muslim, this is my contribution to the call for a peaceful solution to the dangerous path some world leaders today seem to be taking," he said in a statement posted on his Web site.
Islam, who was born Stephen Georgiou, took Cat Stevens as a stage name and had a string of hits in the early 1970s. He abandoned his music career in 1977 and changed his name after being persuaded by orthodox Muslim teachers that his lifestyle was forbidden by Islamic law.
He later became a teacher and an advocate for his religion, founding a Muslim school here in 1983.
Islam made headlines when he supported the death sentence issued by Iran against author Salman Rushdie for his book "The Satanic Verses," which some considered an insult against the Islamic religion.
In 1990, he released his first album in 18 years, which was 80 percent talk.
"Peace Train" and "Angel of War" have been shipped to radio stations around the world and will be available from the singer's Web site, his record label, Universal, said Thursday.
---
On the Net:
Cat Stevens Web site: http://www.catstevens.com 
---
TOKYO (AP) - The Rolling Stones arrived in Tokyo to kick off a tour of Asia - including their first-ever visit to China.
"It's about time they let us in," guitarist Keith Richards joked at a news conference Friday about next month's concerts in Beijing and Shanghai. "It's always nice to go to someplace new."
The Stones are rounding the world on their "40 Licks" tour - marking their 40th anniversary. Their arrival in Japan, where they will perform in three cities, marks the halfway point of the 117-concert tour.
The tour marks a bit of a departure from the band's usual selection of the biggest stadiums. Along with venues such as the 55,000-seat Tokyo Dome, they will also be playing in smaller spaces, such as an arena outside Bangkok which seats about 11,500.
"It's a little different that we're going to play a couple of arena shows, which we've never done here before," lead singer Mick Jagger said of the venues in Japan. "We've only done very big ones. We're going to play in the Budokan - we've never done that before, so we're very excited about that."
The Budokan is a martial arts hall in downtown Tokyo that has been the site of recorded concerts.
The Stones also will play in Hong Kong, Singapore and India.
On the Net:
The Rolling Stones Web site: http://www.rollingstones.com/home.php 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - A 30-year-old woman sued "Tears of the Sun" director Antoine Fuqua, accusing the filmmaker of threatening her life and bringing false stalking and harassment charges in an effort to hide an affair.
The lawsuit, seeking unspecified damages, was filed Thursday in Superior Court by personal trainer Tanya Evans, just a day before the release of "Tears of the Sun," in which Bruce Willis plays a Navy SEAL.
Fuqua's lawyer said the lawsuit was without merit.
"We have received communications from her counsel in the past threatening to go public unless we paid a substantial amount of money," said attorney Barry Hirsch. "The allegations are untrue, and we refused to buy into such behavior."
Evans was arrested last May for allegedly loitering, trespassing and making harassing phone calls after she went to Fuqua's San Fernando Valley home and spoke with his wife, actress Lela Rochon.
The city attorney's office dropped most of the charges, however, saying there was insufficient evidence to prosecute. She was acquitted of a single count of making harassing phone calls.
According to the lawsuit, Evans and Fuqua met at a shopping mall in May 2001 and embarked on a relationship that involved meetings at various hotels. Evans said she ended the relationship last March when Fuqua began working on "Tears of the Sun."
Fuqua directed Denzel Washington in his Oscar-winning performance in "Training Day."
GREENWICH, Conn. (AP) - Jack Paar, host of "The Tonight Show" from 1957-62, has been released from a Connecticut hospital.
Paar was released midday Thursday, said a spokesman at Greenwich Hospital, who would not disclose the nature of Paar's ailment.
USA Today reported Wednesday that Paar, 84, had suffered a stroke over the weekend.
"The Jack Paar Program," a prime-time variety show, ran from September 1962 until 1965.
GREENWICH, Conn. (AP) - Oscar-winning director Ron Howard has offered a day on the set of his new movie to the highest bidder.
The star-powered trip is one of hundreds of items on the block at the annual Greenwich High School PTA fund-raising auction Friday.
The winning bidder will be invited to the New Mexico set of "The Missing," starring Tommy Lee Jones and Cate Blanchett, the Greenwich Time reported.
The annual auction is the organization's only fund-raising event, and organizers hope to raise at least $125,000.
With a little help from the town's celebrities, that might not be a problem.
Bidders can compete for a tour of the MTV studio in New York's Times Square, a one-week stay in an oceanfront condo in Mexico and sports memorabilia autographed by New York Yankees slugger Derek Jeter.
The auction has an Oscar theme this year, and organizers plan to literally roll out a red carpet for the event.
Auction organizer Elaine Conner said the town's star power is both a blessing and a curse.
"People think, 'Oh, it's Greenwich High School. They have all the money they need,"' she said.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Nick Nolte says he's been vigilant about remaining sober since his arrest last year for driving under the influence of drugs.
He said the legal troubles and media attention - much of it focused on a mugshot that showed him looking disheveled - prompted him to be open about his recovery.
"There's no hiding there. I've always said I had a substance problem ever since. It's something you deal with, and you take care of it, and you can keep it under control," the 62-year-old actor said Wednesday.
Looking trim, tan and healthy, Nolte made the remarks during interviews to promote his upcoming drama "The Good Thief," about a heroin-addicted gambler trying to organize a heist. The film debuts in limited release April 2.
In September, he was arrested near his Malibu home when police saw his black 1992 Mercedes-Benz swerving into oncoming traffic along Pacific Coast Highway. Lab tests showed he was under the influence of a banned depressant known as the "date-rape drug" for its incapacitating effects.
After pleading no contest, he was sentenced in December to three years probation and told to undergo counseling and random drug testing. He previously has acknowledged an alcohol problem and said he was sober from 1989-99.
"Now the trick is not to relapse and that's a matter of just daily vigilance," he said. "It's like having a disease. If you had a cancer on your skin and had it burned it off, you'd wash it and clean it every day."
Nolte, who has made dozens of films, was nominated for Academy Awards for 1991's "The Prince of Tides" and 1997's "Affliction."
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. (AP) - It's another record for The Boss.
Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band have added two more dates at Giants Stadium after tickets for the original seven shows in July sold out Saturday.
That marked the first time in Ticketmaster history that a performer sold tickets for seven stadium dates in a single day. The nine-show run at a single stadium is a first for any performer worldwide.
Tickets for the new shows, Aug. 28 and Aug. 30, go on sale at 9 a.m. EST Saturday through Ticketmaster. Giants Stadium holds about 60,000.
Springsteen, who won three Grammys for his Sept. 11-inspired "The Rising," is the top-selling concert attraction at the Meadowlands Sports Complex.
He's played 50 sold-out shows in his home state, including 44 in the Continental Airlines Arena and a six-show run at Giants Stadium in 1985. The band's last appearance in East Rutherford was in August, when they opened "The Rising" tour.
On the Net:
Bruce Springsteen Web site: http://brucespringsteen.net/ 
NEW YORK (AP) - Al Pacino, who appeared off-Broadway last fall, will appear on Broadway this spring.
The actor will play King Herod in Oscar Wilde's "Salome," opening April 30 at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre. Marisa Tomei will portray the title character, best known for her dance of the seven veils. Also in the cast are Dianne Wiest and David Strathairn. The director is Estelle Parsons. Preview performances begin April 12, and the production closes June 7.
Pacino, 62, appeared off-Broadway last October, starring in "The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui," Bertolt Brecht's tale of a Chicago gangster.
LONDON (AP) - Hoping to silence critics who say his life as a tax exile in the Bahamas undermines his support for Scottish independence, Sean Connery said he has paid about $5.9 million in taxes to the British government since 1997.
The former James Bond talked about the payment in an interview published Thursday in Scotland's Herald newspaper.
Some political opponents and critics have said Connery's status as a tax exile undermined his support for Scotland achieving independence from the United Kingdom.
"I'm an easy target because of my political opinions, but I defy anyone in Scotland to find one detail where I knowingly ever did anything that was to the detriment of Scotland," he said. "It gets up my nose."
Connery said between 1997 and 2003, he paid $5,911,000 in British taxes. Before 1997, he added, he paid $4.4 million in British taxes on his earnings from the films "Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade," "The Russia House" and "First Knight."
The 72-year-old actor also said he was denied a knighthood by Prime Minister Tony Blair's Labor government in 1997 because of his connections to the pro-independence Scottish National Party. Connery eventually was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II at the Palace of Holyroodhouse in Edinburgh in 2000.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY115 Yusuf Islam; TOK108-110, The Rolling Stones; NY116,

 

End of Document
