

People in the News
The Associated Press
January 4, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1350 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




ROME (AP) - Leonardo DiCaprio has made a donation to UNICEF for tsunami relief efforts in Thailand, where he spent four months shooting the 2000 movie "The Beach."
The massive tsunamis that struck on Dec. 26 have been "devastating, absolutely devastating," DiCaprio said Tuesday during a news conference to promote his film "The Aviator."
On Thailand's Phi Phi island, where "The Beach" was filmed, 200 bungalows at two resorts were swept out to sea, and resort officials said many foreign tourists were among the missing.
"It is a horrific, horrific situation for all involved," the 30-year-old actor said.
DiCaprio didn't say how much he'd donated.
He recalled Phi Phi as "one of the most pristine, beautiful places I have ever been in my life."
"I had such a wonderful experience there, and the people were wonderful to me."
DiCaprio has also set up a link on his Web site so that visitors can make a donation to UNICEF.
At least 139,580 people are reported dead around southern Asia and eastern Africa, most killed by massive tsunamis that smashed coastlines after a magnitude 9 earthquake off Indonesia's coast. The United Nations estimates the total number of dead will exceed 150,000, while Thailand predicted its toll will hit 8,000.
---
On the Net:
http://www.leonardodicaprio.com/ 
---
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) - Country singer Willie Nelson will headline a benefit concert to help the relief effort for victims of the tsunamis in southern Asia and eastern Africa.
"I started at the top," said musician Michael Hall of his first call to build a lineup, "and when Willie said, 'Count me in,' I knew we were off and running."
The "Tsunami Relief Austin to South Asia" concert will be held Sunday night at the Austin Music Hall. Patty Griffin, Spoon, Joe Ely, Alejandro Escovedo, Bruce Robison and Kelly Willis and the Geezinslaws also are among those scheduled to perform.
All the acts are donating their talents. Proceeds of ticket sales for the concert at the 3,000-capacity Music Hall will go to the American Red Cross, UNICEF and Doctors Without Borders.
"This came together unbelievably quick," Hall said. "The scope of the tragedy has really affected everyone I've talked to. People really want to pitch in."
---
On the Net:
http://www.willienelson.com/ 
---
HONG KONG (AP) - The 1985 African famine relief benefit song, "We Are the World," is being revived for tsunami relief efforts in a new Chinese version featuring Jackie Chan, Andy Lau, Jacky Cheung and other top Hong Kong stars.
The new rendition, titled "Love," will be the featured song in the Crossing Borders charity performance Friday organized by the Hong Kong Performing Artistes Guild.
Organizers felt "We Are the World" captured their belief that disaster relief shouldn't discriminate by ethnicity or national boundary, guild official Patricia Ho said Tuesday.
More than 139,000 people are reported dead around southern Asia and eastern Africa, most killed by massive tsunamis that smashed coastlines after a Dec. 26 earthquake off Indonesia's coast.
"Love" retains the English chorus of the original song, but otherwise contains entirely new Chinese lyrics. Hong Kong's version will be sung in the Chinese dialects of Cantonese and Mandarin.
Unlike the original song, "Love" will not be released commercially, Ho said.
Meanwhile, director Stephen Chow successfully lobbied Columbia Pictures Industries Inc. to donate a portion of Thursday's earnings from his movie "Kung Fu Hustle" to relief efforts, a spokesman for Chow's production company said.
---
VIENNA, Austria (AP) - Shooting for a movie featuring John Malkovich as Austrian art nouveau painter Gustav Klimt began Tuesday in Vienna, a publicity company said.
"Klimt," directed by Raoul Ruiz, will have a dispute about paintings commissioned by the state as a central theme. It also will focus on Klimt's struggle for artistic freedom and on his personal relationships, including his lifelong, platonic friendship with Emilie Floege, played by Veronica Ferres.
Filming in Vienna will continue until the end of the month and then will move to Cologne, Germany, a news release said.
Klimt, who was born in 1862 and died in 1918, was one of the founders of Vienna's modernist Secession movement. During his lifetime, he was considered controversial at home, while the art scene in Paris praised his works. "The Kiss" is among his masterpieces.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - "Million Dollar Baby" has won another round, this time taking top honors from the Dallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association.
The film - directed by Clint Eastwood, who stars as a veteran boxing manager - also earned best-actress honors Monday for Hilary Swank's performance as a fighter who comes from nothing and turns into a champion.
Two out of three New York Times critics named "Million Dollar Baby" the best film of 2004, and the movie has shown up on the top-10 lists of several other critics' groups. It also has received five Golden Globe nominations, including best motion picture drama.
The 63 print and broadcast journalists from across North Texas who make up the group named Paul Giamatti best actor for the wine-tasting comedy "Sideways." Two of his co-stars, Thomas Haden Church and Virginia Madsen, took the supporting-actor categories.
Martin Scorsese was named best director for his Howard Hughes epic, "The Aviator."
"The Incredibles" was the group's pick for best animated feature. Michael Moore's "Fahrenheit 9/11" won the documentary honors, and the French film "A Very Long Engagement" took the foreign-language category.
After "Million Dollar Baby," the Dallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association's picks for the year's best films were, in order: "Sideways," "Finding Neverland," "The Aviator," "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind," "Ray," "Kinsey," "The Incredibles," "A Very Long Engagement" and "Hotel Rwanda."
---
LONDON (AP) - Beatles guitarist George Harrison, actor Nigel Hawthorne and Harry Secombe, one of the stars of "The Goon Show," have been added to the "Oxford Dictionary of National Biography," Britain's definitive record of the great and the good.
In total, 195 biographies were added to the dictionary in the update published Tuesday. The group included 44 women.
"The dictionary is a record of people who were once our contemporaries and who shaped the society in which we now live," said the dictionary's editor, Lawrence Goldman. The revised 60-volume dictionary was published in September.
American-born harmonica virtuoso Larry Adler is among the 31 new entrants from outside Britain.
Other new biographies include Douglas Adams, author of "The Hitch-Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy."
---
On the Net:
http://www.oxforddnb.com 
---
WHEELING, W.Va. (AP) - Country music singer Brad Paisley has donated to an effort to build a skate park in his home state after receiving a letter from a 15-year-old boy who told him youths have nowhere to skate.
Paisley, who owns a skateboard, made the donation to the Wheeling Skate Park Committee in response to a letter from Nathan Mey, a committee member, the group said Monday.
Paisley, a Glen Dale native, doesn't want the amount of his donation released, said committee member Kathi Fader.
The 20,000-square-feet facility, estimated to cost between $200,000 and $250,000, would be the first free concrete skate park in West Virginia, the committee said.
The 32-year-old singer will hold a benefit concert Jan. 15 in Wheeling for victims of September's flooding in the Ohio Valley.
---
On the Net:
http://www.bradpaisley.com 
---
CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) - Three Dog Night and country music singer Rachel Proctor will perform at the Jan. 17 inaugural ball for Gov.-elect Joe Manchin.
The evening also will feature several well-known local acts, including Bob Thompson, Liz Nichols and the Carpenter Ants, Manchin's transition office announced Monday.
Three Dog Night, popular in the late 1960s to mid-'70s, will headline the ball. Their hits include "Mama Told Me (Not to Come)" and "Joy to the World."
Proctor, a native of Charleston, released her debut album, "Where I Belong," last year. The album includes the hit single "Me and Emily."
---
On the Net:
http://www.threedognight.com/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos ROM107 of DiCaprio, NYET106 of Nelson, XLO103 of Chan,
 Load-Date: January 5, 2005

 

End of Document
