

People in the News
The Associated Press
March 10, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1559 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




TUCSON, Ariz. (AP) - Diana Ross was ordered to return to Tucson to serve a two-day jail sentence in her drunken-driving case.
The singer, who pleaded no contest to DUI last month, had arranged to serve her sentence in Greenwich, Conn., where she lives. But during her stay, she left and returned multiple times, said City Court Magistrate T. Jay Cranshaw.
Greenwich Police Chief James Walters originally wrote Cranshaw to say that Ross, 59, had completed her sentence, spending 48 hours in custody over three days, including two overnight stays.
Cranshaw asked for a full accounting of the time spent there, and it turns out Ross spent only 47 hours in police custody.
Arizona law requires DUI defendants to spend at least 24 consecutive hours in custody. Cranshaw said in a written order that the jail arrangement in Greenwich "clearly does not comply with Arizona law."
"To avoid questions of impropriety, the defendant is ordered to return to Tucson to serve 48 consecutive hours in the Pima County Jail," Cranshaw wrote in a March 4 order.
The original jail order sent to Greenwich didn't state that Ross had to serve 24 consecutive hours behind bars.
Ross, the former lead singer of The Supremes, has been on tour in Europe.
She was arrested Dec. 30, 2002, after someone reported seeing someone driving the wrong way on Tucson's northeast side.
A hearing is scheduled April 1 to schedule her new jail stay.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Mira Sorvino is helping Amnesty International launch a two-year campaign to end violence against women.
The actress said Tuesday the campaign is intended to put pressure on governments around the world to create policies that would discourage violence against women.
"Even in the United States, violence against women is the number one threat to women's safety in terms of their health," she said. "Women are more likely to be injured or killed by violence than by any other threat."
In many countries, Sorvino said, violence against women also can take the form of female infanticide or abortions of fetuses expected to be girls.
The campaign also aims to have rape classified as a war crime. Sorvino said for decades rape has been used as a tactic of war, particularly in ethnic conflicts such as the civil war in Rwanda.
The 36-year-old, who won a supporting-actress Oscar for Woody Allen's 1995 film "Mighty Aphrodite," also has appeared in "Romy and Michele's High School Reunion" and "The Replacement Killers."
---
VANCOUVER, British Columbia (AP) - Newlywed singers Diana Krall and Elvis Costello still plan to go their separate ways on tour, but with some limits.
In a talk-show interview that aired Tuesday on CTV, Costello said he and Krall hope to avoid separations longer than three weeks.
"We have actually a date in Madeira in a couple of weeks' time and it is going to be like that, on and off," he said.
"The good thing about it is that we know what the job is and we're lucky that we have the resources to make the journey, and beyond that you just need the will - and love gives you a lot of will."
Krall and Costello were married three months ago in England. Krall, who gave a concert Friday to raise money for the Vancouver Hospital bone marrow transplant program, begins a concert tour in Calgary in May.
"I've been on the press tour - started about two weeks ago, three weeks ago, which I find the most stressful part," she said. "I'll be glad when I'm playing."
---
COPENHAGEN, Denmark (AP) - Canadian writer-actor-director Robert Lepage is the winner of the 2004 Hans Christian Andersen Prize, named for the Danish fairy tale writer, the award committee said Wednesday.
Lepage will receive the $60,000 prize during a ceremony April 2 - the author's birthday - in Odense, where Andersen was born in 1805.
The Quebecois artist was chosen for creating a solo performance based on an Andersen fairy tale about technical inventions interacting with the writer's poetic universe. The prize is sponsored by the city of Odense.
In 2005, Danes will celebrate Andersen's bicentennial with film, television, literature, theater, dance, multimedia, music, exhibitions and educational activities in Denmark and abroad.
Andersen is renowned for his fairy tales, including the classics "The Little Match Girl," "The Ugly Duckling" and "The Red Shoes." He also wrote novels, poetry, plays and three autobiographies.
The separate Hans Christian Andersen Honorary Awards were announced Monday. The 2004 recipients were Denmark's Queen Margrethe, Brazilian scholar Ana Maria da Costa Santos Menin and Italian translator Bruno Berni.
---
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. (AP) - Prosecutors who want to review Rush Limbaugh's medical records argued in court papers that privacy rights shouldn't be used to hide criminal wrongdoing.
Seizing the conservative radio commentator's medical records in their investigation of his prescription drug use didn't violate his constitutional or privacy rights, Palm Beach County prosecutors said in documents filed Monday.
Limbaugh's lawyers are asking the 4th District Court of Appeal to bar prosecutors from using the records seized in November. Limbaugh is under investigation for possible violations of the state's "doctor shopping" law, which prohibits someone from secretly obtaining overlapping prescriptions from different doctors.
The 53-year-old hasn't been charged with any crime. In October, he told radio listeners he was addicted to painkillers and was entering a monthlong rehabilitation program.
His lawyer, Roy Black, had no comment on the filing. He contends prosecutors should have followed a procedure in state law that requires them to notify someone with a subpoena before they can obtain the records rather than using a search warrant. The notification is designed to give a person a chance to contest it in court.
Assistant State Attorney James Martz argued that Limbaugh's records were seized with a search warrant because investigators feared evidence would be altered or destroyed.
Investigators went after the records after discovering that Limbaugh received about 2,000 painkillers prescribed by four doctors in six months at a pharmacy near his Palm Beach mansion.
Limbaugh's former maid has told investigators she supplied him with "large quantities" of prescription painkillers for years.
---
ALBANY, N.Y. (AP) - Cynthia Nixon, co-star of HBO's "Sex and the City," emerged from the office of state Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver to the TV cameras, microphones and tape recorders of a dozen reporters.
But Nixon didn't want to talk about her next role or her series' recent finale. She was among the celebrities lobbying at the state Capitol Tuesday, and the 37-year-old actress wanted to talk education funding.
Nixon, who has a child in New York City public schools, also came to Albany last year to push for more school spending.
Special interest groups such as the Alliance for Quality Education, which sponsored Nixon's appearance, were banking on star appeal to help win publicity and lawmaker votes for their causes.
Her status also got Nixon and other alliance members an audience with Gov. George Pataki's staff.
Steven Sanders, who chairs the Assembly's education committee, said celebrities bring "sizzle and spice" to whatever issue they're promoting.
"Celebrities come with a cachet and a personality," Sanders said. "Does it in the final analysis make a real difference in terms of the outcome of the issue? I'm not sure it does."
---
COACHELLA, Calif. (AP) - "Moon River" crooner Andy Williams was playing blackjack at the Trump 29 Casino last week when a friend ran up and told him: "You better come quick, your mother-in-law ..."
Williams had taken family and friends to the casino for dinner. He then gave his mother-in-law, Mary Jane Myer, $100 in gambling money. The first-time gambler headed for the slot machines while Williams and wife, Debbie, went to a blackjack table.
Concerned over the breathless message from their friend, the 76-year-old singer bolted from the blackjack table to find out what had happened to his mother-in-law, who was 200 yards away. A large crowd had formed and Williams feared the worst.
He asked her what was wrong.
"Wrong? I just hit the jackpot and won a new red Ford Mustang convertible by putting two quarters in this machine," Myer said.
Williams, who begins a six-week engagement April 23 at his Moon River Theatre in Branson, Mo., didn't say how he'd been doing at the blackjack table, publicist Paul Shefrin said Tuesday.
---
On the Net:
http://www.andywilliams.com/ 
---
BETHEL, Maine (AP) - Producers have almost all the dogs they need for a movie scheduled to begin filming in western Maine later this month - though they still need human extras.
"The 12 Dogs of Christmas" will tell the story of a boy who uses dogs to teach people about the meaning of Christmas during the Depression era. The movie will be directed by Kieth Merrill.
Filmmakers want 84 dogs, including golden and Labrador retrievers, boxers, cocker spaniels and mongrels, to parody the English folksong, "The Twelve Days of Christmas."
"The only thing we're still looking for is a couple of boxers," said casting director Bonnie Marshall.
Marshall said more than 250 people tried out for parts, either talking or as silent extras, in three auditioning sessions last week. Many brought pictures of their dogs, and many of the canine parts have been cast.
Auditions for humans continue this week.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NYET128, NYET126, VCR106, NY107, XAB111, NY108
 Load-Date: March 11, 2004

 

End of Document
