

People in the News - Correction Appended
The Associated Press

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1216 words
Dateline: DUBAI, United Arab Emirates
Body




Live 8 organizer Bob Geldof is keeping up with his money-raising campaigns, this time chiding the Arab world for not donating more money to ease poverty in Africa.
Geldof says the Middle East, as a region, does "very little" to help alleviate African poverty.
"I am here today to encourage the business, humanitarian and the arts sectors to do a little more for that continent that lies less than 150 miles from where we now stand," Geldof said at a news conference Friday.
He said that if Dubai hopes to blossom into a multicultural, model economy, it must start shouldering its responsibility to the world's less fortunate.
"We cannot leave Africa suspended and outside the economic net of the planet," he said.
Geldof has dedicated himself to African issues, calling for debt cancellation and fair trade. He organized the Live 8 concerts in July in cities across the world to raise awareness about Third World poverty, and was the mastermind behind the 1985 Live Aid concerts that raised money for famine victims in Ethiopia.
---
HONOLULU (AP) - The Dog is coming back for more.
Duane "Dog" Chapman has signed a $2.6 million contract for a third season of the reality television series "Dog, the Bounty Hunter," a newspaper reports.
The show is A&E's highest-rated series ever.
Chapman will earn $100,000 per half-hour episode aired on the cable channel, believed to be about double what he made for each of the first two seasons, the Honolulu Star-Bulletin reported Friday.
"We haven't gotten to really celebrate yet because we're filming right out of the chute," said Beth Smith, Chapman's partner and companion. "But we got what we wanted."
Chapman and Smith declined to comment on the salary figures, citing contract confidentiality.
---
OMAHA, Neb. (AP) - Bono isn't the kind of celebrity who packs up and leaves town as soon as the concert is over.
The U2 lead singer spent an extra day in Omaha after his band's sold-out concert on Thursday to continue his campaign to raise awareness of the crises in Africa.
On Friday, Bono met with members of DATA - Debt, AIDS, Trade, Africa - the group he co-founded in 2002.
Omahan Susan A. Buffett, daughter of billionaire investor Warren Buffett, is one of the board members. The Buffetts and Bono have become close in recent years as they've worked for similar causes.
Bono, Susan Buffett and her brother, Howard Buffett, were among 16 people who met Friday at the Joslyn Art Museum.
During Thursday's concert, Bono solicited support from the crowd for the ONE Campaign to combat global AIDS and poverty.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - There will be no romantic reunion - Jessica Simpson filed for divorce Friday from Nick Lachey.
The couple had jointly announced their separation Nov. 23 following months of rumors that their tabloid-friendly relationship had soured.
Simpson cited irreconcilable differences in a divorce petition filed in Los Angeles Superior Court.
Their publicists did not return calls seeking comment.
Simpson, 25, and Lachey, 32, wed in October 2002 and went on to star in their own MTV reality show, "Newlyweds." The pair also hosted a 2004 television special, "The Nick & Jessica Variety Hour."
Simpson's star power skyrocketed after her marriage. Her 2004 album, "In This Skin," went platinum, and she released a Christmas album last year titled, "ReJoyce The Christmas Album." She made her big-screen debut this year, playing Daisy Duke in "The Dukes of Hazzard."
Lachey gained fame as a member of the boy band 98 Degrees. He released his solo album "SoulO" in 2003. Lachey also appeared in episodes of "Charmed" on the WB and is slated to star in a pilot for the network in 2006.
In a statement released following their split last month, Simpson and Lachey said that "after three years of marriage, and careful thought and consideration, we have decided to part ways."
---
TUPELO, Miss. (AP) - Elvis Presley's 1956 homecoming, which featured a parade in downtown Tupelo and a concert, will be re-created as part of the eighth Elvis Presley Festival, June 2-4.
In 1956, Presley was honored with a parade down Main Street and proclaimed a favorite son by Gov. J.P. Coleman. The day was capped with a concert where Elvis was greeted by screaming fans during the Mississippi-Alabama State Fair and Dairy Show.
"People were standing and clapping and waving their hands in the air to Elvis' music," said Jane Riley of Tupelo. "We were all into his music big-time."
Presley was born in Tupelo but moved with his parents in 1948 to Memphis, Tenn., where he began his recording career.
The festival hopes to gather oral histories from people who saw the concert, like Janice Coleman, who experienced a rare privilege when Elvis stepped on her right middle finger.
"I put my hand on stage and he stepped on my finger," she said. "He didn't mean to."
---
On the Net:
http://www.tupeloelvisfestival.com 
---
BERLIN (AP) - Muhammad Ali is being honored with a prestigious German peace prize for his work with in the civil rights movement and for the United Nations.
Ali, 63, is being awarded the Otto Hahn peace medal for his "lifelong engagement in the American civil rights movement and the global cultural emancipation of blacks, as well as his work as a U.N. Goodwill ambassador," the organization said.
At a news conference Friday, the former heavyweight boxing champ, who has Parkinson's disease, was helped on stage and sat next to his wife, Lonnie Ali, who said he was honored to be singled out as the first sportsman to receive the award.
"Muhammad, from the very beginning when he started boxing, he never let it define him as a person," she said. "Muhammad has used boxing as a vehicle to sort of promote his values and his ideals."
The award is presented every two years. Other recipients include former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev and Nazi-hunter Simon Wiesenthal. It is named for the 1944 Nobel Prize winner Hahn, a German chemist and nuclear physicist who fled the Nazis in 1938.
---
On the Net:
http://www.alicenter.org 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - When Grammy-winning new age artist Paul Winter started his winter solstice celebration more than two decades ago, he was looking for something that all faiths could take part in during the holiday season.
"It inspired me to look at the big picture, and I wanted to find the most universal milestone in the year that we could celebrate," Winter told The Associated Press recently. "And it struck me that winter solstice has been for Northern people the turning point of the year for tens of thousands of years."
The saxophonist's winter solstice extravaganza marks the shortest day of the year with music, dance and other theatrics. It has been a fixture at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine for 26 years.
Winter says many holiday traditions can be traced to past celebrations of the solstice, which is on Dec. 21.
"This is where these traditions began to grow, of bringing green things into the house," Winter said. "Most of the symbols that we see from Christmas all came from solstice celebrations … all of these holidays are about the return of the light, regeneration."
This year's celebration ends Saturday, but last year's event can be heard on various National Public Radio stations through the new year. Highlights also are available on the newly released three-disc box set "Solstice: The Paul Winter Consort & Friends."
Correction



In a Dec. 17 story about the Otto Hahn peace medal being awarded to Muhammad Ali, The Associated Press reported erroneously that German scientist Hahn fled the Nazis in 1938. He remained in Germany throughout the Nazi regime. Correction-Date: December 20, 2005, Tuesday
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY113 of Geldof NY114 of Chapman Photo of Dec. 16:
 Load-Date: December 18, 2005

 

End of Document
