

People in the News
The Associated Press
January 14, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1860 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) - Oliver Stone will begin shooting scenes for his historical epic "Alexander" in Thailand this week, a publicist said Wednesday.
Hundreds of Thai and foreign cast and crew members will gather Thursday to start filming scenes for the movie about the life of Alexander the Great, which stars Colin Farrell as the Macedonian conqueror, said a spokesman for the production, Michael Singer.
"Alexander" also stars Angelina Jolie, Anthony Hopkins and Val Kilmer. It wasn't immediately known whether any of the actors is visiting Thailand for the filming.
"It is a large-scale movie. We are shooting large-scale scenes here. We are involving elephants," he told The Associated Press, without elaborating. "We have a lot of participants, both in front of and in back of the camera, who are Thai."
The shoot is expected to last several weeks and end in early February.
This is the final stop for the "Alexander" production crew, which began shooting last September and already has shot parts of the film in Morocco and at studios outside London, Singer said.
Stone wrote and is directing the film about the relentless conqueror Alexander, who was born in 356 B.C. and had assembled the largest empire the world had ever seen by age 32.
NEW YORK (AP) - James Carville is writing a children's book: "Lu and the Swamp," based on a true story about his mother, which Simon & Schuster will publish this fall.
"What guy is lucky enough to write a book about his mother's childhood?" the political consultant said Tuesday. "She was a strong little girl, and now that I have two little girls of my own, I want to share one of my mama's stories with them and with other children across America."
Carville's mother, Lucille, grew up in rural Louisiana during the Great Depression. Patricia C. McKissack, an award-winning children's writer whose works include "Color Me Dark" and "A Picture of Freedom," will co-write the book.
Carville, a Democrat who emerged as a key adviser to Bill Clinton's 1992 presidential campaign, is married to Republican consultant Mary Matalin. His other books include "We're Right, They're Wrong" and the current "Had Enough?"
NEW YORK (AP) - George Clooney says reports that his girlfriend, actress Krista Allen, is having a baby are greatly exaggerated.
"She is not pregnant and she never was pregnant," Clooney tells Us Weekly in the issue coming out Friday. "Krista has a 6-year-old (Jacob) in school. I don't want kids saying, 'Oh, you're having a brother or sister' if it's not true. Happy, yes. Pregnant, no."
Clooney, 42, and Allen, 31, met on the set of "Confessions of a Dangerous Mind," the 2002 film he directed and co-starred in. Allen had a small role in the movie.
Previously, she played Billie Reed on the NBC soap "Days of Our Lives" for three years and has appeared in several "Emmanuelle" movies on Cinemax.
NEW YORK (AP) - Jennifer Aniston says she and her mother, who've been estranged since 1999, aren't much closer to reconciling.
"I never thought my mom would not know my husband," Aniston says, referring to Brad Pitt, in an interview airing on ABC's "Primetime Thursday."
The actress says she and Nancy Aniston haven't been close since her mother granted an interview to a tabloid television show and wrote a book about her relationship with the "Friends" star.
"She made a mistake … I don't think she knew any better - obviously," Aniston says.
As for patching things up, the 34-year-old actress says, "I've definitely tried, I made the efforts, and I've sort of started … you know, it's that stubborn thing of, 'Well, I tried … I tried enough. Now it's your turn."'
Aniston co-stars with Ben Stiller in the romantic comedy "Along Came Polly, opening Friday.
GLENWOOD SPRINGS, Colo. (AP) - The Hanging Lake tunnels in Glenwood Canyon will star alongside Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie in an upcoming action film.
Scenes for the Regency film "Mr. and Mrs. Smith" will be shot at the tunnels, which beat out various other locations, including one in West Virginia, said Marianne Virgili, executive director of the Glenwood Springs Chamber Resort Association.
"The beauty of the canyon sold them," Virgili said of the filmmakers' choice. "It's breathtaking."
The film, scheduled for release later this year, features Pitt and Jolie as a couple in a failing marriage who are also covert assassins hired to kill each other. Doug Liman ("Go," "The Bourne Identity") is the director.
Virgili said she didn't know whether Pitt and Jolie would be at the shooting in Glenwood Canyon because a duplicate set has been built in California.
PALM SPRINGS, Calif. (AP) - Kevin Costner said it was Richard Burton who inspired him to pursue an acting career.
Costner was boarding a plane decades ago when he had a chance meeting with Burton and asked the actor if one could have an acting career without the turmoil that surrounded Burton's life.
"I think it's possible. It hasn't been for me, but I think it's possible," Costner said Burton told him.
The brief comment was the inspiration he needed, Costner said Monday during a question-and-answer session at the Palm Springs International Film Festival, where earlier he received the event's Career Achievement in the Art of Cinema Award.
The 400 people participating also watched screenings of his films "Dances With Wolves" and "Open Range," both Westerns that embody an independent spirit.
"I would like to have a big fat hit," Costner said - explaining, however, that he wasn't willing to compromise himself for that hit. "Otherwise, I would be spitting on my life."
Costner said he refuses to cut the heart and soul out of movies.
"I'm not a fearful person, and Hollywood operates on fear," he said. "I would be afraid in Vietnam, on the beaches of Normandy, and I'd be afraid in Iraq. But I'm not going to be afraid to bring you an original piece of entertainment that I thought was worth fighting for."
The 48-year-old actor-director-producer also spoke of his love for Westerns, and recalled watching "How the West Was Won" at the Cineramadome in Hollywood when he was 7.
"I never moved. I never moved during intermission. Westerns are probably one of the genres you watch and wonder if I would have been as brave as them or would I have been as resourceful," Costner said.
The Hollywood Reporter said Monday that Costner plans to make another Western, titled "Horizon," in which he would also star.
LAKE PLACID, N.Y. (AP) - Martin Scorsese, director of films such as "Taxi Driver," "Raging Bull" and "GoodFellas," will leave New York City's mean streets for serene Lake Placid in June.
Scorsese, 61, has agreed to participate in the fifth annual Lake Placid Film Festival, set for June 2-6.
"It is inked into his calendar, and he is coming," the festival's executive director, Muriel Luderowski, told the Press-Republican of Plattsburgh in Tuesday's editions.
Just what Scorsese will be asked to do at the festival is not yet known.
Luderowski said festival organizers lured Scorsese to Lake Placid in part through his relationship with author, screenwriter and film festival co-founder Russell Banks.
Scorsese's involvement should help the festival rebound from a year that was a critical success, but a financial failure. Suffering from a lack of corporate sponsorships, the 2003 event operated on a shoestring budget and ran up a sizable deficit.
On the Net:
http://www.lakeplacidfilmforum.org/index.php 
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Dolly Parton will host Country Music Television's Flameworthy Video Music Awards in April, and Shania Twain will perform.
Parton also will perform during the fan-voted awards show, which airs live from Nashville on April 21 (8-10 p.m. EST). The announcement was made Tuesday.
The singer said she's looking forward to being master of ceremonies.
"I like to do that kind of thing," Parton said from Los Angeles, where she was filming a video for her latest album, "For God and Country." "I like to ad-lib and let things happen. I kind of work without a net."
She should fit right in on the Flameworthy awards. The show has a more irreverent style than other country music events. It's closer in tone to its sister networks MTV and VH1 than to the award shows by the Country Music Association or the Academy of Country Music.
Last year, Toby Keith and actress Pamela Anderson were co-hosts. Performers included Twain, Kid Rock, Tim McGraw and Sheryl Crow.
Rock, seated next to Hank Williams Jr., took sips from what appeared to be a tiny whiskey bottle, while Anderson brought a man onstage clad in underwear and cowboy boots with "Naked Cowboy" written across his bottom.
The show drew one of the largest audiences in CMT's history with more than 8.3 million viewers.
On the Net:
http://www.cmt.com/ 
KERRVILLE, Texas (AP) - Jim Bouton would like to see Pete Rose on the Hall of Fame ballot - but that's it.
Bouton shook up baseball more than 30 years ago with one of the game's first tell-all books. He spoke at Schreiner University Monday about Rose, the career hits leader whose gambling led to his banishment from baseball in 1989.
"He should be made eligible to be voted on by the writers for the Hall of Fame," Bouton said. "But I don't think he should be allowed in baseball in any capacity.
"Letting the writers decide his fate will prevent him from becoming a martyr because one man, the commissioner, stood in his way. That way at least a jury has decided, not a judge."
Rose ended 14 years of denials, acknowledging in his memoir, "Pete Rose: My Prison Without Bars," that he bet on Cincinnati Reds games while he was their manager.
Bouton, promoting his own book, "Foul Ball: My Life and Hard Times Trying to Save an Old Ballpark," had a 62-63 record in a 10-year career that included stints with the New York Yankees, Seattle Pilots, Houston Astros and Atlanta Braves.
NEW YORK (AP) - Actress Brittany Murphy and talent manager Jeff Kwatinetz became engaged Jan. 9 at a silent movie theater in Los Angeles, according to People magazine.
The couple started dating after Murphy's breakup with Ashton Kutcher, her co-star in 2003's "Just Married," People says in its Jan. 26 issue.
Murphy, 26, also appeared in "8 Mile" and "Don't Say a Word."
Kwatinetz, 38, is the founder of The Firm, which represents several actors and musicians.
WOODSIDE, Calif. (AP) - Larry Ellison, CEO of Oracle and one of the world's wealthiest men, married his fiancee of eight years, novelist Melanie Craft, over the winter holidays.
The wedding was the first for Craft, 34, and the fourth for Ellison, 59.
The ceremony, held Dec. 18 at Ellison's 45-acre Japanese-style compound in Woodside, was attended by friends and relatives, including Ellison's best friend, Apple computer co-founder Steve Jobs, and Ellison's children. Ellison has a 17-year-old daughter and 21-year-old son from a previous marriage.
Craft is the author of two novels, "A Hard-Hearted Man" and "Trust Me."
Earlier this week, Ellison named the No. 2 software company's longtime chief financial officer Jeff Henley as chairman. The unexpected appointment was an effort to create more autonomy between Oracle's board and management - a dividing line that has become more important after a series of accounting scandals rocked corporate America.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYET102 Stone; NYET103 Carville; NYET104 Clooney; NYET105
 Load-Date: January 15, 2004

 

End of Document
