

People in the News
August 13, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1359 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LONDON (AP) - Pop singer Adam Ant pleaded guilty on Tuesday to brawling after he threatened pub patrons with a starting pistol for laughing at his clothing.
The 47-year-old appeared at the Old Bailey court under his real name of Stuart Goddard to face a single charge over the incident at the Prince of Wales pub in north London on Jan. 12.
The prosecution dropped three other charges of criminal damage, assault causing actual bodily harm and possession of an imitation firearm. Ant was released on bail until Oct. 2 for sentencing.
In an earlier hearing, prosecution lawyers told the court that Ant's appearance in the pub wearing a "cowboy" ensemble of combat jacket and matching flat cap caused customers to laugh and hum the theme song from the spaghetti Western "The Good, The Bad and The Ugly."
Ant left the bar but returned later armed with a starting pistol that he said was a wartime heirloom belonging to his father, lawyer David Tomlinson said.
After Ant threw a car alternator through the pub window, hitting a local musician, some of the patrons chased him down the street.
"But he pulled out the gun, which they thought was genuine, and threatened to shoot them if they didn't back up," Tomlinson said.
The singer was spotted a half hour later hailing a cab, and police arrested him.
In interviews with police, Ant said he threw the car part through the window to attract the attention of the husband of a market trader who'd been harassing him. The singer said he intended to get the man out of the pub to "pistol whip" him.
Ant, who looked pale and drawn, wore a black Fedora hat and tightly fitted pinstripe suit for his court appearance, during which he spoke only to plead guilty.
The singer, famous for his painted face and flamboyant wardrobe, scored a string of hits in the '80s including "Stand and Deliver," "Prince Charming," and "Goody Two Shoes." He'd been scheduled to headline a nostalgia tour this spring.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Calling the United States the world's biggest polluter, Leonardo DiCaprio urged President Bush to make a statement in favor of the environment by attending the Earth Summit in Johannesburg, South Africa, later this month.
"Mr. Bush, we're asking for your support, to be the president that looks towards the future," DiCaprio said Monday at a rally organized by Global Green USA, an affiliate of Green Cross International.
Bush hasn't said whether he'll join some 100 world leaders, including British Prime Minister Tony Blair, Mexican President Vicente Fox and French President Jacques Chirac, at the summit.
The 27-year-old "Titanic" star also complained that the Bush administration has opted out of the Kyoto Protocol, an international climate treaty with mandatory controls for industry "despite the fact that we are the biggest economy and the biggest polluter."
White House environmental experts have said the agreement would cost the U.S. economy billions of dollars and millions of jobs.
NEW YORK (AP) - Soap opera actress Eileen Fulton sued her former accountant and his firm for $1.1 million, claiming they were negligent in seeing that her taxes were paid and returns were filed.
Fulton, who plays Lisa Miller on "As the World Turns," filed the lawsuit Monday in state Supreme Court in Manhattan against Ed Weisel and the accounting firm of Silver, Laski and Weisel.
According to court papers, Eiful Productions, of which Fulton is president, hired Weisel and his firm to do accounting before 1995. That work included preparing tax returns, filing them and paying all due taxes from Eiful's income.
The lawsuit alleges that in 1996 and 1997, the defendants failed to pay the full amount of taxes due. In 1998 and 1999, the defendants didn't file returns or pay taxes, and Eiful was assessed more than $60,000 in tax, interest and penalties, the lawsuit said.
Weisel called Fulton's lawsuit "incorrect" and had no further comment.
The 68-year-old actress began her role on the CBS soap in May 1960.
LONDON (AP) - Model and actress Elle Macpherson is expecting her second child in February.
The 39-year-old and her Swiss fiance, Arpad Busson, said in a statement Tuesday they were "thrilled" to be expecting a sister or brother for their 4-year-old son, Flynn. The couple, who live in London, got engaged this year.
The 6-foot-tall Australian-born model, nicknamed "The Body" during her career, has also had a series of film and television parts. She starred opposite Hugh Grant in the 1994 film "Sirens" and had a recurring role in the TV comedy "Friends."
One of the world's top-earning supermodels in the 1990s, she's largely retired from modeling in the last few years, declaring in 1999, "I'm too old for that." She has her own line of lingerie, Elle Macpherson Intimates.
Two years ago Macpherson told the British magazine "Hello!" that she'd like to have as many as three or four children, calling motherhood is her "greatest achievement."
NEW YORK (AP) - From "Gidget" to "The Goat."
Sally Field, who began her career playing a perky California teenager in the 1960s television series and later won Oscars for "Norma Rae" and "Places in the Heart," will make her Broadway debut in "The Goat," the Tony-winning Edward Albee play.
Field and actor Bill Irwin will replace Mercedes Ruehl and Bill Pullman starting Sept. 13 in Albee's sardonic comedy about a man who has an affair with a four-legged creature. "The Goat" won the best-play Tony Award in June.
The 55-year-old Field, who also starred in the TV series "The Flying Nun," won Emmys for her performances in the 1976 television film "Sybil" and for portraying a woman afflicted with a bipolar disorder on "ER."
Irwin is best known for his comic roles on and off-Broadway in such shows as "Fool Moon," "Largely New York" and "The Regard of Flight."
Ruehl and Pullman will play their last performances Sept. 8.
NEW YORK (AP) - A quarter-century after his death, Elvis Presley continues raking in the big bucks.
For the second year in a row, Presley leads the list of the top-earning dead celebrities, according to Forbes magazine. Sales of all things Elvis totaled $37 million from June 2001-June 2002, $4 million of which came from a British dance remix of his 1968 song "A Little Less Conversation."
No. 2 on the list, released Monday, is "Peanuts" creator Charles Schulz, with $28 million in earnings. John Lennon and race car driver Dale Earnhardt, who's new to the list this year, both made $20 million.
Also new on the list are former Beatle George Harrison with $17 million in earnings, rapper Tupac Shakur with $7 million, and author Robert Ludlum with $5 million.
Forbes reporters determined the top dead earners by looking at estates, interviewing lawyers and surviving family members, and calculating pretax earnings to the estates from licensing agreements and book and record sales.
On the Net:
Forbes list online: http://www.forbes.com/home/2002/08/12/0812deadintro.html 
NEW YORK (AP) - Teen R&B singer Mario and the British pop trio BBMak will perform at this year's Arthur Ashe Kids' Day, scheduled for Aug. 24.
The daylong festival marks the start of the U.S. Open, set for Aug. 26-Sept. 8 at the USTA National Tennis Center, in Flushing, N.Y. CBS plans to broadcast the concert from 12-2 p.m. EDT on Aug. 25.
Tennis stars Andre Agassi, Serena Williams and Andy Roddick are expected to take part in the event, which includes interactive games and free tennis clinics.
The seventh annual festival honors Ashe, the first black to win the U.S. Open and Wimbledon. He was 49 when he died of complications from AIDS in 1993.
NEW YORK (AP) - Meshell Ndegeocello is teaming up with the Gay Men's Health Crisis to help fight AIDS.
The singer will be the musical director of "You Rock My Soul," a benefit concert at Carnegie Hall on Nov. 11. Ndegeocello also will be among the evening's performers.
"We all have the power to make a difference in the fight against HIV and AIDS. No matter who we are, who we sleep with, or where we live," said Ndegeocello, whose music ranges from funk to soul. "AIDS does not discriminate. That's one of the reasons why I support this work and am participating in this event."
Other performers will be announced later, organizers said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos LON109 Ant; NY117 DiCaprio; NY118 Fulton; NY119
 Load-Date: August 14, 2002

 

End of Document
