

People in the News
March 31, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1600 words
Dateline: CINCINNATI
Body




Entertainer Harry Belafonte has agreed to serve as a spokesman to help raise money for a museum that will commemorate the network that helped slaves escape to freedom, museum officials said.
Organizers already have raised millions in public and private pledges and hope to open the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center in April 2004 along the city's Ohio River shore, where slaves stopped on their way to northern free states in the 19th century.
Belafonte, who was active in the civil rights movement during the 1950s and '60s, will help the Freedom Center's campaign to solicit smaller donations from the general public.
Construction of the $110 million museum is to begin by May 2002. The center will commemorate the safe houses and secret routes used by slaves on their way to freedom.
DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. (AP) - Eminem is no longer welcome in Daytona Beach.
The rapper offended Daytona Beach's mayor with his profanity Friday during a concert filmed at the annual Black College Reunion for Black Entertainment Television.
"He would definitely not be welcome back to perform," said Mayor Bud Asher. "Evidently this guy is a renegade and he does whatever he wants."
Eminem was part of a lineup of rappers and R&B musicians, including Snoop Dog, Missy Elliot and Nelly, scheduled to perform at the annual weekend gathering in this beach town. The performances will air next month on BET.
The mayor said he had an agreement with BET officials that profanity and lewd behavior would not be allowed at the concert, which was held at a city-owned band shell on the beach.
BET officials said that after they asked Eminem to tone down his language he had agreed to perform one of his songs a second time without profanity.
"We just wanted to make sure the mayor's fears were assuaged," said Robert Santwer, a BET spokesman. "We just wanted him to know it won't happen again."
 
HASTINGS, Neb. (AP) - NBC anchor Tom Brokaw is giving rave reviews to a flock of migrating birds that stop in central Nebraska.
"I've looked at birds all over the world, in the Amazon and southern Africa," Brokaw told KHAS-TV on Friday. "I must say the sandhill crane migration and the arrival of the snow geese ranks right up there with all of them."
Brokaw said he was impressed by the huge number of birds that stop in the Platte River valley.
"I was simply not prepared for the majesty," he said of his visit earlier this month to viewing areas between Grand Island and Kearney.
The migration is a little later this year because of the harsh winter, but the number of birds was expected to peak at 350,000 this weekend.
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Growing up as the son of Cesar Chavez was a unique experience.
While ushering in the first Cesar Chavez Day state holiday, Paul Chavez shared some memories of his late father, who founded the United Farm Workers in 1962 to push for better pay and safer working conditions for people working the fields.
"When we went to the supermarket, it wasn't to shop, it was to boycott," Paul Chavez, 44, said Friday at a celebration attended by Gov. Gray Davis and relatives of Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy.
"We didn't go to baseball games, we went to marches."
Davis signed legislation last summer that established March 31 - Chavez's birthday - as a state holiday.
"My father believed that as long as you keep struggling, you never lose," Paul Chavez said. "He said you only lose when you stop struggling."
 
HARTFORD, Conn. (AP) - Nearly 100 pieces of memorabilia - including unwashed socks - that belonged to 1960s activist Abbie Hoffman are on display at the University of Connecticut.
The items, including declassified FBI documents related to his arrest at the violent Democratic National Convention in Chicago in 1968, will be exhibited beginning this weekend through May 25.
In 1968, Hoffman started the Yippie movement, or Youth International Party, to bring together radicals to protest the Vietnam War.
He gained fame as one of the Chicago Seven, the group of radicals tried on charges of conspiring to disrupt the Democratic Convention. He and four others were acquitted of conspiracy but convicted of crossing state lines with intent to riot. Their convictions were overturned.
Hoffman's family donated the collection to the university after his 1989 suicide at the age of 52.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Jim Cramer, whose flamboyant stock market commentary has sometimes landed him in hot water, has signed a deal to make regular appearances on CNBC, where he used to be a fixture.
As part of the deal announced Thursday, Cramer will appear once a week on CNBC's main evening show, "Business Center," and biweekly as a co-host on the "Squawk Box" morning show beginning next week.
Cramer had been appearing occasionally on CNBC since last fall, but his appearances were limited by an agreement he made to settle a lawsuit from Fox News Channel. He and Fox have since reached a new agreement releasing him from those limits.
Cramer had been a regular commentator on CNBC, but the network suspended him in 1998 amid a controversy over comments he made about the stock of a small Internet company.
CNBC later determined that he did not act improperly, but he went to Fox to do a market commentary show based on TheStreet.com, the financial news site he co-founded.
Cramer also tangled with his partners at Fox News, who sued him after he abruptly canceled his show.
Cramer will have to comply with CNBC rules forcing all commentators on the network to disclose their stock holdings, which will be listed on CNBC's Web site. He will also have to make on-air disclosures when he is commenting on a stock in which he has a position.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Illusionist David Copperfield's performances often involve some scary endeavors, like hanging over flaming spikes while wearing a straitjacket and escaping just before the ropes holding him in place burn through.
Does he do it for the thrill? Not really.
"Every single physical challenge is based on either a nightmare or a fear I'm trying to get over," he told The Associated Press.
Copperfield, 44, said past performances have cured him of fears of drowning and heights, and now he's ready to take on his fear of fire.
His next feat, "Copperfield! Tornado of Fire," airs Tuesday night on CBS.
He plans to stand in the center of a flaming tornado, which he calls a "beautiful, dangerous, scary vortex."
He insists it's not an illusion.
"It's all examinable and real," he said. "I might be killing myself on TV."
 
PASADENA, Calif. (AP) - She read the book and "loved the story."
So when Oscar-winning actress Sissy Spacek was approached about starring in a TV movie based on Chris Bohjalian's novel "Midwives," she was worried the script wouldn't live up to the book.
"I carried the script around with me for four or five days before I had the courage to read it," she told The Associated Press. Ultimately, she felt the script captured the essence of the book "and I know the novelist is very happy with the screenplay."
However, Spacek noted, "You can't capture every nuance. It's a frustrating experience at best to try to bring to the screen a wonderful book."
"Midwives" airs Monday night on Lifetime. Spacek plays Sibyl Danforth, a rural midwife charged with the death of one of her patients. Directed by Glenn Jordan, the movie also stars Peter Coyote as Danforth's attorney.
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Jean Smart is the voice of Pickles Oblong on The WB's new animated series "The Oblongs." The half-hour show about the dark side of the American dream premieres Sunday night.
Pickles is a tall, skinny mom, addicted to alcohol and cigarettes, whose life in a toxic valley has rendered her bald beneath a beehive wig.
The rest of the Oblong family is in far worse shape.
Bob, the husband she adores, was born without any limbs, but manages to bounce cheerfully through his daily life. Their four children are also oddly made.
The series was co-created by counterculture cartoonist Angus Oblong, author of "Creepy Susie and 13 Other Tragic Tales for Troubled Children."
Smart insists "The Oblongs" is "very funny - wonderfully sort of politically correct and incorrect at the same time."
She had never done voice-over work, although she had long believed that it would be fun. "For years now, people come up to me and say, 'I recognized your voice before I recognized you,"' she told The Associated Press. "So I'm thinking, 'Why can't I get a bloody voice-over job if I have this distinctive voice!"'
Smart played Charlene Frazier Stillfield on the sitcom "Designing Women" from 1986 to 1991.
 
INDEPENDENCE, Mo. (AP) - Fans and memorabilia seekers picked over the estate of the late Kansas City Chiefs star Derrick Thomas, some waiting hours to buy hats, autographed pictures and clothing.
Rooms and walls at the house were packed with autographed footballs and helmets, posters and photographs, sweat pants and blue jeans, alligator shoes and snakeskin belts. Everything had a price tag, including Thomas' four-poster bed, a gold pinstriped suit, a sack of blue ribbons he won in junior high school, even pool sandals.
Those buying at least $100 worth of goods were given purchase certificates signed by Thomas' mother, Edith Morgan.
Thomas was an avid sports memorabilia collector, amassing numerous autographs, photos, even his own football cards. A poster from a 1992 charity basketball game, signed by participants including former Kansas City Royals star George Brett, had been marked for $400. There also was a $45 price tag on a picture of Thomas with retired star running back Barry Sanders.
Thomas died of complications after he was paralyzed in an auto accident in Kansas City.
 Graphic



 
With AP Photos NY119 Eminem, NY20 Chavez, NY107 Spacek, NY108
 Load-Date: April 1, 2001

 

End of Document
