

People in the News
The Associated Press
October 17, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2102 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




AKRON, Ohio (AP) - It seemed Jerry Springer's final thought on politics was, he wasn't going to get involved again.
Now he's talking about running for governor of Ohio.
The talk show host, who's a Democrat, spent about $1 million this year to determine voter support for a possible U.S. Senate run in a primary, and eventually a possible campaign against Republican incumbent Sen. George Voinovich.
Springer decided against it in August, saying he realized he couldn't be elected as long as he remains host of raunchy "The Jerry Springer Show."
But on Thursday, Springer told students at the University of Akron that he's open to the possibility of running for Ohio governor in 2006. If he decides to join the race, he'll quit doing his Chicago-based syndicated series, which he called the "silliest show ever."
More than 300 students gathered at the university's student center to hear the 59-year-old former Cincinnati mayor urge students to become more politically active. He said education would be a major plank in any future campaign platform.
"Education has to be the top priority of Ohio," Springer said. "If I ran for governor, I would have a clear commitment to early childhood education, particularly in troubled school districts."
TAIPEI, Taiwan (AP) - American celebrity chef, writer and TV star Anthony Bourdain likes to dig into such exotic dishes as live beating cobra hearts in Vietnam and boiled iguana in Mexico.
But the author of the best-selling book "Kitchen Confidential" told Taiwan's CTI cable news that he thinks the scariest food is served up daily at McDonald's.
"What could be more frightening than walking into a McDonald's and looking at a Chicken McNugget. What the hell is a Chicken McNugget?" the New York chef said in a CTI interview that aired Friday.
Later in the interview, Bourdain thought of another scary dining experience: "Walking into Planet Hollywood and seeing Bruce Willis' underwear hanging over your plate. I mean that to me is the most disturbing and frightening."
Bourdain also lamented that American fast-food chains seemed to be ubiquitous worldwide.
"When I go to a tiny little town in Morocco in the middle of nowhere and there's a damn KFC or a Planet Hollywood or a Hard Rock Cafe, that to me is the most frightening and disturbing," he said.
Bourdain, the executive chef at New York's Les Halles restaurants, was in Taiwan this week promoting his TV series and companion book, "A Chef's Tour." The program, shown on Taiwanese cable television, features Bourdain's journeys to exotic places to sample local cuisine.
NEW YORK (AP) - "Johnny Cash In His Own Words," a memoir based on conversations with the country star shortly before his death, is coming out in December from Random House.
Financial terms were not disclosed.
Filmmaker Mari-Lynn Evans interviewed Cash in July for a documentary she was making about the Appalachians. She said the conversation lasted three hours and included the country singer's thoughts about his life and career. The book is a written version of that discussion.
Cash, 71, died Sept. 12 of respiratory failure caused by complications from diabetes.
"He gave so much more … than we ever could have used in that film. We just couldn't bear to leave it on the editing room floor," Evans, whose documentary will air on PBS next spring, said in a statement issued Friday by Random House.
The book will include a foreword by longtime friend Kris Kristofferson, and a compact disc featuring 30 minutes of interview highlights, excerpts from two songs and a complete version of "Forty Shades of Green."
PRAGUE, Czech Republic (AP) - Former U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright arrived in her native land Friday to launch the Czech edition of her best-selling memoir.
Albright, who was born in Czechoslovakia, left the country with her parents for the United States after World War II and went on to become secretary of state under President Bill Clinton - the first woman to ever hold that office.
The book, published last month in the English original as "Madame Secretary," mixes autobiographic details with a personal account of her time as secretary of state. It's being published in Czech as "Madeleine: The best of all possible worlds."
Albright is scheduled to appear at a book-signing ceremony Monday in a Prague cafe, with her friend, former Czech President Vaclav Havel, in attendance.
During her five-visit stay in Prague, Albright - who speaks fluent Czech - also will appear as a guest on television talk shows.
On Saturday, she's scheduled to take part in a conference on NATO and the Middle East organized by PASS, the Program of Atlantic Security Studies, an international think tank.
LONDON (AP) - Moviegoers cried when ill-fated lovers Trevor Howard and Celia Johnson met there in David Lean's 1945 film, "Brief Encounter."
Now Carnforth railway station in northwest England, immortalized by the classic movie but long disused, will reopen as a heritage center, officials said Thursday.
Margaret Barton, who played the part of Beryl in the film, cut the ribbon when the center opened Friday.
Once an important junction, Carnforth station fell into disrepair in the last part of the 20th century. Local residents and the former rail infrastructure company Railtrack have provided funds to restore it to its 1940s glory.
The heritage center includes the Brief Encounter Tearoom, a gift shop, exhibition center and meeting and conference rooms. The original station clock, beneath which the film's lovers met, has been restored and mounted in its old position.
Peter Yates, chairman of the Carnforth Station and Railway Trust, said there's still more to do. "We don't rest on our laurels," he said. "Our ambition must be to get the West Coast Main Line trains to stop here once again."
On the Net:
http://home.clara.net/gw0hqd/ 
LAS VEGAS (AP) - Singer Wayne Newton will receive the Bob Hope lifetime service award at the upcoming Las Vegas Comedy Festival for his efforts entertaining U.S. military personnel.
The festival will run Oct. 29-Nov. 2 at the Stardust Resort and Casino, where Newton is the resident headliner. The Smothers Brothers, the Improv's Budd Friedman and comedian Rita Rudner also will be honored.
Newton took over Hope's USO duties two years ago as celebrity figurehead on tours.
"Wayne Newton has brought a lot of smiles and laughter to Las Vegas for the last 40 years. It's great he's being honored for his work entertaining our troops overseas. I'm sure Bob Hope would be smiling knowing his legacy continues," Stardust spokesman Rob Stillwell said Wednesday.
Tom and Dick Smothers will receive a career achievement award, Friedman will be honored with the Steve Allen Pioneer of Comedy Award and Rudner, a headliner at the Strip's New York-New York gambling resort, will receive the comedian of the year award, presented by the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority.
On the Net:
http://www.lasvegascomedyfestival.com 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - When Mel Blanc died in 1989, his legacy for providing words from the mouths of animated characters such as Bugs Bunny and Porky Pig was passed to son, Noel Blanc.
From Bugs Bunny's signature "Eh, what's up, Doc?" and Porky Pig's stuttering "Th-th-that's all, f-f-folks" to the staccato, high-pitched "Huh-huh-ha-HA-ha" laugh of Woody Woodpecker and the distinctive "Meep-Meep" of the Road Runner, Mel Blanc is credited with inventing the profession of animated voice acting.
"Sometimes it was hard to tell where my dad's personality left off and his characters began," Blanc said Tuesday. "He was a method actor and taught me that I had to 'become' the character in order to effectively do the voice."
"He always said that there was a physiological transfer that came across by becoming the character, even for just a single sentence or sound," Blanc said.
Noel Blanc is honoring his father with a limited-edition lithograph featuring Warner Bros. characters that Blanc helped make famous.
The poster-size "Passing the Baton: A Tribute to Mel and Noel Blanc" lithographs are numbered, signed and will be personalized by Noel Blanc. Produced by Warner Bros. for Great American Ink, they cost $495.
The lithographs are companion pieces to a memorial commemorative lithograph produced when Mel Blanc died in July 1989. Titled "Speechless," it shows the cast of Blanc animated characters in mourning, standing with heads bowed in front of an empty microphone.
The lithograph remains the most popular piece of animation art Warner Bros. has produced, Blanc said, with $20 million in sales.
On the Net:
http://www.greatamericanink.com 
NEW YORK (AP) - A $27.4 million gift from banker Sanford I. Weill and his wife, Joan, will allow Carnegie Hall to bring all its education programs under the umbrella of the new Weill Music Institute.
The Weills' gift, part of the "World of Music" education endowment campaign, is the largest single donation in Carnegie Hall's history, officials said recently.
"For me, education isn't instruction," Weill, who is also chairman of the board of Carnegie Hall, said in a statement. "It is empowerment - encouraging people to figure things out for themselves and enabling them to get better at what they do and to bring something new into the world, to make us all better."
Robert Harth, Carnegie Hall's executive and artistic director, said Hollis Headrick will be director of the Weill Music Institute. He'll assume his new position full-time in mid-December.
Headrick is presently executive director of the Center for Arts Education, a private-public partnership designed to restore arts education in the New York City public schools.
The Weill Music Institute is composed of 10 individual education programs created to reach a wide variety of audiences, from preschoolers to adults, and music lovers to emerging professionals.
On the Net:
http://www.carnegiehall.org/intro.jsp 
COPENHAGEN, Denmark (AP) - Gabriel Axel, the Danish director of the Oscar-winning "Babette's Feast," has received France's Legion of Honor for his contribution to international film.
The 85-year-old Axel, who has directed movies and television series in Denmark and France, received the award Thursday in a ceremony at the French Embassy in Copenhagen.
French Ambassador Regis De Belenet said Axel "found artistic references in both cultures."
Born in Aarhus, Denmark's second largest city, Axel grew up in Paris. He returned to Denmark at 18 and graduated from the Danish Royal Theater Actors' School in 1945. Soon afterward, he returned to Paris, where he joined the theater troupe of famed French actor Louis Jouvet.
Axel had his international breakthrough in 1988 when "Babette's Feast" won the best foreign-language Oscar.
The Legion of Honor was created in 1802 by Napoleon Bonaparte to recognize citizens' cultural, scientific or social contributions to France. It has since been expanded to include people of other nationalities.
MADRID, Spain (AP) - Chilean novelist Antonio Skarmeta is this year's winner of the Planeta prize, one of the most coveted literary prizes in the Spanish-language world.
Skarmeta won the award, which carries a $699,000 cash prize, for his latest novel, "El Baile de la Victoria" ("Victory Dance"), which tells a love story during the dictatorship of Gen. Augusto Pinochet in his native Chile.
The award, decided by a jury of writers selected by the Planeta publishing group, was announced Wednesday at a reception in Barcelona.
Spanish writer Susana Fortes was chosen as runner-up for her upcoming novel "El Amante Albanes" ("The Albanian Lover").
Skarmeta achieved international fame with "The Postman," a book that depicts the friendship of a mail carrier and the well-known Chilean poet Pablo Neruda.
Previous prize winners include Peruvian-born Mario Vargas Llosa for "Lituma en los Andes ("Lituma in the Andes") and Spanish Nobel Prize-winning writer Camilo Jose Cela for "La Cruz de San Andres ("Saint Andrew's Cross").
SIOUX FALLS, S.D. (AP) - Pat O'Brien, co-anchor of the syndicated "Access Hollywood" entertainment show, says he'd like to run for governor of South Dakota - someday.
"I have always said I would like to come back and run for something there, participate in government," he told the Sioux Falls Argus Leader in a phone interview from his California home. "I am not quitting my job, but someday I would like to come back and run for governor.
"This is a well-thought-out idea, not a whim."
His political aspirations first came to light in an interview in the upcoming issue of GQ magazine.
O'Brien, 55, is a graduate of the University of South Dakota.
He joined "Access Hollywood" in 1997.
On the Net:
http://entertainment.msn.com/accesshollywood/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY111 Bourdain; NY112 Springer; NY121 Newton; NY120
 Load-Date: October 18, 2003

 

End of Document
