

People in the News
September 17, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1428 words
Dateline: MODENA, Italy
Body




Luciano Pavarotti pleaded innocent to tax evasion charges in an Italian court on Monday.
The tenor is on trial on charges of filing false tax returns from 1989-95. If convicted, he could face up to three years in prison.
"I don't feel guilty and if a law says the contrary I want you all to know that I was acting in total good faith," the tenor said, according to his lawyer, Massimo Leone.
Pavarotti, dressed in a black suit, gave his statement at the opening of the hearing in Modena, in central Italy.
The tenor has long claimed that his official home is in Monte Carlo, a tax haven, rather than Modena. He also claims that his business core is not in Italy.
"A singer expresses himself in the world," he said in court, adding that he divides his time between New York, Monte Carlo and London, and doesn't even have a house in Modena.
"I earn abroad and bring the money into Italy," he said, according to the ANSA news agency. "I don't think it's right to think ill of me for this reason."
But prosecutors maintain Modena, the tenor's home city and the place where he stages his annual charity concerts, is the center of his activities.
The tenor's good faith "is yet to be proven," said Prosecutor Manfredi Luongo.
Ending a long administrative battle, Pavarotti agreed last year to pay the Italian government more than $11.3 million in back taxes and penalties on civil tax evasion charges stemming from those same years.
The criminal case started in May.
The next hearing is scheduled for Tuesday, but Pavarotti, who arrived with companion Nicoletta Mantovani at his side, is not expected to be in court, said Leone.
NEW YORK (AP) - Michael Jackson, whose "We Are the World" raised millions for African famine relief in the '80s, is hoping a similar benefit song will do the same for the victims of last week's terrorists attacks in New York and Washington.
Jackson wrote a song called "What More Can I Give," and has enlisted members of 'N Sync and the Backstreet Boys, Britney Spears and Destiny's Child to participate in the recording.
"I believe in my heart that the music community will come together as one and rally to the aid of thousands of innocent victims," he said in a statement Monday. "There is a tremendous need for relief dollars right now and through this effort each one of us can play an immediate role in helping comfort so many people."
Jackson hopes to raise approximately $50 million. In 1985, he and Lionel Richie co-wrote "We Are the World," performed by USA for Africa, an all-star ensemble that included Bruce Springsteen, Paul Simon, Diana Ross, Stevie Wonder, Cyndi Lauper, Bob Dylan and Ray Charles.
NORFOLK, Va. (AP) - Earth, Wind & Fire is donating $25,000 from every concert they perform, as well as profits from merchandise sales at the shows, to victims of last week's terrorist attacks in New York City and Washington.
"It puts everything, brings everything to center when these kinds of things happen," singer Philip Bailey told AP Radio. "The priorities are more aligned and the importance of things finds their proper place, hopefully, at least for a little while."
Bailey said it's hard to know when the right time is to return to activities like going to concerts. The R&B group resumed its tour schedule late last week with a show in Norfolk, Va., and performed on New York's Long Island over the weekend.
"As we see that things are kind of getting back to normal, then we do have to get back to normal, and we do have to move on in terms of helping one another to get through this," the 50-year-old said. "And it's something that we'll never really get through. This is just a different time in history for all of us."
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Ellen DeGeneres says she won't read her former girlfriend Anne Heche's book, "Call Me Crazy," because she's not interested in Heche's interpretation of their life together.
"I don't really care," DeGeneres told the Los Angeles Times in Sunday's newspaper. "Her truth is her truth. I would also like to get to the point that I'm not referenced in everything she does."
The two were together from 1997-2000 and shared homes in Ojai and the Hollywood Hills. DeGeneres said she's sold the Ojai house and eventually wants to sell the home in the hills.
"What I don't mind saying is, it was the first time I ever had my heart broken," DeGeneres said. "I'd always been the one to leave relationships … and it was the one time I really believed this is forever."
The 43-year-old actress will star in a new sitcom, "The Ellen Show," in which she plays a once-successful high-tech entrepreneur who moves back home to become a guidance counselor at her old high school.
Even though the character she plays also is a lesbian, that part of the story line will be subdued since the show is scheduled to air at 8 p.m. ET on Fridays.
NEW YORK (AP) - Jack Welch, one of the most celebrated chief executives of his generation, says his earliest money-related memory goes back to his days as a 9-year-old caddy.
The retired General Electric CEO recalled "having that buck and a half and being able to go to the store and buy tons of bubble gum and whatever," he told USA Weekend for Sunday's edition.
Welch, 65, retired earlier in the month after 20 years at the helm at GE, which was transformed under his leadership into the world's most valuable company.
Welch's early lessons about the value of a dollar paid off as he engineered a lucrative corporate career. But in the process, he learned other important lessons - about generosity and charity.
"The nice thing about having money is that you can give it away," he said.
DENVER (AP) - After 50 years, Dean Bushnell is still tapping his toes and tooting his horn.
Bushnell, the trumpeter who still leads the Dean Bushnell Orchestra 50 years after he assembled it, joined former band members and other artists for a reunion on Sunday.
Bushnell started the band while a student at the University of Northern Colorado. Many musicians who started with the orchestra later played with Stan Kenton, Frank Sinatra and Tommy Dorsey.
The band still plays at least 50 times a year.
"Fifty years of anything is quite an accomplishment," Denver Mayor Wellington Webb said. "And for half a decade, this is an orchestra who has helped to keep jazz and swing alive and has also kept hundreds of Denver's musicians employed."
NEW YORK (AP) - Edward Burns doesn't understand why gossip columnists and celebrity photographers get his fellow actors so bent out of shape.
"If that stuff really bothers you so much, you should go do regional theater," he told The New York Times for Sunday editions. "Go do Chekhov in Iowa. No paparazzi will be following you."
Burns is getting his share of attention for his latest movie, "Sidewalks of New York," which was scheduled to open Friday but has been postponed until November because last week's attack on the World Trade Center. Burns wrote, directed, produced and stars in the romantic comedy.
Just as Burns offers a tolerant view of the entertainment press, he also admits that he's not burdened with the face recognition of Hollywood's most famous actors.
"I get great tickets to Knicks games and get to go to nice restaurants, but it's not like I'm Leonardo DiCaprio with paparazzi following me."
DELAFIELD, Wis. (AP) - A former cast member of MTV's "The Real World" canceled plans to visit her on-again, off-again boyfriend, and the decision saved her life.
Julie Stoffer had planned to take United Airlines Flight 11 from Boston to Los Angeles on Tuesday but changed her mind early that morning - just hours before the plane was hijacked and crashed into the World Trade Center in New York.
A couple of hours passed before Stoffer's parents found out their daughter was safe.
"I was just so, so glad to hear she was fine," Stoffer's mother, Jan Stoffer, said Wednesday. "How do you describe that kind of an emotion?"
Julie Stoffer, 21, had an argument with her boyfriend Monday night and considered canceling her trip, Jan Stoffer said. But she woke up at 6 the next morning and called a friend to take her to the airport.
The friend persuaded her not to go, saying the boyfriend wasn't treating her well, Jan Stoffer said. Julie went back to sleep, awakening later to discover the flight's fate.
Jan Stoffer found out about the attacks at about 9 a.m., but didn't know whether her daughter had taken the flight until her husband got a call from Julie two hours later.
Julie Stoffer was a particularly well-known "Real World" cast member from the New Orleans season, in part because she was a practicing Mormon, a faith that is arguably at odds with the racy program.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY116 DeGeneres; NY109 Welch; NY110 Burns
 Load-Date: September 18, 2001

 

End of Document
