

People in the News
July 21, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1388 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




James Hetfield, the singer and rhythm guitarist of heavy metal band Metallica, has entered a rehabilitation center for treatment of alcoholism.
In a note to fans on the band's Web site, Metallica said it will delay work on its latest album "to give James the time and privacy he needs to deal with his problems."
Hetfield, 37, is married and has two children.
Metallica - and the excesses of its members - have been a notorious part of the heavy metal scene since the group formed in 1981. Since then, the Bay Area band has become one of the most successful rock acts of the past 20 years.
Metallica's highly publicized lawsuit against Napster helped precipitate the song-swapping Web site's ongoing legal woes.
On the Net:
Metallica: http://www.metallica.com/ 
GENOA, Italy (AP) - U2 front man Bono took his campaign for Third World debt relief to Genoa this weekend, meeting with officials on the sidelines of a summit of world leaders.
Aboard a cruise liner housing the delegations, Bono and fellow rock singer Bob Geldof met with German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder and European Union President Romano Prodi.
Bono said he came to Genoa to urge the G-8 summit leaders to do more to reduce Third World debt and fight the AIDS epidemic in the world's poorest countries, especially in Africa.
He added he was shocked at the violence that has marred the meeting, including the shooting death of a protester by police.
"Violence is never right," he said.
PRAY, Mont. (AP) - Actor Dennis Quaid rocked the Chico Hot Springs stage with bare feet as he led his band, the Sharks, through a nonstop two-hour set of rock 'n' roll.
Dennis Wilson, operations manager for the Paradise Valley nightspot, said the actor had played at the club before with other bands "but this was the first time he's rocked the building."
Quaid said he's been playing guitar since he was 12, but the group Dennis Quaid and the Sharks has been together about eight months.
"Before that, I hadn't really played music in 10 years," he said. "You know, I was a new father and stuff."
Quaid's 9-year-old son Jack Henry played piano for one song and sang a couple of others as his mother, actress Meg Ryan, took pictures. The couple is seeking a divorce.
Quaid, 47, said he always plays barefoot.
"It makes me feel like I'm in my living room," he said.
There was no cover charge, but Quaid passed around a large water jug to collect cash for the International Hospital for Children.
HONOLULU (AP) - Game show host Pat Sajak is taking to the stage as fussy Felix Unger to star opposite an old friend in Neil Simon's "The Odd Couple."
His Army buddy, Honolulu newscaster Joe Moore, will play the slovenly Oscar Madison in the play Sept. 27-30 at the Hawaii Theatre.
Sajak and Moore play the roles made famous by Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau on film, and Tony Randall and Jack Klugman on television.
It won't be the first time the host of Wheel of Fortune has appeared on a Hawaii stage. In 1993, Sajak played a lawyer in a drama about the court-martial of a general at the end of World War I, a work-in-progress written by and starring Moore.
JERSEY CITY, N.J. (AP) - The actress who plays Tony Soprano's maid on the hit mob drama "The Sopranos" was beaten up and tossed down a flight of stairs, police said.
Katalin Pota, who plays Soprano maid Lilliana Wosilius on the HBO show, was beaten around the face, legs and torso before being thrown down the stairs on July 5, police said Friday. Her arm was also broken.
Police arrested Andre Doumler, 40, of Jersey City, on Friday and charged him with aggravated assault.
Doumler, a Russian national, was in custody at the Hudson County Correctional Facility. His arraignment had not yet been scheduled.
An HBO spokeswoman didn't immediately return a telephone call left after business hours on Friday.
NEW YORK (AP)- The planned reunion of all original members of The Jackson Five at Michael Jackson's 30th-anniversary concert may be in doubt.
Producers of "Michael Jackson: 30th Anniversary Celebration, The Solo Years" released a statement Friday saying that Jermaine Jackson had dropped out of the shows, to be held Sept. 7 and 10 at Madison Square Garden.
Marlon Brando, Britney Spears, Destiny's Child, 'N Sync, Quincy Jones and Diana Ross are among the celebrities expected to participate.
"I am sorry Jermaine has chosen not to participate in this event," said David Gest, the producer of the event. "This is an event for Michael Jackson. It is a salute to a truly great and legendary artist. Jackie, Tito and Marlon, original members of The Jackson Five, will join their brother, Michael, onstage for this very special reunion."
However, Jermaine Jackson's manager, Danny O'Donovan, told The Associated Press that Jermaine had not dropped out. He said his client just wanted to make sure early supporters of The Jackson Five would be invited.
"There is no split, no division between the brothers," O'Donovan said. "Michael is doing his anniversary special, and the brothers are all going to do it, and I am hopeful as a manager that they are all going to be there."
ATLANTA (AP) - Basketball star Patrick Ewing will be called to testify Monday about his encounters with nude dancers at the Gold Club, the lead prosecutor in the case said.
Assistant U.S. Attorney Art Leach said Friday former professional wrestling executive Eric Bischoff also would testify next week, as well as former Gold Club dancer Jana Pelnis, who is expected to say that she witnessed dancers having sex with Ewing and Bischoff at the Atlanta strip club.
Prosecutors say club owner Steve Kaplan used the lure of sex to attract professional athletes and celebrities while cheating customers to funnel cash to New York's Gambino crime family. He and six others are charged with obstruction, credit card fraud, loan sharking and other charges.
In testimony last month, a former Gold Club dancer said she saw a stripper perform a sex act on Ewing in 1996 as Kaplan watched. Ewing, who gained fame as a star for the New York Knicks, played last season for the Seattle SuperSonics and recently signed a free agent contract with the Orlando Magic.
Bischoff was reinstalled last year as head of World Championship Wrestling, but the move failed to regain viewers. The rival World Wrestling Federation bought WCW earlier this year.
ST. PETERSBURG, Russia (AP) - After performing a 90-minute concert before an invitation-only audience, Elton John put one of his outfits and the piano stool he used in the performance on the auction block to help raise funds for monuments in Russia's former imperial capital.
The beige jacquard Versace suit with matching shoes and the stool brought $27,000 at the auction late Thursday after the concert at the 18th-century Catherine Palace in the village of Pushkin, just outside St. Petersburg.
Admission to the concert in the gilded hall required a minimum donation of $1,500. Among those in attendance were Boris Nemtsov, leader of the liberal Union of Right Forces party, and aluminum and oil tycoon Roman Abramovich.
Proceeds from the concert are to be used for restoring crumbling monuments in St. Petersburg and building a new one to commemorate the late Nobel Prize-winning poet Joseph Brodsky.
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP)- Desmond Ballentine, a popular Jamaican musician known as Ninjaman, was in stable condition after being hospitalized with injuries sustained during a domestic dispute.
An argument broke out Wednesday between Ballentine and his live-in girlfriend, police spokeswoman Angela McTaggart said.
A family friend tried to intervene and during the ensuing brawl, allegedly stabbed Ballentine four times in his head. Ballentine also received injuries along his neck and his hand. The family friend, who fled after the skirmish, has not been charged.
"It's pure foolishness," Ballentine told The Associated Press from his hospital room. "It's the one time in my life that I'm sure I never did anything to deserve the (punishment) that I got."
Ballentine has focused his career on dance hall music, a reggae-rap hybrid. He was a popular dance hall deejay in Jamaica during the late 1980s and early 1990s, and has written such songs as "Murder Them."
He served a year in prison for possession of a firearm.
Ballentine is facing a murder charge in the killing of Anthony White, a Jamaican taxi driver. Ballentine has pleaded innocent to the charge.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY117 Hetfield; NY118 of Sajak; NY107 of John; NY108 of
 Load-Date: July 22, 2001

 

End of Document
