

People in the News
March 3, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1413 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Prince William is traveling in Africa as the latest stage in his "gap year" between school and university, his office said Saturday.
St. James's Palace said the 18-year-old prince had left for a 3 1/2 month trip to Africa. A palace spokeswoman would not specify which countries William will visit, but said he would learn about Africa's wildlife and environment, be involved in game conservation and possibly help out with safari trips.
William, the eldest son of Prince Charles, begins an art history degree at Scotland's St. Andrews University in the fall.
SAN JOSE, Calif. (AP) - Former president Bill Clinton and rap artist M.C. Hammer appeared Friday night at a fundraiser for victims of India's devastating earthquake in January.
Clinton spoke for several minutes about daughter Chelsea and wife Hillary Rodham Clinton's visit to India before the quake. M.C. Hammer, known for his single "U Can't Touch This," performed several songs.
The 7.7 magnitude quake struck Gujarat in western India on Jan. 26, killing more than 19,000 people.
Organizers hoped to raise $2 million for the relief effort.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Peter and Bobby Farrelly think there's just something about The Three Stooges.
The sibling writer-directors behind "There's Something About Mary" and "Dumb & Dumber" said Friday they plan to make a movie based on the slapstick characters of Larry, Moe and Curly.
The film won't be a remake of any particular Stooges story, but will be an original idea cooked up by the brothers, Warner Bros. Studios said.
Shaggy-haired Larry Fine, belligerent Moe Howard and his skinhead brother, Jerome 'Curly' Howard, are the best known performers of the Three Stooges comedy act, which went from vaudeville stages to Hollywood in the 1930s.
ATLANTA (AP) - Bob Knight is turning sweet, at least for orange juice.
In a TV commercial debuting Monday, the former Indiana basketball coach sheds his infamous temper after taking a few swallows of orange juice.
"The whole premise here is people acting like you'd never expect," said Dan Schafer, a spokesman for Coca-Cola's Minute Maid unit.
Knight was fired last year for what Indiana University officials said was repeated misconduct, including accusations that he choked a player during a practice.
Schafer said Knight lampoons his own persona in the ad. He puts his arm around a ref and bends to tie a player's shoe to keep him from tripping.
Knight now works as an NCAA basketball analyst for Sandbox.com.
BENTONVILLE, Ark. (AP) - A man has filed a $65 million lawsuit against Wal-Mart heiress Helen Walton, claiming she was responsible for a 1999 accident that left him with chronic back pain.
Jerry R. Otis filed the suit Friday in Benton County Circuit Court, seeking compensatory and punitive damages from Mrs. Walton, a billionaire and the widow of Wal-Mart founder Sam Walton.
In the February 1999 accident, witnesses said Mrs. Walton ran a red light and her car struck Otis' dump truck.
Otis said he was in good health before the accident but now has serious medical problems and is in constant pain. An MRI showed that he has a large disc extrusion, the suit said.
A police report listed Mrs. Walton as the only person injured in the accident and said Otis drove his truck after the accident.
A spokesman for the Walton family, Jay Allen, said he would not comment on the suit because he had not seen it.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Directors Steven Spielberg and George Lucas said the media have exaggerated the possibility of actors being replaced by digital creations in the future.
"It is a non-issue," Spielberg said Thursday during a celebration for the opening of the new Robert Zemeckis Center for Digital Arts at the University of Southern California.
The "Star Wars" creator agreed.
"It is only the typical melodrama the press loves to deal with," Lucas said.
Both directors said actors have no reason to worry, mainly because animation, whether it's hand-drawn or computer-rendered, still needs to be voiced by a real person.
As early as 1997, animation conventions buzzed with discussion over the merits of avatars - digital beings with limited ability to interact with audiences - versus real actors.
Fresh media attention surfaced in 1999 when the Screen Actors Guild said it had begun following the use of digital images after Jar Jar Binks was announced as a character in "Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace."
The Binks character was voiced by an actor but depicted digitally. Lucas has said Binks will return in the next "Star Wars" installment.
Spielberg indicated that if he were making "ET: The Extra-Terrestrial" today, he probably wouldn't use an elaborate puppet, instead opting for a digitally rendered creature. But the need for actors to add "the emotions" will always be there, he said.
"Audiences will go away before actors go away," Spielberg said.
ASPEN, Colo. (AP) - Until the Internet develops a unique language or form, it will continue to be overshadowed by television as an entertainment medium, industry panelists said during the U.S. Comedy Arts Festival.
Internet technology isn't sufficiently developed to compete with television, former Netscape CEO Jim Barksdale said Thursday during the WorldCom Comedy Technology Summit.
But that could change once someone invents the missing link to improve the speed and technical quality of entertainment content on the Internet.
Director Nora Ephron told the panel it's too early to determine how entertainment will develop on the Internet.
"I tend to think we're in the Milton Berle era of the Net," she said. "We're still vaudeville. We don't have a clue what's ahead."
As television invented the sitcom, the Internet could pioneer its own form, Ephron said, adding that it has fostered an explosion of short movies.
The Comedy Arts Festival continues through Sunday.
FORT BENNING, Ga. (AP) - Mel Gibson has a lot of respect for U.S. Army Rangers, especially after taking part in some of their training.
"I'm dragging. I couldn't even make it through today's round," Gibson said as he went through an abbreviated Ranger training program this week.
Gibson will star in "We Were Soldiers Once … and Young," based on the 1992 best-selling book by retired Lt. Gen. Harold G. Moore and U.S. News & World Report senior writer Joe Galloway.
Filming begins Monday on the post.
The book is based on the Ia Drang Valley campaign of 1965 in Vietnam's Central Highlands. The 1st Cavalry (Airmobile) trained at Fort Benning for 14 months before being shipped to Vietnam in August 1965.
Gibson, who will portray Moore, said he wants to make a movie that will make "everybody who served in Vietnam" proud.
NEW YORK (AP) - The cat's out of the bag. The best cure for an allergy to felines is … LSD?
Dr. Andrew Weil, a best-selling author and longtime proponent of alternative health remedies, says on "60 Minutes" that he cured his lifelong allergy to cats by using the hallucinogenic drug.
"I took LSD. I was in a wonderful outdoor setting. I felt terrific and, in the midst of this, a cat came up to me and crawled into my lap," he says on the CBS show, which airs Sunday (7 p.m. EST).
"I did not have an allergic reaction to it and I never did since."
Weil says he believes some allergies are learned.
"That gave me the idea that (taking LSD) would be a great way to teach people to unlearn allergies," he says. "If the drugs were legal, I think I would recommend that some patients do it."
NEW YORK (AP) - Conductor Julius Rudel will celebrate his 80th birthday Tuesday, but says he has no plans to retire.
"That word is not even in my vocabulary," Rudel said. "You know, Leopold Stokowsky conducted until he was 95."
With more than 175 operas spanning four centuries in his repertoire and an equal number of symphonies, Rudel has led six major American arts institutions, including a 22-year tenure as general director of New York City Opera.
Besides seven performances of Massenet's "Manon" at the Metropolitan Opera just prior to his birthday, Rudel's schedule includes concerts in Brazil in May and in London in June.
FAYETTEVILLE, Ga. (AP) - Rapper and producer Jermaine Dupri is serving a three-day jail sentence for missing jury duty two years ago.
Dupri, 28, turned himself in Thursday night at the Fayette County Jail and was to be released Sunday.
Judge Chris Edwards sentenced Dupri, the chief executive of So So Def Records, to three days in jail for missing three days of jury duty in March 1999.
Dupri, known legally as Jermaine Mauldin, has produced records for groups such as TLC and Usher.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY110 of Prince William; NY111 of Clinton; NY107 of
 Load-Date: March 4, 2001

 

End of Document
