

People in the News
The Associated Press
May 1, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1155 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




South Africa, celebrating its 10th year of democracy after apartheid, has something in common with the Tribeca Film Festival, now in its third year of helping revitalize downtown Manhattan after the 2001 terrorist attacks, Desmond Tutu said.
"Our country has risen like a phoenix from the ashes," the Nobel laureate and retired South African archbishop said Saturday. "We believe it is possible for your own city to rise from the ashes of 9-11."
Tutu is an honorary patron of the Tribeca Film Festival, which began Saturday and runs through May 9. More than 250 films from 42 countries are being shown, including a series of South African offerings.
"Lower Manhattan will be a bustling, lively place, and it will be an inspiration to many," Tutu said at a news conference marking the start of the festival. "You might destroy structures, but you can't destroy people."
Robert De Niro and his Tribeca Films partner, Jane Rosenthal, founded the festival in 2002 to help the downtown economy rebound.
"We're very excited about the festival. We think it will be the best yet," said De Niro, who said he hadn't seen many of the films because he's busy shooting "Meet the Fockers," the sequel to the hit comedy "Meet the Parents."
He did have some advice for aspiring filmmakers: "They just have to find any way they can to tell a story, their story, that they feel they need to tell and make it as personal as they can."
---
On the Net:
http://www.tribecafilmfestival.org 
---
AUGUSTA, Ga. (AP) - City officials have delayed the unveiling of a statue honoring James Brown until the singer resolves his legal troubles.
Officials originally scheduled the unveiling for May 7 to coincide with the Godfather of Soul's 71st birthday, which is Monday, and the downtown music festival that was named in his honor until recently.
The former James Brown Music Festival reverted to its original name, the Garden City Music Festival, in February because of the public backlash after his Jan. 28 arrest for allegedly hitting his wife, Tomi Rae Brown. Brown has denied the allegations.
"We need to let Mr. Brown settle those issues in his private life before we move forward with a very public recognition of his professional life," Mayor Bob Young said Friday.
Young also cited production delays. The $40,000 statue is still a clay model waiting to be cast in bronze, a process that will take at least six weeks.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The British rock band The Cure has been honored with a place in the Hollywood Rockwalk.
The band's five members placed their hands in concrete Friday to be installed outside the original Guitar Center store on Sunset Boulevard, joining other music legends such as Chuck Berry, Los Lobos, The Ramones and Van Halen.
The Cure's signature melancholy sound influenced numerous other acts in the years following its founding in 1976.
Singer Robert Smith, 45, crafted haunting, emotional songs that spawned millions in record sales and legions of devoted fans.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Tina Fey found at least a few differences between writing for NBC's "Saturday Night Live" and tackling her first feature-length screenplay for "Mean Girls."
In devising comedy sketches, she says: "Story is your enemy. Story will sink you. Conversely, in a movie, if you don't have (a) story, then that will sink you. So I was just trying to learn that."
The 33-year-old co-head writer of "SNL" also had to confront another way of being funny.
"It's best not to have three jokes a page. Setup/joke, setup/joke, setup/joke," she told The Associated Press in a recent interview. "You kinda will sell yourself out if you try to do that in a movie. You have to have more patience."
One last difference between television and movies was being forced to look back at her work for months on end.
"I'm used to: Do it, do it in a week, good, bad, whatever … move on," she said.
"Mean Girls" opened Friday to mainly positive reviews.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The movie version of John Grisham's comedic holiday novel, "Skipping Christmas," has started production under a new title: "Christmas With the Kranks."
Revolution Studios, which is producing the Tim Allen and Jamie Lee Curtis movie about fed-up suburbanites who irk their neighbors by attempting to forgo holiday festivities, lost the rights to the original title about three weeks ago.
Rival studio DreamWorks SKG had already filmed a Ben Affleck holiday comedy titled "Surviving Christmas," and both studios planned to release their films in November.
The Motion Picture Association of America arbitrated the dispute and determined Revolution Studios had to sacrifice the title of Grisham's book to help differentiate the films, according to the trade newspaper Variety.
Joe Roth, the Hollywood mogul and founder of Revolution Studios, is getting behind the camera as director of the retitled "Christmas With the Kranks," which is derived from the last name of Allen and Curtis' characters. He previously directed "America's Sweethearts" and "Revenge of the Nerds II: Nerds in Paradise."
The movie co-stars Dan Aykroyd and Cheech Marin, and was adapted for the screen by Chris Columbus.
"I worked with Chris on the first two 'Home Alone' films and with Tim on 'The Santa Clause,' all of which were tremendously enjoyable and successful experiences," Roth said in a written statement Thursday. "I am delighted to be reuniting with them and working with Jamie Lee Curtis, one of our most versatile and gifted performers, on this wonderful and funny story."
---
On the Net:
http://www.randomhouse.com/features/grisham/ 
---
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) - A misdemeanor public intoxication charge against "The Alamo" star Jason Patric, who was arrested in late March, has been dropped.
Lawyers reviewing the case didn't think they could prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the 37-year-old actor had been a danger to himself or others, a requirement in public intoxication cases, said City Attorney David Smith.
"He had hailed a cab and was intending to get in it," Smith said in Friday's editions of the Austin American-Statesman. "He had friends with him."
The Travis County Attorney's Office was reviewing a charge of resisting arrest against Patric stemming from the same incident. A phone call to the office wasn't immediately returned Friday.
Patric stars as Texas hero James Bowie in "The Alamo." His other films include "The Lost Boys," "Sleepers" and "Speed 2: Cruise Control."
---
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Minnie Driver or Minnie Pearl?
The 33-year-old British actress has recorded a country music album and is negotiating with Rounder Records to release it, a Rounder spokesman said Thursday. Few details were available.
Driver was in Nashville recently to present an award at Country Music Television's Flame Worthy Video Music Awards. Backstage, she described her album as alternative country.
Her films include "Grosse Pointe Blank," "Return to Me" and "Hope Springs." She was nominated for an Oscar for her role in 1997's "Good Will Hunting."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYR110 of Tutu and De Niro, NY107 of Fey, NY109 of
 Load-Date: May 2, 2004

 

End of Document
