

People in the News
The Associated Press
November 9, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1935 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




ADDIS ABABA, Ethiopia (AP) - Brad Pitt spent four days in Ethiopia to learn more about AIDS in Africa as part of a fund-raising campaign to combat the disease on the world's poorest continent.
The trip was organized by DATA, a Washington-based lobby group co-founded by rock star Bono that campaigns on Third World trade, debt and HIV/AIDS. Pitt began his first visit to Ethiopia Friday and left late Monday night.
"It was a listening and learning visit," DATA spokesman Jamie Drummond said Tuesday. He declined requests for comment from Pitt, star of the film "Troy."
While in Ethiopia, Pitt visited local projects fighting the spread of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. The 40-year-old actor also met with eight top Ethiopian singers who have collaborated on songs to educate people about HIV and to raise money for AIDS programs.
Tsedenia Gebremarkos, who has just released a hit album in Ethiopia, said Pitt was keen to know how AIDS had affected the nation, where the average annual income is $100.
"He was very humble and really interested in the situation here," Tsedenia said. "We hope his popularity can raise awareness in the same way we are trying to. We need the support of people like him."
In Africa, 29.4 million people are living with the virus, which has left 25 million children orphaned, according to United Nations figures. Bono has traveled the world spreading the message that more than 6,500 Africans die every day from AIDS, while 8,000 new people are infected daily.
Only about 50,000 Africans get potentially life-saving drugs, known as anti-retrovirals, while at least 4 million people need the drugs, which cost more than most Africans earn.
---
On the Net:
http://www.data.org/ 
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - A light rain couldn't dampen spirits as dozens of Hollywood celebrities attended the second annual Louis Vuitton United Cancer Front gala, hosted by Sarah Jessica Parker, Dustin Hoffman and Jamie Foxx.
Underwritten by fashion designer Louis Vuitton, all proceeds from Monday night's event will go to UCF, the brainchild of Lilly Tartikoff. Her husband, TV executive Brandon Tartikoff, died in 1997 of Hodgkin's disease.
Tartikoff said she expected the gala to raise about $1.5 million.
"Our intention is to move science forward," she told AP Television News. "And because these celebrities came out, and because Hollywood's gotten involved, and the town of Los Angeles, we've been able to deliver the first-ever nontoxic treatment for breast cancer."
Tennis star Serena Williams, her sister Venus Williams, singer Jewel, and actresses Kristin Davis, Lauren Graham and Kate Bosworth were among those in attendance.
Graham said she had a family member battling breast cancer.
"What a sadness it is for women in the world. It just feels that there's so much attention paid (to the disease), that we have to be close to (a cure)."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Pedro Almodovar has been down the red carpet before, but the director said it felt like the first time at the Hollywood premiere of his new film, "Bad Education."
"For me, premieres are like when you fall in love," Almodovar explained, speaking in Spanish. "It's like the first time in that it's going to last forever. So, in that sense, this premiere is like the first time I've premiered the movie, and that's the way I'm celebrating it."
The movie has been shown at film festivals in Moscow, Toronto, New York and Telluride, Colo.
"Bad Education" teams Gael Garcia Bernal and Fele Martinez in an often gritty examination on the effect of Franco-era religious schooling and sexual abuse on the lives of two longtime friends.
Hollywood isn't just talking about the 26-year-old Bernal, who also stars in Walter Salles' "The Motorcycle Diaries," they're saying good things.
"Really? Is that true?" Bernal asked at Sunday night's premiere. "I don't get to know that. I've been doing too many interviews to realize what goes on in the outside world."
Almodovar said he's not surprised that Bernal has been embraced by Tinseltown.
"Really, he's amazing. I think I give him very good luck," the director told AP Television News with a laugh. "No, truly, he deserves it. He's working very hard and very courageous and with risk, and I'm very glad that he's becoming so big here."
"Bad Education" opens in Los Angeles and New York City on Nov. 19.
---
ROME (AP) - The singer once known as Cat Stevens will receive a peace prize from a foundation headed by former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.
Yusuf Islam is expected to attend Wednesday's ceremony in Rome, where he'll receive the Man for Peace award from Gorbachev and Mayor Walter Veltroni, said Enzo Cursio, a spokesman for the Gorbachev Foundation.
In September, the British musician was expelled from the United States after authorities diverted his London-to-Washington flight to Maine to remove him, saying he was suspected of ties to terrorism.
He says he was a victim of an "unjust and arbitrary system," and that he has denounced terrorism.
Islam will receive the award "for his dedication to promote peace, the reconciliation of people and to condemn terrorism."
Previous recipients include Italian actor-director Roberto Benigni, who won in 2002. Benigni directed the Oscar-winning "Life Is Beautiful."
---
LONDON (AP) - It was more regal than most movie premieres - two dames and the queen were in attendance at a showing of "Ladies in Lavender" in Leicester Square.
Dame Judi Dench and Dame Maggie Smith, both 69 and co-stars of the film, were given second billing Monday as Queen Elizabeth II was the guest of honor.
Proceeds from the event went to the Cinema and Television Benevolent Fund, of which the queen has been patron for 52 years.
Dench and Smith, who previously appeared together in "A Room With a View" and "Tea With Mussolini," portray two spinsters in a post-World War II Cornish fishing village who take in a mysterious young Polish man they find half-drowned on a beach.
Dench said she enjoyed the ease of working with Smith again.
"It's the shorthand that we get to know," she said.
Director Charles Dance said the pair were a fantastic double act.
"They made life very easy for everybody. They don't have any airs and graces," he said. "They're there every day at 7 a.m. on the set without an entourage around them or an army of assistants and they do it better than anybody else can do."
---
LINCOLN, Neb. (AP) - Former Motley Crue drummer Tommy Lee said he's finding his experience at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln to be a lot of work.
In a news conference Sunday, Lee said he loves horticulture, but finds chemistry to be unbelievably hard.
Another shock: Learning he had to wake at 6 a.m. to be at Memorial Stadium for drum practice with school's band.
"This is the total fish-out-of-water experience for me," Lee said. "I didn't have the opportunity to go to college. I was busy touring since the age of 17. So this is completely strange and bizarre, but a lot of fun and a lot of work."
Lee, 42, is attending classes and activities during the filming of an NBC reality show, "Tommy Lee Goes to College." Filming began in early October.
"It's the real deal," Lee said of his studies. "I'm playing catch-up since we jumped in (during) the middle of the semester."
The "Smokin' in the Boys Room" rocker said he really is buckling down.
Executive producer Eddie October has even stored a picture in his cell phone of a sheet of paper he found taped to Lee's door. On it is written: "Do Not Disturb. Tommy is Studying (Seriously)."
---
ASBURY PARK, N.J. (AP) - It's good to be The Boss.
Less than a month after the city broke ground on a waterfront redevelopment project, Bruce Springsteen rendered his verdict on a planned condominium called The Rising, the same name as his Grammy-winning album and song.
The Boss called the name a "mistake." Almost immediately the developer agreed to change it, city Manager Terry Reidy said Monday.
He said the turnabout was sparked by a letter the rocker wrote to a local weekly newspaper, and praised Springsteen, who lives nearby, for his continuing devotion to Asbury Park.
Springsteen, a Monmouth County native who rose to fame playing Asbury Park clubs as the city's fortunes declined, wrote that he agreed with the newspaper's assessment that "it's time for a little originality on the waterfront."
"First, 'The Rising' was written in the shadow of September 11th and should remain connected to the heartbreak and courage of that day," Springsteen wrote in a letter to the triCityNews.
"… I respectfully ask the city fathers and developers to place both my and my song's names out of the running for any new buildings, streets, hot dog stands (well, maybe hot dog stands) as the city moves toward its exciting future."
The 224-unit building is being built by Metro Homes LLC of Hoboken and is part of a $1.2 billion redevelopment project that includes two other condo projects.
Metro Homes officials said they will have a contest for city children to suggest a new name, with the winner getting a $10,000 savings bond and the winner's school getting $5,000.
"I'm a big fan of Bruce Springsteen's. I've been following him since the 1970s. When I read the article, it made a lot of sense," said Dean Geibel, a Metro Homes partner.
---
On the Net:
http://www.brucespringsteen.net/ 
---
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Billy Joe Shaver, Guy Clark, Dennis Morgan and Freddie Hart have been inducted into the Nashville Songwriter Hall of Fame.
Tom T. Hall gave Shaver's induction speech Sunday, and Kris Kristofferson joined Joe Ely to perform some of Shaver's classics, which include "Good Christian Soldier," "Old Five and Dimers Like Me," "Honky Tonk Heroes" and "I'm Just an Old Chunk of Coal."
Shaver was moved to tears by the performance.
"Boy, it's been a rough road, but there've been a lot of happy times, too," he said.
Lyle Lovett and Verlon Thompson paid tribute to Clark by playing selections from his catalog, which includes "L.A. Freeway," "Desperadoes Waiting for a Train" and "Homegrown Tomatoes."
Keith Urban, Jessica Andrews, Marcel and James Slater honored Morgan, whose hits include "Sleepin' Single in a Double Bed," "Smoky Mountain Rain" and "I Was Country When Country Wasn't Cool."
T. Graham Brown performed Hart's "Easy Lovin'," while Freddy Weller, Jim Casey and Dickey Lee did other Hart songs, which include "Bless Your Heart" and "Got the All Overs for You (All Over Me)."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Business schools around the nation are including tips from "The Apprentice" in their MBA programs.
The show and its star, billionaire Donald Trump, have been used in the past to spark debate among students. But now professors are using fundamentals from the NBC hit in the lecture halls.
"Business as a discipline and an academic study area is on the rise," Denise Schoenbachler, chair of Northern Illinois University's marketing department told The New York Post in Monday editions. "And things like this that are innovative and unique get students excited."
For example, students in Schoenbachler's Marketing Apprentice class competed for scholarship money by selling football tickets and raising money for troops in Iraq.
Trump himself has said he's impressed with his reality show's classroom appeal at schools such as Babson College in Massachusetts, Southern Methodist University in Dallas and Ohio State University in Columbus.
But there are critics of teaching the tactics used on "The Apprentice."
"I think the show has a place as an illustration," said Sheila Wellington, clinical professor at New York University's Stern School of Business. "I don't think there's enough content there to build a course around."
---
On the Net:
http://www.nbc.com/nbc/The-Apprentice/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYET148 of Pitt, CJP101-108 of gala, NYET149 of
 Load-Date: November 10, 2004

 

End of Document
