

People in the News
The Associated Press
September 13, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1741 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CINCINNATI (AP) - Dave Chappelle, who walked away from his hit TV series earlier this year, said working in front of smaller audiences is more his speed.
Chappelle, who sold out 10 shows at a northern Kentucky club, said doing standup is "like I'm hanging out with a bunch of people."
He played the Funny Bone Comedy Club at Newport on the Levee last week, a 325-seat club.
"Most people don't know what it's like to stand up there and speak their mind. I have a venue to do that. I get paid to do that. It's not like I'm doing heavy lifting up there. It's not like I'm solving the world's problems," he told The Cincinnati Enquirer in Monday's editions.
The comedian stunned fans and the entertainment industry when he abruptly left during production of the third season of his Comedy Central series, "Chappelle's Show."
He spent two weeks in South Africa before returning home to his 65-acre farm near Yellow Springs, about 75 miles northeast of Cincinnati, and then returned to standup comedy.
"I like that particular kind of attention. People don't know what it's like standing up there onstage, when you have a wall of people smiling at you," Chappelle told the newspaper.
Chappelle has said he was unhappy with the direction of his show. His decision triggered reports that he had mental or drug problems, which he denied.
"It was a little weird," he said. "It felt like some of the stuff was real tabloid, like raw speculation."
"It was like stuff I would normally buy and believe," he said with a laugh. "I just took it as a learning experience. It was like becoming a public person and learning all the responsibility that comes with that."
Chappelle said he wasn't sure what's ahead for him: "Wow. … That's a good question. … Is 'I don't know' an acceptable answer?"
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Ask Angelina Jolie about her children and like any proud mother, she'll brag about them.
"They give me so much joy, and I want to make a better world for them," the Oscar-winning actress said in an interview that aired Tuesday on ABC's "Good Morning America."
Jolie has a 4-year-old son Maddox, who was adopted from Cambodia, and a daughter, Zahara, adopted this summer from Ethiopia.
When she brought Zahara home, "she was 6 months old and not 9 pounds," Jolie said. "Her skin, you could squeeze it, it stuck together. Like - it was terrifying. Just to see the difference what food and the right kind of - just a little bit of care takes.
"She's like - she has gained 6 pounds. … We are calling her chubby. She's, you know, she's just a totally different baby."
Jolie says Maddox loves being a big brother.
"He came to the orphanage. He saw where she was living, and he saw she needed care. Kids understand sadness and poverty and hunger."
Jolie was accompanied by Brad Pitt, her "Mr. & Mrs. Smith" co-star, when she went to Ethiopia in July to pick up Zahara. Rumors of Pitt and Jolie's off-screen relationship had been circulating for months.
She appeared on the ABC morning show the day before a new MTV documentary chronicling her trip to a village in Kenya with U.N. adviser and economist Jeffrey Sachs was scheduled to premiere.
"The Diary of Angelina Jolie & Dr. Jeffrey Sachs in Africa" was set to air Wednesday, coinciding with the opening of the U.N. summit in New York.
"Africa is beautiful, marvelous, smart people, strong people, strong country and has a potential to be so much," Jolie said. "I'd love to see Africa flourish. … It's magnificent and it has so much hope, so much possibility."
The 30-year-old actress, who is a U.N. goodwill ambassador, said her children motivate her to continue her humanitarian work.
"I'm fortunate to do what I get to do to be here, to talk about these issues," she said. "I'm just grateful every day that I have the chance."
---
On the Net:
http://abcnews.go.com/GMA/ 
http://www.think.mtv.com 
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - A judge has frozen the assets of Marion "Suge" Knight in a ruling that favors an imprisoned drug dealer, who wants half of a $107 million court award to his wife.
Monterey County Superior Court Judge Adrienne M. Grover issued the ruling on Aug. 29, the day after Knight was shot in the leg at an MTV awards pre-party in Miami Beach, Fla. He has been released from a hospital.
In March, a Los Angeles judge ordered Knight and his companies to pay $107 million to Lydia Harris, who claimed she helped start Death Row Records and was owed money from the recording label.
The judge made the decision after finding that Knight and his lawyers failed to answer questions and provide information in the case, which never reached trial.
Michael Harris, who is serving a 28-year sentence at San Quentin State Prison, argues that he's entitled to half of his wife's award.
Calls to Knight's lawyer, Dermot Givens, and Lydia Harris' lawyer, Richard Brover, weren't immediately returned Monday.
Harris has claimed he put up $1.5 million from behind bars in 1991 to help start the record label - a contention Knight has repeatedly denied.
In June, Harris filed for divorce after learning his wife was in settlement negotiations with Knight, said his lawyer, Steven M. Goldberg.
"She was trying to settle separately and cut him off the $107 million award," Goldberg alleged.
Harris sought a divorce to block the alleged settlement, Goldberg said. The judge's decision to add Knight as a party to the divorce blocks him from "disposing or transferring his assets away," the lawyer said.
Knight, whose label dominated the rap world in the 1990s, has had a series of legal troubles.
In 2003, he was ordered to pay $5.5 million to managers who accused him of stealing one of their acts.
Knight was released from prison in 2001 after serving time for assault and weapons violations. He recently served an additional 10 months for violating his parole by allegedly striking a Hollywood nightclub valet.
---
BERLIN (AP) - Heidi Klum has given birth to a healthy baby boy, a German tabloid reported Tuesday.
The baby was born late Monday, said the Cologne Express, quoting the 32-year-old German supermodel's father and manager, Guenther Klum.
Guenther Klum wasn't immediately available to confirm the report.
The baby is the first child for Klum and her husband, Grammy-winning singer Seal. Klum has a 16-month-old daughter, Leni, from her previous relationship with Formula One manager Flavio Briatore.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The son of R&B singer Chaka Khan was ordered to stand trial in the shooting death of a teenager at a party last fall.
Damien Patrick Holland, 26, is charged with fatally shooting 17-year-old Christopher Baily of Los Angeles in September 2004 as the two struggled for a gun during a fight. Holland surrendered to police in February.
Superior Court Judge Stephanie Sautner on Monday found sufficient evidence to allow the case to proceed, said district attorney's spokeswoman Sandi Gibbons. Arraignment is scheduled for Sept. 26.
Holland was arrested after the shooting but released when prosecutors said they didn't have enough evidence to charge him. Investigators later found witnesses, allowing prosecutors to charge Holland, police said.
Khan, 52, whose real name is Yvette Marie Stevens, is known for hits such as "Tell Me Something Good" and "I Feel for You."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Shirley Temple Black, the curly haired moppet who sang "The Good Ship Lollipop" in the 1934 film "Bright Eyes," will be honored by the Screen Actors Guild with its Life Achievement Award.
Black, 77, will receive the award during the 12th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards on Jan. 29. The Life Achievement Award is presented annually to an actor who fosters the "finest ideals of the acting profession."
Black has also been U.S. ambassador to Ghana and the former Czechoslovakia.
"She has lived the most remarkable life, as the brilliant performer the world came to know when she was just a child, to the dedicated public servant who has served her country both at home and abroad for 30 years," SAG President Melissa Gilbert said in a statement Monday.
---
On the Net:
http://www.sagawards.org 
---
LONDON (AP) - Luciano Pavarotti has received a medieval British honor in recognition of his fundraising and humanitarian work with the Red Cross.
Pavarotti, 69, was given the Freedom of the City of London, a privilege which in medieval times allowed recipients to trade within the commercial center of the British capital.
The largely symbolic honor formerly bestowed the right to drive sheep across London Bridge and be hanged with a silken cord if handed the death penalty.
Pavarotti received the award Monday from the Corporation of London, the authority that governs the City, London's tiny financial district and historic center.
The Italian opera star was nominated by former Lord Mayor of the City of London Gavyn Arthur and the British Red Cross.
"The Freedom of the City of London is one of London's oldest traditions and I was very pleased to nominate Mr. Pavarotti to receive it," Arthur said.
Pavarotti has supported the International Red Cross and Red Crescent movement for more than a decade. In 1995, he gave a concert at London's Royal Albert Hall in aid of the British Red Cross.
---
On the Net:
http://www.lucianopavarotti.com/intro.html 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen want to make Cole and Dylan Sprouse the male versions of their teenage girl merchandising empire, The Wall Street Journal reported.
"My sister and I started the whole 'tween empire," Ashley Olsen was quoted as saying. "I definitely see the potential for the boys to do that sort of thing."
The 13-year-old Sprouse twins shared the role of Julian in Adam Sandler's 1999 film, "Big Daddy," just as the entrepreneurial 19-year-old twin actresses played Michelle Tanner on television's "Full House," which aired from 1987-1995.
With the brand name of D.C. Sprouse, Cole and Dylan will be the face of a boys division that will include DVD movies, CDs and other merchandise for the Olsens' Dualstar Entertainment Group, the newspaper reported Monday.
"They love to Rollerblade, they like to surf, skate and are into videogames. … They love animals," said the Sprouses' manager, Josh Werkman. "They're boy boys in every sense of the term."
Home video sales and product sponsorships ranging from a fashion line to toothpaste have made the "Mary-Kate and Ashley" brand a billion-dollar enterprise. Each twin is estimated to be worth more than $150 million.
The Olsens, now college students, starred in 2004's "New York Minute."
---
On the Net:
http://www.mary-kateandashley.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYET301 of Chappelle, NYET303 of Jolie, NYET302 of
 Load-Date: September 14, 2005

 

End of Document
