

People in the News
June 14, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1749 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




VICTORIA, Seychelles (AP) - Former Beatle Paul McCartney and his new bride, Heather Mills, were spending their honeymoon Friday in the Seychelles, state-run radio said, and were believed to be staying on one of the Indian Ocean archipelago's private islands.
The couple flew in from Belfast Thursday after their lavish wedding Tuesday at a remote 17th century Irish castle, the Seychelles Broadcasting Corporation reported.
Their exact location has not been disclosed, but there are more than a dozen privately owned islands with luxury homes that are popular with the very rich. The most exclusive and private resort is on Fregate Island, a wild, tropical island that's been described as a "Swiss Family Robinson Win the Lottery" experience.
Fregate is popular among bird watchers and is home to one of the world's rarest beetles, the giant tenebroid beetle. The island is popular with celebrities because it's extremely difficult to reach and surrounded by dangerous rocks, reefs and seas that keep uninvited boats well away.
Tour operators and hotel staffs in the Seychelles also are famous for their discretion; none would confirm or deny whether McCartney and his bride were there.
Former Beatle George Harrison and British actor Peter Sellers once owned an estate on the Seychelles, Mahe, but the government seized the land in the 1970s. In recent years, British Prime Minister Tony Blair has visited the Seychelles twice with his family and stayed on the island of La Digue.
NEW YORK (AP) - Randy Newman has found someone he can identify with - Eminem.
The Oscar-winning composer, inducted Thursday into the Songwriters Hall of Fame, said the rapper is "a great comic artist."
Eminem has been criticized for using slurs against gays and women, and for the violent imagery of his lyrics. But Newman says it's just music.
"He is not serious … he's a comic artist. And since that's essentially what I am, he's a kindred spirit in some kind of way," the 58-year-old said.
"We both want to kill our wives and cut up our mothers," he joked.
Newman has faced criticism for his lyrics too; his song "Short People," which included the chorus "Short people have no reason to live," infuriated some when it was released in the late 1970s.
Michael Jackson, Barry Manilow, Sting, and Nickolas Ashford and Valerie Simpson also were inducted into the hall.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Funds from the state's cigarette tax measure should be made available to low-income and undocumented families who have no health insurance, film director Rob Reiner proposed.
Four years after leading the successful campaign to boost cigarette taxes to support programs for California children, Reiner proposed new measures Thursday, including using Proposition 10 money to make preschool available to all 3- and 4-year-olds in Los Angeles County.
A statewide study released this month by the University of California, Berkeley found at least 100,000 preschool-aged children in Los Angeles County on waiting lists for subsidized child care.
Reiner's staff estimated that providing health insurance to low-income and undocumented families would cost between $95 million and $140 million a year from the money generated by the 50-cent-per-pack tax that voters approved in 1998. Reiner said those costs can be covered by the $165 million allocated yearly for Los Angeles County under Proposition 10. Statewide, about $700 million is generated annually.
"When I envisioned Prop. 10, I had a simple goal - to create a broad, bold program that touches the life of every young child in California," Reiner, 54, told the Children and Families First Proposition 10 Commission at its meeting.
The group, which has the sole authority to spend the money here, approved Reiner's plan in principle and asked its staff to help the director with his plan.
"It's an idea with a great potential to be a model for other counties throughout the state and nationwide," said Amy Dominguez-Arms, vice president for the California child advocacy group Children Now.
TULSA, Okla. (AP) - Taylor Hanson, the 19-year-old lead singer and keyboard player of the pop trio Hanson, has married his girlfriend of two years, 18-year-old Natalie Anne Bryant.
Relatives and friends attended the small, private ceremony in Pine Mountain, Ga., on Saturday, the Tulsa World reported.
"Our wedding was exactly how we envisioned it - romantic and intimate, and surrounded by our family and friends," Hanson said in a statement released Thursday to the newspaper. "Natalie and I are looking forward to our life together."
Rumors began circulating early this week on Internet newsgroups after a photo was circulated featuring the bride and groom standing with two others.
Hanson and his brothers sparked the teen pop craze of recent years when they debuted in 1997. They were just 16, 14 and 11 years old when their first hit, "MMMBop," went to No. 1 in 27 countries.
Taylor Hanson, his older brother, Isaac, and younger brother, Zac, are finishing work on their next CD, due early next year.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Steven Spielberg isn't out to please his fans - even when the fans are his children.
Spielberg, who has seven children, joked that the family has taken exception with some of his recent directing choices.
"I've been offered all the movies that have been hits the last couple of years," he said in an interview last week to promote his new sci-fi thriller "Minority Report," starring Tom Cruise.
"I'm like the first person they bring 'Harry Potter' to. They brought 'Spider-Man' to me. I love 'Harry Potter,' my kids are mad at me for passing. I love 'Spider-Man,' my kids are mad at me for passing there. But I said, 'This is Daddy's time now, this is the time for me to do things that will challenge me.' And those two films would not have been a challenge for me."
Spielberg already has made some of the biggest, highest-grossing adventure and fantasy films, including "Jurassic Park," "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial" and the "Indiana Jones" movies.
While he plans to shoot a fourth "Indiana Jones" movie in 2004, Spielberg said he limits his choices now to projects that grab him personally.
"It's always fun to see those huge grosses come in, but it's not creatively stimulating to me anymore," the 55-year-old said. "Right now, I'm just trying to find things that really make me excited, not necessarily the things that make kids excited."
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Carol Burnett said her daughter's death in January from complications of lung cancer was painful and surrounded by regret over smoking.
"She suffered. She suffered a whole lot," Burnett said of daughter Carrie Hamilton. "And at one point I was praying for her to be released. You know, it's just too much."
In an interview with Barbara Walters airing on ABC's "20/20" Friday, Burnett said Hamilton, 38, apologized for smoking.
"She said, 'Mama, if I can take it back ...,"' Burnett recounted.
The actress also discussed her marriage to musician Brian Miller after two decades of being single, saying it makes her feel "cared for, like I'm No. 1." The pair married last year.
Asked about the fact that Miller is 23 years younger, the 69-year-old Burnett replied: "If it's good enough for the fellas, it's good enough for the girls."
NEW YORK (AP) - Justin Timberlake and Britney Spears said bye, bye, bye to each other after three years together, but it wasn't easy. Less than six months later, Timberlake says he still can't say the words "break up."
"It hurts too bad to say it," the 'N Sync member told People magazine for its June 24 issue, in which he's named among "America's Top 50 Bachelors."
"You get to a point where you're crying yourself to sleep at night," he said. "I feel like I'm in the middle of a soap opera. I honestly know what it's like to have a broken heart now."
Timberlake, 21, says he's not ready to date again because he's focusing on his career; he's recording his first solo album at a studio in Virginia Beach, Va.
"I want to enjoy the simple things," he said. "I want to take three days off when I want to, not when it's on my calendar. I want to go run in the park with my sweats on because I can. That's where I am right now."
Also on the magazine's list of eligible men are Ben Affleck, George Clooney, Olympic skier Jonny Moseley, "Survivor: Africa" winner Ethan Zohn and Los Angeles Lakers guard Derek Fisher.
SINGAPORE (AP) - Fann Wong proudly extends a slender arm to show off her battle scars: a cut, a burn, a bruise.
"They are just minor injuries really," she says.
But the marks are proof positive that the waif-like pop singer is starring in a film with her idol, martial arts legend Jackie Chan.
For the past few months, Wong has been in Prague playing Chan's little sister in "Shanghai Knights," the sequel to the 2000 Hollywood blockbuster "Shanghai Noon," starring Chan and Owen Wilson. It's due in theaters this winter.
Back home in Singapore for two days to perform in a charity concert, the 30-year-old squeezes in an interview while having her hair and makeup done.
The daughter of a tailor and a housewife, Wong has done more than a dozen Chinese language movies for Singapore television and released four albums of Chinese pop songs.
She's a hot commodity here, with big advertising contracts including Emporio Armani and Bella Skin Care, but she's not well-known outside Asia.
Playing Wilson's love interest in "Shanghai Knights" might be her breakthrough role. For now, she's just having fun working on her first big-budget, Hollywood film.
Kissing Wilson was "not so bad, not so bad at all," Wong says. But she denies any off-screen romance with the blond Texan movie star - or anyone else for that matter. "I am single and happy," she says with a laugh.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - "Let's Make a Deal" host Monty Hall broke his hip in a fall while putting on his pants after a medical checkup.
"You can call me stupid, stupid, stupid," Hall said by telephone Thursday from his hospital bed at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. "I was in the hospital taking some ordinary tests and I started to put on my pants.
"I put my leg in and didn't hit it right and down I went."
The 78-year-old was undergoing the checkup at Cedars-Sinai when he fell June 5.
"It was the best place to fall," Hall said. The next day, surgeons replaced the ball joint in his right hip.
Six weeks of rehabilitation will be required when Hall gets home, likely Friday, "then it's tennis and golf," he said.
Hall said he'll show up for a July 9 tribute at the Jewish Home for the Aging, which is honoring the TV personality and his wife, Marilyn.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY118 McCartney and Mills; NY119 Hanson; NY120 Newman;
 Load-Date: June 15, 2002

 

End of Document
