

People in the News
The Associated Press
October 13, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1812 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




OSLO, Norway (AP) - Tom Cruise and Oprah Winfrey will host the Nobel Peace Prize Concert in Oslo, honoring the 2004 laureate, Kenyan environmentalist Wangari Maathai.
"They really wanted to do it, right from the start," concert organizer Odd Arvid Stroemstad told The Associated Press by telephone Wednesday. "They clearly know what the Nobel concert is, and what the Nobel Peace Prize is about."
As masters of ceremony for the Dec. 11 concert, Winfrey and Cruise will share the stage with plenty of high-profile entertainment.
Joss Stone, Andrea Bocelli, Diana Krall, Cyndi Lauper and Patti LaBelle, along with several Norwegian artists, are among those scheduled to perform.
Stroemstad said other celebrities are likely to be added to the roster.
The Nobel concert will be carried live in more than 100 countries, and traditionally draws some of the biggest names in show business. Last year, the event was hosted by Hollywood husband-and-wife Michael Douglas and Catherine Zeta-Jones.
The 64-year-old Maathai, Kenya's deputy environment minister, became the first African woman to win the coveted peace prize, which was announced Oct. 8.
She was honored as founder of the Green Belt Movement, which has sought to empower women, improve the environment and fight corruption in Africa for almost 30 years.
Maathai will receive the $1.3 million prize at a Dec. 10 ceremony in Oslo, followed by a torchlight parade and banquet in her honor, and, the next day, the Nobel concert.
----
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) - The American Jazz Museum Board is considering moving jazz musician Charlie Parker's remains to a new grave.
The board voted Tuesday to explore the idea of moving Parker's remains to the 18th and Vine District in Kansas City. The vote was prompted by a recent trash dumping at Lincoln Cemetery, where Parker is buried.
The board favors moving Parker's remains to a mausoleum in a sculpture of Parker at Charlie Parker Memorial Plaza, near the jazz museum.
"It would be good to move it (the grave) from an area where no one can find it to down here where … people can come and pay their respects," said board member Mike White.
Before any final decision is made, the board will research the legal requirements and costs of such a move.
---
On the Net:
http://www.americanjazzmuseum.com 
http://www.cmgww.com/music/parker/ 
---
DEL MAR, Calif. (AP) - Michael Moore promised to endow a scholarship at California State University, San Marcos, where administrators had canceled his scheduled appearance because of what they called his partisan politics.
The "Fahrenheit 9/11" filmmaker addressed about 10,000 people off-campus Tuesday night at the Del Mar Fairgrounds, promising $5,000 per academic year to a student who "stands up the most to the administration of Cal State San Marcos."
Moore's documentary criticizes the policies of the Bush administration following the Sept. 11 terror attacks.
"I hope to encourage students in the future to do the true American thing and stand up for what they believe in," said Moore, who was accompanied onstage by folk singer Joan Baez. They sang "America the Beautiful" together.
About 200 demonstrators gathered outside the entrance to the fairgrounds. A few were removed from the audience when they tried to disrupt Moore's talk, said San Diego sheriff's Lieutenant Don Fowler.
Moore has been encouraging students across the country to vote. His college tour, which ends on Election Day in Tallahassee, Fla., has drawn sellout crowds, as well as heated criticism at almost every stop.
The student government at California State University, San Marcos, raised more than $40,000 to pay for Moore's visit after University President Karen Haynes revoked his invitation.
Moore accused Haynes of bowing to Republican pressure, and vowed to donate about $20,000 that he earned from the event to the scholarship.
Haynes said she canceled his appearance because the state was prohibited from spending state money on partisan political activity and she believed there wouldn't be enough time to find a speaker whose opinions could balance Moore's views. She welcomed him back after the November presidential election.
---
On the Net:
http://www.csusm.edu/ 
http://www.michaelmoore.com 
---
NEW ORLEANS (AP) - Call it K-Paul rations.
Paul Prudhomme, the New Orleans chef who made blackened redfish famous, prepared Tuesday to take 4,000 pounds of his food and seasonings to feed hungry troops at the U.S. Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
"There's no better audience for a guy who loves to cook," said Prudhomme, who also planned to take along his head chef and other workers from his successful French Quarter restaurant, K-Paul's Louisiana Kitchen.
Born in southwest Louisiana's Cajun country, Prudhomme learned to cook at home and honed his skills early in his career at New Orleans' famed Commander's Palace restaurant.
The menu for the Guantanamo event reflects his Cajun heritage and numerous other influences - red beans and rice, gumbo and more eclectic selections such as teriyaki cream pasta and gingersnap gravy with bronzed beef tenderloin.
Friday night, at the base's Windjammer Club, Prudhomme was slated to prepare a meal for the troops and their families. Saturday, he provides cooking demonstrations and tastings.
The event was being held as part of the Navy Exchange's annual Customer Appreciation Day at Guantanamo.
---
On the Net:
http://www.kpauls.com/ 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The finale of NBC's "Last Comic Standing 3" will be aired - not on the peacock network - but on Comedy Central.
The last episode will be seen at 8 p.m. ET Saturday on the cable network, which has run same-week repeats of the reality show since the beginning of the season.
NBC dropped the finale in favor of a three-episode "Father of the Pride" marathon, which aired Tuesday night, and announced on its "Last Comic Standing 3" Web site that Alonzo Bodden was the winner of the $250,000 prize.
The third installment of the show, dubbed the "Battle of the Best," had pitted comics from the show's first two seasons in an "American Idol"-like competition, allowing the audience to vote for their favorite contestant.
Host and executive producer Jay Mohr had posted a message on his Web site last week saying the show had been canceled.
The four finalists were Bodden and John Heffron, from the second season, and the first season's Dave Mordal and Rich Vos.
---
On the Net:
http://www.nbc.com/nbc/Last-Comic-Standing-3/ 
http://www.comedycentral.com 
---
NEWARK, N.J. (AP) - A computer-animated film that Christopher Reeve had been directing at the time of his death will remain in production, company officials said.
"Yankee Irving," the working title of the movie, follows the story of a boy who overcomes personal obstacles to realize his large dreams.
Reeve had spent many hours working on the project, said Rob Kurtz, who wrote the script for the animated feature. IDT Entertainment had set up two large computer screens in Reeve's home in Pound Ridge, N.Y., so the actor-director, who was paralyzed in a 1995 horse-riding accident, could monitor work that was being done in the company's studios in Newark, as well as in Canada and Israel.
Reeve, 52, died Sunday of complications from an infection caused by a bedsore.
"The bulk of what he was doing as a director is fairly complete," Stephen Brown, chief financial officer of IDT, told The Star-Ledger of Newark for Tuesday's newspapers.
IDT said the film will arrive in theaters in 2006.
Company officials said they plan to keep Reeve's family involved as the remaining animation and post-production work are completed.
"People feel more dedicated now than ever to make it right," Kurtz said.
Another film directed by Reeve is to air on the A&E Network on Oct. 25. "The Brooke Ellison Story," starring Lacey Chabert, tells the true story of a paralyzed young woman who graduated from Harvard University.
---
On the Net:
http://www.aetv.com/ 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Matthew Perry is sweeping back to NBC, but he won't be visiting his friend "Joey."
Instead, Perry will be sitting in the director's chair and standing in front of the lens as a guest star for the Nov. 23 episode of "Scrubs," NBC announced recently. The episode will air during "sweeps." ("Sweeps" is a period four months a year when television ratings are monitored closely to set local advertising rates.)
In the Perry-directed episode, the former "Friends" star will play a man willing to donate one of his kidneys to his sick father - played by Perry's real-life dad, John Bennett Perry - until complications arise.
The appearance will mark the first time, other than Matt LeBlanc on his spinoff, "Joey," that a "Friends" principal has returned to NBC. Perry played sarcastic "Friend" Chandler Bing for 10 seasons on the hit sitcom.
Perry's not the only former NBC star suiting up for "Scrubs." Julianna Margulies, who was featured on the medical drama "ER" for six seasons, will guest star in two "sweeps" episodes on Nov. 9 and Nov. 16. She'll play a malpractice lawyer.
"Scrubs" stars Zach Braff, Sarah Chalke, Donald Faison, Neil Flynn, Ken Jenkins, Judy Reyes and John C. McGinley as the wacky resident staff of Sacred Heart Hospital.
---
On the Net:
http://www.nbc.com/Scrubs 
---
SAVANNAH, Ga. (AP) - Peter O'Toole, Kathleen Turner and critic Roger Ebert will provide the star power at the Savannah Film Festival, which runs Oct. 23-30.
O'Toole will screen the movie version of the stage play "Jeffrey Bernard Is Unwell," a film he co-directed. Turner will be on hand as two of her movies - "Peggy Sue Got Married" and "Romancing the Stone" - are shown. And Ebert will offer a frame-by-frame discussion of the classic "Citizen Kane."
The festival, sponsored by the Savannah College of Art and Design, is in its seventh year and has a growing reputation with movie buffs and industry insiders for screening upcoming independent and Hollywood releases without the hype and crowds of larger festivals.
This year's slate of new films includes Alexander Payne's "Sideways," starring Paul Giamatti and Thomas Haden Church, and "Finding Neverland," a biopic about "Peter Pan" author J.M. Barrie.
---
On the Net:
http://www.scad.edu/filmfest 
---
LONDON (AP) - Take it from the weatherman - Queen Elizabeth II worries about global warming.
Michael Fish, who recently retired as the British Broadcasting Corp.'s chief weather forecaster, said after receiving an award from the monarch that she had expressed concern.
"We talked about climate change," Fish said after the ceremony Tuesday at Buckingham Palace, where the queen made him a Member of the Order of the British Empire, or MBE.
"She is clearly concerned about it - and rightly so," he said.
Fish, Britain's longest serving TV forecaster, will be remembered for his on-air promise in the winter of 1987 that a hurricane that was menacing France wouldn't reach Britain.
The following day, Britain suffered widespread damage in its worst storm in 300 years.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYET108 of Cruise, NYET109 of Winfrey, NYET110 of Parker,
 Load-Date: October 14, 2004

 

End of Document
