

People in the News
January 18, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1461 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




British director Ridley Scott wants his new film about U.S. intervention in Somalia, "Black Hawk Down," to encourage public debate about Afghanistan.
As the film opened in British theaters Friday, Scott said the release date had been moved forward following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks because studio bosses believed it would resonate with both American and British audiences. The movie is now in wide release in the United States.
"The film fundamentally discusses two things about intervention. First, should we intervene, and secondly, when should we do that? But it also raises the question about paying attention to what else is going on in the world," said Scott, who also directed "Hannibal," "Gladiator" and "Thelma & Louise."
"Black Hawk Down," based on Mark Bowden's book of the same name, tells the story of a military mission to Mogadishu on Oct. 3, 1993, to capture two top lieutenants of warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid.
The operation turned into a 17-hour battle that pitted several hundred U.S. soldiers against thousands of Somalis. Two Black Hawk helicopters also were shot down in the longest sustained firefight involving American soldiers since Vietnam.
The firefight left 18 American soldiers dead and more than 70 wounded.
FREEHOLD, N.J. (AP) - Authorities were searching for actor Jason Mewes, who failed to appear for a court hearing last month on an alleged probation violation.
A bench warrant has been issued for Mewes, Monmouth County authorities said Thursday. Mewes, 27, played the character Jay Phat Buds in Kevin Smith's 2001 film, "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back."
Mewes moved to California without informing the county probation department and has failed to show up for required meetings with his probation officer, county officials said.
He was charged with heroin possession in March 1999. He was ordered last year to serve two years' probation. He must also submit to random drug tests and undergo drug counseling, authorities said.
Superior Court Judge Michael D. Farren issued the warrant after Mewes failed to appear for a Dec. 14 hearing. If found guilty of violating his probation, Mewes could face more time on probation or could be jailed for up to four years.
---
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - A federal court has refused to block the sale and distribution of an X-rated, animated "Star Wars" spoof.
Lucasfilm Ltd. sued Media Market Group Ltd., the New York producers of "Starballz," for copyright and trademark infringement last October.
George Lucas alleged that similarities between "Starballz" and "Star Wars" could confuse consumers into thinking that Lucasfilm sponsored or produced the X-rated movie that mocks the "Star Wars" story line.
But a federal judge in San Francisco said last week there was "little likelihood of confusion" between the two films.
"The 'Star Wars' films are so famous that is extremely unlikely that consumers would believe that 'Starballz' is associated with 'Star Wars' or Lucasfilm," said Judge Claudia Wilken.
"We respectfully disagree with the judge's decision on the preliminary injunction," said Lucasfilm spokeswoman Lynne Hale. "This is a pornographic cartoon utilizing 'Star Wars' intellectual property. We feel strongly that the law does not allow for parody to be a defense to a pornographic use of someone else's intellectual property."
In December, the court had granted a temporary restraining order preventing further manufacture, sale, release or distribution of "Starballz" by Media Market Group Ltd.
Hale said Lucasfilm had not yet decided whether it would appeal.
The makers of "Starballz" did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - A concert hall better known for its classical performances became a rap stage as the acoustic hip-hop band the Roots took over Avery Fisher Hall.
"Throw your fists in the air!" the group shouted as about 2,700 eager fans obliged, rushing toward the stage for a better glimpse. The Grammy-winning band, best known for hits such as "You Got Me," sold out the venue for Thursday night's event.
The Roots also paid tribute to hip-hop's past, bringing out old-school rapper Kool G. Rap for a song and the dance group the Rock Steady Crew.
Publicists for the band said the Roots were the first hip-hop group to perform at the concert hall in Lincoln Center, but representatives for the performing arts complex said they could not confirm that.
Avery Fisher Hall is the home of the New York Philharmonic.
The Roots, based in Philadelphia, are working on a new album to be released this summer.
NEW YORK (AP) - Stephen King, John Grisham and Pat Conroy will be among those appearing next month at a benefit for Frank Muller, an award-winning audio book reader severely injured in a motorcycle crash last November.
The benefit will be held Feb. 2 at Town Hall in Manhattan.
Muller's audio book credits include everything from works by King and John le Carre to Shakespeare and Herman Melville. Conroy has called him a "prince of language" and a Chicago Tribune critic labeled him the "Laurence Olivier of the (audio book) medium."
A classically trained actor, Muller has appeared on "Law and Order," "All My Children" and other television programs. He sustained multiple fractures, lacerations and abrasions from his accident, which happened near Los Angeles, and suffered severe head trauma.
KNOXVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Martin Luther King III said the nation should observe the holiday honoring his father, but it's too soon to celebrate it.
Thirty-three years after his father's assassination in Memphis, Martin Luther King Jr.'s goal of eliminating racism, poverty and violence remains a dream, his son said.
"In our minds, a celebration is when we kind of kick back, eat barbecue, chill and not really do anything. That is what a holiday is," he told a King holiday forum sponsored by the Tennessee Valley Authority Wednesday.
"But we have not reached the point in my personal judgment of having a holiday or a celebration."
The holiday will be observed on Monday. King, a Nobel Peace Prize winner, would have been 73 this past Tuesday.
His son said his father's holiday should be observed by "doing something that will uplift the dream and make the dream become a reality."
Among his suggestions: visiting a senior citizen, helping build a house for a poor family, joining a campaign to clean up a neighborhood or doing other good works.
"This is a day on, not a day off," he said.
COPPELL, Texas (AP) - Trying desperately to perfect the curly tip on a soft-serve cone, Mark Cuban licked the remains of another failed effort from his fingertips and handed the messy treat to an anxious 3-year-old boy.
One lick later, the kid dropped it.
That was about the only thing that went wrong Wednesday when the billionaire owner of the Dallas Mavericks worked two hours behind a Dairy Queen counter, making good on a promise to manage the fast-food restaurant.
The company's offer came in response to Cuban's assertion that he wouldn't hire Ed Rush, the NBA's head of officiating, "to manage a Dairy Queen."
The league fined Cuban $500,000 for the comment, a record punishment for an individual. For about $650,000, Cuban could have bought a start-up DQ franchise.
Wearing a navy denim shirt and a manager's name tag, and carrying a pencil in his right shirt pocket, Cuban spent more time signing autographs than taking orders.
But he did take his temporary job seriously. He arrived at 6 a.m., after flying home from a Mavericks game in Atlanta, and began training by 6:30 a.m.
Cuban's presence created a carnival atmosphere at the suburban Dairy Queen and drew more than 1,000 people, many waiting close to an hour to place their order.
"It was worth the wait," said Tony Newpower. "It's not often you see a billionaire serving burgers."
SALT LAKE CITY (AP) - Actress Parker Posey and Tom Beller, a writer, had only one gripe with the new security system in the Salt Lake International Airport.
Riffling through a bag of luggage, they groaned they hadn't known that film was supposed to be removed from any bag going through computer tomography X-ray machines, which give a detailed analysis of every part of a bag.
"We just lost our whole roll of Big Sur," Posey said with agitation. "They were beautiful pictures. We had two disposable cameras and another roll."
Beller nodded his head in agreement, then said hurriedly, "But of course we're still glad they're screening."
They were heading home to New York on Wednesday after leaving the Sundance Film Festival. The new security system was being tested to work out the bugs before Friday's congressionally imposed, nationwide deadline for screening all checked baggage for explosives.
Salt Lake airport personnel have been working hard to have security measures running smoothly before the 2002 Winter Olympics begin in three weeks.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY114, Mewes; CODER202, Lucas; NY115, Scott; NY107,
 Load-Date: January 19, 2002

 

End of Document
