

People in the News
June 19, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1725 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - Two men tried to use video footage showing Russell Crowe in a drunken brawl outside a nightclub to blackmail the Oscar-winning actor, prosecutors told a court Wednesday.
Philip Antony Cropper, 36, and Malcolm Brian Mercer, 37, are charged with trying to extort $112,000 from Crowe in exchange for destroying the security video taken in 1999. They face a maximum sentence of 10 years if convicted.
Prosecutor Colin McPherson told the district court trial that Crowe appeared to start a drunken fight in the early hours of Nov. 18, 1999, outside the Saloon Bar nightclub in Coffs Harbor, a resort town north of Sydney where the actor owns a cattle ranch.
Crowe was seen on video to "manhandle one particular male person … and he remonstrated fairly heavily with a female person," McPherson said.
A few minutes later, the 38-year-old actor left in a stretch limousine.
Cropper and Mercer tried to contact him to sell him the video, jurors were told. Prosecutors didn't say how the men got the tape; the security camera belonged to the nightclub.
Police were tipped off and began monitoring their phone calls, uncovering their attempts "to make a quick quid," McPherson said.
Crowe, believed to be shooting a film in Mexico, was not present for Wednesday's proceedings in Coffs Harbor, 280 miles north of Sydney.
Defense lawyers have said they plan to subpoena the star of films including "Gladiator" and "A Beautiful Mind" to give evidence at the trial.
The trial is expected to last between five and eight days.
PARIS (AP) - Bono and French President Jacques Chirac will meet Thursday to talk about Africa, the developing world and an upcoming summit of industrialized nations.
The U2 singer and activist, who recently accompanied U.S. Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill on a 12-day tour of Africa to press for debt relief and more aid, is expected to meet the French leader at the presidential Elysee Palace, Chirac's office said.
A new development plan for Africa will be a chief focus of the June 26-27 Group of Eight meeting in Canada. That program offers a package of trade and aid help for Africa, coupled with help in ending civil wars and improving governance across the continent.
ALEXANDRIA TOWNSHIP, N.J. (AP) - The Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals has sent seven saddlebred horses rescued from abusive situations to receive care at former NBA star Jayson Williams' sprawling estate.
The horses were taken from places in Hunterdon County and Dutchess County, N.Y., and delivered to Williams' "Who Knew" estate last week.
The home is where prosecutors charge Williams recklessly handled a shotgun in February, killing his limousine driver, Costas Christofi. Williams is free on bail on charges including aggravated manslaughter, and is awaiting trial.
Tee Carlson, president of the Hunterdon County SPCA, said the animals were among a group of horses that had been abused by previous owners.
Carlson said the SPCA wanted to keep the horses together after the ordeal they had been through, and Williams has the space and equipment to care for a large group of animals.
Walter Wilson, attorney for the SPCA, told The Star-Ledger of Newark for Wednesday's editions that Williams has "always been extremely generous" to the organization, providing a home to many animals.
"Jayson Williams has always indicated, based upon his financial status as well as his facilities, that he would be happy to take any animals that the SPCA desired him to," Wilson said. "We know they get a good home. He's got the stables to care for them and is doing so."
Wilson said Williams' legal problems were not an issue in deciding whether to bring the horses to his property.
Williams' spokeswoman, Judy Smith, would not comment on the adoption of the horses, other than to confirm it had taken place.
"They were in need of a home," she said. "That's it. He has other animals and other horses."
The 6-foot-10 Williams was once among the NBA's best rebounders, but leg injuries ended his career and he retired from the New Jersey Nets in 2000. Since the shooting, he has been suspended from his job as an NBA analyst for NBC.
NEW YORK (AP) - Tony-award winning director George C. Wolfe looked back for inspiration for his latest project, "Harlem Song."
The musical, scheduled to debut at the Apollo Theatre next month, chronicles the famous black enclave during the 20th century through music and dance, touching on jazz, soul and hip-hop.
"The idea comes from history," Wolfe said Tuesday as he presented segments of the musical for a small group at the Joseph Papp Public Theater. "It sends out signals to you."
The show starts previews on July 6, and opens officially sometime in August. It will mark the first time the Apollo has hosted a long-term production.
"It's a show created for Harlem, but hopefully it will bring everyone else," said Wolfe, who directed the Pulitzer Prize-winning play "Topdog/Underdog." He won Tonys in 1993 for "Angels in America: Millennium Approaches" and 1996 for "Bring in 'da Noise, Bring in 'da Funk."
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Bobby Brown was being treated for an infection Wednesday at a Virginia hospital, a family spokeswoman said.
The 33-year-old former New Edition singer was traveling with wife Whitney Houston in their tour bus Tuesday when they stopped at Mary Washington Hospital in Fredericksburg, said Nancy Seltzer, a Los Angeles publicist.
Brown and Houston were traveling from Atlanta, where Houston was recording an album, to their home in New Jersey.
Seltzer said Brown had a fever, but said she didn't ask about the nature of the infection.
"He voluntarily put himself there for an infection that had gotten out of hand," she said.
Brown was being treated intravenously with an antibiotic. He was expected to be released by Thursday.
OAKLAND, Calif. (AP) - The lawsuit between a former Third Eye Blind guitarist and the rest of the rock group was resolved when the band members offered Kevin Cadogan a settlement, Cadogan's attorney said.
Cadogan had filed a fraud and breach of contract suit against the band, claiming members owed him about $191,000 in royalties and other income.
Terms of the settlement were not released Tuesday. It came just one day into a jury trial that was expected to last eight days.
Cadogan joined the San Francisco-based group in the early 1990s, before they signed with Elektra Records in June 1996. Their hit single, "Semi-Charmed Life," topped the charts a year later.
Cadogan, who co-wrote many of the band's songs, was ousted in January 2000.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Shaggy's a dad.
Matthew Lillard, who plays the ditzy, latter-day beatnik Shaggy in the live-action adaptation of "Scooby-Doo," became a father last Thursday. Lillard's wife, Heather, gave birth to a baby girl on the day before "Scooby-Doo" opened.
The couple, who were married in 2000, named their daughter Addison Grace Lillard. The baby weighed 6 pounds, 10 ounces.
The 32-year-old Lillard also has appeared in "13 Ghosts," "Scream" and "Serial Mom."
"Scooby-Doo" opened as the runaway No. 1 film over the weekend, scaring up a huge debut of $54.2 million. The film co-stars Freddie Prinze Jr., Sarah Michelle Gellar, Linda Cardellini and a computer-generated version of the goofy title character, a talking Great Dane.
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) - Tim Hagan is calling in the Federation to help in his campaign to transport Gov. Bob Taft out of office.
Hagan, the Democratic nominee for governor in the Nov. 5 election, is holding a fund-raiser in Cleveland on Aug. 24 featuring the cast of "Star Trek: Voyager," headed by his wife, Kate Mulgrew. They will be joined by William Shatner, who created the role of Capt. James T. Kirk on the '60s television classic.
"We're encouraging people who are not involved in day-to-day politics to participate," Hagan said last week.
Taft, a Republican seeking a second four-year term, holds a huge fund-raising advantage. A visit by President Bush last month was worth about $2 million, which would take his total to more than $8 million, Hagan said. He's raised about $500,000 but will have enough to be competitive in the crucial final weeks of the campaign.
Hagan's campaign also will benefit from a July 25 fund-raiser in New York with Rosie O'Donnell as host.
Hagan said about 200 people have signed up so far for reservations to "Kate Mulgrew's Cleveland Entertainment Extravaganza" at the Allen Theater in Playhouse Square.
Tickets are $150 for general admission, $300 for dinner and $400 for both. For an additional $200, there's a private reception with the "Star Trek: Voyager" cast.
Also planned is a memorabilia auction featuring one of the costumes worn by Mulgrew, who played Capt. Kathryn Janeway on the show.
On the Net:
Kate Mulgrew Web site: http://www.totallykate.com 
CINCINNATI (AP) - Thousands of miniature torches glowed as retired boxing champion Muhammad Ali lit a symbolic flame representing freedom at the groundbreaking of an Underground Railroad museum.
Ali and thousands of spectators joined first lady Laura Bush on Cincinnati's riverfront Monday night to celebrate the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center with music and fireworks.
"The heroic stories of the Underground Railroad are powerful reminders of the mission that all Americans share in promoting the values of freedom," Bush said.
The museum will be the largest dedicated to the loose network of safe houses and escape routes that slaves followed to freedom in the 19th century.
The first lady praised the courage of the slaves who fled to freedom and the compassion and bravery of those who helped them along the way. She urged Americans to continue that courage and compassion.
"May we never forget the lessons of our past, and may we always remember that nothing can stop the momentum of freedom," she said.
NEW YORK (AP) - Los Angeles Lakers forward Rick Fox, New York Mets catcher Mike Piazza and Olympic speedskating gold medalist Apolo Anton Ohno were among those chosen by Sports Illustrated Women as "The Sexiest Men in Sports."
The list of more than 75 athletes, in no particular order, was released in the magazine's third annual swimsuit issue.
In an online survey that asked women which athlete they'd most like to see in the issue, Ohno finished first with 15,347 votes. Figure skater Alexei Yagudin was second with 2,308 votes, followed by New York Yankees shortstop Derek Jeter, who received 756.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY111 Crowe; NY112 Bono; FLLAU201 Brown; NY151 Fox; CS104
 Load-Date: June 20, 2002

 

End of Document
