

People in the News
October 6, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1272 words
Dateline: YARDLEY, Pa.
Body




The memorial service for a fan who died in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks included a special videotaped tribute from Bruce Springsteen.
James P. "Jim" Berger, 44, a senior vice president of the insurance company AON Consulting Group, died in the attack on the World Trade Center. His memorial service was attended by 1,000 people.
Co-workers said Berger shepherded many of AON's employees to safety from their 101st-floor office in the trade center's south tower after the north tower was struck by a jetliner.
"I am so proud my husband was able to put other people in front of himself in the face of what must have been unbelievable fear," Berger's widow Suzanne said before the lights dimmed and Springsteen appeared on a screen set up for Friday's service.
Springsteen dedicated his performance to Berger's three sons. "I understand this was one of your Pop's favorite songs," he said.
Then, with a harmonica in his mouth and a guitar in his hands, Springsteen began to play "Thunder Road."
LOS ANGELES (AP) - A company co-owned by Mick Fleetwood, a founder of the rock band Fleetwood Mac, has been sued by a man claiming the firm sold him a bogus Elvis Presley guitar.
Comedian Gordie Brown of Reno, Nev., said in the lawsuit that he bought the guitar for nearly $63,000 through an Internet site operated by Fleetwood Owen Ltd., owned by Fleetwood and auctioneer Ted Owen.
The Chet Atkins Gretsch guitar was said to be the one used by Presley during a show on the opening night of the Las Vegas International Hotel in 1969, according to the lawsuit.
Brown claimed Presley's estate owns the actual guitar and houses it at Graceland, Presley's mansion in Memphis, Tenn.
Neither Fleetwood Owen Ltd., based in the United Kingdom, nor Elvis Presley Enterprises Inc. returned calls seeking comment.
The claim, filed Sept. 25 in Santa Monica Superior Court, seeks a refund for the purchase, plus unspecified expenses.
RENO, Nev. (AP) - On the eve of the 20th anniversary of the assassination of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat, his widow said terrorism must not be allowed to thwart Mideast peace efforts.
Compromise and diplomacy, not bullets and tanks, hold the key to long-term peace, Jehan Sadat told about 750 people at a University of Nevada, Reno banquet Friday night.
"I don't know what will change the hearts and minds of terrorists," she said. "But a small minority should not be allowed to stop the (quest) for peace."
Before beginning the speech, Jehan Sadat, a professor at the University of Maryland, asked for a moment of silence for the victims of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
"My heart is breaking for I, too, have been the victim of such evil," she said. One of two militant groups allied in the plot to kill Anwar Sadat on Oct. 6, 1981, is closely linked to Osama bin Laden, the main suspect in last month's terror attacks.
Sadat was condemned by radicals for standing in the way of establishing an Islamic state and for being the first Arab leader to sign a peace treaty with Israel in 1979.
"Evil and hatred belong to no religion," Jehan Sadat said. "Terrorism will not triumph over freedom and liberty."
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Billionaire philanthropist Eli Broad is showing 100 works by painter Jasper Johns, sculptor Jeff Koons and other contemporary artists in a new exhibition that will travel to other major cities.
The works from Broad's personal collection include a life-size gold and white ceramic figure by Koons of singer Michael Jackson and his pet chimp Bubbles that was completed in 1988.
Also on display through Jan. 6 at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art will be Johns' "Flag."
"Collecting is not just acquisition," said Broad, who semiretired from his SunAmerica Inc. last year. "It's about educating yourself, learning, investing time in artists' studios, attending exhibitions. It's pleasurable work."
"Jasper Johns to Jeff Koons: Four Decades of Art from the Broad Collections," will travel to the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., in March then to the Boston Museum of Fine Arts in July.
BUFFALO, N.Y. (AP) - A 9-year-old lawsuit brought by two writers against the Hollywood producers of "Backdraft" was settled just before the start of jury selection.
Writers Terrence Burns and John Zoll claimed entertainment giants MCA, Universal City Studios and Imagine Films Entertainment, the production company run by director Ron Howard, stole their ideas and used them in the popular 1991 film about heroic firefighters.
Terms of the settlement were not disclosed. Court officials said the settlement was negotiated in a marathon session that ended late Tuesday night.
Zoll, a Buffalo firefighter, and Burns, a former firefighter who is now an anesthesiologist, said they wrote two scripts in the 1980s to illustrate the bravery of firefighters.
In court papers, the writers alleged their scripts were sent to Howard's production company, but were rejected. They said they were later astonished by roughly 100 similarities among their scripts and the plot of "Backdraft," which was directed by Howard and starred Kurt Russell and Robert De Niro.
In the years the lawsuit was being fought, the defendants repeatedly denied allegations they had pirated the Buffalo writers' ideas. The settlement contains no admission of wrongdoing.
MINNEAPOLIS (AP) - Attention, class: Steve Martin and Garrison Keillor are giving lessons in classic comedy in a new radio show premiering Saturday on Minnesota Public Radio.
Martin is the host and Keillor the executive producer of "Comedy College." The half-hour show will air at 10 p.m. Central Time Saturdays on KNOW-FM and other MPR stations, and can be heard on the Internet at http://www.comedycollege.net. 
The show will feature classic sketches from such comedians as Bob Newhart, Lenny Bruce and Bill Cosby. Martin will comment on what makes the routines funny.
Martin will be the host for the majority of the shows in the 39-week first season, said the show's producer, Tiffany Hanssen. The program is talking to other comics about later shows and hopes to be distributed to public radio stations nationally, she said.
Keillor is the host of the MPR-produced "A Prairie Home Companion" radio variety show, which also begins a new season on Saturday.
Last winter, Keillor taught a course in Composition of Comedy at the University of Minnesota, his alma mater.
NEW YORK (AP) - Ben Stiller kept to a pretty strict diet to play a male model in his new film "Zoolander."
He didn't diet to help get into character, Stiller told The Associated Press. He did it to get into some of the film's formfitting outfits.
"I tried to eat right during the movie," he said. "It's that whole vanity thing as an actor. I didn't care if my abs were right for a model, I just wanted to fit in the costumes and look good."
He added: "But I usually eat whatever I like. It's less rigid when I'm not working, I'm eating more cheeseburgers."
The real-life beauties who appear in the film, including Claudia Schiffer, Heidi Klum and Tyson Beckford, were all willing to poke fun at their livelihood, said Stiller, who also directed and co-wrote the film.
"Models see the ridiculousness of it. They live it."
PHOENIX (AP) - Shock rocker Alice Cooper, whose hits include "Welcome to My Nightmare and "Feed My Frankenstein," is welcoming the public to his nightmare.
Cooper has opened a haunted house next to his downtown Phoenix restaurant, Alice Cooper'stown. It will be open until Nov. 3. All proceeds from the Oct. 4 grand opening will go to relief efforts for victims of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
The haunted house uses some of the visual special effects that Cooper has used in his rock-as-theater concerts.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY113 of Springsteen, NY114 of Broad, NVREN104 of Sadat,
 Load-Date: October 7, 2001

 

End of Document
