

People in the News
The Associated Press
December 9, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1416 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LONDON (AP) - John Hurt was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire - and chatted with Queen Elizabeth II about the life of an actor.
"The queen insinuated that it was an interesting profession and that I'd been at it for some time. She said how fascinating it was," he told reporters after Thursday's ceremony at Buckingham Palace.
Hurt, 64, said his CBE, given for services to drama, was "like a very high compliment. I'm very grateful and delighted."
Hurt, who trained at the Royal Academy for Dramatic Arts, has appeared in more than 60 films including "The Elephant Man," "Midnight Express" and "A Man for All Seasons."
He said his favorite role was as Quentin Crisp in the 1975 TV drama, "The Naked Civil Servant."
"That did it for me. It was a fantastic script," he said.
---
BRADENTON, Fla. (AP) - Retired Gen. Tommy Franks has signed on to be the spokesman for a company that uses global positioning system technology in teens' cell phones to let parents know how fast they're driving.
Franks will be the official face of Teen Arrive Alive. The organization aims to get teens to carry a cell phone containing a GPS chip that sends out regular signals letting parents know where they are and how fast they're going.
If a certain predetermined speed limit is passed, an alarm will go off in the cell phone and parents will be notified.
A bumper sticker on the teen's car enables drivers to report reckless behavior. Both the teen and his or her parents are then notified by phone or e-mail that a negative driving report has come in.
"As a parent, I know it is not only my right, but also my responsibility to keep an eye on and protect my children," Franks said. "If I know where my kids are, where they're going, how they're driving and how fast they're traveling, I can counsel them before an accident occurs. I can help protect them."
As commander of U.S. Central Command based at nearby MacDill Air Force, Franks directed the invasion of Iraq.
---
On the Net:
http://teenarrivealive.com/ 
---
LONDON (AP) - The Franz Ferdinand rock band, Pretenders lead singer Chrissie Hynde, Simply Red frontman Mick Hucknall and Yusuf Islam (aka Cat Stevens) performed at a benefit concert for Sudan's refugees at London's Royal Albert Hall.
They and other artists performed the music of Cole Porter in their own varied styles, accompanied by the Royal Philharmonic Concert Orchestra Wednesday night.
The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees staged the concert to raise money to ease the suffering in Darfur, Sudan, where 1.8 million people have been displaced.
Franz Ferdinand, one of Britain's biggest new bands, performed by video link from Mexico City. The band has also donated money to the cause.
Funds were raised through ticket sales for the concert and online donations. The event also will be released on CD and DVD.
---
On the Net:
http://www.unhcr.ch/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/home 
---
FRANKLIN, Tenn. (AP) - Backstreet Boys member Brian Littrell has signed a deal with Christian label Provident Music Group's Reunion Records.
"This has been a dream of mine ever since I was a little boy, singing in church in Kentucky," Littrell said Wednesday.
Littrell, 29, said that singing with the Backstreet Boys was a "12-year steppingstone" to making his decision, and he hoped fans will realize through his music "that standing up for what you believe in is what's important."
He will release the single "In Christ Alone" on an upcoming WOW Christian Music compilation album next year. That will be followed with the debut of his solo album on the Franklin-based label.
Littrell also plans to tour with the Backstreet Boys, who are scheduled to end a three-year hiatus with a new project in March.
Their manager, Johnny Wright, said the group wasn't breaking up - just taking the opportunity to do solo projects.
Nick Carter is the only member to release a solo album, 2002's "Now or Never."
A.J. McLean also has expressed an interest in singing Christian music, Wright said. The other members, Kevin Richardson and Howie Dorough, are leaning more toward film and TV.
---
On the Net:
http://www.backstreetboys.com/ 
---
LONDON (AP) - Sarah Ferguson, the Duchess of York, and U2 frontman Bono will be guest editors of the British Broadcasting Corp.'s flagship radio news program later this month.
They will be among five guest editors of "Today" over the Christmas period, the BBC said Wednesday. The celebrity guests will choose some of the stories to be tackled by the daily current affairs program.
Ferguson has decided to focus on motor neuron disease, while Bono said he would highlight the global fight against poverty.
The programs will air between Dec. 27-31.
"I have to confess, I'm not a natural editor," Bono said. "I want to start the countdown to next year, when Britain can change the world for the poorest people on the planet."
Britain has said tackling world poverty will be one of its key goals when it holds the rotating presidencies of the European Union and the G8 group of wealthy countries next year.
---
TOKYO (AP) - It won't be immediately clear whether "Godzilla: Final Wars," which opened in Japan last week, has broken any box office records. But the giant radioactive reptile's 28th film already has set the bar higher in one way - its cost.
Toho Co. executive producer Shogo Tomiyama said the studio shelled out $19.3 million, small by Hollywood standards, but twice that of any of Toho's past Godzilla movies.
"We wanted to make the best Godzilla movie ever," Tomiyama explained Wednesday at a news conference.
Marking Godzilla's 50th anniversary, "Final Wars" has the movie monster traveling around the world to fight old foes, as well as the new mysterious Monster X.
Tomiyama said Toho's filming on locations over 100 days required a bigger staff than usual. Production was so complicated that Toho divided its special-effects team into two units to handle the work, he said.
The fire-breathing monster, spawned by nuclear weapons testing, first debuted in Japanese theaters in November 1954, while the United States was conducting nuclear tests in the South Pacific. It is played by an actor in a rubber suit who crushes miniature sets.
Whether the popularity of "Final Wars" will top past Godzilla films is open to debate. For now, that honor rests with the original 1954 "Godzilla" and 1962's sequel, "King Kong vs. Godzilla," according to Toho officials.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Steve Guttenberg loves Christmas, so playing Santa's son and heir in a new TV movie was the ideal role for an actor who lives like a big kid.
"Children have a terrific way of telling you like it is," he said. "I'm attracted to that. That makes me feel good."
Guttenberg plays Nick in the romantic comedy "Single Santa Seeks Mrs. Claus," airing Saturday on the Hallmark Channel.
"You have a single mom who is going along with her life and trying to get things done with work and her kid and trying to have a social life and this fellow comes into her surroundings and changes everything," the 46-year-old actor said. "It's about carrying on a kindness and goodness all year-round."
Guttenberg's interest in children's welfare inspired him to create Guttenhouse, an apartment complex that houses young people making the transition from foster child status to adult responsibilities.
He also spearheaded Sight for Students, a program that provides eyeglasses for 50,000 underprivileged and visually challenged children.
"There's an old saying, 'Don't let a crisis wake you up,"' he said. "Many times in life, that's what happens. You're asleep until something happens that makes you notice what's around you."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - And you thought the Grateful Dead toured a lot.
The New York Philharmonic will set the Guinness World Record for "the most concerts performed by a symphony orchestra" with concert No. 14,000 on Dec. 18.
Sir Colin Davis will conduct the orchestra in works by Mozart, Britten and Haydn. The concert also will feature the Philharmonic debut of mezzo-soprano Lorraine Hunt Lieberson.
Board chairman Paul B. Guenther said the orchestra was thrilled to be recognized for its 14,000th concert.
"In the course of our 163 years, we have commissioned 128 new works, and performed 485 world premieres and 443 U.S. premieres, including music that has become a staple of the classical repertoire," he said in a statement Wednesday.
The New York Philharmonic is the oldest symphony orchestra in the United States and one of the oldest in the world. It plays about 180 concerts a year.
---
On the Net:
http://newyorkphilharmonic.org/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos LON804 of Hurt, NYET188 of Franks, LON818 of Hucknall,
 Load-Date: December 10, 2004

 

End of Document
