

People in the News
October 29, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1394 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




PRETORIA, South Africa (AP) - Twelve years after being awarded the Soviet Union's Lenin International Peace Prize, former South African President Nelson Mandela has finally picked up the prize.
The Soviet Union that gave him the award in the twilight of its rule no longer exists and the prison cell where Mandela spent 27 years has long stood empty, but the message behind the prize still resonates.
"Much has changed in the world since the award was given to us, but the world's need for the human solidarity which that generous gesture demonstrated remains as much as ever," Mandela said Monday at the home of the Russian ambassador.
Mandela, 84, who led South Africa into democracy and out of apartheid, was awarded the prize in 1990, the same year he was released from prison.
He visited Russia in 1999 as South Africa's first democratically elected president - after the fall of the Soviet Union - but returned without the prize.
About two years ago, he asked his aides to follow up on the award and on Monday, Russian Ambassador Andrei Kushakov handed him the gold medallion.
Mandela noted that it was the Soviet Union and other socialist countries whose support of the anti-apartheid struggle stood out in the international efforts to topple the racist regime.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Former Disney executive Michael Ovitz is accused of allowing his dogs to get loose and attack a woman as she walked her own dogs near his Beverly Hills home last year, according to a lawsuit that seeks unspecified damages.
The action claims Genevieve Saffron suffered serious injuries, including bite wounds, when she and her dogs were attacked by two dogs believed to be a St. Bernard and a Labrador.
The lawsuit was filed Oct. 11 in Los Angeles Superior Court, said attorney Steven Glickman, who represents Saffron. It accuses Ovitz of negligence, stating no one was with the dogs when they attacked Saffron and her pug and Chihuahua.
Telephone calls made after business hours Monday to Ovitz's representatives weren't immediately returned.
According to the lawsuit, Saffron missed work and had to seek medical treatment because of her injuries.
A co-founder of Creative Artists Agency, Ovitz was once considered among the most powerful agents in Hollywood. He is also a former president of The Walt Disney Co.
MADRID, Spain (AP) - Juan Antonio Samaranch says that when he stepped down last year as president of the much-criticized International Olympic Committee, he'd overhauled it from top to bottom.
"When I left after some 21 years, there was almost nothing left to do," the 82-year-old Samaranch said Monday as he presented his book, "Olympic Memoirs."
"Thanks to the crisis, which was a little exaggerated, that we experienced in 1999 in Salt Lake City, we were able to carry out the most radical changes in the entire history of the IOC."
Samaranch's reputation was badly scarred by the Salt Lake City scandal, which led to an unprecedented purge of 10 IOC members who had benefited from more than $1 million in cash, gifts, scholarships and other favors doled out while the Utah capital bid for the 2002 Winter Games.
Samaranch, IOC president for 21 years and 10 Olympic Games, said two of his biggest achievements were "the unity achieved within the Olympic community" and the incorporation of women into the movement.
"Before they used to say the IOC was a group of aristocrats, barons and marquises. Today within the IOC we have another type of aristocracy which is that of the athletes," explaining that 30 athletes were now members of the committee.
---
MERRILLVILLE, Ind. (AP) - This time, Bill Cosby wasn't just after laughs.
The 65-year-old comedian joined the Rev. Jesse Jackson and former Gary Mayor Richard Hatcher onstage Sunday to raise money for the National Civil Rights Hall of Fame.
Hatcher has been trying to raise money to build the hall in Gary for two decades.
"You go and you buy a lottery ticket. You've got just as much chance of getting struck by lightning as you do of winning the lottery," Cosby told several hundred people at a private reception before his show Sunday at the Star Plaza Theatre.
"Take that money and build something you can see … something for the children," said Cosby, who donated the money from the show to the museum.
"Gary is a huge, pivotal part of the civil rights struggle in America. Especially when Hatcher became the mayor," said Jackson, leader of the Rainbow-PUSH Coalition.
Jackson recalled how the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. taped telephone messages supporting Hatcher's 1967 campaign.
"There were no black mayors in Houston and Dallas, and places like that, until after Hatcher became mayor in Gary," Jackson said.
Gary's City Council and Mayor Scott King have been locked in a dispute over funding for the hall, which both sides support.
The council voted in June to approve $5 million in casino revenues for the museum, but King argued the council had no authority to initiate spending measures, and filed a lawsuit.
BRANSON, Mo. (AP) - The Polish Prince is pulling the plug on his Blue Velvet Theatre.
Bobby Vinton, who recorded pop ballads such as "Roses Are Red (My Love)," "Blue Velvet" and "Mr. Lonely," has sold his theater in the heart of Branson's entertainment strip to producer David King, whose "Spirit of the Dance" has performed with Vinton for the past three years.
Terms of the sale weren't disclosed, but Vinton said last week that the offer "was simply too good to pass up."
Vinton, 67, will perform through Dec. 14 at his theater, fulfilling his season schedule in the southwest Missouri resort town. Then he will shift to venues in Las Vegas and Atlantic City, N.J., although he may perform limited engagements in Branson.
The announcement comes as Vinton marks his 10th anniversary in the 1,600-seat theater - with murals on the ceiling and sparkling blue tiles throughout the lobby.
"This was a very difficult decision for me to do because my family was here along with so many friends and great audiences," he said.
He's been performing five days a week, sometimes doing two shows a day - April through December - in Branson.
Vinton said he's looking forward to reducing his work schedule, but added that fans will still be able to see him.
"I do it for the love of it," he said. "I'm going to keep doing it for as long as I can - and as long as someone will come listen to me."
On the Net:
Bobby Vinton Web site: http://www.bobbyvinton.com/ 
PALM SPRINGS, Calif. (AP) - The Sonny Bono Concourse has been added to the Palm Springs International Airport.
Bono, of the '60s singing duo Sonny & Cher, was the area's congressman until his death in a 1998 skiing accident.
Earlier this year, officials designated a 40-mile stretch of Interstate 10 as the Sonny Bono Memorial Freeway. The section runs from just west of the Highway 111 cutoff near Palm Springs to Dillon Road in the Coachella area.
Downtown, there's a life-size statue of Bono, who once served as mayor of Palm Springs. A wildlife refuge at the Salton Sea also is named after him.
"He opened a door to help focus on tourism and entertainment," airport commissioner Bert Engelhardt said last week.
He said Bono was instrumental in several phases of the airport's development.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia (AP) - Nobody does it better than Chaka Khan, some R&B music lovers might say.
But the Grammy-winning singer insists there are a handful of new-generation vocalists who come real close.
"There are a few recent artists that I have been impressed by," the 49-year-old Khan said during a recent visit to this Southeast Asia country.
"Jill Scott, Lauryn Hill, I love her, Faith Evans, Mica Paris. … Craig David - he's very good, he's brilliant."
Khan was the vocalist for the '70s soul-funk group Rufus. Her solo hits include "Ain't Nobody," "I'm Every Woman" and "I Feel for You."
"Sometimes I wonder what business this is I'm in today - is it a circus, a fashion show or what?" Khan said.
"It's like anybody who has a look can be a singer or entertainer now. The talent is almost not necessary anymore," she said. "I think a lot of people are out there making videos, singing and making a lot of money based on nothing but a cute shape and a pretty face."
Khan assured fans she has no plans to retire.
"As long as I have two legs to walk on and a voice to sing with, I can't see how I can retire," she said. "I would go crazy. I couldn't sit at home for more than a week or two."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos PRE801 of Oct. 28, Mandela; NY115, Samaranch; NY116,
 Load-Date: October 30, 2002

 

End of Document
