

People in the News
The Associated Press
December 30, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1665 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK (AP) - Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera aren't exactly in the same Mickey Mouse Club anymore.
The pop stars, who both kissed Madonna a few months ago during a performance at the MTV Video Music Awards, are now trading insults about each other's careers and personalities.
In the December issue of Blender magazine, Aguilera said of Spears, "She seemed very distant, even during rehearsals. Every time I tried to start a conversation with her - well, let's just say she seemed nervous the whole time. … She seems to me like a lost little girl, someone who desperately needs guidance."
Spears responds in the magazine's January issue, "I can't believe Christina said that about me."
Then she relates a story about seeing Aguilera, her former friend and fellow Mouseketeer, for the first time in two years: "She comes up to me in a club in front of all these people and tries to put her tongue down my throat!
"I say, 'It's good to see you,' and she goes, 'Well, you're not being real with me.' I was like, 'Well, Christina, what's your definition of real? Going up to girls and kissing them after you haven't seen them for two years?'
"A lost girl?" Spears says. "I think it's probably the other way around."
BOSTON (AP) - ESPN's Peter Gammons and Boston Red Sox general manager Theo Epstein are lending their musical talents to a charity CD, featuring Pearl Jam, Paul Westerberg and the Allman Brothers Band.
Gammons will host the fourth annual "Hot Stove, Cool Music" concert on Jan. 11 to coincide with the release of the CD, which also includes donated tracks from Dropkick Murphys, Letters to Cleo's Kay Hanley and Little Feat. The disc goes on sale to the public Jan. 20.
Proceeds from the CD and the concert at the Paradise in Boston will benefit the official charity of the Red Sox, the Jimmy Fund, which supports research at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute.
Several Red Sox players will join Gammons and Epstein's band, Trauser, at the concert. Also performing will be Buffalo Tom's Bill Janovitz and Hanley, along with others.
On the Net:
http://www.jimmyfund.org/ 
CAIRO, Egypt (AP) - Angelina Jolie visited a Sudanese refugee camp on the outskirts of the Egyptian capital, distributing winter clothes, blankets and toys.
The Oscar-winning actress, who was in Egypt as a goodwill ambassador for the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, on Monday toured the Kilo Arbaa We Nus camp outside Cairo with Egyptian film star and fellow goodwill ambassador Adel Imam, the UNHCR said in a statement.
Jolie also donated $20,000 to build a health center in the crowded camp, which houses tens of thousands of African refugees, mostly from war-torn Sudan, the statement said.
The 28-year-old actress spoke about the importance of improving living standards at refugee camps, saying refugees "are not just beneficiaries of assistance, but, if given the chance, they are also contributing members of the host society."
According to official estimates from 2001, about 200 Sudanese arrive in Cairo each week, streaming easily over their country's shared border with Egypt. Many hope to secure temporary asylum in Egypt before resettling in the West, while many others stay on illegally, facing hard living conditions in already overpopulated Egypt and few job prospects. Some turn to prostitution or drug dealing.
Jolie, a goodwill ambassador for the U.N. refugee agency since 2001, won a supporting-actress Oscar for 1999's "Girl, Interrupted." Her movies also include the "Lara Croft" films and the recent "Beyond Borders."
ISTANBUL, Turkey (AP) - Turkey's Culture Ministry has agreed to allow a movie about the killings of Armenians at the time of World War I to be shown in Turkey but at least one scene will be cut from the film, an official said Tuesday.
"Ararat" by director Atom Egoyan, a Canadian of Armenian heritage, recalls the plight of Armenians in Ottoman Turkey during World War I.
Armenians say that a 1915-23 campaign to force their ancestors from eastern Turkey left 1.5 million people dead and amounted to genocide.
Turkey says the figures are inflated and that Armenians died during civil unrest and not as the result of a planned campaign.
A ministry commission, which reviewed the movie last week, said it was suitable for viewing in Turkey but added that at least one scene depicting Ottomans raping Armenian women would be censored, a Culture Ministry spokesman said, speaking on condition of anonymity. The film is expected to open in Turkey in mid-January.
Culture and Tourism Minister Erkan Mumcu expressed support for showing the movie in Turkey.
Turkey "can easily tolerate such things," Mumcu told reporters Friday. "Those who want to see it can go and see the movie. … Strong reaction to this movie would only help keep the subject on the agenda."
Former Turkish Culture Minister Istemihan Talay had denounced the movie, which was shown at the Cannes film festival last year, as "propaganda."
Turkey's new government, which assumed power last year, has pledged to expand freedom of expression as part of its bid to join the European Union.
TAMPA, Fla. (AP) - George Steinbrenner is back at home recovering from a fainting spell, feeling well enough to crack jokes about it.
"I really didn't faint. I was practicing my slide into second base," the New York Yankees' owner said in a statement Monday.
Steinbrenner, 73, collapsed Saturday at a church service in Sarasota for football great Otto Graham. The Hall of Fame quarterback, a longtime friend, died Dec. 17 at 82.
Steinbrenner was taken to Sarasota Memorial Hospital and released Sunday. He was picked up by family members, hospital spokeswoman Lyn Cassan said.
Dr. Andrew G. Boyer, Steinbrenner's personal physician, called Steinbrenner's health "excellent" and said the owner probably passed out because of the stress of being at a memorial service for a friend.
KNOXVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - The Southeastern Film Critics Association has named "The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King" the best film of 2003 and its director, Peter Jackson, has received honors as best director.
"City of God," from Brazil, was chosen best foreign language film in the association's 12th annual awards, announced Dec. 22.
Best actor honors went to Bill Murray for "Lost in Translation," which also won best original screenplay for director Sofia Coppola. Naomi Watts was named best actress for "21 Grams."
Tim Robbins was voted best supporting actor for "Mystic River," which earned best adapted screenplay for Brian Helgeland, working from Dennis Lehane's novel. Renee Zellweger won best supporting actress for "Cold Mountain."
Andrew Jarecki's "Capturing the Friedmans" was named best documentary.
The group's top 10: "The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King," "Mystic River," "Lost in Translation," "Cold Mountain," "American Splendor," "The Station Agent," "Finding Nemo," "Seabiscuit," "Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World" and "In America."
The Southeastern Film Critics Association is composed of print, broadcast and Internet film critics from nine states: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee and Virginia.
DURHAM, N.C. (AP) - Tammy Faye Messner has three words in response to those who think ill of her - "not true" and "onward."
The former Tammy Faye Bakker knows many people believe she played a critical role in the financial scandal that sent her ex-husband, Jim Bakker, to prison in 1989. She knows her public persona - which includes heavy makeup and sometimes loopy behavior - has made her a walking punch line at times.
Messner doesn't care. She's remarried, moved to the Charlotte area and begun work on a Christian variety show that she hopes to syndicate.
She's also promoting a new self-help book, will appear on the WB reality show "The Surreal Life" (premiering Jan. 11) - and will host a drag bingo benefit in Durham Friday night to raise money for the Alliance of AIDS Services-Carolina.
"I've been around a lot of drag queens," Messner said. "I see myself a lot. And they do a better job of me than I do."
Messner says she tries not to judge others, believing she herself was condemned harshly and wrongly during Bakker's teleministry corruption scandal.
She says the truth wasn't told in court and that people took advantage of Bakker during that time. She declined to elaborate "because that's yesterday and today is today."
On the Net:
http://www.tammyfaye.com 
http://www.thewb.com/Index/0,7349,,00.html 
SAN DIEGO (AP) - Washington State coach Bill Doba was given a prickly souvenir from his trip to the San Diego Zoo.
Free safety Erik Coleman gave his coach a quill that a porcupine had shed during the Cougars' field trip to the zoo Sunday.
Kicker Drew Dunning, linebacker Al Genatone, Coleman and defensive tackle Jeremy Williams joined Doba for a photo when zookeepers and photographers encouraged the players to "pet" the spiny animal in the children's zoo.
Doba flinched when a zookeeper brought out an African serval - a spotted wildcat about 2 feet tall - and the players were asked if they wanted to pet and feed it.
Doba gamely fed the cat a morsel of meat, looked at his watch and said, "Time to go."
Washington State faces Texas in the Holiday Bowl Tuesday night.
ROME (AP) - The House of Savoy has a new member.
Italy's former royal family has announced the birth of a baby girl to Emmanuel Filiberto and his French actress-wife, Clotilde Courau.
Vittoria Cristina Adelaide Chiara Maria was born in Geneva on Sunday, and both baby and mother are in excellent health, said a statement Monday from the family.
Filiberto, who is the grandson of Italy's last king, Umberto II, married Courau on Sept. 25 in a Roman basilica.
The Rome wedding was made possible after Italy last year scrapped a constitutional ban on the presence of the royal family's male heirs in the country.
The ban was introduced after World War II to punish the House of Savoy for the support offered by King Victor Emmanuel III, Umberto II's father, to Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYET101 Spears and Aguilera; NYET102 Epstein; NYET103
 Load-Date: December 31, 2003

 

End of Document
