

People in the News
The Associated Press
May 10, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1375 words
Dateline: DETROIT
Body




Eminem's music label has agreed to an undisclosed financial settlement with Apple Computer over the use of one of the rapper's songs.
Apple featured a 10-year-old singing the Oscar-winning "Lose Yourself" from the 2002 film "8 Mile" in an ad on MTV for the computer company's iPod music player and iTunes music service.
The TV ad appeared many times during a three-month period beginning in July 2003 and on Apple's Web site. The computer company had unsuccessfully sought Eminem's permission for the campaign.
In February 2004, Ferndale-based Eight Mile Style filed a copyright infringement lawsuit in U.S. District Court against MTV, Apple, MTV's parent Viacom and ad agency TBWA/Chiat/Day.
"The parties were able to reach an amicable resolution," Howard Hertz, a lawyer for Eight Mile Style and Eminem, told The Detroit News for a Tuesday story. Elizabeth McNamara, a lawyer for MTV and Viacom, said the case was "amicably resolved." Both declined to elaborate.
A lawyer for Apple refused to comment.
Eminem, 32, whose real name is Marshall Mathers III, lives in the Detroit suburb of Rochester Hills.
---
On the Net:
http://www.eminem.com 
http://www.mtv.com 
http://www.apple.com 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Nine Inch Nails and Eminem will perform at the 2005 MTV Movie Awards.
The 14th annual awards show, hosted by Jimmy Fallon, will be taped June 4 at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles. The show will air June 9.
Nine Inch Nails will perform their single "The Hand That Feeds," and Eminem will perform his new single, "Ass Like That," MTV announced Tuesday.
Presenters include Hilary Swank, Vin Diesel, Jessica Simpson, Johnny Knoxville, Jessica Alba, Hilary Duff, Zach Braff, Lindsay Lohan, Billy Bob Thornton and Katie Holmes.
Winners will be decided by viewer voting by phone or online at MTV.com.
---
On the Net:
http://www.mtv.com/ 
http://www.nin.com/ 
http://www.eminem.com/ 
---
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone (AP) - Angelina Jolie began a goodwill trip to Sierra Leone to meet survivors of the West African nation's devastating war.
Jolie, a goodwill ambassador for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees since 2001, flew to Freetown late Monday, agency spokeswoman Rachel Goldstein-Rodriguez said.
On Wednesday, Jolie was expected to meet Sierra Leone President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah, other government officials, aid workers and victims of the bloodshed, the New York-based nonprofit organization Witness said in a statement.
"Sierra Leone is still scarred by the war, but the people have invested a great deal of courage and hope in the truth and reconciliation process," Witness quoted Jolie as saying. "It is vital that the government acts on the (Truth and Reconciliation Commission's) recommendations to ensure that history will not repeat itself."
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission, set up after a brutal 10-year-war ended in 2002, collected thousands of written statements documenting atrocities and held public hearings. The commission's final report, presented to Kabbah in October 2004, hasn't been made public.
Jolie has visited refugee camps throughout the world, most recently visiting Afghan refugees in Pakistan.
The 29-year-old Oscar-winning actress toured Sierra Leone in 2001.
---
On the Net:
http://www.witness.org/ 
---
CANTON, Ohio (AP) - Members of the Canton City Council voted to rename part of a street for The O'Jays, who got their start in this northeast Ohio city.
The street will be called The O'Jays Parkway. Eight council members voted for the change, with two abstaining and one voting against renaming the street.
Councilman Greg Hawk, who grew up on Mahoning Road, abstained from Monday night's vote, saying he would have trouble explaining to his 83-year-old mother that he changed the name of the street where he was born.
The street, named for an American Indian word meaning salt lick, is part of an old trail that wound from New York through Pennsylvania to Canton.
"I don't believe The O'Jays ever asked to have the street named after them," said Jermaine Williams, brother of O'Jays member Walter Williams.
The O'Jays' songs include "Back Stabbers," "Love Train" and "For the Love of Money.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Robert Blake wanted to enlist other 1970s television stars to rally public support as he awaited trial on charges of murdering his wife, the Los Angeles Times reported.
Among Blake's favored actors: Gavin MacLeod, captain of "The Love Boat," the Times said Monday.
"He's perfect," Blake told his publicist, Dale Olson, according to jailhouse tapes and transcripts obtained by the Times.
He also liked Suzanne Pleshette of "The Bob Newhart Show," declaring "the whole world loves her," as well as "The Bionic Woman" star Lindsay Wagner.
"It should be one person after the other. You call another one and say, 'Would you come to the courthouse with us one time and afterward go out and talk to the public?"' Blake, star of TV's "Baretta," told Olson.
Blake's comments were recorded by sheriff's officials during the 11 months he spent in a downtown jail where taping inmate visits is standard practice. He posted bond in March 2003. Besides Olson, Blake talked with friends and unidentified associates.
None of those actors helped out, though others did. Sally Kirkland, for instance, said she once visited Blake, describing him as "beyond lonely."
Olson said other actors paid Blake a visit in jail but were never used for media coverage.
"The whole idea was to make Robert know that there were people - colleagues he had, peers - who were supporting him and continuing to be his friends," Olson said.
Blake, 71, was acquitted last March of shooting to death Bonny Lee Bakley, 44, in 2001 as she sat alone in a car outside a restaurant where she and Blake had just had dinner.
---
MORGANTOWN, W.Va. (AP) - Don Knotts will get the first star on what could become West Virginia's version of the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
City officials are hoping artist Jamie Lester will design a pattern that could be used in front of the Metropolitan Theater to honor other celebrities.
"We're starting with somebody we know and then we'll see where it goes," Jack Thompson, spokesman for the Greater Morgantown Convention & Visitors Bureau, said Monday. "It's just a great way for Morgantown to honor its most famous son."
Other West Virginia stars include Kathy Mattea, Brad Paisley, Jennifer Garner, Ann Magnuson, Chris Sarandon and Soupy Sales.
The 80-year-old Knotts, a Morgantown native, is best known for his role as the bumbling Deputy Barney Fife on television's "The Andy Griffith Show" and as would-be swinger landlord Ralph Furley on "Three's Company."
He'll be the voice of Turkey Mayor in the upcoming animated movie "Chicken Little."
Knotts will be honored by his hometown Aug. 12-15 with a parade, a film festival and a local beer to be brewed and named in his honor.
Thompson said the city is also negotiating the launch of a Don Knotts chapter of The Andy Griffith Show Rerun Watchers Club.
---
On the Net:
http://www.tourmorgantown.com/index2.php 
http://www.tagsrwc.com/ 
---
BOMBAY, India (AP) - American director Willard Carroll expects his movie "Marigold: An Adventure in India" to help showcase India's Bollywood film industry in the United States.
Carroll is shooting "Marigold" in Bombay after a filming stint in the western Indian desert state of Rajasthan. He described the movie as a breezy, romantic comedy with music.
"I have this desire to introduce Bollywood to the American audience," Carroll told The Indian Express newspaper Monday. "I wanted to make a spectacle with song and dance, energy and razzmatazz."
Carroll's best-known Hollywood movie was 1998's "Playing by Heart," a romantic comedy starring Sean Connery and Angelina Jolie.
Salman Khan, known for his action hero and romantic roles, plays an Indian choreographer who meets an unsuccessful American actress stranded in India and forced to work in a Bollywood movie to get back home. His co-stars are Ali Larter ("Varsity Blues," the "Final Destination" films) and Nandana Sen.
India's Bombay-based movie industry, known as Bollywood, churns out more than 900 movies a year, earning some $4.5 billion annually.
Bollywood films are hugely popular throughout Asia and are starting to gain global attention with movies such as "Monsoon Wedding" and "Bend It Like Beckham."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYET181 of Eminem, NYET182 of Jolie, NYET183 of The
 Load-Date: May 11, 2005

 

End of Document
