

People in the News
August 21, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1548 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




GENEVA (AP) - Angelina Jolie will become the United Nations' latest celebrity ambassador at a ceremony next week, the U.N. refugee agency said Tuesday.
Kris Janowski, spokesman for the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, said Jolie would be appointed a goodwill ambassador Monday during an event at the agency's Geneva headquarters.
"She is the kind of person who can get our message across to young people," Janowski told reporters.
Jolie stars in the action film "Lara Croft: Tomb Raider," which included several scenes shot in Cambodia at Angkor Wat, the largest religious monument in the world and the best known of the scores of old Buddhist and Hindu temples around Cambodia.
Last month, the 26-year-old actress visited Cambodia as a guest of the UNHCR, which is working with displaced people and returned refugees in the country. Jolie also has visited UNHCR work sites in Sierra Leone, Ivory Coast and Tanzania.
Since 1954, when the late comedian Danny Kaye became the first goodwill ambassador for the U.N. Children's Fund, leading personalities in the arts, sports and public life have traveled around the world advertising the work of the United Nations.
Current ambassadors include Muhammad Ali, Michael Douglas, former Spice Girl Geri Halliwell and French soccer star Zinedine Zidane.
DETROIT (AP) - Finnish conductor Leif Segerstam will lead the Detroit Symphony Orchestra on its European tour as Neeme Jarvi continues to recover from surgery for a burst blood vessel.
The Estonian-born Jarvi, 64, was hospitalized on July 9 after an attack at a music festival in Parnu, southern Estonia, which briefly left him unconscious.
Jarvi's doctors told him it was too early to resume his rigorous schedule of traveling and conducting, said his wife, Liilia Jarvi. The couple is at their home near West Palm Beach, Fla., where they flew last week from Finland.
"He knows the difference now between what you want to do but what you can't do," she told the Detroit Free Press for a Tuesday story.
Segerstam, music director of the Helsinki Philharmonic and the Royal Opera of Stockholm, made an impressive debut with the DSO in April at Orchestra Hall. The 57-year-old is known for his sometimes eccentric interpretations.
The orchestra's 17-day, 12-city European tour begins Oct. 1.
COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) - Kristin Davis, one of the stars of the HBO series "Sex and the City," has probably become quite accustomed to being on the A-List.
But this fall, she'll be the featured guest at a gathering of the B-List in Charleston.
Davis, a Columbia native, will help raise money for the nonpartisan group that hopes to raise about $400,000 to fund women candidates for public office.
"I'm looking forward to returning to South Carolina to help the B-List, a groundbreaking women's political committee working hard to make a difference," Davis said.
The event is set for Oct. 13. The time and location have not been determined.
WALTERBORO, S.C. (AP) - Buzz Aldrin, the second man to walk on the moon, said that just as people were key to the successful 1969 moon shot, they will be key to the success of a new business and technology park here.
About 500 people turned out Monday as Aldrin, joined by Gov. Jim Hodges and other state and local officials, helped break ground for the new 1,800-acre Buzz Aldrin Business and Technology Park off Interstate 95.
Aldrin, a close friend of Colleton County native and former state Republican Party Chairman Van Hipp Jr., has agreed to lend his name to the park and help recruit companies to locate there.
Aldrin said he was "humbled by the honor" and said the park might "play a role in creating the technology that will send more Americans skyward."
The former astronaut recalled his feelings sitting in the space capsule awaiting the 1969 moon launch.
"At moments like that, it's not the technology you're putting your faith in, it's the people behind it," he said. "It's the people who make the difference."
SPRINGFIELD, Mass. (AP) - Plans to rename a city street in honor of blues musician and former Springfield resident Taj Mahal have run into a dead end.
Following objections from people who live on the street set to be renamed - Monroe Street - city councilors on Monday night decided instead to add a plaque to the street instead of changing its name to Taj Mahal Way.
The residents said they didn't want to go through the inconvenience of having to change their mailing addresses to accommodate the name change.
"I think it's a good balance," council President Angelo Puppolo Jr. said. "It's a tribute to Taj Mahal while keeping Monroe Street as Monroe Street. I think both sides were happy"
Taj Mahal, who spent part of his childhood on Monroe Street when his name was still Henry Fredericks, lived in Springfield for 23 years. The bluesman has won two Grammy awards.
CHICAGO (AP) - Paul Harvey returned to the airwaves sounding a bit hoarse but telling his audience he "feels so good to be back."
"Americans, in judging the speaking voice which is still undergoing renovation, please be merciful," Harvey said Monday as he closed his five-minute morning program, "Paul Harvey News and Comment."
The 82-year-old broadcaster had been absent from his daily radio shows since mid-May while recovering from what he believed at first was a severe case of laryngitis. Doctors later diagnosed a virus that had settled in one of his vocal cords, and he was treated in Chicago earlier this month, Chris Berry, vice president of ABC News Radio, said Monday.
Harvey's voice sounded scratchy and hoarse as he began his broadcast with his trademark "Good Morning, Americans," with news of Tropical Storm Chantal and President Bush's visit to Milwaukee. But it seemed to clear up as he went along, and near the end of the program, Harvey broke into song.
"It's been a long winter without you. It's been a long winter without you," he sang. As he closed, Harvey said he felt so good to be back on the air that he might start singing the news. "And you wouldn't want that," he said, laughing before signing off with his trademark "Good Day!"
Harvey will do only his morning broadcast and his daily "Rest of the Story" program for a few weeks, leaving the duties of his 15-minute midday program to guest hosts while he continues to recover, Berry said.
Harvey signed a 10-year, $100 million contract with ABC Radio Networks last November to continue the commentaries that he began broadcasting in 1951. The broadcasts reach about 24 million listeners daily.
SAN JOSE, Calif. (AP) - Hall of Fame quarterback Joe Montana is leading a drive against a different kind of opponent these days - the owners of a pornographic Web site that used his name.
The player who led the San Francisco 49ers to four Super Bowl championships is suing the site's owners for millions of dollars in damages, citing a California law that prohibits the use of a famous person's name and image for commercial purposes without the celebrity's consent.
The Web page has been taken down since the lawsuit was filed earlier this month in Santa Clara County Superior Court. But Montana said in a statement that he hoped the case would lead "other cyber pirates" to "stop using and profiting from other people's identities."
"The fact that the Web site had nothing to do with football, fans or me is quite disturbing," Montana said.
NEW YORK (AP) - Sean "P. Diddy" Combs doesn't want to talk about Death Row Records founder Marion "Suge" Knight. And he doesn't want to talk about whether the East Coast-West Coast rap rivalry will flare up, now that Knight is out of prison and back at work in Los Angeles.
Knight feuded with Combs, head of Bad Boy Records, as did their respective artists, Tupac Shakur and The Notorious B.I.G., before both rappers were shot to death in the '90s.
"If y'all want to know 'bout East Coast-West Coast, why don't you ask Suge Knight?" Combs asked as he prepared to walk out of an interview with Details magazine for its September issue. "Why don't you go interview him?"
"Time is money to me," he's quoted as saying. "And you wasting my time."
But Combs hides nothing - and neither does his new girlfriend, model Emma Heming - in a provocative photo layout in which the two wear diamond crosses, Chanel sunglasses and little else. The magazine reports that the 31-year-old rapper-producer came up with the "new Gatsby" look of the photo shoot, hand-picking their outfits from 16 racks of clothes.
NEW YORK (AP) - Gwyneth Paltrow learned a lot about beauty by wearing a fat suit.
The tall, leggy actress plays an obese woman in the upcoming Farrelly brothers' movie "Shallow Hal." It took three hours to put on the suit and an hour to take it off.
"The first day I tried it on, I was in the Tribeca Grand, and I walked through the lobby," the 28-year-old told W magazine for its September issue. "It was so sad; it was so disturbing. No one would make eye contact with me because I was obese.
"I was wearing this black shirt with big snowmen on it. For some reason, the fat clothes they make ..." Paltrow stops to correct herself. "The clothes they make for women that are overweight are horrible. I felt humiliated because people were really dismissive."
"Shallow Hal," co-starring Jack Black as a man who's hypnotized and sees Paltrow's character as a thin, beautiful woman, is scheduled to open Nov. 9.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY131 Jolie; NY132 Davis; NY133 Taj Mahal; CHTX102,
 Load-Date: August 22, 2001

 

End of Document
