

People in the News Michael, Randy Jackson and Nate Dogg. Contains items on Shania
August 22, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1564 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LOS ANGELES (AP) - Severe bronchitis has forced Stevie Nicks to postpone two concerts while she undergoes treatment.
The former Fleetwood Mac singer was to perform Tuesday and Wednesday at the Universal Amphitheatre.
She first experienced respiratory problems last month as she embarked on the "Trouble in Shangri-La Tour," her publicist, Liz Rosenberg, said Tuesday.
As the tour went on, Nicks' voice grew more hoarse, Rosenberg said.
After an Aug. 17 concert in Santa Barbara, "it's clear that she's not going to get better until she gets off the road and rests for a while," she said.
The 53-year-old singer will undergo tests and treatment in Los Angeles, and hopes to return for a Las Vegas concert Saturday if she responds well to medication, Rosenberg said. The two Los Angeles shows will be rescheduled.
PESHAWAR, Pakistan (AP) - It was a long way from the glitter of Hollywood for Angelina Jolie, who Wednesday slogged through the choking dust of the Jalozai Refugee Camp, home to tens of thousands of Afghans who have fled their war-devastated homeland.
Jolie, who will be named the latest United Nations celebrity good will ambassador next week at a ceremony in Geneva, declined interviews and photographs.
At Jalozai Camp, a squalid tent village occupied by about 60,000 exiled Afghans, Jolie shook hands with refugees and knelt before their dusty tents to see their plight, said a U.N. official who didn't want to be quoted.
Pakistan houses an estimated 2 million Afghans in camps and cities throughout the country.
Jolie also was to visit Afghan refugees in southwestern Baluchistan province.
In recent months, the 26-year-old actress has visited Cambodia, Sierra Leone, Ivory Coast and Tanzania as a guest of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees.
TEL AVIV, Israel (AP) - Braving Mideast turmoil, George Michael attended a wedding at a seaside hotel in Tel Aviv.
The pop singer was the only celebrity to arrive for the Tuesday night nuptials of friend Simon Halfon, a British photographer, and his Israeli bride Anat Browerman, said Orna Goldfeld, a spokeswoman for the Tel Aviv Hilton.
Several celebrities were invited, but Goldfeld said they were frightened off by Israeli-Palestinian fighting, now in its 11th month. She declined to name the famous no-shows.
The Israeli daily Yediot Ahronot said security guards flanked Michael during the wedding. Guards were posted at the entrances to the hotel.
The 38-year-old singer didn't perform at the wedding, but he signed autographs, Goldfeld said. He was scheduled to fly back to Britain late Wednesday.
Israel's entertainment calendar this summer has been notably bleak. Last week, the Red Hot Chili Peppers canceled a concert planned later this month because of security concerns.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Randy Jackson of the Jackson 5 admitted he committed bankruptcy fraud by failing to list a sport utility vehicle when filing his claim, authorities said.
In an agreement filed Tuesday, Jackson pleaded guilty to one count of making a false statement, said Special Assistant U.S. Attorney Sandra Klein.
The 39-year-old brother of Michael Jackson is scheduled to appear in federal court on Sept. 24. He could be sentenced to as many as five years in prison but prosecutors are recommending that he receive probation and pay $21,100, the value of the SUV.
Jackson filed for bankruptcy on Oct. 17, 1996. In a subsequent filing, which required him to list all the vehicles he owned, authorities said he mentioned his 1989 LaForza but not his 1995 Chevrolet Suburban.
The Jackson 5 is scheduled to perform at concerts honoring Michael Jackson on Sept. 7 and 10 at New York City's Madison Square Garden.
NORWALK, Calif. (AP) - Rapper Nate Dogg was sentenced to three years probation after pleading no contest to a misdemeanor charge of possessing an unmarked firearm.
The judge on Tuesday also ordered the rapper, whose real name is Nathaniel Dawayne Hale, to pay a $1,000 fine.
Hale, 32, had faced a felony charge of being a felon in possession of a firearm, which was dropped as a result of the plea, said his lawyer, Mark Geragos.
The rapper was arrested June 18, 2000, for allegedly kidnapping his girlfriend from her mother's house, holding her against her will, assaulting her and setting a car on fire.
Those charges were dismissed at a preliminary hearing in March.
Hale got his start with rappers Snoop Dogg and Warren G in a Long Beach-area band. He later recorded with Dr. Dre on "The Chronic" and appeared on Snoop Dogg's "Doggystyle."
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Shania Twain feels like a mother.
The country singer gave birth to a boy, Eja (pronounced Asia), on Aug. 12, according to a publicist who works for a public relations firm representing Twain. He spoke Tuesday on condition of anonymity.
The Grammy-winning country singer and her producer-husband, Mutt Lange, are releasing no information on the baby, including where he was born. The couple lives in Switzerland and Twain is a native of Canada.
She and Lange have been married since 1993. The baby is the couple's first child.
Twain, 35, has sold more than 50 million albums with hits including "Man! I Feel Like a Woman!" "Any Man of Mine" and "That Don't Impress Me Much."
Lange, a rock producer for Def Leppard, Foreigner, Bryan Adams and AC/DC, produced Twain's two hit albums, "The Woman in Me" and "Come on Over," and co-writes with his wife many of Twain's songs.
ATLANTIC CITY, N.J. (AP) - Tony Danza will be the boss of the year's Miss America Pageant.
The former star of TV's "Who's the Boss?" will be the host of the 81st annual pageant, scheduled for Sept. 22 on ABC.
Danza replaces Donny and Marie Osmond, who were co-hosts the past two years, the Miss America Organization said Tuesday.
The 50-year-old actor was nominated for an Emmy for his guest appearances on the legal drama "The Practice." He co-starred on the sitcom "Taxi" from 1978-83, and on "Who's the Boss?" from 1984-92.
"Tony's charm, enthusiasm and energy perfectly complement the changes we are making in the show," said Bob Bain, the producer of the telecast. "We believe Tony's talent and intelligence will be real assets to our efforts revitalizing and updating the Miss America telecast."
Last week, organizers announced several changes to this year's Miss America Pageant. They're incorporating elements of quiz shows and reality TV, including an opportunity for contestants to help vote for the winner.
On the Net:
http://www.missamerica.org 
WHITE PLAINS, N.Y. (AP) - Bryant Gumbel and his wife have finalized their divorce, ending a bitter four-year dispute that included charges that "The Early Show" host had cheated with a series of mistresses.
The contentious divorce proceedings, which involved allegations by Gumbel's wife, June Gumbel, that the $5 million-a-year television star had left her destitute, ended quietly in a Westchester County courtroom on Tuesday. Details of the agreement were sealed.
"Mrs. Gumbel was satisfied that this part of her life is over and she can go on without the concerns she had before," said her attorney, Barry Slotnick. "It was sometimes a bitter process, but she's happy and satisfied."
An attorney for Bryant Gumbel, Stanley Arkin, did not return a telephone call for comment on the end of the 27-year marriage.
The Gumbels have two grown children: son Bradley and daughter Jillian.
During the divorce proceedings, Slotnick had charged that Bryant Gumbel was financially ignoring his estranged wife. In early 2000, Gumbel started paying court-ordered emergency relief - $4,000 a month, plus expenses that included her Visa bill, utilities and the mortgage on their suburban home.
LONDON (AP) - U2 lead singer Bono lost his father to cancer Tuesday, but took the stage at a London concert hours later, dedicating a song to him from the band's new album.
"I want to thank my old man, my father, for giving me this voice," Bono told the audience. "He was a fine tenor and he always said if I had his voice, who knows what might have happened."
Bob Hewson, 75, had suffered from cancer.
"He's free of all that now," Bono said. "This is a song I wrote for him."
The Irish band performed "Kite," which Bono has said he wrote after taking his two daughters outside to fly a kite.
Bono flew back to Dublin to visit his ailing father, a retired postal worker, nearly every night the band has played in Britain. Performances this week in London and at Slane Castle in Ireland will go ahead as scheduled.
NEW YORK (AP) - Willa Ford is still friends with her ex-boyfriend, Nick Carter of the Backstreet Boys. After all, they share five dogs; Ford has the teacup Pomeranian, a miniature Maltese and a pug, and Carter has another pug and a boxer.
The 20-year-old pop singer said she and the 21-year-old Carter, who dated for three years, didn't talk at first after breaking up in October, but now they're friends again.
"We learned a lot together. We went through so much at such a young age," Ford told The Associated Press. "We were put in front of all these people so quickly and were so ridiculed."
As Carter's girlfriend, Ford was the target of massive adolescent hatred. When she was the opening act for the Backstreet Boys' 1999 tour, angry girls held up signs that said "Die Willa."
"I think at the end of the day, he knows that I caught the brunt of it. Like, I really got the bad part because I wasn't the boy band celebrity at the time," she said. "I think he feels bad that it happened."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY120 Jolie; NY121 Nicks; NY122 Michael; NY109 Twain;
 Load-Date: August 23, 2001

 

End of Document
