

People in the News
The Associated Press
November 18, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1762 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




UNITED NATIONS (AP) - Christopher Reeve helped present Italy with the Franklin Delano Roosevelt international disability award at the United Nations.
The 51-year-old "Superman" actor, paralyzed from the neck down in a horseback riding accident in 1995, said Monday his own nation had much to learn from "small countries with big hearts."
Italy's minister for social welfare and labor, Roberto Maroni, accepted the seventh annual award on behalf of President Carlo Azeglio Ciampi. The award includes 1,000 wheelchairs for needy Italians and a $50,000 check in recognition of Italy's 30-year commitment to make equal opportunity for people with disabilities a top priority.
The award "will give renewed momentum to Italy's commitment to the full social integration of our disabled fellow citizens," Ciampi said in an acceptance speech read by Maroni.
Reeve said he was in awe of Italy's accomplishments, both at home and abroad, where it reached out to "Afghanistan, Uganda and Somalia, exporting technology and exporting the idea of inclusion in those countries that are suffering the ravages of war and poverty and disease."
"It's a lesson to the larger countries of the world, including the United States, where there is not yet full compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act," Reeve said.
Reminding participants that previous winners included Ireland, Ecuador and Hungary, Reeve said: "The award has gone to small countries with big hearts."
---
On the Net:
http://www.worldcommitteeondisability.org 
http://www.paralysis.org 
NEW YORK (AP) - Actor Danny Aiello and a group of businessmen have filed a $30 million lawsuit claiming the city sabotaged their attempt to build a movie studio on a stretch of vacant city-owned land on Staten Island's waterfront.
The group says in court papers it had already spent $2 million on building the Stapleton Studios when the city moved in September 2002 to evict them from the 36-acre property, a former Navy yard on Staten Island's north shore.
The developers are still occupying the property because they got an order that delayed the city's eviction attempt. The city appealed that order and a ruling from the state Supreme Court's Appellate Division is pending.
Court papers accuse the city and its Economic Development Corp. of breach of contract, unjust enrichment, violation of the state's business law, breach of fiduciary duty and loss of profits and business opportunity.
The lawsuit was filed Monday in Manhattan's state Supreme Court.
"The city has just been served with Stapleton's latest complaint and is evaluating the legal papers," Kate O'Brien Ahlers, spokeswoman for the city's Law Department, said Monday.
Michael Sherman, spokesman for the EDC, would not comment on the lawsuit. Mayor Michael Bloomberg has appointed a task force to study the best possible use of the property, Sherman said Monday.
Aiello, 70, has appeared in more than a dozen New York films, including "Do the Right Thing" and "Moonstruck."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - An ex-boyfriend of Anna Nicole Smith has been convicted of making criminal threats against her.
Mark Hatten, 35, was found guilty of the felony Monday after two days of deliberation by a Van Nuys Superior Court jury.
Jurors acquitted Hatten of two other counts that alleged he stalked Smith and made criminal threats against her neighbor, Rene Navarro.
The jury also convicted Hatten of two other felony counts, assault by means likely to produce great bodily injury and battery. Those counts involved an altercation with Navarro.
Hatten punched, knocked Navarro down and then kicked him after being told to leave Smith alone, Deputy District Attorney David Stuart said.
Hatten is scheduled to be sentenced Dec. 11 and faces up to eight years and eight months in state prison.
During Hatten's trial, Smith testified that she had a brief sexual relationship with him in 2000 that ended when he approached her with a knife in her home.
Hatten claimed they had an on-again, off-again relationship, the prosecutor said.
Smith, 35, is a former Playboy playmate. She became a reality TV star when "The Anna Nicole Show" began airing on E! Entertaiment Television.
---
COLUMBUS, Ga. (AP) - Robert Englund, best known for his role as Freddy Krueger in the "Nightmare on Elm Street" films, has been treated and released from a Columbus hospital, officials said.
The Columbus Ledger-Enquirer reported Tuesday that Englund had been involved in an all-night filming session at Westville Village Sunday and later went to the hospital after experiencing pain when he woke up in his motel room.
Englund was treated at the St. Francis Hospital emergency room and released Monday, said spokeswoman Judy Walsh.
The 54-year-old actor is starring in the horror film "2001 Maniacs," which is expected to be released next year.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Michael Douglas will receive the Cecil B. DeMille Award for career achievement at this year's Golden Globes, more than three decades after his father, Kirk Douglas, won the honor in 1968.
Douglas is the first second-generation actor to receive the DeMille award. The decision was announced Monday by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, which hosts the annual ceremony.
He will receive the award during NBC's live telecast of the 61st annual Golden Globe banquet on Jan. 25. The event will take place at the Beverly Hilton Hotel.
Previous recipients include Gene Hackman, Harrison Ford, Al Pacino, Dustin Hoffman, Shirley MacLaine, Jack Nicholson, Sean Connery and Sophia Loren.
Douglas and his 86-year-old father acted together for the first time this year in the dramatic-comedy "It Runs in the Family," co-starring with Michael's mother and Kirk's ex-wife, Diana Douglas, and Michael's 24-year-old son, Cameron Douglas.
The Hollywood Foreign Press Association also announced that Kevin Costner's 17-year-old daughter, Lily Costner, will escort winners off-stage at this year's ceremony as Miss Golden Globe.
Offspring of well-known performers are traditionally chosen for the roles, and past escorts have included Melanie Griffith, Laura Dern, Joely Fisher and Freddie Prinze Jr.
---
OCEAN, N.J. (AP) - The frontman of British band Jethro Tull has apologized for remarks made in a newspaper interview that seemingly criticized displays of the Stars and Stripes.
In a posting on Jethro Tull's Web site, Ian Anderson further explained what he meant when he told the Asbury Park Press, "I hate to see the American flag hanging out of every bloody station wagon, out of every SUV, every little Midwestern house in some residential area."
Anderson said his concern wasn't specifically displays of the U.S. flag, but "the flag-waving mind-set" across the world.
The 56-year-old singer said he regretted the tone of the statements and apologized for "any perceived slur on the Stars and Stripes."
"I really didn't understand - even after 35 years of visiting the USA on a regular basis - that this symbol had such fierce resonance for so many people as is now apparent to me," Anderson said.
Anderson said he cannot support the international policies of current U.S. and British administrations, but "I will always stand up to defend the honor and integrity of the American people, anytime, anywhere and in the face of anyone's criticism."
"Anyway, I was out of line on the flag thing and I am sorry for it," he said. "I know I have forever lost some American friends as a result."
The interview had prompted a local classic rock station to remove Jethro Tull from its playlist. On Monday, WCHR-FM program director Phil LoCascio said the station took the step at the request of its audience and would leave any decision to restore the band to listeners as well.
---
On the Net:
http://www.j-tull.com/news/starsandstripes.cfm 
http://www.1057thehawkfm.com 
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Add Pamela Anderson to the crowded list of celebrities with their own clothing line.
"The Pamela Collection" will include jeans, T-shirts, sweaters, jewelry, lingerie and fragrance. The collection is expected to be in stores in fall 2004.
Anderson will debut the line Feb. 24 in Las Vegas, where she'll meet with buyers and retailers. The 36-year-old actress, who stars in the animated show "Striperella" on cable channel Spike TV, is involved as a co-designer and has creative control.
She described the line as "fun, sexy and super comfortable for the everywoman."
"I want to make sure it's affordable and available," Anderson said. "I can't wait for it to come out so I can get the clothes for myself and my friends. It's been a lot of work."
Anderson signed a worldwide deal with United Licensing Group, headed by chief executive officer Jimmy Esebag, who helped license the Playboy name.
Other celebrities with clothing lines include Sean "P. Diddy" Combs, rappers Eve and Nelly, and actress-singer Jennifer Lopez.
---
On the Net:
http://www.pamelaanderson.com/ 
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Collectors snapped up hundreds of items at a weekend auction of classic Hollywood horror films and props once used by magician Harry Blackstone.
Boris Karloff's original contract for "Frankenstein" went for $12,925, and a model of a dinosaur used in the original 1933 "King Kong" movie was bought for $41,125, according to Julien Entertainment, the company that held the auction Saturday on eBay and at a local hotel.
"Halloween was weeks ago, but obviously there's year-round interest by collectors in memorabilia from famous monster movies," said Darren Julien, company president.
Other movie-related items included the razor-tipped glove used in a "Nightmare on Elm Street" sequel, which sold for $6,169; an idol from "Raiders of the Lost Ark"; a rubber dagger used in the TV series "Buffy the Vampire Slayer"; and a costume used by Patrick Stewart in "Star Trek: Nemesis."
Hundreds of tricks and personal effects used by Blackstone also were auctioned. The saw blade and other paraphernalia the magician used in the illusion of sawing a woman in half fetched $28,200.
The figures included a 17.5 percent fee paid by all winning bidders. The winners' identities weren't disclosed.
DETROIT (AP) - Singer Mary J. Blige will perform during halftime at the Detroit Lions' Thanksgiving Day game against the Green Bay Packers.
The Nov. 27 game - and the sixth-annual halftime show - will be broadcast from Detroit on the Fox network. Celebrity newlyweds Jessica Simpson and Nick Lachey are slated to make cameo appearances from Los Angeles, organizers said Friday.
Blige, known for her unique blend of soul and hip-hop styles, is expected to perform one of her classic hits as well as songs from her latest album.
On the Net:
http://www.mjblige.com/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos Reeve, NYR104 of 11/17; Aiello, NY112; Douglas, LA103;
 Load-Date: November 19, 2003

 

End of Document
