

People in the News
August 27, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1408 words
Dateline: GENEVA
Body




Angelina Jolie, newly appointed goodwill ambassador for the U.N. refugee agency, wiped tears from her eyes as she described her encounters with Afghan refugees in Pakistan.
"What do you do about that? It's really awful," said the 26-year-old actress as she told reporters about small children scratching a living by picking through garbage.
Jolie, who stars in the action film "Lara Croft: Tomb Raider," returned from Pakistan on Sunday. She had visited the huge refugee camps where hundreds of thousands of Afghan refugees live in poverty.
"It's still very hard to talk about it. It is the worst situation, I think, because there is no end in sight for the needs of these people," she said after a ceremony Monday in which she was formally appointed ambassador for the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees.
"But I was surprised to sit down with these women and their children and talk with them, and they were so kind and warm and funny and generous and hardworking and grateful for any little help they could get, and they are living in a situation I don't think anybody in this room could survive for more than a few days."
Jolie started visiting refugee camps earlier this year. She has released the journal she kept during visits to Sierra Leone and Tanzania on the Internet to publicize the work of the UNHCR.
High Commissioner Ruud Lubbers said he believes Jolie will be able to bring the issue of refugees to the attention of young people.
"We look after 22 million people, and that is hardly known by young people. She can show her personal commitment as a young person to convince the younger generation that something has to be done here," he said.
On the Net:
http://www.usaforunhcr.org/journal 
http://www.unhcr.ch 
NEW YORK (AP) - Chris O'Donnell will go from "Batman & Robin" in the movies to Arthur Miller and Broadway next spring.
O'Donnell, who played Batman's sidekick in 1995's "Batman Forever" and 1997's "Batman & Robin," will star in a rare revival of Miller's "The Man Who Had All the Luck." It was Miller's first Broadway play, and ran for only four performances in 1944.
The production, directed by Scott Ellis, will be part of the Roundabout Theatre Company's season at the American Airlines-Selwyn Theatre. In the play, O'Donnell portrays a young man who has a hard time reconciling his good fortune with the bad luck experienced by his friends and family.
The 31-year-old O'Donnell, who also appeared in "Vertical Limit" and "Scent of a Woman," first played the role in July at the Williamstown Theatre Festival in Massachusetts. It was his stage debut.
NEW YORK (AP) - Hoops star Grant Hill will be taking on additional duties off the court - he's going to be a father.
The Orlando Magic star and his wife, R&B singer Tamia, announced Monday that they are expecting a baby in January. It is the first child for the couple, who wed two years ago.
Hill, 28, was sidelined most of last season due to an ankle injury, but is expected to return to the basketball court when the season begins in October. Tamia, 26, has released two albums; her most recent hit was the song "Stranger in My House," released earlier this year.
COPENHAGEN, Denmark (AP) - A thousand people with Danish and Norwegian flags - and a few dozen reporters - waited in vain on a downtown Copenhagen dock, hoping to get a glimpse of newlyweds Crown Prince Haakon and Princess Mette-Marit of Norway.
But the couple, who left Oslo on Sunday aboard the royal yacht K/S Norge, didn't appear on the deck of the slim, white ship as it arrived in Copenhagen on Monday, supposed to have been the first destination.
A spokesman for the royal palace in Oslo told the Norwegian news agency NTB that the couple had left the yacht somewhere between the two Scandinavian capitals. Sven Gjeruldsen refused to disclose details about the honeymoon destination.
When Haakon's parents married in 1968, King Harald V and Queen Sonja also found a way to sneak away to a private honeymoon after they had boarded the royal yacht.
On Saturday, the heir to the Norwegian throne married commoner Mette-Marit Tjessem Hoiby, now Crown Princess Mette-Marit and Norway's future queen.
OPELOUSAS, La. (AP) - Fans stood on chairs to snap pictures and staked out places to get autographs when "Big Brother 2" evictee Krista Stegal returned to the diner where she had been a waitress.
Even the mayor was waiting for Stegal at Ray's Diner.
"We are proud of you, Krista," said John Vallien, the mayor of Opelousas (pronounced op-uh-LOO'-sus). "With all of your stardom, you have never lost sight of where you started.
"Because of your stardom, everyone now knows how to say Opelousas, spell Opelousas and knows where it is. Thank you, Krista, and we are very proud of you."
Stegal, who stopped by at Ray's last Friday, said she will be visiting relatives and friends for about a week. Then it's back to Los Angeles to continue exit interviews for CBS' reality show "Big Brother 2."
She had not been back to her hometown since leaving the show Aug. 16.
Stegal said she hoped Monica would be the last member out. "She was my best friend. I hope she wins everything."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Josh Hartnett believes William Shakespeare has something to say to today's youth.
Hartnett, 23, a star of this summer's "Pearl Harbor," has three movies coming out over the next six months, including "O," a teen retelling of Shakespeare's "Othello" set in a present-day prep school and including some disturbing instances of teen violence.
The film's release was delayed after the Columbine High School shootings in Colorado. Original distributor Miramax eventually decided against releasing it and sold it to Lions Gate.
In the film, Hartnett plays Hugo, the conniving son of his school's basketball coach. The character is based on the role of Iago in Shakespeare's play.
Hartnett said he hopes the film, which opens Friday, will spark discussion of school violence.
"I love Shakespeare and the fact that his story can be so relevant today is astonishing," Hartnett said. "But the film does not glorify violence. It does just the opposite. Hopefully, it will start a dialogue about school violence. For that reason alone, I'm glad it's finally being released."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Don't think of "Passions" soap opera star Lindsay Korman as just an actress. She can sing, too.
Korman was a teen when she landed a singing role in Las Vegas' longest-running daytime stage show, and was still a teen-ager when she sang on Broadway.
At 16, she starred in "Viva Las Vegas" and followed it up after high school graduation with a role in "Grease." She has had eclectic roles, including in a "Beetlejuice" stage show and the role of Galatea in the rock opera "Pygmalion: The True Story," played on the island of Cyprus.
Now at 21, she plays Theresa Lopez-Fitzgerald, who recently wed the richest man in the fictional coastal town of Harmony in the 2-year-old NBC soap.
Korman saw herself as a singer and said acting was challenging.
"Instead of singing the words, you speak them," Korman said. "It's gotten easier, but it's still hard work."
Korman got a chance to use her musical talent when she sang a duet on the soap, a song she co-wrote with musician-boyfriend Mark Provart. Korman also was thrilled to sing the national anthem at Dodger Stadium.
She says it's hard to find time for a dual show business career.
"I have a lot of difficult choices to make, and I always want to find time to enjoy myself and be with my friends," she said.
---
PROVO, Utah (AP) - There's nothing talk-show host Larry King would like to do more than take a year off and broadcast baseball on radio or television.
"Sports is really my avocation," King said, while attending a Provo Angels rookie league doubleheader against Casper on Saturday. "It's the first thing I read in the newspaper every day."
"I love the minor leagues," King said. "You get to see the kids so young and brilliant, but the problem is they're too brilliant and they get sucked into the majors and you never see them again."
King said he's excited to watch a new minor league team that has just moved to Brooklyn in New York.
"There's nothing more cerebral for me than watching the shadows fall across the field," he said. "There's something about being raised on baseball that makes it become part of the fabric of your life."
King filled in as an announcer part of the time Saturday, and during the fifth-inning stretch of the first game, he led the crowd in singing "Take Me Out to the Ball Game."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos Angelina Jolie, GE106; Chris O'Donnell, NY111; Crown
 Load-Date: August 28, 2001

 

End of Document
