

People in the News
The Associated Press
March 11, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2440 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Oscar-winner Charlize Theron was reduced to tears Thursday when former President Nelson Mandela praised her for putting South Africa on the map.
"I love you so much," the actress said during an emotional meeting at the Nelson Mandela Foundation in Johannesburg.
Theron, who won a best-actress Oscar for her portrayal of serial killer Aileen Wuornos in "Monster," grew up in the small South African town of Benoni.
Wearing a simple white dress with her hair pulled back in a ponytail, she told Mandela he was an inspiration to her and many others.
Mandela returned the compliment.
"She has put South Africa on the map," he told reporters. "Even those who were ignorant of South Africa, having seen her, they must know now that there is a country like South Africa."
---
LONDON (AP) - Former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, lawyer Cherie Booth, author J.K. Rowling and model Kate Moss were among 180 high-flying women who joined Queen Elizabeth II for lunch Thursday, the first all-women event of its kind at Buckingham Palace.
Celebrities including teenage singer Charlotte Church and former model Heather Mills McCartney mingled with writers, academics and sports stars at the event marking women's achievements.
The queen was accompanied by her daughter, Princess Anne; her daughter-in-law, the Countess of Wessex; and the Duchess of Gloucester, a cousin.
Booth, wife of Prime Minister Tony Blair, said she hoped the luncheon will take place annually.
"I think it's very important we celebrate women's achievements. The leader of the country is a woman - the queen," she said.
Booth said she was delighted that the guest list didn't just describe her as the premier's wife, but highlighted her work in employment and discrimination law.
Church, at just 18 believed to be the youngest guest, said she felt privileged to be invited "when all I do is sing."
Rowling, creator of the best-selling "Harry Potter" books, confided that the monarch had divulged an interest in the young wizard: "She was appreciative of Harry," she said.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Kelli Carpenter O'Donnell says she's happy that she and Rosie O'Donnell have put a face on the issue of same-sex marriage.
"We're public figures at least now in this whole gay marriage movement and public figures as a gay family. And I feel like in some ways it's nice that we represent it because I think it brings a sense of normalcy to it," Carpenter O'Donnell tells Barbara Walters in an interview airing Friday night on ABC's "20/20."
"It's like, you know what? That's me and that's my partner and these are my kids and we're raising happy, healthy children."
Carpenter O'Donnell and the comedian are among the thousands of same-sex couples who've gotten married in San Francisco in the past month. They tied the knot Feb. 26.
And after being together six years and raising four children, she said there was never any doubt that she'd take O'Donnell's last name.
"It was my Christmas gift to Ro two years ago," she said. "My sister who's married was like, 'I don't want to take my husband's last name.' And I said, 'That's so funny, because I do want to take Ro's last name."'
---
PARIS (AP) - Gucci Group NV announced Thursday it was promoting four in-house designers to fill the gap left by fashion superstar Tom Ford, who steps down as creative director next month.
Ford's top designers at Gucci and its French fashion house, Yves Saint Laurent, have all been handed the reins at their respective lines, the Florence-based company said.
Alessandra Facchinetti, Gucci's women's wear design director, is to replace her departing boss under the catwalk spotlight, along with John Ray and Frida Giannini, the top men's wear and accessories designers.
Creative control of YSL goes to Stefano Pilati, until now Ford's right-hand man at the Paris-based company.
Ford and Gucci Group chief executive Domenico De Sole announced their resignations last November after they failed to agree on terms for the renewal of their contracts with French parent company Pinault-Printemps-Redoute.
Their departure represents a challenge for Gucci, the former leather goods maker rescued from near-bankruptcy by the duo a decade ago and transformed into the world's No. 3 luxury group.
In a statement, Giacomo Santucci, chief executive at the Italian fashion house, stressed the "significant contributions to Gucci's current success" made by the brand's new creative directors.
---
ANDERSON, Ind. (AP) - Gospel singer Sandi Patty has withdrawn from a school board race, saying her music career wouldn't leave her enough time to devote to the office.
The 47-year-old said Wednesday she'd re-evaluated her ability to serve on the Anderson Community Schools Board following unanticipated changes in her performing schedule.
"It would not be responsible or fair to the board, this community, or our kids - as important decisions and issues are discussed in the future - for me to be unable to participate at a 100 percent level," she said.
Patty, who has never held public office, filed papers Feb. 18 expressing her intent to run for a school board seat being held by former Anderson teacher Keith Millikan. Her withdrawal leaves the three-term incumbent with one other challenger.
She and her husband, Don Peslis, have eight children, all of whom have attended schools in Anderson, a city of 59,000 about 40 miles northeast of Indianapolis.
Patty is the most awarded female artist in contemporary Christian music history with 39 Dove Awards and five Grammys. She has sold more than 11 million albums and on Feb. 11 was inducted into the Gospel Music Hall of Fame.
---
KISSIMMEE, Fla. (AP) - A surprise visit by rapper Ludacris to a central Florida high school gave some much-needed diversion to students who'd experienced a string of tragedies in the past year.
The concert came in response to an e-mail from sophomore class president Nada Taha, who explained the school's rough year after the death of two classmates in a drag race and the loss of a beloved English teacher to breast cancer.
With state testing coming up, Taha asked Ludacris to come and "help our school regain the once-lost spirit and make a difference in our lives."
"I get a lot of e-mails," the rapper told the Orlando Sentinel after the performance. "I knew we could make it possible because we were in town and with all the people here passing away, we felt like it was a good thing to do."
Already in town for a performance at Orlando's House of Blues, Ludacris and fellow rappers Chingy and David Banner gave a 30-minute performance that set off screams and cheers from the over 2,000 students in attendance.
Ludacris also donated $5,000 to the school district's fund-raising arm, the Osceola County Foundation for Education. The money came from his Ludacris Foundation, a nonprofit group that provides gifts, grants and scholarships to youth organizations.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Robert De Niro is making a movie in Queens, Sydney Pollack is filming at the United Nations and Mayor Michael Bloomberg is pretending to be mayor - at City Hall - for an episode of NBC's "Law & Order."
Those are some of the film and TV scenes shot this month in New York, where the movie industry spends about $10 billion each year, said film commissioner Katherine Oliver.
Pollack is shooting "The Interpreter," starring Nicole Kidman, inside the United Nations, and De Niro is filming "Hide and Seek" at the Silvercup Studios in Queens, also the set for HBO's "Sex and the City" and "The Sopranos."
As possible locations, "We've got Chinatown in Manhattan, and we've got a Chinatown in Brooklyn's Sunset Park neighborhood," Oliver told business leaders at The Forum Club Tuesday. "We have Little Italy in Manhattan, and there's Arthur Avenue, the Italian neighborhood in the Bronx.
"We have a neighborhood on Staten Island, faking as the Midwest."
Oliver has helped the mayor bring more productions to New York, especially after the Sept. 11 terror attacks, which put a damper on new business.
---
On the Net:
http://www.nyc.gov/film 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Real estate mogul Donald Trump will take over "Saturday Night Live" on April 3, NBC announced Wednesday.
NBC's "The Apprentice" features Trump and contestants vying to work for him. Trump also serves as executive producer with Mark Burnett ("Survivor").
Ben Affleck will host this Saturday's "SNL" with musical guest N.E.R.D.
---
On the Net:
http://www.nbc.com/ 
---
PITTSBURGH (AP) - The Steel City apparently rocks.
Pittsburgh tops the list of Esquire's "Cities That Rock" in its April issue. The list excludes New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago and Austin, Texas, which are widely cited for their music scenes.
"The overarching idea about this is we didn't want to pick the same old cities," said Chris Berend, associate editor of Esquire. "The idea was that there were other cities that represent the majority of America that really might be the next spring of something."
The magazine polled more than six dozen music writers, acquaintances and friends to compile the list. A little sympathy for the Steel City didn't hurt.
"I think there's this affection for Pittsburgh that people kind of want to feel. I feel like it's an underdog," Berend said.
The last big band to come out of Pittsburgh arguably was Rusted Root, whose single "Send Me on My Way" enjoyed heavy air play in 1995.
Other cities making the list were Denver; Minneapolis; Raleigh, N.C.; Gainesville, Fla.; Fresno, Calif.; New Orleans; Phoenix; and San Francisco.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - A new production of Wagner's "Tristan und Isolde" directed by Peter Sellars headlines the 2004-05 season of the Paris Opera, the first under incoming director Gerard Mortier.
The production, with sets by Bill Viola, opens April 12, 2005, at the Bastille opera house and features Ben Heppner and Waltraud Meier in the title roles, the company announced Tuesday in Paris. Esa-Pekka Salonen conducts.
There will be two new productions of Janacek operas. "Katya Kabanova" with Angela Denoke opens Oct. 31 at the Palais Garnier and "From the House of the Dead" with Jose Van Dam opens May 14, 2005, at the Bastille.
Handel's "Hercules" is another of the nine new productions and opens at the Garnier starting Dec. 4. Luc Bondy directs a cast featuring William Shimmel and Joyne DiDonato, and William Christie conducts.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Ben Stiller and Owen Wilson's action comedy "Starsky & Hutch" has renewed interest in 1974 Ford Torinos, but Hollywood's top car star is still the orange 1969 Dodge Charger the General Lee from "The Dukes of Hazzard."
"We thought the top choice would be the Batmobile, or maybe Tom Selleck's Ferrari from 'Magnum P.I.' We were surprised," said McKeel Hagerty, president of Hagerty Insurance, the Traverse City, Mich.-based firm that specializes in collector car insurance.
Hagerty Insurance surveyed car enthusiasts nationwide to determine the Top 10 television and motion picture car stars.
"Each of these vehicles not only played an integral part in a movie or TV show story line, but each possessed a unique character, an on-screen personality all of its own," Hagerty said Wednesday.
The Top 10 Car Stars list: "The Dukes of Hazzard," 1969 Dodge Charger General Lee; "Bullitt," green 1968 Ford Mustang driven by Steve McQueen; "Gone in Sixty Seconds," 1967 Shelby GT500; "Back to the Future," 1983 DeLorean; "Batman" TV series, Batmobile; "Goldfinger," Aston Martin DB5; "Smokey and the Bandit," 1977 Pontiac Firebird T/A; "Herbie, the Love Bug," 1963 Volkswagen Beetle; "Starsky and Hutch" TV series and "Starsky & Hutch" movie, 1974 Ford Torino; and "The Green Hornet" TV series, Chrysler Imperial Black Beauty.
---
On the Net:
http://www.hagerty.com 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Katie Couric talks to Ben Affleck about his new film, "Jersey Girl," in an interview airing Friday on "Today" and "Dateline NBC," the network said Wednesday.
Couric asks Affleck if he's concerned that his relationship with ex-fiancee Jennifer Lopez will overshadow the movie. "Jersey Girl," directed by Kevin Smith, opens March 26. A wedding scene with Affleck and Lopez has been cut from the film.
"I would hate to have that sort of like tabloid aspect of it or the relationship or anything overshadow, you know, what I think is really Kevin's best movie - and probably mine, too," he says.
Excerpts of the interview were released in advance.
Affleck's films include Smith's "Mallrats," "Chasing Amy," "Dogma" and "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back." The 31-year-old actor also has starred in the notorious bomb "Gigli," co-starring Lopez, "Pearl Harbor" and "Good Will Hunting."
Affleck and Lopez were to have married last September, but abruptly postponed their lavish plans. They have since ended their engagement.
---
On the Net:
http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/3032600/ 
http://www.viewaskew.com/ 
---
GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. (AP) - William Ryberg has resigned as president of the Grand Rapids Symphony to accept a similar position with the Oregon Symphony.
Ryberg, 46, a native of Washington state, will return to the Pacific Northwest as director of an orchestra that is among the 20 largest in the United States. His new job will begin May 1, it was announced Wednesday.
He was president of the Grand Rapids orchestra for more than five years. Paul Farr, who heads the Grand Rapids Symphony's board of directors, said a search for Ryberg's replacement will begin immediately.
"We love the community and we love the organization," Ryberg told The Grand Rapids Press. "We wouldn't be doing this if we didn't think it was the right thing to do."
---
On the Net:
http://www.grsymphony.org 
http://www.orsymphony.org 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Prince fans who buy tickets to his upcoming concerts will get a bonus - his new CD.
The singer, who will begin his first arena tour in six years on March 29, had been negotiating with several major labels to release his upcoming album, "Musicology," his publicist, Ronnie Lippin, told The Associated Press Wednesday.
However, the 45-year-old musician decided instead to give away the disc at his concerts.
"Every person who buys a ticket to his concert will walk away with a free CD," Lippin said.
Prince has released his albums on the Internet, through other labels or distribution deals since he left Warner Bros. in 1996 after a bitter feud.
The album also will be available commercially; his Web site, www.npgmusicclub.com, will make downloads available March 29, and the disc will be in record stores later.
Prince will be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on Monday. The typically reclusive singer has recently raised his profile with a number of appearances, including a performance at last month's Grammy Awards.
His tour will take him to 38 cities.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo JOH103, LON122, LON123, NYET135, PAR101, NYET136, NYET137,
 Load-Date: March 12, 2004

 

End of Document
