

People in the News
The Associated Press
November 19, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1473 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LOS ANGELES (AP) - A photographer accused of trying to extort $3.3 million from actress Cameron Diaz for photos taken before she was famous threatened to sell them to a European group for $5 million, an investigator testified Tuesday.
Detective Brian Bennett, an investigator in the district attorney's office, said during a preliminary hearing for John Rutter that the "majority" of the 20 photos depicted Diaz topless.
Bennett testified that Diaz, 31, told him she feared the photos would "hamper her ability to land certain family movie roles," including a role in an upcoming "Shrek" sequel.
Rutter, 41, has been charged with one count of attempted extortion, attempted grand theft, perjury and forgery. He was released from custody after posting $250,000 bail.
Bennett said he interviewed Diaz in June at her lawyer's Century City office and was told Rutter threatened to sell the photos to a European group that planned to place them on buses, billboards and kiosks to promote "Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle," which starred Diaz.
Diaz told him the photos were taken in 1992 during a "spec shoot," meaning they were taken only to build her and Rutter's portfolio and weren't meant to be published.
She also said Rutter didn't have a valid photo release giving him rights to sell the photos, Bennett testified.
Rutter, who was arrested Aug. 12, has said he was negotiating with Diaz and she offered "sums of money" to keep the photos private. Rutter said he contacted her lawyers to offer them right of first refusal before trying to sell the photos.
Authorities raided his apartment and seized the photos, which are being kept in a safe deposit box.
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Oprah Winfrey has received the Marian Anderson Award for her efforts helping minority students and families.
The award honoring artists and performers for their humanitarian efforts was presented Tuesday by Mayor John Street and musician Quincy Jones, a 2001 winner. Winfrey, 49, said she hopes to "light up the world."
Winfrey said she stands on the shoulders of people such as Anderson, an opera singer from Philadelphia who fought discrimination to become the first black singer to perform with the Metropolitan Opera in New York.
The Chicago-based talk-show host has transformed her celebrity into activism by starting numerous charities including Oprah's Angel Network, which raises money from viewer and celebrity donations. The donations have been put toward scholarships and building homes for Habitat for Humanity, and the construction of 34 schools in 10 countries.
In 2005, she'll open the Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for Girls, an education program in South Africa. She's also the spokesman for A Better Chance, which offers scholarships to minority high school students to attend prep schools.
---
On the Net:
http://www.oprah.com/ 
---
WHISKEY FLATS, Texas (AP) - A Texas man stuffed the tails of nine live rattlesnakes in his mouth Tuesday, besting his record of eight.
In a field behind his mobile home in Whiskey Flats, a community about 25 miles southwest of Fort Worth, Jackie Bibby banded nine snakes together by their rattles and wedged the tails into his mouth.
The 52-year-old leaned forward from the waist and held still for 10 seconds, the snakes dangling down. Guinness World Records sent a photographer to record the event.
"I have to break my own records. Heck, there's nobody else who can do it," Bibby told the Fort Worth Star-Telegram for its online edition. "I think I could do 12 or 13, but probably no more. My mouth is only so big."
Bibby, who's performed snake stunts for TV shows and other events, said he's been bitten six times in 34 years of snake handling.
He also holds the world record for sitting in a bathtub with the most live snakes - 75 western diamondbacks, according to Guinness.
Bibby had planned to break that record Tuesday by sitting in a tub with more than 81 snakes, but the snakes wouldn't cooperate and Bibby had to quit after only about 40 were dumped on him.
---
On the Net:
http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/ 
---
MOUNT CLEMENS, Mich. (AP) - Eminem's ex-wife appeared in two Macomb County courts on bench warrants Tuesday after missing two earlier court hearings.
Kim Mathers stood before judges in Macomb County Circuit Court and a Warren district court on charges connected to the two missed dates, the Detroit Free Press reported.
Mathers, 28, posted a $50,000 cash bond in Macomb County court and was released.
Macomb County Circuit Judge Edward Servitto ordered her to be placed on an electronic tether, which notifies authorities if she leaves her home but doesn't track her whereabouts. He also ordered her to undergo drug and alcohol testing and attend weekly Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics Anonymous meetings.
Lawyer Michael Sinutko didn't say where Mathers had been, but told Servitto that she is under "emotional as well as personal stress" and "is hoping to put this back on the right path."
Mathers had been scheduled to appear at a Nov. 4 hearing for violating the conditions of her bond in a St. Clair Shores drug case.
Servitto issued a warrant when Mathers' lawyer said he couldn't reach her after she missed the hearing.
A pretrial hearing on cocaine possession charges is scheduled for Dec. 18 in Macomb County court.
Later Tuesday, Mathers appeared in district court in Warren, where she had missed a Nov. 6 arraignment on a separate charge of running a drug house. The charges stem from a Sept. 29 hotel party in the city.
District Judge Dawnn Gruenburg reinstated Mathers' $3,000 personal bond and set a Dec. 16 court date.
Mathers and Grammy-winning rapper Eminem, whose legal name is Marshall Mathers III, married in 1999 and divorced in 2001. They have a daughter, Hailie Jade.
---
NEWARK, N.J. (AP) - Naomi Campbell has been sued by a former administrative assistant who alleges the supermodel struck her and threw a phone at her during a tantrum two years ago in a Beverly Hills hotel.
The lawsuit, filed Sept. 15 in state Superior Court in Morris County, was reported in Tuesday's editions of The Star-Ledger of Newark.
Simone Craig, 29, of Morristown, alleges Campbell grabbed her by the arms and threw her down on a couch during a tantrum at L'Hermitage Hotel. It also alleges that Campbell held Craig prisoner in the room and yelled at her, "You're going to stay here and do your job."
John Rosenberg, a lawyer for the 33-year-old British model, told The Associated Press Tuesday that Campbell "categorically denies the allegations."
The lawsuit says Craig immediately quit. She'd been hired two weeks earlier by a New York agency to work for Campbell, the court papers said.
Last week, Campbell's New York lawyer asked that the case be moved to federal court in Newark.
"It's an unfortunate byproduct of visibility and celebrity that individuals such as Ms. Campbell are subjected to this sort of claim," Rosenberg said Tuesday.
In February 2000, Campbell pleaded guilty in Toronto to an assault charge for beating assistant Georgina Galanis while making a film in Canada in 1998. Under an agreement with the prosecution, Campbell expressed remorse and was released without punishment or a criminal record.
Rosenberg declined to provide details of a settlement with Galanis.
NORFOLK, Neb. (AP) - Owners of Johnny Carson's boyhood home are asking the city of Norfolk to buy it.
Jim Pruett of Brandon, S.D., said he and partner Rick Runge of Sioux Falls, S.D., were trying "to do a nice thing" when they bought the two-story, off-white house last spring. They remodeled it, and hoped to sell it for a profit.
"(But) we stand to lose a bunch of money," he said. "I failed with it." It had been reported earlier that the two men had paid $150,000 for the house in March.
Pruett said he and Runge had spent about $171,000 on remodeling and were willing to sell the house for $119,000. It has been listed on Internet auction site eBay and with a local real estate company.
Pruett met with Mayor Gordon Adams and the City Council Monday, but no action was taken on his request. They told Pruett they would contact some civic-minded residents to see if they had any interest.
The Carson home sits on the city's busy 13th Street, informally named Johnny Carson Boulevard. Carson, former host of NBC's "Tonight" show, lived in the five-bedroom house from ages 8 to 18.
LONDON (AP) - The five books in the "Harry Potter" series have collectively sold a quarter of a billion copies, author J.K. Rowling's agent said.
Rowling's stories chronicling the adventures of a boy wizard have been translated into 60 languages and sold around the world. She's working on the sixth installment and plans seven in all.
"We are delighted J.K. Rowling's books continue to win new fans internationally and look forward to introducing Harry Potter to yet more readers in the farthest parts of the globe," her agent, Christopher Little, said Monday.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos KIM102 of Nov. 18, Winfrey; TXFOR102 of Nov. 18, Bibby;
 Load-Date: November 20, 2003

 

End of Document
