

People in the News
The Associated Press
June 30, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1241 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




TORONTO (AP) - Neil Young will mark his return on stage by performing at Canada's Live 8 concert Saturday, three months after he was treated for a brain aneurysm.
Young will close out the show, accompanied by the Fisk University Jubilee Choir, organizers said this week. The free concert, one of nine to be held simultaneously around the world to raise awareness of poverty in Africa, will be held in Barrie, just north of Toronto.
The Toronto-born musician was part of the Live Aid show in Philadelphia 10 years ago. The 59-year-old rocker has been working on a new album, a follow-up to 2003's "Greendale."
Young was treated for the aneurysm at a Manhattan hospital in late March. His vision had become blurry after attending the March 14 induction ceremonies for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
Bryan Adams, Our Lady Peace and Motley Crue are among the scheduled headline acts at Canada's Live 8 concert. Dan Aykroyd and Tom Green will host the show, which will mostly feature Canadian artists, including Jann Arden, Gordon Lightfoot and The Tragically Hip.
Concerts also are scheduled Saturday in London, Moscow, Berlin, Rome, Tokyo, Philadelphia, Paris and Johannesburg, South Africa.
Sheryl Crow has announced on her Web site that she will not perform at Saturday's Live 8 concert in Paris "due to substantial logistical and personal challenges."
---
On the Net:
http://www.live8live.com/ 
---
ALBANY, N.Y. (AP) - Cyndi Lauper has lost her bid to have the rent on her Manhattan apartment cut nearly in half.
On Thursday, the state Court of Appeals upheld a lower court ruling that set Lauper's rent at nearly $1,000 a month.
The 52-year-old singer and her husband, actor David Thornton, sued the owners of their luxury apartment building, claiming they were cheated out of thousands of dollars in a scheme to end rent stabilization for their residence.
In 1992, 390 West End Associates entered into a lease with Shlomo Baron for an apartment in the Apthorp building. While the prior tenant paid just $508 monthly for the apartment, Baron agreed to pay $2,400 a month under an agreement that he wouldn't use the dwelling as his primary residence. Baron then sublet the apartment to the Thorntons for $3,250 a month.
In 1996, the couple sued Baron, seeking to recover what they paid in excess of the legal stabilized rent plus damages. They later sued 390 West End, seeking to have their rent reduced to the stabilized price of $508 a month.
The state Supreme Court ruled in favor of the Thorntons except for the manner of determining rent. The court used a default formula adopted by the Division of Housing and Community Renewal to determine the rent should be set at $989 a month.
Lauper and her husband appealed that ruling to the Court of Appeals.
The court upheld the lower court's ruling in a 5-2 decision.
Lawyers representing the couple and 390 West End did not return calls for comment.
Lauper is best known for her 1980s hits "Girls Just Want to Have Fun," "Time After Time" and "I Drove All Night."
---
On the Net:
http://www.courts.state.ny.us/ctapps/ 
http://www.cyndilauper.com/ 
---
VIENNA, Austria (AP) - Seiji Ozawa has renewed his contract as music director of the Vienna State Opera and will stay in the position through the 2009-2010 season.
The agreement, announced last week by the opera company, did not include financial terms.
Ozawa, 69, began his Vienna tenure in the 2002-2003 season. Before that, he was music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra for 29 seasons.
Ozawa first conducted at the Vienna State Opera in 1988 for a new production of Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky's "Eugen Onegin."
---
WELLINGTON, New Zealand (AP) - New York will host the world premiere of Peter Jackson's mammoth update of "King Kong" in early December.
The premiere will be held ahead of the movie's Dec. 14 release, Universal Pictures Vice Chairman Marc Shmuger said Wednesday. He was in Wellington for meetings with Jackson.
The original 1933 movie starring Fay Wray featured New York's Empire State Building, the skyscraper that massive gorilla King Kong scaled while holding tight to Wray.
Shmuger said the premiere was an opportunity for New York "to welcome Kong back."
"New York is very excited about the opportunity and the city is one of our partners on the film," he said. "They are lending extensive resources to really make the return of Kong to New York an official event."
Jackson's film stars Naomi Watts, Adrien Brody and Jack Black. Andy Serkis provides the body motions for Kong.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Melissa Joan Hart, who starred in the TV series "Sabrina the Teenage Witch," is reportedly expecting her first child.
Hart, 29, is married to Mark Wilkerson, 28, lead singer and guitarist for the rock trio Course of Nature. Their baby is due in January, People magazine says in its July 11 edition.
Calls by The Associated Press Wednesday to Hart's representatives were not immediately returned.
"I'm thrilled to death," Paula Hart, the actress' mother, told People. "Melissa is feeling great. So far, so good."
Hart and Wilkerson were married in July 2003.
Best known for her role as Sabrina on the WB sitcom, Hart also played the spunky namesake of Nickelodeon's "Clarissa Explains it All."
Hart stars in the upcoming film "Jack Satin."
---
BIRMINGHAM, Ala. (AP) - "American Idol" winner Ruben Studdard has filed a complaint with the Birmingham police department, accusing his ex-manager of identity theft and forgery.
Studdard, 26, said in the complaint filed Monday that Ronald W. Edwards forged paperwork giving himself power of attorney. According to the report, the forgery took place between Aug. 1, 2003, and Nov. 30, 2004.
The singer also claims Edwards used his credit cards to take $105,000 and had written checks for $150,000. The report says $22,000 in checks were stolen and deposited in Edwards' account. Studdard sued Edwards and his marketing company, SEZ Inc., in February, claiming Edwards misused more than $246,000 of his money.
Edwards denied the allegations and has indicated Studdard owes him money. Edwards filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy on June 17, prompting a stay in the lawsuit.
Vic Hayslip, a lawyer for Studdard, claimed that Edwards' bankruptcy filing was an effort to avoid giving a deposition in the lawsuit. Edwards' lawyer, Glennon Threatt, called the contention inaccurate.
Studdard won Fox TV's "American Idol" talent competition in May 2003.
---
On the Net:
http://www.rubenstuddard.com/ 
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Former President Clinton mouthed the word "kooky" as he sat next to CNN founder Ted Turner. But the moment underscored a serious issue.
Turner received the Clinton Center Award for Leadership and National Service Wednesday at the American Museum of Natural History for his work as an environmentalist, pushing for new energy sources. The award is given by the Washington-based Democratic Leadership Council.
Clinton told a luncheon crowd that before prominent personalities such as Turner raised their voices in favor of alternative sources such as the wind and the sun, "most people thought anyone who was serious about building an energy future and energy conservation was slightly kooky."
Turner and Clinton also engaged in an in-depth discussion of energy and environmental issues moderated by UN Foundation President Timothy Wirth.
Clinton said most Americans think of energy conservation "the way, when I was a kid, we thought of gulping castor oil."
---
On the Net:
http://www.dlc.org 
http://www.tedturner.com/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo of June 28: CPT106 of Young, NYET109 of Lauper, NY107 of
 Load-Date: July 1, 2005

 

End of Document
