

Prime Minister expected to continue his role in the day-to-day government of the Palestinians
The Associated Press
November 11, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 307 words
Dateline: RAMALLAH, West Bank
Body




Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmed Qureia walked a political tightrope in the last months of Yasser Arafat's leadership, but was expected to stay on to run the day-to-day government of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
He first won recognition for secret talks with Israel that led to the famous handshake on the White House lawn in 1993 between Yasser Arafat and Israel's Yitzhak Rabin - the birth of the peace process.
Qureia, who was No. 3 in Arafat's Fatah movement, had long been considered a possible successor to Arafat, but lost out Thursday to Mahmoud Abbas who took over as leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization upon Arafat's death.
The 65-year-old Qureia, who was close to Arafat despite squables, rose to power as the PLO's top money manager. He joined Fatah shortly after the group's 1965 founding.
Qureia's longtime involvement in the peace process make him a recognizable face, and he has considerable credibility with ordinary Palestinians.
Qureia, better known as Abu Ala, returned to the Palestinian territories from exile in Tunisia in 1994 along with Arafat and other leaders, and was elected to serve as speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council in 1996.
Qureia has long been at the heart of negotiations with Israel. He was the head of the Palestinian team in talks that led to the breakthrough 1993 Oslo peace accords, which gave birth to the concept of "land for peace" - Israel would return occupied lands in the West Bank and Gaza to Palestinian control in exchange for peace and security.
Qureia has had several heart attacks, the first one in the middle of a negotiating session with Israeli leaders in September 1995. Israel's Shimon Peres rode by his side in an ambulance that took him to an Israeli hospital. An emotional Qureia later thanked Peres and said he saved his life.
Qureia has two daughters and two sons.
 Load-Date: November 12, 2004

 

End of Document
