

Seeking friends in the West, Sudan tempers its Islamic zeal
July 9, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1042 words
Byline: By HAMZA HENDAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KHARTOUM, Sudan
Body




The "ghost houses" once used to detain and torture dissidents are gone. Prominent exiles are coming home. No longer are young men rounded up and sent into battle against southern rebels in the name of Islam and country.
Rarely do policemen publicly admonish women for leaving their hair uncovered or wearing tight pants. Khartoum, the hot, dusty capital of some 8 million people astride the Nile, is ablaze with Pepsi and Coke billboards. Internet cafes are all the rage.
Sudan has come a long way since its militant heyday in the 1990s, when Africa's largest country sought to transform itself into an exemplary Islamic state but ended up alienating many at home and abroad. Sudan is now eager to project moderation, respect for human rights and reconciliation with the West.
Experts and diplomats see various reasons for the change: pressure from the United States, spurred by suspicion of militant Islam following the Sept. 11 attacks; a power struggle between moderates and radicals within the ruling establishment; eagerness to get foreign aid and Western technology to exploit natural resources like oil.
The shift, they say, may have also been the result of the removal in 1999 of parliament speaker Hassan Turabi, an Islamic ideologue widely suspected of having engineered the 1989 coup that brought President Omar el-Bashir to power. Turabi is now under house arrest.
"Fresh foreign investment, the rapid development of Sudan's oil and mineral wealth, and more than $1 billion in potential development aid are all the prizes that peace would bring," Ghazi Salah Eddin Atabani, el-Bashir's peace adviser, wrote in Kenya's Daily Nation newspaper.
The article appeared last month just after the latest round of peace talks between the Khartoum government and the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army.
Whatever the impetus, the changes in this country of 30 million people seem to be too sweeping and popular to be rolled back.
Sudan's Islamic government started off its rule in 1989 claiming Islam was the remedy for everything - a long-running civil war, an economy in tatters and decades of political instability.
Extremists, including Osama bin Laden, whose al-Qaida terror network is held responsible for the Sept. 11 attacks, found a haven in Sudan in the 1990s. In 1993 Sudan was added to the U.S. list of countries sponsoring terrorism. U.N. sanctions followed for Sudan's alleged role in a 1995 attempt by Muslim extremists on the life of Hosni Mubarak, president of neighboring Egypt.
In what may have been one of the earliest signs of Sudan's break with militant Muslim groups, Khartoum ordered out the Saudi-born bin Laden in 1996 after its offers to hand him over to Saudi Arabia or the United States were either rejected or ignored. Bin Laden returned to Afghanistan.
In 1998, after the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania were bombed, the United States fired cruise missiles at a Sudanese pharmaceutical factory allegedly linked to bin Laden.
The government invoked jihad, or holy war, when referring to the war against the south's non-Muslim rebels and armed Muslim tribesmen to fight in the name of the faith.
Rebels in the south, a mostly virgin area the size of France, have fought successive Khartoum governments on and off for decades, demanding autonomy from what they see as a ruling Muslim clique in the Arab north.
Now relations with the West are rapidly improving. The United States has said Sudan is cooperating in the war on terror and, in what seemed unthinkable a few years ago, accepted a U.S.-brokered truce in the Nuba mountains in central Sudan and the deployment there of Western monitors. In theory, the Nuba mountains is part of northern Sudan, but is close enough to the south to have been drawn into the civil war.
The Nuba Mountains cease-fire is part of an effort led by special U.S. special envoy John Danforth to end the war, which has so far claimed at least 2 million lives.
Meanwhile, human rights and civil society groups now operate openly in Sudan. Press censorship has been lifted and independent newspapers freely criticize government policies.
On June 24, for instance, an article published by the independent newspaper al-Horiya complained that the regime was more concerned about its own comforts than helping a population "suffering to the point of misery." The article was written by Haidar Ibrahim Ali, who runs an independent think tank in Khartoum.
Opposition parties, banned for more than a decade, are active again, albeit within limits set by the government.
Couples are back strolling along the Nile or at restaurants and cafes, of which dozens had sprung up in recent years. For women, "Islamic chic" - like tight pants with a jacket or a loose top - is back. Coca-Cola, long denounced as an American imperialist import, is now produced at a $42 million Khartoum factory.
Mohammed Wardi, Sudan's most popular singer and a longtime communist, returned home this summer for the first time since the Islamic government seized power. His three sold-out concerts were the talk of town last month. The audience included Cabinet ministers, and crowds swayed and sang along with Wardi in scenes that would have been frowned upon only two or three years ago.
Another returned exile is Sadiq el-Mahdi, the prime minister whose elected but ineffective government was overthrown by el-Bashir's 1989 military coup.
"They haven't gone back on Islam, but their narrow interpretation of Islam and the suppression they imposed under its name have changed," said el-Mahdi in an interview with The Associated Press.
Many of the Islamic regime's changes have stuck. Islamic banks and universities are now common in Sudan and the five daily breaks for prayers are routine in workplaces. Street signs exhort people to perform the prayers. News conferences begin and end with recitations of passages from the Quran.
Extending from Egypt's southern border to the borders of the Congo and Uganda, controlling the middle reaches of the Nile, and blessed with potentially vast mineral and agricultural wealth, Sudan has strategic importance.
But since independence from Britain in 1956, a succession of short-lived democratic governments and decades of military dictatorships have failed to bring about political or economic stability.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY375-380 of July 9
 Load-Date: July 10, 2002

 

End of Document
