

Ten years after the genocide, Rwandans are struggling to rebuild their society
The Associated Press
April 4, 2004, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1296 words
Byline: By RODRIQUE NGOWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GASHA, Rwanda
Body




During the genocide, Ismail Muhakwa marched through his hilltop village with a machete, hunting down his Tutsi neighbors. His first victim was a young man trying to cross a river into Burundi.
"We killed him on the spot … using clubs and knives," Muhakwa recalls.
Today, as he awaits trial before his fellow villagers, he meekly goes from family to family, asking them to forgive him and believe that he, like his country, has changed.
The soft-spoken farmer is just one example of how Rwanda is still recovering, 10 years after it was ripped apart by genocide and left an abiding stain on the world's conscience.
Wednesday is the 10th anniversary of the beginning of the systematic slaughter unleashed by the Hutu majority on more than 500,000 Tutsis and politically moderate Hutus. For the next 100 days, victims were chased into churches, banana fields and swamps. They were hacked to death by neighbors, shot by soldiers.
The genocide drew unusual apologies from President Clinton and the United Nations for failing to intervene. Romeo Dallaire, the Canadian general whose U.N. peacekeepers had to stand by helplessly as the slaughter unfolded, went into a suicidal depression. The violence spilled into neighboring Congo where it stoked two civil wars.
The slaughter wrecked this former Belgian colony and left many wondering how the two communities - 8.2 million people jammed together in a Maryland-sized country - could ever live in peace.
Rwanda has made more progress than most could have imagined, refusing, in the words of Tutsi President Paul Kagame, "to be held hostage" by grief and mistrust.
But even as Hutus and Tutsis farm the terraced hillsides together, growing potatoes, bananas and beans, Tutsis remain wary of their Hutu neighbors, who in turn say they have been cut out of power by Kagame.
One indication of the lingering distrust is marriage habits. Tutsis and Hutus used to marry each other. Now, says Jacques Hitimana, a 63-year-old Hutu night watchman, "if a Tutsi woman agreed to marry a Hutu, her family would refuse to bless them."
While Rwandans like Muhakwa are building bridges to the victims' families, others are intimidating and attacking survivors to keep them from testifying.
"There are many cases of poisoning, killing, harassment and attacks on genocide survivors," said Benoir Kaboyi, the executive secretary of IBUKA, an association of genocide survivors. "The problem is in all corners of the country."
The genocide ended when Kagame's Tutsi-led Rwanda Patriotic Front toppled the Hutu extremists. Tutsis now largely control the government, economy and army.
The country's relative peace and prosperity gave Kagame, a U.S.- trained officer, a handy victory in last year's first post-genocide election.
But in the election campaign, reports piled up of police threatening opposition supporters, and the government-run media demonized Kagame's Hutu challenger.
The government's authoritarian bent, and the constitutional ban on any word or deed deemed to promote ethnicity, stifles the growth of democracy, critics say.
"My response to those people is maybe we have to agree on the definition of what they call democracy," Kagame said. "I have lost track of what a standard definition of democracy is."
Still, the government has worked hard to promote reconciliation, most notably through an unusual experiment in community justice.
Last year, with 115,000 jailed genocide suspects awaiting trial, the government decided those who confessed and named others who took part in the bloodbath would be released and tried by their neighbors in traditional community courts known as "gacaca."
The government has freed 23,000 suspects and expects 30,000 more will be out by the end of June.
The gacaca (pronounced ga-CHA-cha) have the power to impose life imprisonment. But repentant offenders like Muhakwa, if they can persuade the judges that they have owned up to all their crimes, can expect a substantially reduced sentence, part of it in community service.
Muhakwa spent six years in prison, confessed and was freed. These days, the 52-year-old father of nine awaits his gacaca hearing on charges of murder, assault and robbery related to genocide. When not tending his crops, he visits the homes of genocide survivors.
Muhakwa said his confession "was the first step in the difficult process of rebuilding my life." But he never knew the man he murdered, and therefore cannot seek his family's forgiveness. So he does the next best thing - find reconciliation with his village neighbors.
"Tutsis are now my friends," he said. "They don't look at me with an evil eye."
Sitting in the dusty living room of Specioza Nikabure, two of whose sons were murdered, Muhakwa said he shared responsibility for the genocide.
Listening intently, a hand on her chin, the head-scarfed 70-year-old woman said she hoped such confessions would paint a detailed picture of what happened.
"Only the killers can tell us the names of people that went around searching for victims," Nikabure said. "They saw everything because they were in the killing fields."
Not all the released suspects have had a change of heart.
Muhakwa said some people have threatened him because he told authorities about a smuggler in the area who helped uncover Tutsi hiding places during the genocide.
Muhakwa said he mainly stays at home. He avoids bars, fearing someone might poison his drink.
At least eight genocide suspects have been sentenced to death by a provincial court for killing survivors who were to testify against them, said Desire Kayinamura, a prosecutor. A handful of other cases remain under investigation, he said.
The U.N. tribunal in neighboring Tanzania which is trying alleged masterminds of the genocide has convicted 18 people, imposing prison terms ranging from 10 years to life. Three defendants have been acquitted.
Rwandan officials are fiercely critical of the tribunal, accusing it of being inefficient and remote from the victims.
Economically, Rwanda has rebounded remarkably. It has privatized key industries and, with ample foreign aid, is rebuilding shattered infrastructure.
All around Kigali, the capital, gaudy mansions and glass office towers are going up for a freshly minted elite. Tea and coffee production has returned to pre-genocide levels and gross domestic product has doubled to $1.7 billion.
The boom is driven by returning Tutsi exiles bringing money and business know-how.
But the statistics mask a harsh reality.
More than 60 percent of Rwandans live on less than a dollar a day, and 90 percent depend on farming.
"There is a remarkable appearance of order and stability," said Alison Des Forges of the New York-based Human Rights Watch. But the growing gap between rich and poor "could eventually pose a very serious threat to stability," she said in a telephone interview from Buffalo, N.Y.
A traditional economic arrangement called ubudehe is being touted as a road to prosperity.
Ubudehe entails setting poor families up in small businesses like raising chickens. A European Union fund finances the projects, and the repaid loans go to other poor families. It gets wealthy Hutus and Tutsis to work together to help the poorer members of each other's community.
Rwandans are also welcoming home some of the genocide's perpetrators, remnants of the defeated Hutu regime who fight on from bases in Congo.
Assured it was safe to return, rebels have begun to trickle home.
"We see clearly that the use of a gun is not the best solution," said Maj. Gen. Paul Rwarakabije, the rebels' leader, after returning in November. "We can use peaceful means to solve any outstanding issues."
Or as Janvier Mbarushimana, a Tutsi genocide survivor, put it: "Everyone has learned a painful lesson from the past. The desire for peace is the common bond for the majority of Rwandans."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY388,389 of March 30; NY456-466 of April 1; AP Graphic RWANDA GLANCE
 Load-Date: April 5, 2004

 

End of Document
