

Term "guerrilla war" evokes the ghosts of Vietnam, represents new challenge for U.S. in Iraq
The Associated Press
July 20, 2003, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 828 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRUSSELS, Belgium
Body




The whoosh of a rocket-propelled grenade out of nowhere. The rattle of machine gun fire in the night. Pain and death from an enemy who may be lurking behind every wall.
Guerrilla war is what American soldiers are facing in Iraq, according to their own commander, Gen. John Abizaid. It's a term not invoked lightly in a military only now recovering from defeat in Vietnam.
For Americans who remember that conflict, "guerrilla war" evokes discredited cliches about "winning the hearts and minds" of the people and victory as a "light at the end of the tunnel" slipping ever further away.
It was a conflict in which the Americans won all the major battles but still lost the war.
Yet victory for guerrillas - lightly armed irregulars who fight a superior force by stealth and ambush - is never assured either.
Guerrilla fighters were successful in China, French Indochina, Laos, Cuba, Algeria and Nicaragua. But they lost in Greece, the Philippines, Malaysia, Cyprus and Kenya.
Either way, the price can be high and the struggle long. It took the British and their Commonwealth allies about 12 years to stamp out Marxist guerrillas in what is now Malaysia. Shining Path in Peru, the New People's Army in the Philippines and FARC in Colombia are still active after decades of struggle.
In America's first colonial war, Filipino insurgents battled U.S. troops for four years - half of them after rebel leader Emilio Aguinaldo was captured in 1901.
Guerrillas are the unseen enemy lurking among the civilian population. Fighting an adversary who could be the smiling teenager hanging out on a street corner often requires methods as brutal as those used by the guerrillas themselves.
"I shudder watching American GIs kicking down doors of civilian homes in the dead of night, threatening screaming children with their weapons, hooding suspects, firing into crowds of demonstrators, and calling air strikes on villages," wrote columnist Eric Margolis in The Toronto Sun.
Such methods can alienate the local population, weakening public will back home and draw international outcry. That plays into the hands of the guerrilla, who gambles that his superior adversary will tire of the bloodshed and withdraw.
In Cuba, Fidel Castro's guerrillas seized power on New Year's Day of 1959 by wearing down popular support for the government of Fulgencio Batista and sapping his army's will to fight.
The pattern of guerrilla war set down by China's Mao Zedong begins with establishing "safe zones" where insurgents can train and organize. The next phase calls for expanding the zones until the insurgents are ready to attack cities.
The Iraqi guerrillas' zone appears to be the "Sunni Triangle," Saddam Hussein's stronghold north of Baghdad. Expanding to phase two could require winning support among the majority Shiite Muslims, who had been among Saddam's fiercest opponents.
To succeed, insurgencies often need support of other countries. The Viet Cong got weapons and sanctuary in Cambodia, Laos and North Vietnam. The 1979 Sandinista offensive that toppled Nicaraguan President Anastasio Somoza was launched from bases in Costa Rica and Honduras.
Although none of Iraq's neighbors supports the Iraqi insurgents, Saddam's stalwarts are gambling on support from ordinary Arabs who want to drive the Americans from Arab soil.
The French in Southeast Asia, the Americans in Vietnam and the Russians in Afghanistan have all learned painful lessons in suffering defeats in guerrilla wars:
- Overwhelming force and high-tech gadgetry are no guarantee of success;
- Intelligence - knowing the enemy and his culture - is paramount;
- Time is a weapon. The guerrilla knows he can't defeat a superior force on the battlefield. Instead, he drags out the conflict until his adversary grows tired and leaves.
In guerrilla wars, the superior force must fight like his adversary. Special operations troops, operating like the guerrilla in small, mobile units, prove more effective than heavily equipped conventional forces.
Russian tank units, designed to fight on the plains of Europe, bogged down in the mountains of Afghanistan. However, Soviet special forces, the spesnatz, won the respect of Afghan fighters.
Tactics must be adapted to the situation on the ground, sometimes in ways that seem bizarre. One of America's most successful practitioners was the legendary Col. Edward Lansdale, who masterminded the campaign that crushed communist rebels, or Huks, in the Philippines in the 1950s.
Lansdale turned Filipino superstitions, including a belief in a vampire-like creature known as the asuang, against the Huk guerrillas.
"When a Huk patrol came along the trail, the ambushers silently snatched the last man on the patrol," Lansdale wrote in his book "In the Midst of Wars." "They punctured his neck with two holes, vampire-fashion, held the body up by the heels, drained it of blood, and put the corpse back on the trail."
When the Huks found the body, "every member of the patrol believed the asuang had got him."
 Load-Date: July 21, 2003

 

End of Document
