

Terror mastermind captured in Baghdad was the rogue force of the Palestinian movement
The Associated Press
April 16, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 739 words
Byline: By JASPER MORTIMER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




From a deadly act of piracy in the Mediterranean Sea to an attempt to infiltrate Israel by hot-air balloon, Abul Abbas found no method too drastic to strike a blow for the Palestinian cause.
But it was that very taste for the extreme that made even radicals within the Palestinian power structure blanch - and probably ended up making Abbas, who was captured Monday by U.S. forces in Baghdad, more of a liability to their movement than an asset.
Abbas' most notorious coup was the storming of the Achille Lauro cruise ship off Egypt's Port Said in 1985. Militants shot American Leon Klinghoffer in his wheelchair and tossed him overboard.
The attack reinforced the image of the Palestinian cause as a movement of terror - no matter that the mastermind was leader of the Palestinian Liberation Front, a splinter group of Yasser Arafat's more moderate PLO.
After the attack, Abbas, 55, proved a slippery quarry. Even after his conviction in an Italian court, Abbas popped up throughout the Middle East, fielding reporters' questions without any fear.
The Abbas plot that did most damage to Palestinian hopes came in 1990, two years after Arafat renounced terrorism and amid nascent dialogue between Washington and the Palestinian Liberation Organization.
Armed PLF militants raced toward Nizzanim beach in southern Israel, only to be intercepted by the Israeli Navy. The most notable outcome of the bungled attack was a break-off of peace talks.
While out of the limelight for the past decade, Abbas is believed to have continued plying the terror trade from Iraq up to the time of his capture Monday in a raid on the southern outskirts of Baghdad.
Israeli intelligence officials say the PLF faction under Abbas was a conduit for Saddam Hussein's payments to the families of Palestinian suicide bombers.
Israel reported earlier this year that it captured several Palestinians who trained at a PLF camp in Iraq and were told by Abbas to attack an Israeli airport and other targets.
Abbas, a burly man with a fleshy face, black eyes and a drooping mustache, will be most remembered for the attack on the Achille Lauro.
Hundreds of passengers, including Klinghoffer and his wife of 36 years, were taken hostage aboard the Israel-bound liner. Marilyn Klinghoffer, when she last saw her husband, had a machine gun to her head.
Her husband was then shot to death. His body and his wheelchair were thrown from the ship.
The Klinghoffers had been celebrating their 36th wedding anniversary on the Achille Lauro. Marilyn Klinghoffer died of cancer four months after the attack.
The other passengers were released after a two-day ordeal and the commandos surrendered to Egyptian authorities, who put the alleged killers on a flight to the PLO's headquarters in Tunisia.
U.S. Navy fighters forced the flight down in Sicily, under Italian jurisdiction. But the Italians allowed Abbas to flee to Yugoslavia before a U.S. warrant for piracy and hostage-taking could be served.
Abbas disappeared, and international manhunts failed to track him down. He was convicted in absentia in an Italian court and sentenced to life in prison in 1986, but never served any time.
His faction relocated to Iraq after the attack.
Abbas, whose real name is Mohammed Abbas, was born in 1948 in the Yarmouk Palestinian refugee camp in Syria after his family fled from their home in Tira, near Haifa, when the state of Israel was created.
He attended Damascus University and graduated with a degree in Arab literature. He also became involved in student politics and in 1967 joined George Habash's Marxist Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
He fought as a guerrilla, as often against rival Palestinian factions as the Israelis. But Abbas and others felt that group was focusing too much on political philosophy rather than armed struggle.
In 1976, Abbas took his followers to form a new faction, the Palestine Liberation Front.
In 1981, Abbas' group launched the first attempt to infiltrate Israel by air. Two PLF guerrillas flew motorized hang gliders from south Lebanon into northern Israel in an abortive bid to attack an oil refinery near Haifa. Later that year, another PLF squad flew a hot-air balloon into Israel, but it was shot down.
Abbas initially refused to apologize for the killing of Klinghoffer, accusing the West of double standards in repeatedly holding him to account for it.
However, in 1996, Abbas said: "The killing of the passenger was a mistake … we are sorry."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY193, NY95, NY198.

 

End of Document
