

THE WILD SIDE: Traipsing through the South African bush
The Associated Press
April 21, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel News
Length: 1059 words
Byline: DINA KRAFT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KRUGER NATIONAL PARK, South Africa
Body




A blur of gold is spotted through the high, wind-whipped grasses and off we walk toward the lion's den.
We glance at each other nervously, but forge ahead. My friends and I have come to experience the African bush on foot, so, gulping, we fall in shaky step behind our two ranger guides. Their rifles are at the ready.
So are our zoom lenses.
We are in the Kruger National Park, the largest game park in South Africa, on a guided walking safari. Forsaking open jeeps for hiking boots, we learn how to recognize the direction of elephant tracks, the white droppings of the bone-eating hyena, and how to scare away crocodiles before taking a dip in a stream.
Seeing lions is a special treat, even for our veteran guide, Chris Muthani, and he can't stop smiling as we creep closer and closer into the glow of the day's last light.
About 150 yards ahead we count 10 lions sitting in a semicircle in the grass. Their heads poke up through the grass thicket, listening, aware.
Just a few feet away from the lions a straggling buffalo lopes by. Perhaps the lions' intended dinner? But our appearance seems to distract them and the buffalo gets away.
"See? The toilet paper bush brought us luck," Muthani chirps, referring to the feathery leaves of the whipping whettle he ceremoniously blessed us with earlier in the day.
The leaves are used not only as the de-facto toilet paper of the bush, but in the tradition of Muthani's Shangan people who live in this part of the country, its branches are used to bring luck.
Muthani, one of the few black rangers to lead guided trails through Kruger Park, sprinkles descriptions of the trees and wildlife with cultural stories and traditional knowledge of the plants.
At the edge of a dried river bed he describes how the thin gray branches of the marula tree are used to help guide home the spirit of an ancestor who has died far away.
He tells us how babies born prematurely are bathed in boiled down bark from the gnarled gray trunk of the massive baobab tree.
He laughs sheepishly, pointing out the blue leaf bush cherry, which he calls "African Viagra."
Mixing the ground roots of this tree with tea can make memories, he tells us.
"I was a real man that day," Muthani says laughing.
Although he grew up in a village just outside the park, the 31-year-old Muthani did not get his first glimpse at wildlife until he was 17. During the years of racist apartheid rule in South Africa which ended in 1994, blacks were systematically excluded from Kruger Park.
Today, relatively expensive entry fees make it difficult for many South Africans to experience what visitors come across the globe to see.
Kruger National Park is the country's main game reserve. Roughly the size of Wales, it stretches for almost 2.5 million hectares (6 million acres) across a maze of ecozones from flat scrubby bush, dense shrub-like Mopane tree covered hillsides to lush valleys.
After several visits to both Kruger and the smaller private reserves that border it, it was time to experience the feel of the bush up close.
For me the best part of a game drive has always come when the engine was shut off.
Finally, the rhythm of the bush can be experienced: a hot dry wind whistling across vast plains of grazing zebra and buffalo, the call and response of flirting hornbills, the distant crunch of a branch being snapped in the trunk of an elephant.
Through a private company Kruger National Park runs seven guided two-day, three-night wilderness trails from base camps throughout the reserve. Bookings are best several months or even a year in advance as only one group of eight is allowed on the trails at a time.
My friends and I were booked on the Nyalaland Trail, in the remote northern reaches of the park. It is known more for its rugged beauty - gorges, sloping hillsides, and valleys green from the summer rain - and rich bird life than big game which can be more easily seen on the other trails.
For three nights home was a circle of thatched roof two-person huts tucked behind a leafy grove of trees in an enclosed camp that included toilets and hot (mostly) showers.
Dinner was served around an open fire, a massive kettle of hot water for tea or coffee steaming on a nearby pile of smoldering coals.
The only light after dark were swaths of luminous stars overhead and our kerosene lanterns. We joked that we had arrived to the catered version of "Survivor".
The 1,690 rand ($US 210) cost of the hike includes all meals, prepared by the camp cook. Breakfast of cheese, sausage and fruit is eaten on the road after a pre-daybreak wake up call of about 5 a.m.
The first morning we climb out from beneath mosquito nets to the muffled sounds of an elephant munching on a tree behind our huts, separated only by a few meters (feet) and a wire mesh fence.
As if the elephant was not wake-up call enough, outside each hut a jug of water had been poured into a plastic basin for a quick face wash before hitting the trails.
Single-file we line up behind our two armed guides, Muthani and his assistant Richard Mhlongo, 27. Rifles are slung across their shoulders.
"Listen, listen," says Muthani. "A hyena is calling."
Under an open sky we wind our way through cracked sun baked pathways through Baobab and Kuduberry trees.
Our guides kneel in the sand, pointing out the differences between the various animal tracks.
A meandering line in the sand tells a crocodile has recently slipped into a nearby pool.
Later we see a crocodile sunning on a rock not far from where we had been swimming the day before.
In the same area we had a sunset sighting of a mauve colored hippo who was not happy to see us.
Thrashing in the water he grunts, snaps his giant jaws, and lunges foreword. We keep our distance behind a log on the banks of the river where we later get a glimpse at a family of baboons.
Passing around binoculars we also revel in the colors of the bird life - the electric flash of blue when the lilac breasted roller flies overhead, the black and yellow head of the glossy longtailed starling.
On our last evening streaks of orange make the periwinkle sky glow as if on tangerine fire. We are all on a high from our lion sighting.
I inhale the colors, the silhouette of buffalos grazing near a watering hole, the evening drop in temperature and squeeze a friend's hand.
dk
- On the Net
South African National Parks:
http://www.ecoafrica.com/krugerpark/bushcamp.htm#trails 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY400-NY403 of April 21

 

End of Document
