

THE UNSINKABLE: Eclectic Molly Brown was a woman of the West
The Associated Press
April 21, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel News
Length: 804 words
Byline: By ERIN GARTNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DENVER
Body




Titanic survivor Molly Brown may be best known as the "unsinkable" Western woman whose loud personality and trailblazing politics helped her survive the tragedy 91 years ago April 14.
Some say that image, nourished by plays, Hollywood and even Brown herself, overshadows many merits of her life.
Brown spoke five languages, and ran for Congress and the Senate before women could vote. She devoted much of her time to charitable activities - characteristics often overlooked, says Kerri Atter, curator of the Molly Brown House Museum.
"She was a very eclectic character," Atter says.
Brown's life is on display at her restored Denver home, now a museum attracting about 45,000 visitors each year.
The three-story, stone house is nestled discreetly among downtown's historic Victorian homes. Original dishware, art and other furnishings adorn 14 rooms largely restored to look as they did between 1894 and 1912 when the Browns lived there.
The entry room's vaulted ceilings are covered with gold, textured wallpaper, and two stained-glass windows illuminate a large, wooden staircase that extends to the third floor, creaking slightly every few steps.
The fangs of a polar bear rug greet visitors to the parlor, where Brown's friends probably sat in the plush chairs near the fireplace for a piano recital.
Brown had written color schemes on the back of black-and-white photos taken of many rooms in 1910, Atter says. Microscopic paint analysis, original wallpaper scraps and architectural research also helped in renovating the home.
Tour guides tell stories of Brown's travels to Japan, Egypt and other locations, and of playwright Richard Morris who needed a "woman of the West" for a musical. He found Margaret Brown, whom he renamed "Molly" because it was easier to sing.
"She's a fascinating character," said historian and author Tom Noel. "It's great because she's a woman, she is a poor immigrant without any formal education who makes it with a lot of pluck."
Brown was born Margaret Tobin on July 18, 1867, to poor but politically active parents in Hannibal, Mo. She attended grammar school until about age 13.
She moved to the mining town of Leadville, Colo., when she was 18 to find a rich husband, Atter says. Instead, she fell in love with and married James Joseph Brown, a poor but ambitious man 12 years her senior. They had two children, Lawrence in 1887 and Helen two years later.
The family lived modestly until Ibex Mining Co. explored an old mine using baled hay and timbers, an innovation James Brown employed to prevent cave-ins, according to the museum's Web site.
The project resulted in a major gold discovery that made the company and the Browns extremely wealthy in 1893.
When the family moved to Denver, some claimed Molly Brown was ignored by socialites because of her "new rich" status. In reality, she snubbed them. "She was in the paper for throwing the best party of the year," Atter said.
Molly Brown was mentioned frequently in the newspaper, sometimes due to her own exaggerated stories. "She didn't care, as long as they were saying something," Atter said. "She was as much feeding the myth as anyone else."
The spotlight put a stress on the Browns' marriage and they separated in 1909.
Molly Brown was a passenger on the Titanic, which sunk after hitting an iceberg on April 14, 1912, claiming more than 1,000 lives. She helped fellow survivors, some of whom were young immigrant mothers who had lost their husbands and children.
"She used her influence to raise about $10,000 to put women up in hotels, radio families," Atter said. "She also made sure victims had proper burials."
Molly Brown also helped found a Denver animal shelter that still exists today and supported a juvenile justice system used as a model in other states
She continued to live a full life until she died in her sleep Oct. 26, 1932. She was 65. She had been studying acting in New York with women less than half her age, Atter said.
Hollywood movie producers took notice in 1964 when Molly Brown was immortalized by then-budding actress Debbie Reynolds as "The Unsinkable Molly Brown."
A younger audience may know Molly Brown for lending a love-stricken Jack, portrayed by Leonardo DiCaprio, a tuxedo in the 1997 movie, "Titanic."
Noel, also a history professor at the University of Colorado at Denver, said his students know Molly Brown from the movies but are soon inspired by her life.
He noted that Molly Brown was often chastised because of her poor Irish Catholic upbringing. "She felt some of the discrimination that blacks and Hispanics do today," he said. "She's a role model for younger ethnic woman."
Brown's story also attracted Atter, who continues to admire the charismatic Colorado icon.
"The mystique of the West is what made me come out here," Atter says. "She kind of embodies that."
---
On the Net:
http://mollybrown.org/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY407-NY410 of April 21

 

End of Document
