

U.N. trial of the accused leader of the Rwandan genocide begins
April 2, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 686 words
Byline: By ANDREW ENGLAND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ARUSHA, Tanzania
Body




The trial of four former Rwandan army officials charged with masterminding the 1994 massacre of more than 500,000 people opened Tuesday with U.N. prosecutors accusing them of unleashing "a legion of ferocious demons" on the victims.
Col. Theoneste Bagosora faces 12 counts of genocide, crimes against humanity and rape for his role as the army chief of staff. He and co-defendants Lt. Col. Anatole Nsengiyumva, Maj. Aloys Ntabakuze and Brig. Gen. Gratien Kabiligi have all pleaded innocent. Nsengiyumva is charged with 11 counts and Ntabakuze and Kabiligi with 10 counts each.
Rwandan and tribunal officials hope the trial will reveal the military's complicity in the genocide, as well as the planning behind the 100-day slaughter in Rwanda in which more than 500,000 Tutsi civilians and politically moderate Hutus were killed.
"These four men are among the principle perpetrators of the genocide," Carla Del Ponte, the United Nations' top prosecutor, said in opening statements. She added that some of the charges against the men were "frightening on account of their violent nature and their cruelty."
Lead prosecutor Chile Eboe-Osuji said the accused "unleashed a legion of ferocious demons that rampaged" through Rwanda, "seeking out, killing, raping and maiming every victim they could find."
All four men boycotted the trial's opening day, claiming their rights had been violated by prosecutors who have not supplied them with French translations of key prosecution documents. They also complained that they were not given the names and testimony of protected witnesses 60 days before trial. The court had earlier reduced that requirement to 35 days, for this trial only, a decision defense attorneys appealed.
The court ruled Tuesday that prosecutors could proceed with an opening statement, but that witnesses could not testify until documents related to them were translated.
Kennedy Ogetto, defense attorney for Nsengiyumva, said in an interview with The Associated Press that the men were fighting Tutsi rebels at the time of the genocide and not involved in killing innocent civilians in the east African country.
"The prosecutor's theories are nonsense. They have to produce the evidence, these are political statements made in court," Ogetto said. "My client was busy with a war. … He cannot have been at the same time telling villagers to kill."
The prosecution alleges that Bagosora took direct control of the army following the shooting down of a plane carrying President Juvenal Habyarimana on April 6, 1994. The genocide erupted after the plane was downed.
Emmanuel Ndahiro, Rwandan President Paul Kagame's security adviser, told AP that Bagosora was "essentially the de facto leader" of the government during the genocide.
Bagosora, 60, is alleged to have walked out of peace talks with the Tutsi-led rebels in Tanzania in 1993, saying he was returning to Rwanda to "prepare for the apocalypse." He and the other officers on trial are also alleged to have trained and armed a Hutu militia, known as the "Interahamwe," at the forefront of the slaughter.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Philip Reeker said the trial signifies "an important day in the annals of international justice."
He said the United States remains steadfast in its support of the tribunal and its pursuit of justice and accountability for the victims of the "horrific crimes" committed in 1994.
The genocide is believed to have been planned well in advance by Hutu-extremist members of the army and government.
Spurred on by propaganda, the Hutus were incited to butcher their Tutsi neighbors with ordinary farm tools like machetes and hoes, alongside the Interahamwe and army.
The genocide ended when Tutsi rebels, led by Kagame, captured Kigali, the capital, in July 1994 and formed a government of national unity.
All four defendants are jailed in Arusha, the northern Tanzanian town where the international tribunal for Rwanda's genocide is based. They were captured in Cameroon after being forced into exile when Kagame captured Kigali.
The trial was adjourned until Wednesday, when a closed-door "status conference" will be held.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos ARU101-102
 Load-Date: April 3, 2002

 

End of Document
