

Voice said to be Bin Laden threatens new suicide attacks in the U.S., attacks on nations who help in Iraq
The Associated Press
October 18, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 775 words
Byline: By SARAH EL DEEB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




In a new audiotape aired Saturday, a voice purported to be Osama bin Laden vowed suicide attacks "inside and outside" the United States and threatened nations that are helping the American occupation of Iraq.
The speaker in the tape, broadcast throughout the Arab world by the Al-Jazeera television station, also warned Iraqis against cooperating with U.S. forces and urged youth in neighboring nations to join a jihad, or holy war, against the Americans.
"We reserve the right to respond at the appropriate time and place against all the countries participating in this unjust war, particularly Britain, Spain, Australia, Poland, Japan and Italy," the voice said.
He added there would be "no exception for those participating from the countries of the Islamic world, and the Gulf, especially Kuwait."
It was the first tape since one released on the eve of the second anniversary of the Sept. 11 terror attacks - and the new message came as President Bush was on a tour of Asian nations rallying allies in the war on terrorism.
The United States is pushing more nations to send troops to Iraq to help U.S.-led forces trying to stabilize the country. Even as U.S. troops have faced on ongoing guerrilla resistance - blamed on Saddam Hussein loyalists - a series of deadly suicide bombings has taken place in the past two months, mostly in Baghdad, whose authors are still not known.
White House press secretary Scott McClellan said authorities would analyze the new tape. "It is a reminder that the global war on terror continues," said McClellan, with Bush in Bangkok, Thailand, at an economic summit. "Terrorists are enemies of the civilized world who seek to spread fear and chaos and they have no regard for innocent life."
The Qatar-based satellite station Al-Jazeera received the recording Saturday from a "trusted source" who called and offered the audiotape, news editor Ibrahim Hilal said.
The recording was 31 minutes but the station aired only about 17 minutes of "important material, what is newsworthy," Hilal said. The station broke up the tape into two parts, one addressed to Americans, the other to Iraqis and Arabs.
The message apparently was recorded before early September, because the speaker refers to the government of former Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas, who resigned Sept. 6.
Al-Jazeera aired the message Saturday over a still photo of bin Laden, dressed in a robe and vest and a traditional flat Afghan cap.
In the portion addressed to Americans, the speaker said: "I tell the American people we will continue fighting you and we will continue martyrdom operations inside and outside the United States until you stop your injustice, and you end your foolishness."
Addressing U.S. troops in Iraq, the speaker said: "Your blood will be spilled so the White House gang gets richer and the arms dealers with them, as well as the large companies involved."
U.S. officials have noted that some tape releases have been preludes to attacks. In an April 7 tape, a voice thought to be bin Laden exhorted Muslims to rise up against Saudi Arabia and calls for suicide attacks against U.S. and British interests.
There was no major attack, however, following the Sept. 10 message from bin Laden. In that message, al-Jazeera broadcast a videotape that contained a pair of voiceovers, one purportedly from bin Laden and the other from his deputy Ayman al-Zawahri.
The CIA said two days later that analysts believed bin Laden's voice on the tape was probably authentic.
The message aired Saturday also derided Washington's attempts to persuade other nations to send troops to Iraq.
"America is bogged down in the quagmire of the Tigris and the Euphrates (rivers)," the speaker on the tape said. The United States "is in real trouble, God willing, and is today screaming at the top of its lungs."
Bush "thought that Iraq and its oil is a big treasure," the voice said. Now he has turned to buying "mercenaries."
There are already troops from 26 other nations in peacekeeping forces led by Britain and Poland. So far after Washington's new call for forces, Turkey and South Korea have said they would send troops.
"I call upon all Muslims, especially Iraqis. I tell them: Do not dare support the crusading American armies and those that ally with them," the speaker on the tape said. "Anyone that aids them, or whatever comes of them, no matter the label, is sacrilegious."
"You young people of Islam everywhere, especially from neighboring states, and Yemen, you have to go wage jihad (holy war) and show your muscles. Follow the right path and don't follow people who follow their whims … who want to divert you from such a mission," the speaker said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY196
 Load-Date: October 19, 2003

 

End of Document
