

WASHINGTON TODAY: The guiding force behind the al-Qaida leader
September 18, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Commentary; Washington Dateline
Length: 687 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Early during the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan more than 20 years ago, Ayman al-Zawahri joined hordes of other young Islamic radicals to help Afghan rebels.
An Egyptian doctor, al-Zawahri spent two tours of duty tending to victims of the conflict.
But he never saw the Soviets as the chief enemy of Islam, a distinction he reserved for Moscow's chief rival at the time.
Al-Zawahri viewed the insurgency in Afghanistan as a mere training ground for the Muslim Mujahadeen "to wage their awaited battle against the superpower that now has the sole dominance over the globe, namely, the United States."
It was a turning point for al-Zawahri when, during his service on behalf of the Afghan resistance, he met a Saudi, six years his junior, who had the same political outlook. His name was Osama bin Laden.
As reported by Lawrence Wright in the current issue of The New Yorker magazine, al-Zawahri was a guiding force in making the most of bin Laden's militancy and money on behalf of Islam.
Wright suggests that bin Laden might never have become a terrorist mastermind it not for al-Zawahri, a figure virtually unknown in the West outside of intelligence and law enforcement circles.
For Americans, Sept. 11 might be just another day on the calendar were it not for the encouragement and political skills al-Zawahri passed on to his al-Qaida colleague.
The two were affiliated with different militant groups over the years but often found themselves together on the same turf, including Sudan and Saudi Arabia.
They did not forge a formal alliance until Feb. 23, 1998, becoming part of a new International Islamic Front for Jihad on the Jews and Crusaders. The founding document said the killing of Americans and their allies - civilian and military - is an "individual duty for every Muslim who can do it in any country in which it is possible to do it."
By that standard, bin Laden has been fulfilling his duty. He is wanted by U.S. law enforcement for the near simultaneous bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in August 1998.
Al-Zawahri was involved as well, Wright reports, saying there was a link between the bombings and the purported CIA breakup of an Islamic Jihad cell in Albania a month earlier.
On Aug. 6, 1998, al-Zawahri sent a declaration to a London-based Arabic newspaper: "We are interested in briefly telling the Americans that their messages has been received and that the response, which we hope they will read carefully, is being prepared."
The embassy bombings occurred the next day. More than 200 people died and more than 5,000 were injured.
Wright also was told that bin Laden reviewed photographs of the U.S. Embassy in Kenya and suggested a spot where a truck could go through for a suicide bombing.
After the embassy bombings, Wright said, American intelligence concluded that al-Zawahri as an equal partner in al-Qaida with bin Laden. They also believed that al-Zawahri was in charge of al-Qaida's Yemen cell when the USS Cole was bombed at the port of Aden on Oct. 12, 2000.
As Wright describes it, al-Zawahri's scientific background may have been the catalyst for al-Qaida's interest in developing chemical and biological weapons.
On Sept. 11, 2001, Wright reports, al-Zawahri and bin Laden were in the Afghan city of Kandahar, a Taliban stronghold. They left their quarters and fled to the mountains, where they listened to an Arabic radio station's news flashes about the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
Afterward, on an unspecified date, bin Laden and al-Zawahri appear together on a videotape and are seen talking about the Sept. 11 operations.
Al-Zawahri says, "This great victory was possible only by the grace of God. This was not just a human achievement. It was a holy act. These 19 men (suicide bombers) who gave their lives for the cause of God will be well taken care of."
Wright says this may have been al-Zawahri's last public statement. He speculates that al-Zawahri may have died in the American military campaign that began in Afghanistan three weeks after Sept. 11.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - George Gedda has covered foreign affairs for The Associated Press since 1968.
 Load-Date: September 19, 2002

 

End of Document
