

WASHINGTON YESTERDAY: To the shores of Tripoli
February 11, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Commentary; Washington Dateline
Length: 761 words
Byline: By LAWRENCE L. KNUTSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Captured on the Barbary Coast nearly two centuries ago, the weathered cannon lining the parade ground at the Washington Navy Yard are silent trophies of America's first war against terrorism.
The bronze guns, each long barrel a faded green, also represent the opening chapter in the story of U.S. relations with the world of Islam, a story that grew longer this year with the war in Afghanistan.
The wars against the Barbary pirates, who seized ships, held sailors for ransom and sold some into slavery, were accompanied by as much bravado and adventure as the age of fighting ships could offer.
The conflict offers a few striking parallels with the struggle today: a campaign far from U.S. shores enlisting foreign troops alongside American fighters; an enemy cast then as a "treacherous set of villains," now as the "evil ones."
A blockade of the Mediterranean coast ordered by President Jefferson in 1801 led to the bombardment of coastal forts, naval combat, disaster at sea, more American hostages, harbor raids, covert action and a desert march by a force of mercenary soldiers held together by a squad of U.S. Marines.
The Marine Corps never forgot that march, writing the line, "to the shores of Tripoli," into its anthem.
It all began with the unanticipated consequences of U.S. victory over Britain in the Revolutionary War.
Before the war, the powerful British fleet protected colonial America's merchant ships from Mediterranean pirates operating out of the four Barbary states in North Africa: Libya, Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco.
British protection ceased with American independence; American vessels began to incur serious losses.
Absorbed with nation-building at home, Congress authorized annual payments to assure safe passage. By one estimate Americans had paid out as much as $2 million in tributes and ransom before hostilities began.
By the time Jefferson became president in 1801 the demands were increasing. American patience was wearing thin. And six newly built frigates were ready for action.
Jefferson dispatched a squadron that targeted pirates in Tripoli ruled by Ysuf Karamanli, the local potentate.
The unofficial American motto: "Millions for defense; not one cent for tribute."
But fortune did not initially favor the Stars and Stripes.
The frigate Philadelphia, pursuing a blockade runner, struck a reef off Tripoli harbor and was captured; its 307 crew members were taken hostage.
The humiliation was partially answered on Feb. 16, 1804, when Stephen Decatur, then a 25-year-old lieutenant, led raiders who burned the Philadelphia to the waterline, depriving the pirates of their prize.
British Adm. Horatio Nelson called it "the most daring act of the age."
Commodore Edward Preble, the American commander in the Mediterranean, hammered Tripoli, Libya, with cannon fire and in early September 1804 sent in the aptly named Intrepid loaded with gunpowder.
But the Intrepid, perhaps hit by enemy fire, exploded in an eruption of flame at the harbor entrance, killing its crew.
At this point, with Tripoli still holding hundreds of Americans, U.S. agents turned to covert action.
William Eaton, a former U.S. counsel to Tunis, hatched a plan to replace Karamanli with his older brother.
Eaton marched across the desert from Egypt with several hundred Greek and Arab mercenaries and eight U.S. Marines under the command of Lt. Neville O'Bannon. They covered 500 miles in 50 days.
"If he wants us to march to hell, we'll gladly go there," O'Bannon said in a line that might have been lifted from a John Wayne war movie.
Reaching the pirate coast, O'Bannon's Marines captured a key town.
But the situation had changed.
The U.S. government had cut a deal: The crew of the Philadelphia would go free. The Navy would liberate prisoners it had captured and make a one-time $60,000 payment. Significantly, Tripoli made no demands for any future tribute, and piracy subsided.
The drama had a second act.
By 1815, with Americans again at war with Britain, the pirates resumed their attacks.
Decatur, by now a commodore, was sent to Algeria. The presence of his powerful squadron prompted the local ruler to sign a treaty freeing U.S. shipping from the threat of piracy. The other pirate states fell into line and the Barbary Wars were over.
The captured cannon serve as reminders of it all.
But for the moment, the tightened security at the Navy Yard that is the legacy of today's terrorism has placed the artifacts of yesterday's piracy off-limits to the public.
EDITOR'S NOTE: Lawrence L. Knutson has reported on Congress, the White House and Washington's history for 34 years.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo WX101
 Load-Date: February 12, 2002

 

End of Document
