

What the leaders agreed on at the Sharm el-Sheik summit
The Associated Press
February 8, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 312 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at agreements reached during a summit Tuesday attended by Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and Jordanian King Abdullah II:
CEASE-FIRE: Abbas said Palestinians will halt all violence against Israelis. Sharon said Israel will stop military activity against all Palestinians.
Israel would also stop its controversial targeted killing operations against wanted Palestinians, so long as the Palestinians keep militants under control.
After Sharon's declaration of an end to military operations, the two sides would go back to operating as they did before the 2000 outbreak of fighting: In Palestinian-controlled areas, including most of Gaza and eventually most West Bank towns, the Israelis would coordinate with Palestinian security forces if they want to make an arrest.
PRISONERS: Israel will immediately release 500 Palestinian prisoners as a goodwill gesture, with 400 more to be freed later.
TRANSFER OF TOWNS: Israel will transfer security control of five West Bank towns to Palestinian forces within three weeks. Israeli and Palestinian security commanders will meet Wednesday to prepare the handover of Jericho, the first of the five towns.
COOPERATION: They agreed to establish two joint committees. One will deal with the release of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails and a conditional liberty for Palestinian fugitives wanted by Israel. The other will oversee the withdrawal of Israeli forces from five Palestinian towns in the West Bank.
AMBASSADORS: Egypt and Jordan say they will return their ambassadors to Israel. The diplomats were recalled following the outbreak of violence in late 2000.
HOUSE CALLS: Abbas accepted an invitation to visit Sharon at his ranch in Israel. Sharon also said he would like the next meeting between the two leaders to be in the West Bank town of Ramallah.
 Load-Date: February 9, 2005

 

End of Document
