

Who's dead, who's captured and who's still on the loose in the war on al-Qaida
January 8, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 630 words
Byline: By JOHN J. LUMPKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The U.S.-led anti-terror coalition in recent days has increased its tally of top al-Qaida and Taliban leaders either dead or captured in the war in and around Afghanistan.
Officials caution that they don't have a body for all those reported killed, but say they have reliable intelligence, frequently from eavesdropped communications, that leads them to believe the leaders are dead.
As of Tuesday, the United States had 364 suspected Taliban and al-Qaida prisoners in custody, military officials said. Most are in Kandahar, and a few prisoners of high-interest are on board the USS Bataan.
A summary of who's dead, who's captured, and who remains wanted "dead or alive" by the coalition, as identified by U.S. officials:
Believed to be dead:
 
Mohammed Atef, bin Laden's military chief and one of his top two advisers. The Egyptian was killed by an airstrike near Kabul around Nov. 14.
Abu Hafs the Mauritanian, a bin Laden lieutenant from the African nation of Mauritania. He was reported killed Tuesday.
Abu Jafar al-Jaziri, an al-Qaida logistics coordinator, reported killed on Tuesday.
Abu Salah al-Yemeni, another al-Qaida logistics coordinator, reported killed on Tuesday.
Tariq Anwar al-Sayyid Ahmad, a high-ranking member of Egyptian Islamic Jihad, killed by an airstrike near Khost in early November. The terrorist group has close ties with al-Qaida.
Muhammad Salah, another senior figure in Egyptian Islamic Jihad, also killed near Khost, probably in the same strike.
Qari Ahmadullah, the Taliban's chief of intelligence, was killed by a U.S. airstrike near Khost on Dec. 27.
In U.S. or allied custody:
 
Ibn Al-Shaykh al-Libi, a Libyan who ran some of bin Laden's training camps. He was captured by Pakistan and turned over to U.S. authorities earlier this month.
Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi, another training camp director. He was captured this month.
Mullah Fazel M. Mazloom, the head of the Taliban's army, was captured by the northern alliance at Kunduz in November. He was turned over to U.S. authorities.
Mullah Abdul Salam Zaeef, the Taliban's ambassador to Pakistan, was arrested by Pakistan and turned over to the United States.
Abdul Aziz, a Saudi and official with the Wafa humanitarian organization accused of ties to al-Qaida.
In addition, three top Taliban officials, including Defense Minister Mullah Hadji Obaidullah Akhund, may be negotiating a surrender to anti-Taliban Afghan forces, Afghan officials said.
Still at large:
 
Osama bin Laden.
Mullah Mohammad Omar, head of the Taliban.
Ayman al-Zawahri, an Egyptian who is bin Laden's top spiritial adviser and doctor. The head of Egyptian Islamic Jihad, al-Zawahri's family is believed to have been killed in a U.S. strike.
Shaihk Saiid, also known as Sa'd al-Sharif and Mustafa Ahmad al-Hisawi, a Saudi who is bin Laden's financial chief. He wired money to Mohammad Atta, the alleged ringleader in the Sept. 11 attacks.
Abu Zubaydah, a Saudi who is considered a senior planner of al-Qaida terrorist operations.
Saif al-Adil, bin Laden's security chief, an Egyptian who appears to be taking over some of Atef's duties.
Abu Mohamed al-Masri, also known as Abdullah Ahmed Abdullah, an Egyptian who ran some of bin Laden's training camps.
Sulaiman Abu Ghaith, a Kuwaiti who is al-Qaida's spokesman.
Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, a Saudi identified as a terrorist operations planner.
Abu Basir al-Yamani, a bin Laden aide.
Thirwat Salah Shihata, the second-in-command, after al-Zawahri, of Egyptian Islamic Jihad.
Bilal bin Marwan, a Saudi and bin Laden senior lieutenant.
Saqar al-Jadawi, a senior al-Qaida member.
Amin al-Haq, an Afghan and bin Laden security official.
Ahmad Said al-Kadr, an Egyptian al-Qaida member with ties to Canada.
Abd al Aziz al-Jamal, an aide to al-Zawahri who, like al-Adil, is thought to be taking over some of Atef's duties.
 Load-Date: January 9, 2002

 

End of Document
