

1997: The year the world caught fire, says environmental group
December 16, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 651 words
Byline: By SUE LEEMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Homeowners in Sydney and children in Jakarta, Indonesian orangutans and Kenyan elephants - all are feeling the adverse effects of the world's worst year for fires.
More tropical forests burned in 1997 than at any time in recorded history, sowing death, respiratory illnesses and pollution, and destroying wildlife habitats, the World Wide Fund for Nature said in a report Tuesday.
"This was the year the world caught fire," said Jean-Paul Jeanrenaud, head of WWF's forest program and co-author of the report. "As we destroy forests, we are destroying our insurance for the future."
Up to 12.4 million acres of forest and other land burned in Indonesia and Brazil, where the Amazon region alone had more than 45,000 fires, the group, which used to be called the World Wildlife Fund, said in its report.
Vast areas of Papua New Guinea, Colombia, Peru, Tanzania, Kenya, Rwanda and other parts of Africa also burned, and large-scale fires were reported in Australia, China, Russia and several Mediterranean countries, the report said.
In his preface to the report, WWF director general Claude Martin called it "a planetary disaster."
El Nino, the cyclical phenomenon of warming Pacific temperatures that disrupts climate patterns, had delayed monsoon rains which usually extinguish many naturally occurring forest fires, Jeanrenaud said. The 1997 El Nino effect was the worst this century, he said.
At least 80 percent of the fires were set deliberately, often by multinational companies trying to clear land for planting or development, he said.
There also were the growing problems of timber speculation, insurance fraud, arson and setting fires as an act of political defiance, a phenomenon seen in Indonesia and some Mediterranean countries, he said.
The London-based group warned in October that the fires in Indonesia and Brazil were speeding global warming by spewing greenhouse gases into the air. It also believes the loss of forest can threaten animal habitats, weakening genetic and ecosystem diversity, and deplete the supply of renewable resources.
The WWF urged governments to set up an international tribunal to punish offenders and to deploy a task force to intervene in areas where environmental catastrophes are looming.
Still, Jeanrenaud acknowledged there was no international consensus to do so.
Instead, he said, the WWF is trying to persuade individual governments to take action. Brazil and 20 other countries now have pledged to protect a minimum of 10 percent of all forest types within their borders, he noted.
The report said the fires in Indonesia that spewed vast smoke clouds over southeast Asia this year destroyed more than 4.9 million acres of forest and damaged at least 19 protected areas.
More than 40,000 people were hospitalized with respiratory problems when the haze was at its worst, Jeanrenaud said.
In Brazil, fires destroyed about 5 million acres in several states and damaged critically endangered Atlantic forest, the report said. In the Brazilian Amazon, fires were up by 50 percent from 1996 to 1997, with 44,734 recorded between July 1 and Nov. 22 of this year alone.
Other countries that suffered:
-Kenya, where parts of the 5,930-acre Imenti Forest around Mount Kenya burned, threatening animals, including elephants, and plants.
-Colombia, where 7,000 forest fires destroyed 42,000 acres of national parks.
-And Papua New Guinea, where thousand of acres of grassland and rainforest burned, including several protected areas.
The report also warned that in the United States, where naturally occurring forest fires are routinely suppressed, "ecological processes are disrupted and the accumulation of flammable materials in forests poses a serious risk of greater and more destructive fires in the future."
It said also criticized U.S. government for trying to use the risk of fire "as an excuse for felling old-growth forests rich in wildlife to subsidize the logging industry."
 Load-Date: December 16, 1997

 

End of Document
