

2004 Olympic bidders: Let the cuts begin
March 6, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 713 words
Byline: By STEPHEN WILSON, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: LAUSANNE, Switzerland
Body




With a record 11 cities from three continents in the running, the race for the 2004 Summer Olympics is about to get much tighter.
As many as seven contenders will be eliminated Friday when the IOC selects four or possibly five finalists in the contest to stage the world's biggest sports festival.
The bidders are Athens, Greece; Buenos Aires, Argentina; Cape Town, South Africa; Istanbul, Turkey; Lille, France; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Rome; San Juan, Puerto Rico; Seville, Spain; Stockholm, Sweden; and St. Petersburg, Russia.
Front-runners Rome and Athens appear certain to make the list, with Stockholm, Cape Town, Buenos Aires and Rio competing for the other spots. Lille, San Juan, Seville and St. Petersburg are given little chance.
After a 14-member IOC panel names the finalists, the race will move into high gear for six months until the full International Olympic Committee selects the winner on Sept. 5 in Lausanne.
Still uncertain is whether the panel will select four finalists or five. The rules call for four, but the number can be raised to five by unanimous agreement.
This is the first time a cutoff procedure has been used in the race for a Summer Games. Some have complained that the system is flawed and humiliating for those who don't make the final round, but most IOC officials are unsympathetic.
"They knew the system when they got into this," IOC vice president Dick Pound said. "It's not a surprise. What's more embarrassing? Do you want to be one of the five-six cities which isn't ready yet or the one that gets only a single vote from your own IOC member in the final round?"
The decision could rely on geopolitical factors as much as the technical merits of the bids.
Some IOC officials would like to strike a geographical balance by including at least one candidate from Europe, Africa and South America.
Most agree that Europe has the strongest candidates, and there is strong sentiment that it will be time for the games to return to the old continent in 2004.
But since the games have never gone to Africa or South America, Cape Town and either Rio or Buenos Aires could be included in the list of finalists - even though they may be considered no more than token choices.
All 11 cities made final pitches Thursday to the IOC.
Cape Town, once seen as the sentimental favorite, sought to allay concerns over South Africa's high crime rate and political uncertainty surrounding the succession to President Nelson Mandela.
Bid leaders said the crime problems have improved substantially and would be under control by the year 2000. They said the country would continue to enjoy political stability after Mandela ends his presidential term in 1999.
Cape Town officials said the games would help transform South Africa, as well as the whole of Africa.
"We are convinced that an Olympic Games in our country will be a second transformation miracle, a major turning point in the economic and socio-political history of our country," Deputy President Thabo Mbeki said in a videotaped message.
"The Cape Town bid must be seen as an African bid," he said. "Your acceptance of this bid will send a strong signal to the rest of the world that this is the beginning of the African Renaissance."
Stockholm, whose strength lies in Sweden's reputation for political stability, low crime rate and efficiency, sought to counter its biggest weakness: lack of public support for the bid.
A recent IOC evaluation report cited a poll showing that 52 percent of the city population was opposed, with only 32 percent in favor.
But the Swedes presented the results of a new nationwide poll showing that 59 percent support the bid, with 29 percent against.
Athens addressed its problem of air pollution, saying that smog levels will be reduced by 35 percent by 2000 once the city's new metro system is completed.
"In three years' time, Athens will be one of the cleanest cities in Europe," Mayor Dimitris Avramopoulos said.
St. Petersburg, whose bid has received heavy political backing from President Boris Yeltsin, said the city will be able to hold the games despite Russia's economic and social problems.
"The way we have already progressed in five years has taken some other countries dozens of years," bid chief Alexander Kozlovsky said. "Two years from now you won't recognize our country."
 Load-Date: March 6, 1997

 

End of Document
