

50 years ago, a makeshift team of GIs put America into the Korean War
The Associated Press
June 28, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 738 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, AP Military Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




If anyone would remember the U.S. Army's shocking first encounter with North Korean troops on July 5, 1950 - 10 days into the Korean War - it would be Charles "Brad" Smith.
He was there.
As a lieutenant colonel commanding of Task Force Smith, a 400-man team fielded from ill-equipped and ill-prepared occupation troops in Japan, Smith witnessed the desperation of the moment on that rainy day near Suwon, South Korea.
"Here we are at the beginning of another war, was the thought that went through my mind," says the retired brigadier general who had been present in Hawaii when Japan bombed Pearl Harbor nine years earlier.
On Wednesday, 84-year-old Smith stood erect and square-jawed among the fields of white grave markers at Arlington National Cemetery to commemorate the sacrifices made by soldiers of Task Force Smith. Under a gray and drippy sky, he joined 31 other surviving members of his unit, as well as Gen. Eric Shinseki, the Army's Chief of Staff, and other Army leaders in laying a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknowns.
In an interview, Smith recalled that when President Harry Truman authorized Gen. Douglas MacArthur on June 30, 1950, to send U.S. ground forces under his command in Japan to meet the invading North Korea forces south of Seoul, "the general feeling was, if the Americans show up the North Koreans will turn tail."
The unfortunate surprise was that the North Koreans, in columns of Russian-supplied T-34 tanks, not only swept through Task Force Smith's blocking positions but inflicted heavy casualties as they rumbled south to Osan and beyond - an advance that was not stopped until early August at the Pusan perimeter.
Smith's men fired bazookas and 75mm recoilless rifles at 33 advancing North Korea tanks, but to little effect. The U.S. Army had developed a 3.5-inch rocket launcher capable of penetrating North Korean armor, but none were available in South Korea. Anti-tank mines could have worked, but they had none of them either.
"We held them up for seven hours," Smith recalls, by drawing the tanks off the main road into firing positions.
"By the time I ordered a withdrawal we were down to about two clips of ammunition per rifleman," he said, and forced to retreat through rice paddies, leaving weapons behind. "Some men took off their shoes because it was easier to walk through the ooze of a rice paddy with shoes off. It was a disaster."
On the morning of July 6, after his makeshift battalion had to withdrawn toward Osan, Smith could account for only 185 of his 400-plus men, members of the 1st Battalion, 21st Infantry Regiment of the 24th Infantry Division and the 52nd Field Artillery Battalion. Among the losses was the first U.S. soldier killed in the war. (Six American airmen had been killed in aerial combat several days earlier, north of Seoul.)
In today's Army, the rout of Task Force Smith is often cited as an example of the disastrous consequences of failing to keep the military modernized in arms and fully trained for short-notice combat.
Smith, while acknowledging that his men faced a mismatch they could not possibly have won, speaks proudly of their effort.
"Not a man left his position until he was ordered to do so," he said. "Everyone of them could see what I could see after the tanks went by: three more tanks coming down, then about 25 vehicles loaded, and behind them North Korean soldiers walking four abreast for as far as I could see."
Task Force Smith may have been little more than a bump in the road for the invading North Koreans, but in Smith's opinion that encounter on July 5 gave MacArthur's field commanders the time they needed to get reinforcements to South Korea in time to build a defensive line at the Naktong River west of Pusan.
In mid-September Smith's 1st Battalion of the 21st Infantry helped lead the allied breakout from the Pusan perimeter - coinciding with the U.S. amphibious landing at Inchon - and within weeks he and his troops were within 11 miles of the Chinese border at the mouth of the Yalu River. Smith had orders to leave Korea on Oct. 20, but he ignored them, thinking, "This is a hell of a time to leave; we are winning."
Unfortunately China then entered the war, and Smith and the rest of the 8th Army were forced to withdraw back below the original dividing line between North and South Korea, and the war became a stalemate.
When he finally left in early November, Smith was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for heroism.
 Load-Date: June 29, 2000

 

End of Document
