

A Cambodian family remembers the long march out of Phnom Penh
The Associated Press
April 17, 2000, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1294 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - Ker Munthit, a journalist for The Associated Press, was a child when the Khmer Rouge marched into Cambodia's capital 25 years ago. He looks back at the harsh social transformation the Marxist guerrillas began in the very first days.
---
 
By KER MUNTHIT
Associated Press Writer
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia (AP) - I remember being puzzled by the black-clad soldiers, many as young as me, who celebrated wildly in the streets of Phnom Penh on April 17, 1975.
Running barefoot with traditional red-checkered scarves wrapped around their heads, they shouted slogans - "Long live the revolution!" and "Down with American imperialism!" - and fired their rifles into the air, scattering frightened onlookers.
"Khmer Rouge," someone whispered to me, clearing up the confusion in my 12-year-old mind.
I understood that the communist guerrillas' arrival marked the end of Gen. Lon Nol's foundering Khmer Republic, but neither I nor anyone else realized the horror that Cambodia's new masters had in store for us.
My four siblings and I watched the Khmer Rouge victory unfold from inside the gates of a Buddhist pagoda packed with refugees from the three-month siege of the capital.
We had lived there with my grandmother for about a week while my parents guarded our house on the outskirts of the capital, dodging intense mortar and rocket fire.
Two Khmer Rouge units engaged in a brief standoff outside the temple as the leadership carved Phnom Penh into military-controlled districts. After the argument was settled, the order came to evacuate us from the city.
It was imperative that we leave because the United States planned to bomb the city, the Khmer Rouge told us. We would be allowed to return in three days, the soldiers said.
My father remembers the citywide panic as people tried to gather their families for the evacuation.
We were lucky. The Khmer Rouge commander in charge of the district was the brother of our neighbor. He was in high spirits after being reunited with his sister, so he agreed to help my father collect his own family.
"If it were not for that woman," my father, Ker Sa Ut, now 63, says of our old neighbor, "we would certainly not have seen each other ever again."
The commander and two subordinates, chugging Pepsi seized from a nearby bottling plant, escorted my uncle as he drove across town to the pagoda to pick us up.
We were happily reunited, but the moment proved to be the beginning of a tragic, four-year journey. The Khmer Rouge's plan to turn what they would call Democratic Kampuchea into a communist agrarian utopia had begun. Everyone was to live - or die - in an equal society.
As we left the city, we came upon a group of ethnic Chinese carrying small backpacks. They were pleading with a Khmer Rouge soldier to let them stay in Phnom Penh.
The annoyed soldier asked, "OK, who wants to go back to Phnom Penh?"
One of them raised his hand and stepped forward. The soldier shot him in the head at point-blank range, killing him.
"It was terribly shocking," my father says. "They terrified people into remaining obedient to their orders. The crowd kept moving. I still believed that after three days they would let us return home."
The execution was just one of many horrible sights on the road from capital. The cries of children mixed with calls of people frantically searching for relatives lost in the crowd. The sick and wounded lay on stretchers in agony by the roadside, abandoned by their desperate kin.
Under a makeshift tent, a woman had just given birth to a baby. Khmer Rouge troops denied her any rest and forced her to rejoin the exodus. Her husband loaded them into a cart and pushed them forward under the burning sun. The baby, barely cleaned of birth blood and swaddled in cloth, slept by its mother's side.
Swollen corpses of government soldiers were scattered around the highway. Some had been crushed flat under the treads of Khmer Rouge tanks.
At one point, a woman separated from her family tried to force her way into our car when we stopped in traffic. She revealed a handbag brimming with diamonds and gold - the only possessions she brought with her - and begged that we take some in exchange for a ride.
We refused; there were already 11 of us crammed in the vehicle. A few days later, we learned she was found dead by a riverbank.
Most people made sure to carry enough food to eat for at least three days. But some wealthy families simply brought cash packed into pillows or rice sacks. When they learned the Khmer Rouge had abolished money and their savings were worthless, their despondency drove many insane.
After four days without hearing the sounds of American bombs, my father realized we had been tricked into evacuating. We had left behind a house built just two years earlier. In a few more days, the Khmer Rouge confiscated our car.
"I knew that was it. I began to try to forget about everything we left behind," my father says. "Everybody was facing the same fate, not just us. Ahead of us stood the question of death and survival."
After eight days we arrived at a village 37 miles northeast of Phnom Penh. Branded as "new people" or "April 17 people," we struggled as members of the lowest caste of a supposedly classless society.
Living conditions steadily deteriorated. After living in a modern concrete house, we had to adjust to a 16-by-24-foot thatched hut with a leaky roof.
Privacy was taken from my family as surely as our old home. We were constantly watched. Any time our family exhibited "bourgeois habits," my parents were summoned for "self-criticism" sessions.
Urban families lived in constant fear. When my father was stricken with diarrhea so severe he could not stand, the village leaders warned my mother that he would be "crushed" if he was caught lying about his ailment.
The Khmer Rouge were more kind to children, whom they considered empty vessels easy to fill with the doctrine of Khmer Rouge leader Pol Pot.
Children belonging to families of "old people" - rural peasants who had lived under the Khmer Rouge for several years - were given the status of police officers, an upending of village society that quickly went to their heads.
I remember how one teen-age boy beat his mother senseless for stealing a potato from the farming collective. Steeped in Khmer Rouge teachings against traditional family life, the boy stated proudly, "I'm beating a thief, not my mother."
My father, a French-trained accountant who had worked at the Industry Ministry, was sent to a re-education camp. All but my youngest brother, a mere 4 years old, were put to hard labor. He would catch small frogs in the evenings to fill his empty stomach. Many other children died of malnutrition and starvation. My mother was often brought to tears.
Work hard but eat less - that was the formula that killed most of the estimated 1.7 million victims of Pol Pot's regime.
"People became real slaves," my father says. "We had to work as told by (the leaders). Nobody had any right to think about anything except working for watery rice porridge."
Of the nearly 200 urban families who were settled in the village, only about 50 were left when the Khmer Rouge were driven from power by a Vietnamese invasion on Jan. 7, 1979.
No family survived intact. I lost my grandparents, a relatively small price compared to others. Even my father survived, one of a handful released from re-education camps around the country.
Looking back, he says, patience and hard work were our best survival tools. With everyone in the family joining the work force without complaint, we probably convinced the Khmer Rouge that we had been successfully integrated into the revolution.
We had effectively given our lives to the collectivization policies of the regime. Our bodies were owned by the Khmer Rouge, while we quietly clung to our souls.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY185
 Load-Date: April 18, 2000

 

End of Document
