

A federal judge rang in the year with a surprise telecom decision
The Associated Press
January 4, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 880 words
Byline: By KAREN SCHWARTZ, AP Business Writer
Body




The year closed with more good economic news and a shocker of a decision from a federal judge who threw out parts of the Telecommunications Act.
A look at what happened in business this past week:
---
 
 ONE WAY TO RING IN THE NEW YEAR
A federal judge in Texas gave the long-distance telephone establishment a hangover even before New Year's Day by declaring key parts of the historic 1996 Telecommunications Act unconstitutional.
The law was carefully written to spur competition between regional and long-distance telephone competitors. In order to enter the $ 80 billion long-distance market, the law required the regional Bells to prove that they took steps to open local phone markets to competition.
The Federal Communications Commission has yet to grant a Bell company's application to provide long-distance in their local service areas, and two companies took the case to court: SBC Communications and U S West.
U.S. District Judge Joe Kendall in Wichita Falls, Texas, ruled Wednesday that by singling out the Bells, the law essentially had declared them guilty of anti-competitive behavior without a trial.
FCC Chairman Bill Kennard said the government would appeal, and that he believes that the ruling would apply only to the two companies involved in the court case, and not to the other three regional phone companies. Still, stocks of long-distance companies took a beating as the new year began on fears of new competition.
---
 
 DID THEY SLEW THE FLU?
In an emergency round-the-clock effort, the Hong Kong government ordered all the chickens in the territory killed in hopes of eradicating the so-called "bird flu."
Despite the government's efforts, the slaughter of 1.3 million chickens did not go smoothly. A lack of manpower and equipment hindered the effort, with the result being that some chickens survived. There also are fears that dogs and rats that got to some of the carcasses might now spread the virus.
In its defense, the government issued statistics to show the effort that went into the slaughter operation. Nearly 1,300 tons of carcasses - 95 percent of the total - had been buried at landfills by Thursday.
Chickens have been pinpointed as the likely source of the mysterious A H5N1 virus that has sickened at least 15 people and killed four since it was first reported in May. But scientists are still puzzled as to how the flu spread from chickens to humans and whether it can be passed from person to person.
Health experts say the United States has some degree of protection because it does not import chickens. The American poultry industry also handles birds very differently from Hong Kong growers - where the birds are taken to market live, then taken home by consumers for killing and cooking.
---
 
 ECONOMIC UPDATE
The economy is still growing, but its pace is slowing somewhat. The National Association of Purchasing Management said its monthly index of business activity fell to 52.5 percent in December from 54.4 percent in November. The report marked 19 straight months of manufacturing growth and 80 straight months of overall growth.
Any reading over 50 percent in the purchasing managers' index is a sign that manufacturing is growing, although analysts had expected December to come in at 54 percent.
Although the report was further confirmation the economy continues noninflationary growth, the slowdown in the rate of expansion also is viewed as a warning that it will be harder for corporations to turn in the kind of earnings increases that have led to an unprecedented three straight years of gains of more than 20 percent by the Dow Jones industrial average.
A separate report put out by the Conference Board found consumer confidence surged to a 28-year high in December. Consumer spending accounts for two-thirds of the nation's overall economic activity.
The private research group reported that its index of consumer confidence rose to 134.5 in December from 128.1 in November. The figure was well above Wall Street's expectations.
---
 
 TICKER TALK
 
 eral Electric Corp.  won Justice Department approval for its proposed $ 600 million purchase of Stewart & Stevenson Services gas turbine division.
A federal appeals court ordered expedited consideration for
 
 Microsoft's appeal of an injunction restricting distribution of the company's browser program. Written motions must be submitted by March 9. No date for oral argument was set.
 
 Colgate-Palmolive is betting $ 100 million on a new product launch for Total, the only toothpaste the U.S. Food & Drug Administration has approved as a fighter of gum disease. … Researchers at Abbott Laboratories have developed a new painkiller, called ABT-594, that may have the benefits of morphine without the drug's damaging side effects. The drug is now in early human-safety testing in Europe and the results should be known by the summer.
 
 Lexus unveiled a roomier, more powerful sport utility vehicle, the LX470, at the Greater Los Angeles Auto Show in a bid to hold its share in one of the auto industry's strongest market segments.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has filed a lawsuit accusing TJX Cos. Inc., of subjecting older employees at a T.J. Maxx store in New Jersey to a "hostile work environment" through unfair discipline and verbal harassment.
 
 End advance for weekend editions
 Load-Date: January 4, 1998

 

End of Document
