

A Hopeful Moment for the World, Says Clinton as Russia Joins Summit
June 20, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 944 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: DENVER
Body




After six years on the outside, Russia was initiated Friday as an equal partner at the summit of industrialized nations, completing an improbable journey from the era when the Soviet Union was the primary antagonist of summit policies.
President Clinton called it a "hopeful moment for the world," and praised Boris Yeltsin for his "vision and persistence" in pursuing democracy and reforms after seven decades of Communism.
Russia also won another eagerly sought prize: membership in a Paris-based club of wealthy countries that sets debt terms for poor countries. The United States hailed the step as tantamount to "the financial end of the Cold War."
"What you see here is a sweeping integration of Russia into the major decision-making institutions in the world in a way that is very positive for the rest of us," Clinton said in summarizing the changes as leaders of eight summit nations began their three-day summit with an opening banquet.
Beforehand, Clinton and Yeltsin met at the Brown Palace Hotel where a buzz broke out among sightseers at the approach of Yeltsin's motorcade. The Russian president stepped from his limousine as the crowd began snapping photographs and chanting "Boris! Boris!"
He told Clinton he had lost more than 60 pounds after last year's heart attack and that his suits were baggy. "My brain is always moving fast," Yeltsin remarked, "but now my body is also moving with more energy."
Clinton's day was diverted by the announcement of a landmark tobacco regulation settlement. While saying tobacco companies had made concessions once unimaginable, Clinton did not endorse the agreement, saying the administration would have to review it.
Following private meetings among the leaders, the 23rd annual summit began with a courtyard reception at the colonial mansion of Gov. Roy Romer. After admiring French tapestries and 16th century carvings, the leaders were sitting down for a western dinner to talk about international developments - particularly the fragile Bosnian peace accords.
Yeltsin was asked to lead off the discussion with Clinton and leaders of Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Canada and Japan. Without Russia, the group had been known as G-7 but Clinton renamed its meeting "Summit of The Eight."
Yeltsin's inclusion was both a symbolic and substantive gesture of support for Russia's reforms and its desire to participate in international economic and political institutions.
It also gave a big dose of international prestige to the Russian leader, who was almost written off as a political relic last year after a heart attack and widespread doubts about his leadership. With Russia joining the summit, Clinton said, "It's quite a hopeful moment for the world, I think, and I give him a lot of credit…
"This is the first time we've ever had a meeting where the Russians were here from the beginning to the end. It's a great tribute I think to President Yeltsin's leadership and to the commitment of the Russian people to democracy and reform."
Clinton and Yeltsin announced that Russia, after all-night negotiations in New York, was being admitted to the so-called Paris Club, a group of wealthy countries that negotiates debt terms with developing nations. Russia's inclusion will give it greater bargaining power for collecting at least a portion of the $ 120 billion it has loaned to poorer countries.
"I am very pleased with this," Clinton said. The two leaders also discussed their arms control agenda but skirted over the touchy subject of NATO expansion, which Yeltsin opposes.
U.S. officials said Clinton expressed concern about a law pending in the Russian Duma to require registration of religious groups. Clinton said it could cause problems with free expression of religion. Yeltsin said he understood Clinton's concern and would look into it, U.S. officials said.
Away from the summit, leaders took the opportunity to meet among themselves. After a session with Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto, Yeltsin grinned and said, "I think we need to improve our personal contact and I'm glad you're of the same opinion. … I'm distressed that our relations are not at the needed level.
Russia and Japan have had a long-running territorial dispute over the Russian-held Kuril islands. Hashimoto had said he would press for an early solution. But Yeltsin spokesman Sergei Yastrzhembsky said the two leaders did not specifically discuss the matter.
"We cannot expect to solve this problem today or tomorrow or in the near future," a Japanese Foreign Ministry official said.
Clinton met French President Jacques Chirac and Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi - both unhappy with Clinton's insistence on limiting new membership in NATO to Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic.
Chirac pressed his campaign to include Romania but Clinton did not budge, National Security Adviser Sandy Berger said. Prodi wants to include Slovenia in NATO.
At a picture-taking session with Clinton, Clinton and Chirac expressed concern over the slowdown in Mideast peace-making. "I am, in fact, worried about the situation," Chirac said.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl brought a proposal for a World Environmental Organization, a new U.N. agency that would oversee international environmental agreements. The leaders also are to discuss common problems with terrorism, drugs, international crime and infectious diseases spreading around the globe.
Discussing plans for the NATO summit, a U.S. official said Clinton is considering extending his travels in Europe next month after the July 8-9 meeting in Madrid - and Poland appeared to be one possible stop. Yeltsin told Clinton he would not go to Madrid but would send high level representatives.
 Load-Date: June 20, 1997

 

End of Document
