

A look at what happened at the summit
The Associated Press
September 8, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 801 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a look at some issues and events in and around the three-day United Nations Millennium Summit.
 
PEACEKEEPING
The Security Council pledged an overhaul of U.N. peacekeeping operations so troops can respond more quickly and robustly to world trouble spots.
The council's pronouncement, however, was not in the typical form of a Security Council resolution - an indication that the 15 presidents and prime ministers weren't entirely comfortable with making such concrete, legally binding pledges to better finance peacekeeping operations.
But the document was one of the major outcomes of the summit.
The world body is currently engaged in 14 peacekeeping operations - most of them in the world's poorest countries - with more than 37,000 troops and civilian police deployed from East Timor to Cyprus and Sierra Leone at an annual cost of about $2.2 billion.
Nearly 1,000 U.N. civilian staff are engaged in 14 other political and peace-building missions from Afghanistan to Burundi and Guatemala.
The council leaders - from Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada, China, France, Jamaica, Malaysia, Mali, Namibia, Netherlands, Russia, Tunisia, Ukraine, Britain and the United States - vowed "to strengthen the central role of the United Nations in peacekeeping."
---
MIDDLE EAST
Hopes faded that President Clinton would be able to achieve a Middle East peace accord before he leaves office in four months.
Despite prodding by Clinton and other administration officials during the summit, Palestinian negotiators failed to reach agreement on how to share Jerusalem holy sites.
At the heart of Clinton's mediation effort was the fate of a walled compound in Jerusalem's Old City. It is revered by Jews as the Temple Mount, the site of their ancient Temples, and by Muslims as Haram as-Sharif, or Noble Sanctuary, with two mosques marking the spot where the Prophet Mohammed ascended to heaven.
The United States has proposed complex sovereignty arrangements to accommodate rival Israeli and Palestinian claims, including placing some areas under divine sovereignty to enable both sides to save face in accepting the compromise.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak said Thursday he was willing to contemplate U.S. ideas, provided Arafat was willing to reciprocate. But Arafat insisted on full Palestinian sovereignty over all of traditionally Arab east Jerusalem, including the Old City and its Muslim and Christian holy sites.
---
AIDS AND AFRICA
The summit declaration, adopted by acclamation, commits the 150 heads of state and government who attended to promote democracy, strengthen respect for human rights and reverse the spread of AIDS, especially in Africa.
"One more day of delayed action is a day too late for our people," pleaded Botswana's President Festus Mogae, whose country is among those hardest hit by the disease. "Our people are crying out for help. Let us respond while there is still time."
Britain's Prime Minister Tony Blair urged governments to enter into a new partnership with the continent to help settle its conflicts and develop its economies.
"There is a dismal record of failure in Africa on part of developed world that shocks and shames our civilization," Blair said.
---
U.N. REFORM
Security Council reform was a major theme at the summit, which was specifically designed to chart the course for the United Nations in the next century. But no breakthrough was achieved.
Japan, the second largest contributor to the organization after the United States, asked for a permanent seat on the council.
The problem is the Africans want one, too. And the Arabs. And the Latin Americans.
Japanese Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori urged the world leaders to end seven years of deadlock and agree to an expansion of the 15-member council to make it more representative of the 189-member organization.
Many say one of the organization's chief shortcomings is that it essentially has been directed by the five countries that have veto power- the United States, Britain, France, Russia and China.
The Security Council is made up of the five veto-wielding permanent members and 10 non-permanent members whose seats rotate every two years. The General Assembly has been negotiating an increase in both the permanent and non-permanent members but has been stymied by disputes over who to put on and whether to extend veto power to them.
---
HANDSHAKE
President Clinton and Cuban leader Fidel Casto shook hands and exchanged brief greetings after a lunch on the first day of the summit. It was the first time they had met and apparently the first time Castro, 74, had ever shaken hands with a sitting American president.
Clinton said the encounter was over in a matter of seconds. "It just happened, you know?" he said. They had been in the same room before. White House officials said Castro initiated the exchange, which had no substance.
 Load-Date: September 9, 2000

 

End of Document
