

A look at the victims aboard the Cole
The Associated Press
October 13, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 699 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Sketches of some of the 17 sailors killed or missing after the bomb attack on the USS Cole in Yemen.
Lakeina Monique Francis, 19, of Woodleaf, N.C., a mess management specialist aboard the Cole, graduated from high school last year and followed her father into a military career. "The family is taking it real hard," said the Rev. Willie Gray, a neighbor. Two of Francis' brothers, James and David, play football at West Rowan High School. "Our counseling staff, teachers and coaches are working with the brothers," said the school principal, Henry Kluttz. "We're just going to work with the boys, help them through the day, do whatever the mom and dad would like us to help them through this."
Information Systems Technician Tim Gauna, 21, of Rice, Texas, was a 1997 graduate of Ennis High School, where teachers said he was a quiet student who excelled in baseball and art. In 1999, he joined the Navy as a radio man. "He went there to better himself, to make a better life for himself," said his mother, Sarah Gauna. The family last heard from Gauna by phone a few days ago from the Cole as it headed for a secret destination. "He just kept saying, 'We're in dangerous waters, Mom, but we're OK. I'll be OK. I promise you,"' Sarah Gauna said.
Ensign Andrew Triplett from Macon, Miss., had been in the Navy for 13 years. "He was a good family man. He had two children and he was just a likable person," said his mother, Savannah Triplett, a cook at C&K Super Stop in the small Mississippi town of Shuqualak. "He just loved the Navy. That's all he used to talk about." She said her son was a strong student who excelled on Navy tests. Triplett, who will be buried in Norfolk, Va., is survived by his wife, Laurie, of Detroit, whom he met while in the Navy, and their children.
Petty Officer 3rd Class Ronchester Santiago, 22, of Kingsville, Texas, had been in the Navy since graduating in 1996 from H.M. King High School. He was scheduled to get out of service in December and planned to study electrical engineering at the University of Texas at Austin. "He was attracted to the adventure in the Navy," said his father, Rogelio Santiago, a retired Navy petty officer 1st class. "He wanted to see the world. He just wanted the experience."
Duties aboard the Cole for Seaman Craig Wibberley, 19, of Williamsport, Md., included raising and lowering the destroyer's small anchor. "He was a good all-American boy," said the Rev. Anne Weatherbolt, the Wibberley family minister. "Any time there's a loss on a small community everybody feels it." His mother, Patty Wibberley, is a nursing assistant at an assisted-living center. "I'm just numb. It hasn't sunk in yet," she said. One of Wibberley's friends, Tyler Growden, 19, said the two liked to fish in the Potomac River. He and others described Craig - who graduated from Washington Technical High School last year - as someone who had no enemies.
Kevin Shawn Rux, of Portland, N.D., was an electronics warfare technician on the Cole, and son of a Navy veteran. "His dad was Navy lifetime, and he was so much like his dad," said Rux's aunt, Joy Ust, of Finley, N.D. Finley said most of Rux's family, including his mother, lives in West Virginia. Rux joined the Navy after high school, stayed about 10 years, then tried being a policeman, Finley said, but this summer decided to re-enlist in the Navy.
Hull Maintenance Technician 3rd Class, Kenneth Eugene Clodfelter, 21, of Mechanicsville, Va., was planning to sign up for another tour of duty in January. He was the father of a 2-year-old boy, Noah. Clodfelter graduated from Lee-Davis High School in Mechanicsville in 1997, and was described as a good student who wrestled and played football. He was an Eagle Scout.
Engineman 2nd Class Marc Nieto, 24, of Fond du Lac, Wis., joined the Navy six years ago and had only two weeks of duty left. His mother, Sharon Priepke, said Nieto worked in the engine room on the Cole and loved repairing machinery.
Electronics Technician 1st Class Richard Costelow, 35, was from Morrisville, Pa., a blue-collar suburb across the Delaware River from Trenton, N.J. His wife and three children had been staying at the Paxtuxent River Naval Air Station in Lexington Park, Md.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos TXDAM103, TXDAM104; MDHAG102
 Load-Date: October 14, 2000

 

End of Document
