

A Passage to Mexico: On the Road With the Indian Tech-Head Crowd
April 28, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1085 words
Byline: By MITCHELL LANDSBERG, AP National Writer
Dateline: EL PASO, Texas
Body




Three-thirty a.m. In the darkness, lights are flickering on in the windows of Econo Lodge No. 119, a bleached horseshoe of a motel close by the scrub-brush runways of El Paso International Airport.
Something is happening here on the frontier of the new world economy. By 4:15 a.m., guests begin to leave their rooms and gather outside the motel office. There are nine of them, shuffling nervously in the pre-dawn chill. They don't talk much.
They wait.
Just before 4:30, Marco Antonio Moreno pulls up in a tan Ford Club Wagon van with Texas plates. He checks names as his passengers climb aboard for the trip across the border into Mexico.
Vikram Kallepu.
Venkatesh Ramachandran.
Srinivas Bandaru.
Irfan Ashraf.
And so it goes through the entire list of nine - eight from India, one from Pakistan. All work in the computer industry, most of them as software engineers. All are neatly dressed, most in jackets and ties, some carrying briefcases. And all are here on the same strange mission: They are about to leave the United States for a few hours so they can legally re-enter the United States. For this, they have come from all over the country, from as far away as Boston and California's Silicon Valley.
Marco starts up the van and they lurch into the night.
Each day, Moreno and his father, Victor Garcia, take as many as three vanloads of people - almost always from India or Pakistan, almost always software engineers - across the border from El Paso to Juarez, there to stand in serpentine lines that wind around and through the U.S. Consulate.
The passengers are in the United States under a program designed to lure the best and brightest of the world's high-tech workers to American corporations for stints of up to six years. By far the largest number of these workers are from India, home to a rapidly growing software industry.
They are in the United States legally, but there's a catch: If they leave the country, they can't get back in without a new visa.
And that's where things get weird.
The visas should be available from U.S. consulates or embassies anywhere in the world. A software engineer returning home to, say, Bombay, for a vacation ought to be able to walk into the U.S. Consulate there and get his passport stamped with the appropriate "multiple-entry" visa. This allows him to re-enter the United States as many times as he wants.
But through word of mouth, and over the Internet, the rumor has spread: It's risky. Everyone knows someone who knows someone who was turned down by the U.S. Consulate in their home country and thereby stranded thousands of miles from work.
The solution: Juarez. Here, the grapevine has it, rejections are rare. And even when people are rejected, they still can cross back into the United States because of what's known as the "contiguous territory rule."
No one gets stranded in Juarez.
And so, a curious pilgrimage route has been established. In some pockets of the Internet, Victor Garcia - a man who, not so long ago, was a mechanic and part-time taxi driver - has become a famous man. Go to Victor, people say in chat groups with such names as soc.culture.indian. Victor will take care of you. "Don Garcia," some of them call him.
Don Garcia, who doesn't own a computer.
The van rumbles toward the border. Moreno steers over the crest of a hill. All of El Paso and Juarez are splayed before him, the twin cities as a common quilt of lights. But there's something odd about the view. Because Juarez uses old-fashioned mercury vapor lamps for its streetlights and El Paso uses modern high-pressure sodium, the border stands out as the line dividing the harsher white light of Mexico from the softer copper-colored light of the United States.
"Only in the night can we see the difference," says Moreno, a soft-spoken, 21-year-old native of Juarez who now lives in El Paso. "Because in the day, the two cities are so close."
By about 5 a.m., the van is crossing the bridge over the Rio Grande and into Mexico. Cars are backed up for 45 minutes heading into the United States, but there is almost no traffic headed into Mexico.
At the border checkpoint, a bored-looking Mexican official checks passports and counts heads. "Uno, dos, tres ..." They add up; he waves them through. Soon, they are piling out of the van in front of the U.S. Consulate, a walled-in compound of undistinguished sandstone-colored buildings plopped down on a strip of motels and restaurants. It has the generic look of so many U.S. outposts in Third World countries; it could as easily be in Bombay or Karachi.
Already, there are hundreds of people, almost all Mexican, waiting in line. Vendors are selling coffee, pastries, gum. People are chatting, laughing. The desert sky has not yet begun to lighten. The consulate won't open until 7 a.m.
And so they wait.
Passing the time, the passengers begin to tell their stories.
There is Sudhir Kamath, a 27-year-old software engineer from Bangalore, India's Silicon Valley, who holds a master's degree from Northern Illinois University and now works in Chicago. He's planning to visit family in India and wants to make sure he doesn't get stuck there.
Anyway, he said, "If you're going back home after two or three years, you don't want to spend time waiting in line at the consulate."
There are a husband and wife from Boston via Madras - Gopal and Rajshree Subramanian, a handsome couple in their late 20s. Gopal has a visa already, but Rajshree needs one so she can do software consulting work abroad, most likely in Europe.
Gopal got his visa in India, with no problems. "If you have all the papers right, it shouldn't be a problem," he says. He looks around and recalls the scene at the consulate in Bombay. "Exactly the same," he says.
First in line is Vikram Kallepu who, with his broad face and deep brown complexion, could pass for Mexican. That's his problem.
Kallepu is a 26-year-old computer programmer from Hyderabad, India, now working for a company in McLean, Va. Last December, he came to Juarez to get a visa so he could travel to India on vacation.
Everything went smoothly until he got back to the motel in El Paso and took a close look at his visa.
In the place where it was supposed to list his country of origin, it said this: "Mexico."
When Kallepu got home, he called the State Department. Sorry, he was told. To fix the mistake, he would have to return to the consulate that issued the visa. So here he was again, out $ 500 for another trip to Juarez, smiling at the insanity of his misfortune.
"The State Department," he says, "is so bad."
 Load-Date: April 28, 1996

 

End of Document
