

Advice to Japanese allergy sufferers: Beware the Ides of March
The Associated Press
March 19, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 785 words
Byline: By CHISAKI WATANABE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TOKYO
Body




The weather report starts off happily enough, with a prediction of bright and sunny skies. But then the forecaster's voice turns ominous. He points to a darkly shaded map. There, looming over the capital, is something far more dreaded than a cold front.
For millions of Japanese, spring isn't about the sight of cherry blossoms and the sweet smell of flowers filling the air. It's a time of huge and largely invisible clouds of cedar pollen that will send them into fits of sneezing, eye-rubbing and nose-blowing.
Health experts believe Japan has one of the highest incidences of cedar pollen allergy in the world, affecting 10 percent-20 percent of the population. In Tokyo, where about one in every five people suffer from the allergy, the problem is tantamount to an epidemic.
According to a study conducted by the metropolitan government in October, the percentage of people affected has doubled over the last decade and continues to rise.
"It's painful," said Satoko Kishi, a young office worker who has endured bouts of the allergy for 10 years. Like most sufferers, for Kishi the arrival of spring's pollen clouds means nasal congestion, sneezing and a nagging fever that can last until May.
Underscoring the breadth of the problem, the Japan Weather Association began a "pollen watch" in 1987, when the allergy started to gain national attention. The association now uses about 500 observation points nationwide to estimate how much pollen is likely to be airborne at various population centers. The density of pollen is ranked on a scale of four, with one being slight and four very thick.
The forecasts have become a standard part of many TV weather programs. When the pollen is heavy, forecasters frequently advise their audiences to wear glasses and surgical masks, and dust off their clothes when they get home.
But there is no cure.
According to weather association officials, cedar starts producing large amounts of the yellowish, powdery pollen in late January and the process continues until May, with the peak being mid-March.
The inflammation caused by the pollen can cause extreme discomfort. Many sufferers complain they can't sleep at night and have difficulty concentrating during the day. That often translates into decreased productivity during the spring months, with people calling in sick or leaving the office early to nurse their symptoms.
Much of the blame for the problem can be traced to Japan's postwar agricultural policy, according to Miki Takagi of the Forestry Agency's pollen allergy research department. After Japan's surrender in 1945 ended World War II, the country had to struggle to meet its resource demands. Cedar was chosen as the primary lumber tree because it tends to grow faster than other kinds of trees.
The demand for domestic cedar eased in the early 1960s, when cheap imported wood began entering the Japanese market. But cedar continues to make up 44 percent of Japan's manmade forests, followed by cypress at 25 percent. Unfortunately, cypress pollen also is a potent allergen.
The Forestry Agency in 1993 set up a research department to study the pollen problem. In an effort to reduce airborne pollen, the agency had varieties of cedar known to be high pollen producers chopped down.
But when the forest was pared back, the trees left standing got more sunshine and thus thrived. Because they were growing faster, they also began producing more pollen, Takagi says.
Doctors say changing lifestyles also have left many Japanese more vulnerable to allergies. Koichiro Fujita, a researcher at Tokyo Medical and Dental University, found in a recent study that Japan and the former West Germany have particularly high incidences of allergies.
He noted that allergies are less common in developing countries, where sanitation facilities are not as advanced and people tend to have stronger immune systems because they are exposed to more parasites.
"The better hygiene your surroundings have, the weaker your immune system becomes," he said.
Cedar pollen allergies can develop in a person at any age, and doctors say they often get progressively worse.
"The number of sufferers will just go up if the government does not do something," said Tomonori Takasaka of Tohoku University's medical school in the northern city of Sendai.
He suggested tighter controls on air pollution in general, which tends to weaken people's respiratory systems, as one possible measure.
In the meantime, the legions of snifflers looking for relief are supporting a huge market for everything from mainstream sinus decongestants to Chinese herbal teas.
"Customers come in rubbing their eyes, or wiping their runny noses," said Hiromi Suzuki of Shibaguchi Drug Store in Tokyo. "They look so wretched."
 Load-Date: March 19, 1998

 

End of Document
