

Advice from Greenspan, Wall Street Gurus: Smile, the market's down
November 2, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 761 words
Byline: By BRUCE MEYERSON, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The U.S. stock market is now worth $ 520 billion less than it was slightly more than a week ago.
The Dow Jones industrial average now languishes more than 800 points, or nearly 10 percent, below its August peak.
And from Wall Street to the hallowed halls of the Federal Reserve, the experts on the economy and the stock market are saying it's all for the better.
How can it be? Isn't this money we're talking about?
The losses are quite real, the experts acknowledge - but come from gains at least partially ill-gotten, they insist with equal vigor.
And while none of them were particularly pleased by the sheer ferocity of Monday's record-setting plunge of 554 points in the Dow, most are hoping Tuesday's stunning 337-point turnaround was a one-time affair as well.
"It would be healthy to fluctuate in this area for a while and let emotions calm," said Eric Miller, chief strategist at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities.
Judging by how the market's gyrations grew less severe as the week wore on, it seems the Asian typhoon that hit these shores has done its worst and moved back out to sea.
Certainly, the winds have died down. By week's end, the daily trading volume was still heavy, but well below the astonishing 2.83 billion shares that changed hands in the United States on Tuesday, a tally that blew away the previous one-day record by more than a billion.
Even though the overall outlook for the U.S. economy remains upbeat, it may take months to assess and repair all the damage, especially the relentless drubbing suffered by the technology sector, which is considered most vulnerable to the economic woes gripping Southeast Asia. And again, that's fine with most market pros.
Miller, like many analysts, asserted that the market had been cruising for a bruising for some time, that its three-year dalliance through record territory, so rarely interrupted, was based on reality, but was hardly realistic.
"Things were so close to perfect that you had to develop blemishes sometime, and it was remarkable that it was so long in coming," said Miller. "The playout of problems in Asia's markets and currencies and banking systems, that's clearly going to require time, and that's going to be a volatile backdrop for our market and suggestive that the possibility of our market going straight back up is not high, and probably not desirable."
Maybe it's to be expected that Wall Street's finest would try to put a positive spin on recent events. But even Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, protector of the nation's economic health, seemed pleased by all the upheaval, almost like a forest ranger explaining how a devastating fire would set the stage for new growth.
"Things are less out of line" in the aftermath of the market's downturn, Greenspan said Wednesday in a scheduled appearance before Congress. "It is quite conceivable that a few years hence we will look back at this episode, as we now look back at the 1987 crash, as a salutary event."
The comparison to 1987 might seem a bit unsettling - and inappropriate, since a 500-point drop meant 22 percent in 1987 and just 7 percent this past Monday - but consider that the market has more than quadrupled in value in the 10 years between Black Monday '87 and Black Monday '97.
And remember, analysts implore, that the Dow is still up 15 percent for the year, and the Standard & Poor's 500 - the model for many a mutual fund - is up more than 23 percent.
All of which might be a bit comforting when investors open their monthly brokerage statements in early November and see the damage the past week has wrought.
On Friday, the Dow rose 60.41 at 7,442.08, closing the week with a loss of 273.33, or about 3.5 percent.
The S&P 500 rose 10.94 to 914.62 on Friday, trimming the week's loss to 27.02. The New York Stock Exchange composite index rose 5.31 to 481.14, down 14.62 for the week.
The Nasdaq composite index rose 23.20 on Friday to 1,593.61 on Friday, ending the week with a loss of 57.31.
The American Stock Exchange composite index rose 4.91 to 675.75 Friday, ending the week 25.43 lower.
The Wilshire Associates Equity Index - which represents the combined market value of all NYSE, American and Nasdaq issues - ended the week at $ 8.865 trillion, down $ 237.8 billion from last week's finish. A year ago the index stood at $ 6.842 trillion.
The NYSE had a record 4.02 billion shares traded for the week, while the Nasdaq market had a record 4.65 billion. All U.S. stock markets, including the American and regional exchanges, recorded volume of 9.57 billion shares.
 
 End adv for weekend editions Nov. 1-2
 Load-Date: November 2, 1997

 

End of Document
