

After Southeast Asia meltdown, Hong Kong shares feel the heat
October 23, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 910 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HONG KONG
Body




Hong Kong stocks suffered their worst fall in a decade today in a burst of panic selling triggered by rocketing interest rates and fears that the vibrant Hong Kong economy may be infected by turmoil elsewhere in Asia.
The plunge by Hong Kong shares sent shudders through European stock markets, where losses were heavy by early afternoon.
Financial Secretary Donald Tsang disclosed that monetary authorities were forced to dip into Hong Kong's bulging foreign exchange coffers to sell U.S. dollars overnight and support the currency.
This triggered the interest rate hikes that pounded the stock market the next morning, he said, but added that it was the price of defending the currency's peg to the U.S. dollar, "our top priority."
The key blue chip index, the Hang Seng, shed 14 percent in morning trading before recovering to finish the day with a 10 percent loss. The losses drove down Tokyo's Nikkei Stock Average by 3.03 percent, and shares also took a further battering in Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines - as well as in Europe.
At the London Stock Exchange, the blue-chip Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index was down 150.3 points, or 2.9 percent, at 4,998.5 around midday.
During the first 16 minutes, however, the 100-share index dropped 199.8 points, or 3.9 percent, as it tumbled to an early low of 4,949.0.
Prices were getting hammered elsewhere, with Germany's DAX index off by 3 percent in the early afternoon. In Paris, the CAC 40 index had fallen 3.3 percent.
In the United States, prices of U.S. Treasury bonds soared today as shaky investors sought a safe haven for their cash. The U.S. dollar also gained ground as investors bought dollars to buy bonds.
"It's a flight from tragedy," Robert Brusca, chief economist of Nikko Securities International Co. in New York, said of the bond market's gains.
"Investors are running for cover. In this environment, it means running for bonds," he said.
Analysts said the Hang Seng's plunge raised the question of whether Hong Kong can continue to insulate itself from the rest of Asia, despite fundamental economic distinctions.
Where other Asian economies suffer from perceptions that they suffer serious institutional flaws, Hong Kong's system is the International Monetary Fund's model. Its problems stem mostly from having the only Asian currency still pegged to the U.S. dollar.
That makes it the only currency that could still tempt concerted speculative attack. Hong Kong authorities say they will fight back at all costs because they view a stable, dollar-pegged currency as vital to maintaining international confidence in Hong Kong now that China has taken over from Britain.
"The fear is that this is going to affect world markets," said Glen Poulter, a stock dealer at Schroders in London. "I spoke to traders yesterday and none of them were talking about Hong Kong. Today, that's all they're talking about."
As often happens, nervous European traders were waiting for direction from the opening on Wall Street.
But the big action occurred overnight when interbank rates that determine the short-time price of borrowing for such an attack shot up to 150 percent, and three major banks hiked their prime rates by 0.75 percent to 9.5 percent today.
The result was a sharp strengthening of the dollar, but the high interest rates could rock Hong Kong's high-flying property market and raise question marks about the price of doing business here.
"We're going to pay for keeping the peg" to the U.S. dollar, "and if that's at the cost of corporate Hong Kong in the short term, that's the cost that we'll have to bear," James Osborn, head of sales at ING Baring Securities (HK) Ltd., told Hong Kong radio.
Steven Xu, an economist at Standard Chartered Bank, said he was confident the peg would stay, but "if every country in Asia starting with Japan has to go through a deflationary process, it seems Hong Kong cannot be spared."
Today's plunge followed three days of falls that had already shaved 14 percent from the market's value since Friday. The market has lost 37 percent of its value since hitting a high of 16,673.27 on Aug. 7.
The Hang Seng, which closed at 11,637.77 Wednesday, dipped below the 10,000 level today. It closed at 10,426.3, down 10 percent for the day and 23 percent for the week.
Anson Chan, Hong Kong's top civil servant, urged calm.
"Hong Kong cannot escape being affected in the short term by what's happening in the region," she told reporters.
"But the important thing is that our economic fundamentals remain very strong and we have absolute determination to defend the Hong Kong dollar."
Elsewhere, the main Philippine index plunged to a four-year low, with traders citing U.S. investment bank Morgan Stanley's recommendation to reduce portfolio weightings for developed Asian markets to zero from 2 percent.
"People are afraid," said Robinson Siao, vice president of Securities 2000 Inc.
In Malaysia, one of the countries worst hit in the turmoil that began in July, the main index shed 4.7 percent while the ringgit hit its lowest level against the U.S. dollar since the Malaysian currency was floated 24 years ago.
"This is crowd instinct. People are just dumping their shares," said Ibrahim Mamat of Sime Securities Sdn. Bhd.
Singapore's index was down 5.4 percent, Indonesia's 2.4 percent, while Taiwan finished 1.7 percent higher, South Korea was up 2.74 percent and Thailand markets, whose woes triggered the regional crisis, were closed for a public holiday.
 Load-Date: October 23, 1997

 

End of Document
