

After warship bombing, Afghans feel they're in the cross-hairs again
November 13, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 881 words
Byline: By KATHY GANNON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KABUL, Afghanistan
Body




Alerted by the arrival of crates of TV equipment, a neighbor walked in clutching an automatic rifle, his voice choked with rage.
"Who lives here?" he asked. "I thought only Afghans lived here. We have our orders to kill any American we see anywhere in Afghanistan. You know what the situation is like right now. You don't think I'll do it? I will do it. I mean it."
There was no telling how seriously to take this bearded, overwrought man in long tunic and baggy pants claiming to be an Islamic warrior. But his intrusion into The Associated Press office in Kabul was a chilling taste of life in a country that feels it is again in America's cross-hairs.
The 1998 bombing of two U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania provoked a U.S. cruise missile salvo at targets in Afghanistan, where Osama bin Laden and his network allegedly planned the attacks. Now, after the suicide bombing of the USS Cole in Yemen on Oct. 12, Afghanistan is anxious about the possibility of a U.S. response.
The Clinton administration has not explicitly threatened retaliation, but an attack is assumed possible if U.S. investigators can find evidence to pin the bombing of the Cole on bin Laden's network. At this point they say they do not have such evidence.
Bin Laden is hiding out in Afghanistan as the guest of its Islamic rulers, the Taliban. The Taliban insists there's no proof bin Laden was involved. But its glossy English-language monthly, The Islamic Emirate, writes that whoever blew up the embassies and killed 224 people are "a force to be reckoned with and not the small, loosely knit network of militants that Washington had imagined them to be."
"The alarming accuracy and efficiency with which the two bombings were planned and executed revealed the extent to which America had underestimated the capabilities of its enemies," the September issue says.
On the streets of Kabul, ravaged by 21 years of relentless war, the feeling seems to be that a few more U.S. missiles wouldn't amount to much, compared with the damage inflicted on Afghanistan since the 1979 Soviet intervention.
"This country is ruined. What more can they do?" says Mohammed Alim, who sells household goods off a rickety old crate in front of rocketed buildings.
"For the last one year all they have been talking about is this one guest (bin Laden), but for 20 years Afghanistan has been in darkness. We have so many problems coming on us - drought, earthquakes, fighting. Always we are in trouble," said another storeowner, Farhat, who, like many Afghans uses only one name.
High schools, government offices, an orphanage, the military academy, an industrial park, embassies and even the zoo - all are in ruins. Heavily veiled women sit in the middle of cratered roads begging motorists for money.
For four years until the Taliban Islamic group captured Kabul in 1996, rival factions rained thousands of rockets down on the city. Some 50,000 people died, most of them civilians.
"You didn't know if you would be alive by the end of the day. And now America with its computers and rich cities and people want to attack us? Who is Osama? He's nothing to me," said Bibi Shah, interviewed as she stepped off a bus in Kabul.
Few people say they are afraid for their lives. If the United States does retaliate, it is likely to aim at Bin Laden's bases in the countryside, not Kabul.
Instead, the notion of another U.S. attack brings out sadness.
Older people may remember when the Soviet Union and the United States shared influence in Afghanistan, and the country was at peace.
That ended with the Soviet intervention to prop up a government allied with Moscow, and the U.S.-backed Islamic uprising that forced the Soviets to withdraw a decade later.
"Afghans have always thought friendly of the United States. People are hurt by the treatment of the United States toward Afghanistan now," said Abdul Sattar Pakties, a Taliban protocol officer.
"I don't know how strong the Afghan people can be," he said. "Every time there is more pressure and more pressure. How much can people take? I don't know."
Until recently, at least, one U.S. target might have been the Farmada area, 75 miles east of Kabul. A farm there reportedly had served as a base for more than 1,000 fighters brought in from Arab countries. An Afghan source speaking on condition of anonymity says bin Laden himself attended a meeting there 16 days after the Cole bombing to discuss the possibility of U.S. retaliation.
But last week there was no sign of any fighters at Farmada. Bin Laden is said to have gone into the snowy Hindu Kush mountains, traveling between Kunar, Laghman and Badakhshan provinces, far from Kabul. But such reports are impossible to verify independently.
Back in Kabul, the AP's angry visitor came back again that day.
On the first visit, when asked for his name, he roared, "Just tell them my name is Osama." Now, much calmer, he said his name was actually Mohammed and he was a Saudi, like bin Laden.
Once assured there were no Americans in the neighborhood, Mohammed explained over a cup of tea that seeing foreigners in the neighborhood made him and his fellow fighters nervous.
He said he and other Arab guerrillas fight with the Taliban against its northern-based opposition.
"We are the best fighters," he said. "We are not afraid of death. We want death."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo ISL101; AP Graphic AFGHANISTAN
 Load-Date: November 14, 2000

 

End of Document
