

Airstrikes against Kosovo likely to cost the Pentagon billions
The Associated Press
March 31, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 732 words
Byline: By LAURA MYERS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Prolonged and intense NATO airstrikes in Yugoslavia could cost the United States billions of dollars, putting more pressure on a $ 270 billion Pentagon budget already stretched thin unless Congress provides new money.
Using the four-day Operation Desert Fox in December in Iraq as a guide, congressional and outside economists estimate the Pentagon could spend several hundred million dollars a week over regular U.S. defense costs.
NATO has said airstrikes could continue for weeks to degrade the Yugoslav military's ability to attack independence-minded ethnic Albanians in Kosovo.
"The longer it goes on and as more aircraft are destroyed and as more munitions are consumed, the costs are going to come up," said Steven Kosiak of the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments.
Most extra defense costs will come from replacing missiles launched and bombs dropped on Serb military targets. The 7,300 U.S. troops and 210 warplanes there already are paid for.
Aircraft refueling and maintenance also drive costs above peacetime training levels.
In the cases of Iraq and Yugoslavia, most airstrikes are conducted by U.S. troops and aircraft already in the region with only some added airpower, so potential transportation costs for ships, troops, military gear and weapons are not a big additional factor.
"The real budget question in the wake of an operation is how much do you need to rebuild your stock of munitions," said Steve Daggett of the Congressional Research Service.
Precision bombs come fairly cheap - about $ 40,000 each, mostly for the laser guidance system attached to 500- to 2,000-pound iron "dumb bombs," Daggett said.
But Navy Tomahawk and Air Force cruise missiles can average $ 1 million apiece, which can raise the airstrike tally quickly since the Pentagon uses the weapons more often these days because they can be fired from afar without putting pilots at risk.
The Pentagon has put the extra cost of the cruise-missile strikes in Iraq at $ 260 million, although outside analysts estimate the pricetag is closer to $ 500 million.
Extra defense spending for NATO airstrikes in Yugoslavia, which so far have not relied as much on cruise missiles, will most likely be cheaper each week than the four-day Iraqi operation, say congressional and independent budget analysts.
In the first week of the NATO airstrikes alone, more than 100 sea- and air-launched cruise missiles were used. In the same period, 400 NATO aircraft flew more than 1,700 sorties.
Pentagon accountants could discount the munitions costs, however.
In Desert Fox, the Navy fired 330 Tomahawks, but assigned the extra cost at just $ 123.8 million because there's no plan to replace them all. The Navy has more than 2,000 Tomahawks. The Navy also spent $ 9.1 million on laser-guided bombs.
The Air Force launched about 90 cruise missiles in Desert Fox, pegging the price at $ 51.5 million.
The remaining Desert Fox costs - $ 75.4 million - went for operations.
Losing aircraft to enemy fire or crashes might not count as extra costs.
A $ 43 million F-117A stealth fighter went down Saturday in Yugoslavia, apparently after it was struck by a Serb anti-aircraft missile, although the Pentagon is still investigating. The pilot was rescued, but the plane was a complete loss - the first to go down in battle.
But the Pentagon can't buy a new 1980s-era F-117A.
"They're not building stealth fighters anymore so if the Pentagon doesn't replace it, they don't have to charge it to the Kosovo operation," said Daggett.
It could be the same for the $ 2.2 billion B-2 bomber, which first saw combat in the airstrikes that began March 24. Congressional critics of the plane, which can carry 16 one-ton bombs, have said the B-2s never should have been built because they are too costly to lose. They are still in production.
If Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic reverses course and makes peace with ethnic Albanians in Kosovo, the U.S. peacekeeping bill won't be cheap either.
Under the plan, 28,000 NATO peacekeepers would remain in Kosovo for three years, including 4,000 Americans. Kosiak said U.S. peacekeeping could cost $ 1 billion a year, based on the 4-year-old Bosnia model. The Pentagon estimated $ 1.5 billion to $ 2 billion a year.
The Clinton administration hasn't yet made a supplemental budget request to Congress to cover either the unplanned spending for the December airstrikes in Iraq or the Yugoslavia operation.
 Load-Date: March 31, 1999

 

End of Document
