

Alexander conquered the world, and now viewers can travel in his footsteps
The Associated Press
May 4, 1998, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 780 words
Byline: By FRAZIER MOORE, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




If Frosted Flakes are grrrreat, what does that make Alexander?
Viewers can get a reality check on the nature of greatness when PBS focuses on one of history's greatest figures. "In the Footsteps of Alexander the Great" airs tonight and Tuesday from 9-11 p.m. EDT.
Alexander is a great source of fascination. "He was an opportunist and visionary rolled into one," says filmmaker-historian Michael Wood. "He was said to be corrupt, noble, tyrannical, kind. He was totally charismatic. And it was an absolute buzz to be along with him, conquering the world."
And that's what Alexander did between 334 B.C. and 324 B.C., leading his 35,000-member Macedonian army on a crusade across Asia. A chap who had ascended to the throne at age 20, he conquered much of the known world before he was 30 and brought the East and West face to face for the first time.
The West, Wood says, "had never heard of China before, but the theorem of Pythagoras reached China within two generations of Alexander's expedition. The world was just exploding with ideas!"
Some 23 centuries later, Wood sets out to retrace, for the first time, Alexander's explosive course. Unlike his forerunner, who meant to crush the Persian empire, Wood goes in peace. But traversing 16 countries from Greece to India, he encounters 22,000 miles of rugged frontier, urban congestion and political hot spots that guarantee his quest will be no Sunday drive.
All the better to retell the story, an unfolding detective yarn where Wood seeks clues to the truth behind Alexander's legendary campaign.
"You go on a hunch that, by the act of exploration, you'll stand on the spot and something more will be understood," he explains.
The hunch paid off.
"We saw things that had been argued about for a donkey's years," Wood says, "and actually it was plain, once we were there, that there was only one way of understanding what happened. We found the exact site of the battle at the Persian Gates, never been found, and the site of the crossing of the river in India where the battle against the elephants took place.
"One of my favorite sequences is the journey across the Hindu Kush," he says, recalling his march with pack horses over mountainous regions of war-torn Afghanistan. This was the same treacherous route Alexander traveled in 329 B.C., scaling the 12,000-foot Khawak Pass with his troops. "You're with him, you're REALLY in his footsteps!"
It was in Afghanistan that filming began, Wood explains, because of "very good inside information" that the Taliban religious army was planning to take the Afghan capital of Kabul.
"There was no telling whether we might be able to get in, if we waited. Everything about the filming schedule was determined by that single factor. We did the whole of the film's second half, first."
Later along this unforgiving path, Wood's unit encountered problems getting Israeli permission to enter Gaza.
He explained: "We're doing a film about Alexander the Great."
The wary response: "What's Alexander the Great have to do with Gaza?"
Fortunately, this skeptic was won over when he learned of Alexander's siege against a key Persian fortress at Gaza in 332 B.C.
Like warfare, Wood's journey called for strategy, grit and good fortune. Even so, he says, "it was a constant logistical nightmare."
But if he is the worse for wear it doesn't show, either during this recent interview or throughout the film. At 49, the Manchester, England, native displays an expansive manner and the boyish look of actor Michael York.
A natural storyteller, Wood supplemented his history studies at Oxford University with a stint as a journalist. This led to television, and to stardom when the BBC, stretching a pound, insisted Wood be host as well as writer of his first program.
He has since done some 60 documentaries on history, travel and culture.
And what has impressed him most from his global expeditions? "The pace of change," he says a bit sadly. "The big story is: Traditional cultures and civilizations are rapidly being eroded.
"It's a cliche, but the global culture, the monoculture, is taking over everywhere."
---
Elsewhere in television …
THEY WERE THERE: CBS News celebrates its first half-century by revisiting key events that gripped the nation on "We Were There: CBS News at 50." Major stories include Vietnam, the space program and the Los Angeles riots; abuses of power represented by Sen. Joseph McCarthy and Watergate, and the pursuit of freedom around the globe. CBS anchors and correspondents sharing their memories include Dan Rather, Morley Safer, Bob Schieffer, Bob Simon, Ed Bradley and Walter Cronkite. It airs tonight at 10 p.m. EDT.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Frazier Moore can be reached at fmoore "at" ap.org
 Load-Date: May 4, 1998

 

End of Document
