

Ali, The Man And The Memories
August 29, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 486 words
Byline: By ED SCHUYLER JR., AP Sports Writer
Body




A smiling Muhammad Ali extended his hand.
The recipient of the warm handshake smiled back, as a mental picture formed of Ali's fist shooting toward him and stopping a hair short of his nose. It was something The Greatest used to enjoy doing, something he no longer can do.
For a moment, he felt tinge of sadness as he recalled the Ali of the fast hands and quick quips while looking at an Ali slowed by Parkinson's syndrome to a stiff-legged walk.
Then, it dawned on the man that he wasn't feeling sorry for Ali, but for himself because Ali was no longer the man of his memories. And he thought of how childish he was acting, and he looked around the crowded room and saw that Muhammad Ali is not an object of pity, but a celebration of the spirit.
The Greatest, fresh from his triumph as the Olympic torch lighter, was in New York for a reception and a preview of parts of "Muhammad Ali: The Real Story," a fine documentary that will be televised by TNT for the first time at 8 p.m. EDT next Tuesday.
The film touches all the high points of Ali's life in and out of the ring, but shows the warts, too - the mean taunting of some opponents, the widely publicized breakup in Manila of his marriage to second wife Kahila after he introduced Veronica Porche as his wife to President Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippones. Veronica became his third wife.
The documentary is broken up into eight "rounds," and in Round V, some of the women in Ali's life talk about him.
"He didn't ask me, he told me: 'You are going to be my wife," Khaila says in the film. She also talks about Manila and pulls no punches.
Of course, Ali's great fights are documented. There's the three bouts with Joe Frazier, including The Fight, which Ali lost, the Thrilla in Manila, which Ali won; the two victories over Sonny Liston, and the Rumble In The Jungle in which Ali became champion a second time by stopping George Foreman.
Round III is about Ali's refusal to accept the military draft om 1967 during the Vietnam War on religious grounds and his banishment from boxing following his conviction.
"You think about the pressure he was under when the mightiest goverment in the world came down on him," says Dick Gregory, a civil rights activist. "And they did come down on him. Yet, he didn't compromise - he stayed the course."
He's still staying it despite his health, and the real star of the night was not the Ali on the screen, but the Ali, accompanied by wife Lonnie and close friend Howard Bingham, who worked the room like the pro he is.
Looking rested and relaxed, Ali shook a lot of hands, often bending to whisper something that would make the listener laugh delightedly. He also posed for amateur as well as professional photographers, but he made no speech, held no news conference - and no one cared.
"To me, it was an honor to just fight the man," Ken Norton says in the film.
It seems to be special for a lot of people to be just in his presence.
 Load-Date: August 29, 1996

 

End of Document
