

Along Kashmir line, the shots fly, the hopes fall
The Associated Press
March 24, 2000, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 683 words
Byline: By LAURINDA KEYS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SRINAGAR, India
Body




Every night and most days, Indian and Pakistani armies are likely to be shelling one another across the cease-fire line that divides the disputed Himalayan region of Kashmir. India says Pakistan fires to provide cover for guerrillas. Pakistan says India shoots first.
So it goes in a confrontation where President's Clinton's mediation is wanted by one side, Pakistan, but not the other, India.
Some of the people caught in between are not so sure it matters what role Clinton plays.
"President Clinton won't make any difference," said Sher Singh, among thousands of Kashmiris staying in transit camps because of the shelling, having been forced from his home seven times since June. "Only war will decide whether our land goes to Pakistan or India."
President Clinton, in Pakistan on Saturday, is urging both sides to talk. But he's expressed reluctance to get directly involved.
Virtually all peaceful contact broke off in May when Pakistan-based fighters were discovered swarming into the mountains on India's side of the line. More than 1,000 people were killed in 11 weeks of combat.
India and Pakistan have fought two previous wars over Kashmir since 1948, leaving the territory divided between them.
Despite Singh's skepticism about what Clinton could do, others in Kashmir said their hopes soared in anticipation of his visit to South Asia. Now they see little chance for peace.
"We feel very bad," said Nisan Khan, a trader attending Friday prayers at Srinagar's main mosque. "We were expecting Clinton to intervene in this matter. We had high hopes."
Mortar and artillery fire, usually from 8 p.m. to 7 a.m. daily, has driven thousands of villagers from their homes along the dividing line. The intensity of the shelling has increased steadily since December, rising dramatically in the two weeks preceding Clinton's visit, said villagers and army officers.
"The Pakistanis are trying to show Clinton that it is a nuclear hotbed and flashpoint," said Indian Maj. Gaurav, manning a post at Mendhir along the cease-fire line, known as the Line of Control.
India accuses Pakistan of training, financing and supplying guerrillas who cross the frontier to stage bombings, ambushes and other attacks in Indian-controlled Kashmir. The nightly firing from Pakistan, Indians say, is meant to provide a cover for guerrilla crossings.
Pakistan says it provides political and moral support to what it calls an indigenous freedom movement in Kashmir, and it is the Indians who fire first.
For several days this week, during Clinton's Indian visit, an Associated Press reporter on the Line of Control noticed that the nightly shelling began from the Pakistani side.
On Friday, the Indian government said it had captured a man who participated in the killings of three dozen Sikhs in the village of Chati Singhpura - a Muslim from the same village - and had identified two alleged leaders of a 17-man killing squad.
At the central mosque, police used tear gas to break up a demonstration of 100 men led by Omar Farooq, the chief priest and head of the separatist All Party Huriyyat Conference. The protest was to demand an independent investigation into the massacre.
Later in his office, Farooq dabbed his nose with a handkerchief because of the tear gas. He said Kashmiris were glad Clinton had urged India and Pakistan to talk to each other.
"We are a bit dismayed at his approval of Indian democracy," said Farooq, noting he had been under house arrest for five days to prevent him from going to New Delhi during Clinton's visit there.
Farooq has not been allowed travel outside India, either, and most of the other leaders of his organization have been in some sort of custody - one detained for six months without a trial.
Farooq predicted violence will increase in Kashmir. He said the Indian army has deployed more troops, and he agreed with Indian military assessments that there are many more foreign militants in Kashmir than before.
Clinton "understands the complexity of the problem and does not want to get too much involved," Farooq said. "That is how politics works. We don't have any oil as the Kuwaitis have."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: March 25, 2000

 

End of Document
