

Amid Vietnam war, news media and military fought their own battles; Part of a continuing series of stories marking the 25th anniversary of the end of the Vietnam War. Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City, fell
The Associated Press
April 9, 2000, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1086 words
Byline: By RICHARD PYLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It was called the first "living room war," the beginning of a communications revolution that has fundamentally changed battlefield reporting and left a legacy that still affects, sometimes bitterly, the way America's wars are covered.
"For better or worse, Vietnam was the most important story of the time, and it shaped us - and journalism - ever since," says Don North, a veteran war correspondent who first arrived in Saigon as a freelance reporter in 1964.
Until it fell to the communists 25 years ago and became Ho Chi Minh City, Saigon was the capital of South Vietnam, and was filled with hundreds of journalists and would-be journalists with ambition and a taste for adventure.
That spirit hasn't changed, but the 20-pound tape recorders, film cameras and other tools of that era are now museum pieces - replaced by laptop computers, digital cameras and portable satellites.
Vietnam also triggered a war-within-a-war - a battle of credibility between the military and the media that has ebbed and flowed for nearly 40 years.
The sourness was felt in 1983, when U.S. officers tried to bar journalists entirely from the Grenada invasion, and in 1989 in Panama, when even Pentagon-organized "media pools" were kept away from the action.
These controversial incidents led to new "rules of engagement" for journalists, including media pools - small, selected groups of journalists who cover for all - and "security review" of news material before sent. Both were used in the 1991 Gulf war, but failed, largely due to abuses by the military itself.
The Gulf War showed "resentment of the press was still there, part of the lore," says William Hammond, senior historian at the Army's Center of Military History.
Today, training in media relations is mandatory for the Pentagon's top uniformed and civilian officials, and it is taught, at least obliquely, at the nation's military academies and war colleges.
But there was none of that in Saigon in the early 1960s, where the budding conflict was being covered by a tight group of newcomers, notably Malcolm Browne and Peter Arnett of The Associated Press, David Halberstam of The New York Times and Neil Sheehan of United Press International.
At first uncritical of the U.S. commitment, these reporters became disillusioned by what they saw as hypocrisy, incompetence and corruption. Their harsh assessments infuriated officials at the U.S. Military Assistance Command Vietnam, known as MACV, and in Washington. President Lyndon Johnson even tried to have some reporters reassigned out of the war zone.
"It became clear early on that there was a great deal of difference between what the Americans in the field were saying, and the hyped-up, artificial optimism of high Americans in Saigon," says Halberstam, who went on to publish several books, including the acclaimed Vietnam War study, "The Best and the Brightest."
"Gradually, the American people began to see what we saw - that you could grind this war on forever, and the other side, no matter how many we killed, would keep coming."
Between 1962 and 1975, some 5,100 journalists from 64 countries kept coming, too, according to a recent study by Hammond for Harvard University's Joan Shorenstein Center for the Press and Public Policy.
The peak number was about 600 during the 1968 Tet offensive; about 100 were still there as North Vietnamese tanks rumbled into Saigon on April 30, 1975.
By contrast, 1,095 journalists were accredited during the one-month Gulf War, according to retired Army Col. William Mulvey, who ran the military's media operation in Saudi Arabia. Non-registered and one-time visitors pushed the total considerably higher, say former officers. And they estimate more than 2,000 media people were in Kosovo.
Many reporters in Vietnam, too, were one-time visitors; the Saigon press corps also drew its share of drifters, adventurers and even spies. MACV officers estimated in 1966 that fewer than 35 percent of the accredited press - mostly wire service, print and television journalists - actually covered combat.
At war's end, more than 70 were dead or missing.
Photographers won the most Pulitzer Prizes and suffered the most casualties. Despite their high profile, TV crews dodged death until 1970 when eight people working for NBC and CBS were ambushed and killed in Cambodia.
In other major incidents, four reporters - three Australian and one British - were killed at a Viet Cong roadblock in Saigon in 1968, and four photographers, for AP, UPI, Life and Newsweek, perished in a South Vietnamese helicopter shot down over Laos in 1971.
Saigon's media centerpiece was the daily command briefing, a battle of semantics that ranged from hilarious to hostile and was known as the "Five O'Clock Follies." Though derided and ridiculed, the briefings served to put information - true or false - on the record.
Competition was fierce, especially among wire services and TV networks. But "in the field we were mutually supportive and cooperative - without New York's knowledge," recalls ex-ABC correspondent Steve Bell.
World War II-type censorship was impractical in a country where military secrets hardly existed, so U.S. officials would "embargo" reports of field operations until fighting began.
The policy worked, says Hammond. Only eight journalists were ever cited for violating security, and "no one has ever been able to demonstrate that any damage resulted."
Retired Col. Robert Burke, MACV's chief of information in 1972-73, said military officers held "grudging respect" for journalists, especially those who shared the perils of combat. "But no one got up in the morning saying, 'God, I'm so happy the press is over here reporting the war."'
What most rankled officials, says Burke, were "inaccurate stories" that affected policy, and a perceived media bias that "ignored NVA and Viet Cong atrocities and errors, while exaggerating those of the U.S. and South Vietnamese."
This, and the TV images of battle being beamed into American living rooms, led to a widespread perception that the media "lost the war in Vietnam."
But historian Hammond doesn't believe it.
"What finally alienated the American people wasn't news coverage but casualties," he said in an interview. "Public support in both the Korean and Vietnam wars dropped 15 percent each time casualties rose by 10 percent."
---
 
Editors: AP Correspondent Richard Pyle covered the Vietnam War for five years and was Saigon bureau chief in 1970-73. He subsequently covered wars in the Middle East, the Persian Gulf and Kosovo. He is based in New York.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY392-393 of April 4
 Load-Date: April 10, 2000

 

End of Document
