

Amid rising tensions, officials say Clinton visit is worth the risks
The Associated Press
December 10, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 815 words
Byline: ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton's planned visit to the Holy Land this weekend is whipping up emotions among the Israelis and Palestinians, but U.S. officials and experts say it would be a mistake to back out.
"What he is doing is valuable precisely because it isn't popular with many people" in the Middle East, said Anthony Cordesman, a professor of national security studies at Washington's Georgetown University.
The trip comes as Israel's peacemaking with the Palestinians is on hold, Israeli internal politics is in turmoil and Palestinian-Israeli violence is on the rise.
Most members of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's Cabinet want Clinton to stay home, and even Netanyahu, the reluctant host, asked, "What am I going to tell him, not to come - don't come?" In the Palestinian-controlled West Bank, clashes with Israeli troops are the most widespread in months.
Presidential aides insist it still makes sense for Clinton to visit Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
"The president believes that it's important to take this trip," White House press secretary Joe Lockhart said Wednesday. He said it "demonstrates our commitment to" the Wye River accord, in which Israel pledged to make further withdrawals from the West Bank in exchange for firmer Palestinian security assurances.
Meanwhile, Clinton's proposal for financial aid to support the Wye River agreement drew criticism today from key congressional Republicans. Incoming House Speaker Bob Livingston of Louisiana and the incoming chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, Rep. Bill Young of Florida, protested that Congress was not consulted in advance about the request.
The administration has pledged $ 900 million over five years in U.S. economic aid to the Palestinians.
This, together with administration plans to ask Congress for $ 1.2 billion for Israel and $ 300 million for Jordan, "calls into question an earlier agreement with Israel to phase out most economic assistance to that region," Livingston and Young wrote Clinton.
"At the very least, we would ask you to consult senior members of the congressional leadership on both sides of the aisle before committing billions of taxpayer dollars to foreign governments," they said.
Clinton, who helped forge the Wye River deal in October, is scheduled to leave for Jerusalem on Saturday.
In remarks Tuesday night, Clinton briefly referred to the trip as a way to "do what we can to keep the process agreed at Wye on track."
The trip itself is part of the Wye River accord. There is disagreement now about who initiated the idea, but the intention was for Clinton to witness a Dec. 14 meeting of the Palestine National Council in Gaza City, where the assembly is to void all clauses in its charter that call for the destruction of Israel. Clinton's presence was meant to reassure Israel, yet some now see it as conveying tacit recognition of Palestinian statehood.
The Clinton administration's position is that the question of Palestinian sovereignty is a matter to be settled in what are called "final status" talks with Israel, which are supposed to be completed by May 1999.
Rep. James Saxton, R-N.J., said Wednesday he doubts the climate is right for Clinton's visit to boost the peace process.
"If the president asked me, I would say don't go," Saxton said, adding that he had canceled his own planned visit to Israel this month after calculating that the political scene there was too unsettled. "The president should walk very carefully if he goes."
Although Saxton was referring to the political pitfalls Clinton will face, his words of caution could as easily apply to the security threat. Clinton as always will travel with a large security contingent at his side. As a matter of policy, the Secret Service will not discuss security precautions or publicly assess the threat.
"We try to duplicate the security that is at the White House and on the White House grounds no matter where the president goes," said Jim Mackin, a Secret Service spokesman. He declined to elaborate.
In addition to Jerusalem and Gaza City, Clinton also is scheduled to visit Manger Square in Bethlehem, the Palestinian-controlled West Bank town where tradition says Jesus was born. In a bid for balance, Clinton also is going to Masada, the fortified plateau on the Dead Sea that symbolizes Jewish defiance.
Hillary Rodham Clinton will have her own schedule. Last spring she caused a stir with remarks that were interpreted as expressing support for Palestinian statehood.
Cordesman, the Georgetown professor, said it was inevitable that Clinton's trip would stir vocal opposition from many Israelis and Palestinians who see the Clinton-brokered Wye River accord as fatally flawed. He noted that Clinton has often been attacked for seeking the politically expedient path in foreign policy.
"Now this is a case where he appears to be putting leadership ahead of popularity," Cordesman said.
 Load-Date: December 10, 1998

 

End of Document
