

Amusement park among the perks monarch lavishes on Brunei
The Associated Press
June 9, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 710 words
Byline: By JOCELYN GECKER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BANDAR SERI BEGAWAN, Brunei
Body




Down the road from the sultan's palace is his gift to the people of Brunei: a sprawling amusement park where entertainment is courtesy of the king.
"It's not as big as Disneyland, but it's better," said Mohamhad Sofrihaten, 19, who like many Bruneians has dubbed the park the Sultan's Playground. "In Disney, money's king. Here, everything's free."
Some locals shrug off the free rides at Jerudong Park Playground as another perk of living in this oil-rich kingdom on the north coast of Borneo, ruled by one of the wealthiest men in the world.
No one pays taxes and medical care is free, thanks to the oil reserves that keep inflation nonexistent and also have sheltered Brunei from Asia's currency crisis. There are no highway speed limits and subsidies keep prices low for the gasoline that fuels all the imported cars.
Other Bruneians say it's due compensation for the kingdom's cannots.
In recent years, Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah's push for a stricter Islam in the majority Muslim nation of 300,000 people has brought laws banning alcohol, most night life past 10 p.m. and the public display of affection - all of which still exist unofficially.
The one authorized exception is the multibillion-dollar amusement park, which is open until 2 a.m. on the outskirts of Bandar Seri Begawan, the capital. Built by the sultan in 1994 to mark his 48th birthday, the park draws a nightly crowd of 2,000 that scarcely fills its sprawl.
Thrill seekers careen on looping roller coasters and plunge on a 165-foot freefall ride with no lines to slow them down. Music fans get free tickets to concerts by the likes Michael Jackson and Celine Dion. Young couples stray from marble paths to steal forbidden kisses.
"It's the only place where guys can play loud music and look at pretty girls," said Caroline Ang, a Bruneian travel agent. "You can't really live without vices."
That is the unspoken message that has trickled out of the sultan's lavish 50-acre palace, which is gated from the public except for one day a year at the end of the holy month of Ramadan.
Several Filipino actresses and beauty queens have allegedly received large sums to entertain at the 1,788-room royal palace, the world's largest residence.
Last year, a former Miss USA, Shannon Marketic, filed a damage suit against the sultan claiming she had been held captive at the palace for 32 days with six other American beauty queens and told they had to engage in sex soirees with wealthy men.
The sultan denied having had contact with Ms. Marketic. His lawyer got the $ 90 million lawsuit dismissed from a U.S. District Court on the grounds the sultan has sovereign immunity and cannot be sued.
Press coverage of the case was blacked out in Brunei. Locals said rumors slipped through, but they choose their words carefully when commenting.
"Just like in a small family, no one questions what the master of the house does," said Ang. "But if you disobey, he can point a finger."
The sultan and religious leaders have recently scolded the kingdom's people for sinning. Awang Abdul Aziz Junid, a leading religious teacher, warned against "unhealthy entertainment," notably liquor and women who wear revealing clothes that flout Islam's teachings about modest dress.
While alcohol sales are forbidden, non-Muslim visitors can bring up to two liters into Brunei.
Many restaurants honor a bring-your-own policy. Bruneians also can drive three hours to Malaysia for liquor, but some partake of the underground market, where alcohol is sold in back alleys and sipped in tea cups.
One cafe is known for its "herbal brew." At night, tables are topped with tea pots as customers sip beer concealed in dainty china.
In a residential section, a van parked backwards marks a house that is more than it seems. A double rap on the glass front door and a face appears between the curtains. The illicit order is placed, and, quickly, a newspaper-wrapped beer is slipped out the gated door.
The risk for such activities is high as raids are common and punishment runs to a fine of 200,000 Brunei dollars ($ 120,000) or jail.
But competition keeps prices down. Two cans of Heineken sell for the equivalent of $ 6, only slightly more than across the border in Malaysia.
"It's the forbidden fruit," said one beer buyer who asked to remain anonymous.
 Load-Date: June 9, 1998

 

End of Document
