

Answers to some murky questions in the fund-raising controversy
October 11, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1081 words
Byline: By LARRY MARGASAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Just who are John Huang and Charlie Trie? What's wrong with having coffee with the president at the White House or making fund-raising calls there? What is "soft money?"
With separate investigations into political fund raising under way in the Senate, the House and at the Justice Department, the controversies and cast of characters can become a bit confusing.
Here are answers to some questions that have arisen with developments of the last few weeks.
 
 Q. What federal laws apply to donations?
A. Since the reforms in the post-Watergate era, strict limits have been imposed on the size of donations to campaigns and parties that directly support federal candidates. These are commonly referred to as "hard-money" donations.
An individual donor can give no more than $ 25,000 in hard money donations a year and is limited to no more than $ 2,000 per election cycle to a single candidate. Corporations cannot donate "hard money." Donors must give their own money, without reimbursement. And foreigners are prohibited from giving.
A loophole in those laws, however, allows corporations and wealthy individuals to donate unlimited amounts to political parties in so-called "soft money." These donations, which frequently exceed six figures, cannot be used directly to help candidates but are supposed to fund generic party ads and activities like get-out-the-vote drives. The amount and size of "soft money" donations have spiraled since the 1980s and are at the core of the current controversy.
 
 Q. What is the law on foreign money, and how much of it have investigators found in elections?
A. Federal law prohibits campaign donations from foreigners lacking who are not legal residents of the United States. Senate and House investigators have produced evidence showing that hundreds of thousands of dollars in foreign money made its way into recent elections - either through reimbursements to U.S. donors for contributions to political parties or through donations to tax-exempt groups engaging in political activity.
Sen. Fred Thompson, R-Tenn., chairman of the Senate's fund-raising investigation, opened his hearings by declaring that China plotted to influence U.S. elections with illegal money. No testimony has been presented to back up the contention.
 
 Q. Who are Yah Lin "Charlie" Trie and John Huang? What did they do?
A. Both men were major fund-raisers among Asian-Americans for the Democratic Party in the last election and raised most of the suspect money the party has since returned. Huang was head of U.S. operations for the Indonesian-based Lippo Group financial empire and worked for 18 months in the Clinton administration's Commerce Department before taking a job as Democratic fund-raiser. Trie was a Little Rock, Ark., restaurateur who followed his friend Bill Clinton to Washington and became involved in fund raising. Both Huang and Trie deny wrongdoing.
 
 Q. How much donated money have the two parties returned?
A. The Democratic National Committee has returned $ 2.9 million in contributions that it concluded were inappropriate or it suspected came from foreign or other improper sources. Of that total, $ 2.3 million was raised or solicited by Trie, Huang or another fund-raiser, Johnny Chung.
The Republican National Committee returned $ 102,400 in contributions from a Florida company after learning the money came from overseas.
 
 Q. Is there evidence that a government decision was directly affected by a political donation?
A. There has been little tangible evidence of such a quid pro quos. In one episode still being explored, Senate documents show that former Democratic Party Chairman Don Fowler played a role in the White House contacting the Interior Department on behalf of Minnesota Indian tribes that opposed a casino at Hudson, Wis. The Minnesota tribes, contributors to the Democrats, won the battle when the Interior Department disapproved the casino. Wisconsin tribes seeking the casino were Republican donors. A lawyer was recently quoted as saying he was told by Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt that money played a role.
 
 Q. If donors didn't get something tangible, what did they get?
A. In a word, access. For themselves and their associates, through coffees, breakfasts and dinners with the president and vice president or overnight stays in the Lincoln Bedroom.
Some who got access have foreign ties. Macao businessman Ng Lap Seng, who wired close to $ 1 million to Trie that Senate investigators allege may have been tied to donations, visited the White House 10 times and dined once with Clinton. A Chinese arms dealer had coffee with Clinton. International oilman and financier Roger Tamraz, charged with embezzlement in Lebanon and fraud in France, got inside the White House several times over the objection of a national security aide.
 
 Q. What does the law say about fund-raising calls made from the White House?
A. Attorney General Janet Reno is trying to determine whether an independent prosecutor should be appointed to investigate this issue. Vice President Al Gore admits dialing for dollars from his government office. President Clinton says he doesn't remember but has left open the possibility in the face of documents suggesting he made solicitations.
The 1883 Pendleton law makes it illegal for federal officials "to solicit … any contribution … in any room or building occupied in the discharge of official duties."
It is not clear whether the law applies to the president and vice president, or when the caller is inside a government building and the donor is not. The White House contends the law doesn't apply to the situations involving Clinton and Gore.
 
 Q. Is it illegal for Clinton to play host to donors at the White House?
A. "Merely entertaining his supporters in the White House does not constitute a violation," the attorney general recently concluded.
Republicans argue the presidential coffees were really fund-raisers, because donors who attended were solicited soon after. Democrats acknowledge the events were designed to generate money, but were legal because nobody was solicited on White House grounds.
 
 Q. Is Clinton the first president to entertain donors at the White House?
A. No. There are numerous examples of Republican donors attending events at the White House during GOP administrations. And a video that emerged last week from the Ronald Reagan presidential library showed the former president in 1987 with $ 10,000-plus Republican donors in the East Room of the White House and asking for their help.
 Load-Date: October 11, 1997

 

End of Document
