

Anti-Muslim Prejudice Goes Behind The Scenes In Bombay
April 9, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 704 words
Byline: By NARESH FERNANDES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOMBAY, India
Body




Three years ago, Bombay erupted in Hindu-Muslim riots that killed 800 people while the Hindu-dominated police stood by, and in some cases, joined in.
When a radical Hindu alliance took power last year in the state of Maharashtra, where Bombay is the capital, many Muslims feared the violence would return.
It hasn't.
The city and the state have continued to prosper. Business is the watchword. Foreign companies - always wary of political unrest - have poured in investments.
But the city's Muslims - about 10 percent of Bombay's 13 million people - remain fearful. And the steps the government has taken to shield Hindu extremists from criminal prosecution has rankled moderates across India.
"This government hasn't started any riots. But they've proved that they are anti-Muslim," said Shaikh Abdul Raza, whose 6-year-old son was killed in a 1993 riot.
As India heads toward parliamentary elections - conducted on three dates, April 27, May 2 and May 7 - many people are looking at the Hindu alliance governing Maharashtra for what the future could hold for the rest of India.
The Bharatiya Janata Party, a key figure in the state alliance, has its best chance yet to displace Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao's Congress Party from the national government in New Delhi.
Although the Bharatiya Janata Party, or BJP, has governed other states, its coalition with the outspokenly anti-Muslim Shiv Sena party in Bombay amounts to an extreme-case scenario for India, which still upholds secularism as its ideal.
Animosity between India's majority Hindus and minority Muslims dates back to the 13th century, when Muslim invaders from Central Asia overran Hindu kingdoms and founded the Moghul Empire.
In the 1940s, the departing British colonialists sliced off two Muslim-dominated areas and created the Islamic nation of Pakistan. But hundreds of millions of Muslims remained in India.
In 1992, Hindu radicals leveled an ancient Muslim mosque in the north Indian city of Ayodhya, which they believe had been built on top of a Hindu temple. The nationwide riots that followed were most deadly in Bombay.
Angered at the ruling Congress Party for failing to protect them, Muslims voted for leftist parties in the 1994 state elections, inadvertently leading to a Shiv Sena-BJP victory.
The most visible evidence of the government's pro-Hindu policies is the formal change of the name of Bombay - a creation of the British - to Mumbai, after a Hindu goddess.
Town-by-town and perhaps street-by-street, old names derived from the Moghuls or the British may be changed to names from Hindu mythology or the Indian independence movement.
But Muslim apprehension is based on grimmer signposts.
The Maharashtra government dissolved the state Minorities Commission, a public body to safeguard minority rights, saying it only reminded Hindus and Muslims of their differences.
In January, it suspended a judicial inquiry into the riots of December 1992 and early 1993 that was investigating who was responsible and why police failed to act. That includes some policemen and Shiv Sena state legislators who were accused of helping Hindu mobs that targeted Muslims.
Chief Minister Manohar Joshi, the state's premier, argued the inquiry only heightened tensions between Hindus and Muslims. "We are definitely not anti-minority," he said. "We treat all citizens equally."
"It's obvious that the Shiv Sena was afraid of the truth," said Raza, 40, a movie usher whose tin walls still bear scorch-marks from the fire three years ago.
Raza's son Rizwan was trapped when a Hindu mob set alight the family's 8-foot-square hovel in Dharavi, Asia's largest slum.
Joshi's administration also dropped 24 charges filed by the previous Congress Party government against radical Shiv Sena leader Bal Thackeray, who was accused of fueling the riots through inflammatory editorials in the party newspaper, Samna.
Rajmohan Gandhi, who has studied Hindu-Muslim violence at the Center for Police Research in New Delhi, says today's quiet is deceptive.
"The seeming peace of Maharashtra exists under fear and intimidation," said Gandhi, a grandson of independence leader Mohandas Gandhi. "No one can pretend the Muslim minority feels secure or that it has equal rights with the others."
 Load-Date: April 9, 1996

 

End of Document
