

Anwar's yearlong trial drags Malaysia down the road of cynicism
The Associated Press
July 31, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 870 words
Byline: By ALVIN UNG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia
Body




When prosecutors moved against Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim two years ago, they sent hundreds of police officers, dozens of army rangers and an elite weapons squad to arrest him.
It was the opening of a judicial drama that has shaken the political hold of long-governing Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad.
Last year, Anwar was convicted of corruption and given a six-year jail sentence. This Friday, he is scheduled to hear the judge's verdict in a year-old trial on sodomy charges.
Anwar and his supporters say both cases have been nothing but a conspiracy led by Mahathir because he considered his deputy a political threat. Both trials opened in the glare of publicity but domestic and international interest has waned in recent months.
Yet Anwar, the jailed politician, has successfully used his plight to unleash public opinion that has swept through Malaysia and reached Mahathir, master of the country for 19 years.
"The trial has effectively placed the entire Malay society on trial," said Bruce Gale, a political analyst with Singapore-based Political and Economic Risk Consultancy. "You either believe Anwar did it, or you don't. This is one of the great divides in Malay politics."
Pared to its essence, the sodomy trial is between the word of the former deputy prime minister and his alleged victim, Azizan Abu Bakar, an ex-chauffeur for Anwar's family.
A guilty verdict means imprisonment of up to 20 years and possibly a whipping. Even if Anwar is found innocent, he will be imprisoned until 2003 and blacklisted from public office for five more years for last year's corruption conviction.
Both crimes were alleged after Mahathir abruptly fired Anwar in September 1998 following a year of widening differences over how to cope with the Asian economic crisis.
Critics of Anwar said he had become too ambitious and coveted the top job. Anwar has claimed that his calls for reforms threatened Mahathir's cronies and corruption in the system.
For Mahathir, a guilty verdict would provide justification for why he removed the man he had slated as his heir apparent.
Firing Anwar incensed much of the country's normally placid Malay population, the dominant ethnic group and Mahathir's power base, resulting in thousands taking to the streets.
The subsequent criminal charges of corruption and sodomy - plus a beating Anwar suffered in custody at the hands of the national police chief - triggered further outrage and brought protests from local and international rights groups.
The joint trial of Anwar and his adopted brother, Sukma Darmawan, alleged to have been Anwar's sex accomplice, began in June 1999. It immediately became mired in controversy when prosecutors waffled over the date of the alleged offense.
They initially said Anwar attacked Azizan in Sukma's Kuala Lumpur apartment in May 1994. Then they changed the date to May 1992, citing a typographical error. They changed the date again after the defense showed that the apartment had not been built until 1993.
Lead prosecutor Abdul Gani Patail called Azizan "a victim who had been under untold suffering" who could even identify the queen-sized bed where some of the acts allegedly took place.
The defense called Azizan an avaricious liar willing to concoct tales fed to him by Mahathir's associates. The defense team submitted alibis for most of the 90 evenings in question.
The defense also subjected Azizan to a withering cross-examination, during which he conceded that he was asked by police to change the date of the alleged sodomy to 1993.
The fierce, often personal attacks mounted by both the defense and the prosecution diminished the respect of the Malaysian public for their institutions, Gale said.
"The cumulative effect of the Anwar trial is that Malaysians are more cynical now than ever before," Gale said. "This cynicism exists whether or not you believe Anwar is guilty. Both sides flung mud on each other, and neither came out looking particularly good."
During last November's elections, the fundamentalist Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party capitalized on the discontent by tripling its seats in Parliament.
The gains came at the expense of Mahathir's United Malays National Organization, whose popular vote fell to its lowest in decades.
The reform-touting National Justice Party, led by Anwar's wife, Azizah Ismail, did not fare particularly well.
The result has been to split ethnic Malay political power between a party that represents the old guard and one espousing a brand of religious politics that would be anathema to moderate Malays and the substantial ethnic Chinese and Indian minorities.
Mahathir's rhetoric has been filled with attacks on the Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party, following a raid on military armories by an obscure Muslim cult preaching holy war and who killed two hostages.
Mahathir claimed that many of the extremists belong to the party and threaten the stability of Malaysia. The party denied any link.
Gale said that Anwar's case and the violence weren't directly related.
"But it did suggest that there were a number of Malaysians out there who didn't believe that it was possible to attain power through peaceful means," Gale said. "They felt that if you wanted to gain power, you had no other choice but to use violence."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY191-192
 Load-Date: August 1, 2000

 

End of Document
