

Archives shed light on the communist claims of germ warfare in Korea
The Associated Press
November 16, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 644 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




At the height of the Korean War, the communist world exploded with charges that U.S. warplanes were dropping germ-carrying insects over the battlefields. North Koreans facing execution were infected with plague to make the case and 25 American POWs were induced to sign "confessions."
Now Cold War historians have pieced together the story of how the claim, instigated by Chinese battlefield advisers at a time when many North Koreans were dying of cholera, was repeated even after the Kremlin informed a nervous Mao Tse-tung that it had been "based on false information."
On Feb. 22, 1952, North Korea told the United Nations that U.S. aircraft had dropped disease-bearing insects in seven raids. Two weeks later, Chou En-lai charged the United States had sent 448 aircraft on 68 missions to spread plague, anthrax, cholera, encephalitis and meningitis.
Using 12 documents spirited from the still-secret Presidential Archive in Moscow, scholars Milton Leitenberg and Kathryn Weathersby are publishing details about the campaign in the Bulletin of the Cold War International History Project of the Woodrow Wilson Center.
Leitenberg is a biological warfare specialist at the University of Maryland and Ms. Weathersby is a historian specializing in the Soviets' role in the Korean War. The center is a government-sponsored think tank.
Leitenberg said the documents "provide explicit and detailed evidence that the charges were contrived and fraudulent." The Americans' confessions were renounced when the prisoners were repatriated.
The allegations, blessed by Josef Stalin and backed by Mao and Chou, were given credibility by the late Joseph Needham, a British biochemist and avowed Marxist, Leitenberg said.
Needham headed a communist-backed "International Scientific Commission for the Investigation of the Facts Concerning Bacterial Warfare in Korea and China" which issued a 669-page report in 1952 that affirmed the charges.
But Leitenberg said the commission conducted no on-site investigation; it merely listened to witnesses and examined slides of infected tissue. "They looked into a microscope and nodded their heads," he said. "It was a setup."
When communist-organized delegations traveled to North Korea to investigate, the North Koreans staged raids - setting off explosives and sounding sirens - to convince the delegates they were in danger and had better return to Beijing.
Additionally, the Soviet ambassador to North Korea wrote a memo that said, "Two false regions of infection were simulated for the purpose of accusing the Americans of using bacteriological weapons."
Meantime, at the United Nations, the Soviets vetoed U.S. resolutions calling for an investigation by the International Committee of the Red Cross. The Soviets also offered the North Koreans advice on how to avoid playing host to independent investigators.
Following Stalin's death in 1953 and with a Korean armistice a few months away, the Soviets decided in secret councils that pressing the charge was undercutting Soviet credibility. They resolved to quit making the claim but never owned up to its falsity.
On May 2, 1953, the documents show, the presidium of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. adopted a blunt resolution that said: "The Soviet Government and the Central Committee of the CPSU (Communist Party of the Soviet Union) were misled. The spread in the press of information about the use by the Americans of bacteriological weapons in Korea was based on false information. The accusations against the Americans were fictitious."
When the Soviet ambassador to China so informed Mao, he refused to take responsibility, the ambassador reported to Moscow. Mao said the claims had been based on reports from Chinese battlefield advisers to the North Koreans. He displayed "some nervousness," the ambassador said: "He smoked a lot, crushed cigarettes and drank a lot of tea."
 Load-Date: November 16, 1998

 

End of Document
