

Around the world, the Great Millennium Baby Race sputters out
The Associated Press
December 26, 1999, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 716 words
Byline: BY PHIL GALEWITZ, AP Business Writer
Body




Radio stations held contests. Hospitals offered glitzy prizes. Bookmakers gave odds.
But the allure of giving birth at the dawn of the new millennium has failed to spark much of a baby boom.
Around the world, many large hospitals say they are seeing no significant increase in women scheduled to go into labor on New Year's Day.
"It's an ordinary New Year's Eve," said Dr. Anders Berg, head of gynecology at Danderyds Hospital in Stockholm, Sweden. Doctors in much of the United States and Europe echo his words.
In many hospitals, officials are relieved to know they won't have extra births to deal with when New Year's Eve passes and the Y2K computer bug may or may not wreak havoc on computers and power supplies.
Two hospitals in Leicester, England, have advised would-be millennium mothers to bring a flashlight just in case. The hospitals have emergency generators to keep their equipment running, but patient room lights would be low priority in a power failure.
Dr. Sabastian Faro, chairman of obstetrics at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago, said the lack of extra births shows the inherent difficulty in trying to get pregnant on demand.
Those hoping to have a millennium baby won't necessarily get special assistance from their doctors.
The American College of Obstetrics/Gynecology said it would be unethical for doctors to induce pregnancy for the purpose of giving birth on New Year's Day unless it is medically necessary. Using drugs to induce pregnancy can increase the risk that the woman will need a Cesarean section.
"It's not a great idea to bring a child in the world just because you think it would be special to do it on the millennium," said Dr. John Gianopolous, chairman of obstetrics-gynecology at Loyola University Medical Center in Chicago.
In Thailand, health officials have warned doctors they could end up in jail if they perform Caesarean operations to time baby births with the onset of the new millennium.
"Doctors should not do so even though they might be pressured from parents-to-be," said Health Ministry Deputy Permanent Secretary Supachai Khunaratanaphreuk.
Couples looking to give birth at the start of the millennium would have had to conceive around the end of March or first week in April.
At that time, from Malaysia to Norway, from Spain to the United States, radio stations held first-baby-of-2000 contests, and couples were offered some private time together, romantic hotel getaways and aphrodisiacs ranging from a traditional Malaysian potion to a Barry White CD.
Some hospitals that traditionally celebrate the first baby of the year with a gift basket of donated diapers and toys are offering larger gift packages for 2000, including savings bonds and limousine rides.
Baseball's Minnesota Twins are promising lifetime season tickets to the first set of twins born in 2000 at any one of seven Minnesota hospitals.
In Britain, bookmakers William Hill said dozens of pregnant women are staking bets that they will give birth on Jan. 1. Jacqueline McDaid of Aberdeen, Scotland, will win $4,125 if her baby is born on New Year's Day. She bet $165 at odds of 25-1 in September.
Though most hospitals said they expect an average number of births, there are some exceptions.
Doctors at St. Mary's Regional Medical Center in Lewiston, Maine, are expecting 38 percent more births in December, and 30 percent more in January.
At Dr. Cha's Clinic in Seoul, South Korea, about 350 women are expected to give birth in the week surrounding New Year's Day, a 15 percent jump from last year.
One of them is Chung Jong-hwa, 36, who is due Jan 2.
"Once we decided to have a new baby, we said, 'Why not a millennium baby?"' Jong-hwa said of her discussion with her husband. "We tried very hard last March to conceive. … Having a new baby on Jan. 1 will be a great beginning for the new millennium."
But most women expecting in the next few weeks are more concerned with having a healthy baby than giving birth on a certain day.
That's the case with Chaely Rund, of Phoenix, who is scheduled to have triplets around New Year's Day, even though she didn't plan it that way. "It was the fertility drugs," she said.
Will having the baby on New Year's Day make the delivery any more special?
"I would think giving birth to triplets any time is special enough," Rund said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo PN101 of Dec. 26
 Load-Date: December 27, 1999

 

End of Document
