

As Dole Tees Off on Clinton, the President Hits Off the Tee
October 15, 1996, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 567 words
Byline: By SONYA ROSS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M.
Body




As Republican presidential candidate Bob Dole tees off on President Clinton, the president is getting relief from his debate preparations by teeing off at a golf course.
"You get beat up in the morning, you clear your head in the afternoon and get beat up again at night," Clinton said at the course on Monday. "It's a great way to do it."
Clinton spent most of Monday in debate practice sessions with aides, taking a break only to play golf with Albuquerque Mayor Martin Chavez and announce that he'd signed a bill allowing the sale of surplus military planes for fighting wildfires. Dole, meanwhile, is preparing for the debate in San Diego, and is already sharpening his attacks on Clinton.
Today, White House aides cheered a report that violence on television has declined in the past year. The report, financed by the major networks and released in Los Angeles, is the latest in a three-year study seeking ways to curb violence in TV programming.
Clinton has urged TV networks to reduce violence and has advocated devising a ratings system for television programs and installing "V-chips" into television sets so parents can block shows they consider inappropriate for their children.
"The president has pushed this issue hard from the bully pulpit," said White House spokesman Mike McCurry. "I think we deserve some credit."
Dole deserves credit as well, for decrying the level of violence in movies, McCurry said. "He's given at least two speeches in Hollywood about the culture. We certainly would credit him."
Other than the golf foray - which also included Clinton's former aide Erskine Bowles and close friend Vernon Jordan - the president stuck close to his hotel, the Holiday Inn Pyramid. The bill signing took him only as far as a hastily erected stage in the hotel parking lot.
Clinton told reporters he wants Wednesday's final debate in San Diego to offer voters a solid view of where he and Dole stand on issues. He would not comment on Dole's new strategy of questioning his ethics, nor on how he plans to respond.
"We'll see what the people have to say afterwards," Clinton said. "Many people said to me after the last debate that they thought it had been fundamentally positive and that people had really learned from the debate what the differences between us are. That's all any of us could hope for, and that's what I hope will come out of this debate."
Dole, however, left little mystery as to where he wants the line of inquiry to go. On his way to San Diego for his own debate practice, Dole hammered at Clinton's ethics, raising questions about contributions to the Democrat's re-election campaign from Indonesian banking interests.
"He does not have an ethical administration. And we're going to go after that in the debate on Wednesday night," Dole said.
Clinton aides dismissed Dole's attacks as desperation moves.
"They have basically given up trying to convince people of a positive rationale of why Bob Dole should be elected president and they've resorted to purely negative politics," said Clinton political aide Doug Sosnik.
Added White House spokesman Mike McCurry, "They're getting very desperate. I think that's been pretty obvious for some time."
The president himself shrugged off as another political attack House Speaker Newt Gingrich's call for Congress to investigate contributions to his campaign from an Indonesian banking conglomerate.
"It's election time," Clinton said.
 Load-Date: October 15, 1996

 

End of Document
