

As governments haggle, scientists report 1997 the hottest ever
December 5, 1997, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 783 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: KYOTO, Japan
Body




British scientists came to the global warming conference today to report that 1997 is expected to be Earth's hottest year on record, adding to a string of warm years in the 1990s and to the evidence that something is happening to the planet's climate.
"We are beginning to see the fingerprint of man's impact on the climate," said Catherine Senior, of the British government's Hadley Center for Climate Prediction and Research.
In conference meeting halls and transoceanic telephone calls, meanwhile, negotiators from 150 nations labored on, trying to nail down details of a historic agreement to control gas emissions linked to global warming.
The chairman of the talks, in the fifth of 10 scheduled days, was searching for a compromise formula assigning various levels of gas reductions to 34 industrialized countries. But progress was slow on that and a host of other issues.
The conference is to wrap up two years of negotiations to toughen the 1992 Climate Change Treaty, by setting legally binding limits on emissions of carbon dioxide and other "greenhouse" gases, mostly byproducts of fossil fuel burning.
The gases allow sunlight in but trap the heat that Earth emits back toward space.
An authoritative, U.N.-sponsored network of hundreds of climate scientists reported in 1995 that the average global temperature had increased an estimated 1 degree Fahrenheit in the past century. It projected temperatures would rise an additional 2 to 6 degrees by 2100.
They said that would shift climate zones abruptly, produce more turbulent weather and, because of heat expansion and melting glaciers, raise sea levels between 6 to 37 inches, inundating islands and shorelines.
The British scientists said data since the 1995 U.N. report only buttress its conclusion that "the balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on the global climate."
As of the end of November, "1997 is looking like the warmest year on record," Senior said. "It's pretty much certain now."
Based on data from over 1,000 land stations and an even larger number of ships and buoys, Earth's surface air temperature this year has been on average almost one-fifth of a degree Fahrenheit warmer than in 1995, the previous record year, she said.
The data from the Hadley Center and Britain's University of East Anglia, based on temperature records going back to the mid-19th century, are considered among the most reliable in climate science.
Hadley's chief of climate monitoring, David Parker, said 1997's temperatures were raised in part by El Nino, the ocean warming phenomenon that occurs every few years in the Pacific.
The apparent record is unsurprising to climate scientists, who have seen nine of the 10 warmest years on record occur since 1980.
Senior said ever-improving computer models of the climate indicate that the long-term temperature trend since the early 1980s has exceeded what can be explained by the natural variability of temperatures.
She now expects warmer years to become more frequent. But she said she doesn't expect "we will suddenly come to the point where people believe in global warming overnight."
Instead, she said, after 10 or 15 years ordinary people "will look back and say, 'Yes, it seems to have happened."'
Many scientists say that may be too late to head off some of global warming's damaging effects, and they support decisive action now.
The West Europeans and Americans have set the upper and lower boundaries of the negotiation here: The European Union proposed that industrial nations reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 15 percent below 1990 levels by 2010; the Clinton administration proposed lowering them to 1990 levels, but not below.
At the outset of the Kyoto talks, the U.S. delegation said it would consider "differentiated" targets, a sliding scale of emissions cutbacks set country by country. And the chairman of the closed-door talks, Argentine diplomat Raul Estrada, said he would look for the Americans to "flexibilize" their position, shifting away from their "zero percent" plan.
On Thursday, European Union spokesmen said they understood the U.S. team might offer a "modest" reduction below zero. But American officials here and in Washington subsequently said they had not changed their position, although one senior Clinton administration official was quick to note the U.S. target remained on the negotiating table.
"Everything is under discussion," said this official, speaking on condition of anonymity.
The complex talks offer negotiators a wealth of numbers and technical details to bargain over in the horsetrading leading up to a final agreement next week, when high-level officials, including Vice President Al Gore, come to Kyoto for the conference's final days.
 Load-Date: December 5, 1997

 

End of Document
