

As Hong Kong's big day nears, focus is on the days after
June 22, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1194 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HONG KONG
Body




As Hong Kong nears the end of its long march back to China, the last British governor is packing and the Chinese army has made its first forays onto what is still British soil.
But the Big Question still looms as large as the skyscrapers that line Hong Kong's shore: Can a thriving, argumentative, capitalist society - a place that takes democracy and civil rights for granted - survive under a communist autocracy?
The only possible answer at this stage is a qualified yes, provided everyone follows the script. That is, China keeps its promise to let Hong Kong rule itself, and Hong Kong remains its prosperous, orderly - and unthreatening self.
With the whole world watching the grand event of June 30-July 1, a smooth transition will also be of paramount importance to China's place in the world. If things go sour, so most likely will the fragile U.S.-China relationship.
At one level, Hong Kong's return to China seems to defy the flow of history. Less than a decade after the 400 million people of the Soviet bloc broke out of one communist embrace, a free and affluent society is about to enter another - not because the 6.3 million people of Hong Kong asked for it, but because a lease signed 99 years ago by Victorian Britain and imperial China had to be honored.
But at another level, it closes a vast historical cycle.
The lease of 1898 simply set in stone what had already become a fact in 1841, when those vigorous, thrusting Victorians brushed aside a weak and backward China and helped themselves to a small mountainous island called Hong Kong.
The China that is taking Hong Kong back is becoming an economic and military superpower. The historic insult of colonialism is about to be erased in a blaze of red flags and fireworks as Hong Kong goes from British colony to "Special Administrative Region" of China.
But the merger was always going to be as tricky as docking in space, and the Chinese scriptwriters knew any attempt to impose communist authoritarianism on Hong Kong would kill the goose that lays golden eggs for China's own economic renaissance.
So what emerged was a relatively generous tradeoff.
Hong Kong is to run its own domestic affairs under a home-grown leader, remain capitalist and free, keep its legal system, go on electing its legislature.
In return, it will have to learn to bite its tongue. As Tung Chee-hwa, its future, China-approved leader, has made clear, the script requires not touching China where it hurts - on matters concerning dissidents, Taiwanese independence, Tibetan autonomy.
"One country, two systems" - the overarching formula for the return of Hong Kong - means insulating Hong Kong from China. It means stopping China's rampant corruption at the border (which will remain in place), and keeping meddlesome Chinese bureaucrats at bay.
But it also means preventing the virus of Hong Kong's freedom from infecting the provinces of China.
"If Hong Kong does not want China to interfere in its internal affairs, Hong Kong itself must not interfere with China's," Chang Kuo-sin of Baptist University wrote in the Hong Kong Standard.
What makes Hong Kong skeptical is that promises on paper may prove a weak bulwark against a country where Communist Party edict overrides the law; where corruption and abuse of power are rampant, and freedoms guaranteed by the constitution are severely curtailed in practice.
Nerves are already on edge over Beijing's determination to disband the elected legislature and roll back some of Hong Kong's civil liberties, thus unraveling the democratic reforms belatedly enacted by Britain.
To democracy campaigners like Martin Lee, China's moves augur an age of shrunken freedoms, of "repressive laws to enable the future government to suppress human rights."
Tung portrays the changes as inconsequential. Fresh elections will be held by mid-1998, he says, in which everyone, even Lee and his turbulent Democratic Party can take part.
Demonstrations will require police permission, and foreign donations to political parties will be banned, leaving Hong Kong no different than many Western societies, he says.
For all the aches and pains since Britain and China sealed the deal with champagne and handshakes on Dec. 19, 1984, opinion polls reflect a calm, sober confidence among Hong Kong's people, and the gloomiest predictions have been confounded.
There has been no collapse of the currency, no mass emigration. The big pieces of the rosy picture promised by the two sides are falling neatly into place.
Even the insertion of the Chinese army, an important symbol of sovereignty for China but perhaps the most awkward issue on the agenda, is being handled with the utmost care.
The stock market is booming and economic growth is projected at 5.5 percent for the year. Hong Kong has just opened its third road tunnel under the harbor and the world's longest rail-and-road suspension bridge. The shriek of jackhammers never ceases. The racetracks and restaurants are always packed.
And none of that should change when the Union Jack comes down and the red Chinese flag goes up.
Much of the transition should be seamless. Foreign work visas will remain valid. Police will do no more than change their cap badges at midnight of June 30. The border will remain in place. The currency will be the same. And when the five-day handover holiday ends July 3, the public will find the same cops and bureaucrats back at work.
The British priority is "a dignified and honorable departure," and it is going out on a high note, compared with its bloody retreats from other parts of its empire.
Even at this late stage, Gov. Chris Patten still gets high approval ratings, and few Hong Kong Chinese deny the benefits of colonialism.
Britain gave Hong Kong its common law, "the cornerstone on which we base our prosperity and stability, the freedom of expression that is now our daily life," says Rita Fan, speaker of the provisional legislature set up to replace the existing one.
But its departure is timely, she adds, because Hong Kong can manage on its own, and an opinion poll suggests most agree.
In February, the running opinion survey by the private Hong Kong Transition Project for the first time found a majority - 62 percent - saying that if they could control history, they would still choose reunification with China. Previously, the majority had preferred any option but that.
Acceptance is different from rejoicing, however. Asked to characterize their feelings about China's takeover, people were split almost evenly among "no choice," "prepared for it" and "a glorious thing."
This circumspection is understandable in a society of refugees from Chinese communism.
Beijing's bloody 1989 crackdown on democracy demonstrators at Tiananmen Square continues to color Hong Kong's perception of its future masters.
Could a Tiananmen Square ever happen in Hong Kong? "It will not happen here. I will not allow it to happen here," Tung said recently.
But even such a forthright pledge from the beefy shipping tycoon did not allay the fears.
"I doubt if he has such a power if the troops are ordered by their commanding officers to shoot. What can the chief executive do to stop that?" asked Lee, the Democratic Party leader.
 Load-Date: June 22, 1997

 

End of Document
