

Asians present their case to the United Nations this week
September 29, 1997, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 741 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




South Korea's foreign minister announced today his country will extend indefinitely its moratorium on exporting anti-personnel mines but cannot accept the international treaty banning those weapons because of tensions with the North.
Singapore's foreign minister, meanwhile, told the annual U.N. General Assembly debate that his country believes U.N. reform is stalled because major powers do not really want a strong United Nations.
The minister, S. Jayakumar, said Singapore supports Germany and Japan for permanent Security Council membership but only after a "general agreement" on the overall issue of council reform. That, he said, is unlikely soon.
The two ministers spoke at the beginning of the second week of the annual General Assembly debate. During this week's sessions, East Asians are taking their case to the United Nations.
They are expected to spell out Asia's views on issues such as U.N. reform, economic globalization and the situation on the Korean peninsula.
During his speech, South Korean Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-Ha acknowledged the suffering caused by anti-personnel mines, which a newly negotiated treaty seeks to ban. The United States refused to accept the treaty after failing to win an exception for the Korean Peninsula.
Yoo said South Korea "has decided to extend for an indefinite period its moratorium on the export of anti-personnel land mines, which was to expire at the end of the year."
In his speech, Jayakumar said Singapore was pessimistic on prospects for genuine U.N. reform.
"The necessity of U.N. reform may be widely accepted," he said. "But what the great powers want is not a strong U.N. per se. They want a U.N. just strong enough and credible enough to serve as an effective instrument of their will and policies."
On the Security Council, Jayakumar said so many proposals have been put forward that "the entire Security Council reform process is in danger of being lost in a wilderness."
Other major issues of interest to the East Asians are the human rights situation in Cambodia, Burma and East Timor and the environment.
In North Korea, U.N. agencies have been working to stave off famine because of the critical food shortage. The United Nations has encouraged donor countries, especially Japan and South Korea, to step up food aid.
But diplomatic efforts to reach a longterm settlement of the Korean conflict bogged down because neither side would compromise on fundamental positions.
North Korea insists the conference take up the withdrawal of 37,000 U.S. troops from South Korea.
North Korea also wants a separate treaty with Washington, which excludes the South Koreans. Washington and Seoul want North Korea to accept a peace deal before discussing the status of U.S. troops.
In Cambodia, the international community has deferred to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or ASEAN, in diplomatic efforts to resolve the conflict which broke out after Prime Minister Hun Sen ousted his co-premier, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, last July.
Under pressure from China and Japan, the U.N. Security Council refused to condemn the coup nor demand Ranariddh's restoration. During the current debate, the General Assembly decided not to seat either a delegation loyal to Hun Sen nor one which supports Ranariddh.
Instead, diplomacy has focused on gaining assurances from Hun Sen that he will allow free and fair elections next year and permit international observers. The United Nations, which brokered the settlement of the Cambodian civil war, also wants Hun Sen to permit international observers for the balloting.
On Burma, Southeast Asians have been at odds with the United States and the Western Europeans. In July, ASEAN admitted Burma to the regional trading bloc against the urging of the Clinton Administration and the European Union.
ASEAN said reforms in Burma and respect for human rights should have been a prerequisite for membership. Instead, Southeast Asian governments maintain the best way to promote civil liberties is to bring the Burmese military regime into the global market place.
The Southeast Asians are also uneasy about pressure on Indonesia, the largest ASEAN power, to solve the East Timor issue in a way favored by Portugal, Western Europe and East Timorese opposition groups.
U.N.-brokered talks between Portugal and Indonesia have been cordial but have made little progress. Portugal, the former colonial power, wants a referendum in East Timor to decide the territory's status.
 Load-Date: September 29, 1997

 

End of Document
