

At the Movies: 'The Replacement Killers'
The Associated Press
February 4, 1998, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 710 words
Byline: By DOUGLAS J. ROWE, Associated Press Writer
Body



AT THE MOVIES Logo
"The Replacement Killers" just might be the ultimate temp job.
Let's hope so, particularly for the film's two stars - Chow Yun-Fat and Mira Sorvino. They deserve bigger and better jobs. Even the old Kelly agency wouldn't foist this gig on them.
Chow, who's trying to cross over into American stardom, has to his credit some 70 movies and various best-actor awards from Asian film festivals. He's following in the footsteps of Jackie Chan, another Asian star who brought his act to U.S. audiences after making his name internationally. But in his U.S. debut, the 42-year-old actor lacks Chan's comedic sense and martial-arts spirit.
Sorvino might be a victim of "Renny Harlin syndrome." (When the talented Geena Davis was married to the director, she made a couple of painfully bad action-adventure films.) Could it be that Sorvino, whose last film was the mindless, slimy mutant-bug actioner "Mimic," is suffering bad career moves by association with her beau, the blood-and-guts, hyperverbal auteur Quentin Tarantino?
Chow portrays professional assassin John Lee, who does a yeoman's job blowing away a cut-rate thug and his bodyguards in a disco. Once the echoes of his final shots subside, he looks in the mirror above his prey and appears to be wondering: Do I like what I see?
Maybe he does, because he readily takes the next job from an underworld figure named Mr. Wei, who wants payback for his son who was killed by a detective during a drug bust.
"After that, your obligation to me ends," Wei tells Lee.
But Lee loses his nerve when he has the cop and his 7-year-old son in the cross hairs of his high-powered rifle. Later, he reveals why he couldn't pull the trigger: the target wasn't the detective (Michael Rooker, solid in his supporting role) but the boy. His assignment was to make sure the boy died in his father's arms.
"This is how Mr. Wei deals with his enemies - through the families," Lee explains later.
So Lee decides to hang up the old arsenal, much to Wei's displeasure.
All Lee wants is a forged passport so he can return to China and take care of his mother and sister (this passes for character development in the sketchy screenplay written by Ken Sanzel, who once worked for the New York City Transit police). He enlists the help of document forger Meg Coburn (Sorvino), but she's barely finished taking his mug shot when the fireworks begin.
The bad guys, however, are such bad shots.
"Bring in professionals - men of John's talent," Mr. Wei says, after apparently sending his second-string hitman to kill Lee. He warns his top henchman: "Don't confuse luck with skill."
Well put, Wei. Too bad you're in a film that has all the allure of curd.
Not everything about this movie is cheesy, though.
The movie has the imprimatur of John Woo, a master of ultraviolence and one of the film's executive producers. The action sequences are solid, and fans get plenty of bang (and BANG-BANG-BANG!) for their bucks.
The camera work has a dizzying and distinctively hip-hop style - an impressive feature film debut by Antoine Fuqua, till now probably best known for the music video of Coolio's "Gangsta Paradise."
Cinematographer Peter Lyons Collister complements Fuqua's vision with a "Blade Runner"-ish view of a grimy, wet, postmillennial urban landscape.
And Sorvino is engagingly sexy and sweaty, gunslinging and gutsy, as a gal whose police record dates back to her mid-teens. You go, girl! But next time go to a movie where you don't have to run, jump, shoot, swear or act slutty or stupid.
The Academy Award-winning actress has a broader range than that and shouldn't let those talents atrophy.
"The Replacement Killers " is a Columbia Pictures release of a Brillstein-Grey Entertainment Production in association with WCG Entertainment. It is rated R for its eviscerating fusillade of gun play. Running time: 88 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: February 4, 1998

 

End of Document
