

At the Movies: 'The Art of War'
The Associated Press
August 23, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 514 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body




Did you know that the United Nations maintains a covert operation that aims to manipulate politics in certain countries? Or that the U.N. can negotiate a trade agreement with China and the rest of the world?
No? Well, these and other whoppers can be learned in another slam-bang Wesley Snipes adventure, "The Art of War."
Snipes plays Neil Shaw, an American whose undercover work for the United Nations is so super-secret that he lacks an identity. We find him first in China, where a tycoon is throwing a millennium celebration in a hotel that rivals anything in Las Vegas. Snipes is there to learn more about the tycoon's plans to disrupt a historic trade compact between China and the world. All heck breaks loose at countdown to 2000, and Snipes is in the middle of it.
The scene shifts to New York, where Snipes reports to his supervisor, an ambitious FBI officer in charge of U.N. security, Anne Archer. She is close to the Secretary General, a Canadian played by Canadian Donald Sutherland. He is dubious about the wisdom of covert operations but is willing to go along with this one.
When the Chinese ambassador to the United Nations is assassinated as he speaks at a formal luncheon, the movie shifts into high gear. Snipes goes on the lam, pursued by an overzealous FBI agent (Maury Chaykin), the N.Y.P.D. and assorted Chinese thugs. Snipes' only ally is a lovely U.N. translator, Marie Matiko.
Needless to say, the plot is more byzantine than a "Mission: Impossible" movie. Events and characters never turn out the way you expect.
The direction by Christian Duguay, also a Canadian, resembles a military operation. Gun battles, explosions, car chases, running races ad infinitum. Also lots of breaking glass. All of this punctuated by thunderous music and sometimes thunder itself.
Wayne Beach and Simon Davis Barry are credited with the script, based on Beach's story. The dialogue is replete with lines like "There is no free lunch; you have to pay the piper," and before an execution, "Whatever goes around, comes around."
Snipes is getting to be an old hand at these conspiracy/adventure yarns. He outdoes himself this time, leaping from tall buildings without a net (he does use a parachute on one occasion). To his credit, there are few other stars who could breathe a degree of credibility into a film like "The Art of War."
The title, by the way, comes from a handbook by a long-ago Chinese general who reportedly inspired Napoleon and other war makers.
The Warner Bros. release, which lists four production and financing companies before the title, was produced by Nicolas Clermont. Rated R for nudity, language and excessive violence. Running time: 117 minutes.
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY348
 Load-Date: August 24, 2000

 

End of Document
