

At the Movies: 'The Legend of Drunken Master'
The Associated Press
October 18, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 539 words
Byline: By CHRISTY LEMIRE, For The Associated Press
Body




"The Legend of Drunken Master" is not one of Jackie Chan's better movies.
It was made six years ago, but Dimension Films is just now releasing it in the United States, seemingly to cash in on Chan's popularity after this year's action-comedy hit, "Shanghai Noon."
His fans will enjoy the fight sequences, which are beautifully choreographed, as always. But they will have to wade through a convoluted plot, bad dubbing and some cultural stereotypes in the process.
Chan plays Wong Fei-hong, master of an ancient martial art known as "drunken boxing." Basically, this means he tosses back a few drinks before he tosses people around. He staggers, woozy and wild-eyed, which throws his opponents off-balance.
Aboard a train with his doctor-father (Ti Lung), Wong's luggage gets mixed up, and he ends up with Chinese treasures that a group of British bad guys have stolen. He must stop the villains from stealing more artifacts, while at the same time helping his father and stepmother (Anita Mui) save a local school.
Confused?
The real point of all this is to showcase Chan's fighting skills. At one time, he takes on dozens of attackers who wield axes, spears and flaming metal rods. In one truly ridiculous scene, he battles a throng of angry men (all dressed in the same black robes) with a few pieces of broken wood.
Ooooh! Ahhhh!
The film starts out as a broad comedy, with Chan and everyone else in the cast mugging for the camera. But Chan's character is an alcoholic. In a fit of tough love, Master Wong pours wine all over him, beats him up and throws him out of the house.
The shift in tone is awkward as the film suddenly turns serious. After he sobers up, Wong emerges teary-eyed from his bedroom, drops to his knees and tells his father, "I will never drink again."
Toward the end, the film turns political as Wong and his friends fight to maintain the sanctity of ancient Chinese culture from those in the British embassy who want to exploit it.
As the film evolves, one thing stays the same: The Chinese and the British are portrayed as stereotypes that are so bad, they're uncomfortable to watch.
Master Wong dominates his wife. She has to sneak around if she wants to play mahjong with her friends. When he is angry with her, he physically abuses her, which she accepts.
"If you're going to hit me, just go on," she says, kneeling before him with tears in her eyes. He responds, "You know, that's not a bad idea." There is nothing funny about this.
Meanwhile, the British are categorically portrayed as arrogant tyrants.
Chan is always likable, and his fighting skills are undeniably impressive. But here, his over-the-top antics aren't terribly funny, and he is too eager to please.
"The Legend of Drunken Master" is rated R for violence and language. It is in Cantonese with English dubbing. Running time: 102 minutes.
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY374
 Load-Date: October 19, 2000

 

End of Document
