

At the Movies: 'Up at the Villa'
The Associated Press
May 4, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 524 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body




Florence, Italy, 1938. Members of the expatriate colony, mostly Brits, some American, gather at an elegant party given by a rich American woman who bought the title of Princess with one of her marriages. All toast the prospect of "peace in our time," as proclaimed by England's appeaser, Neville Chamberlain.
It is a doomsday gathering, since the war with Hitler and Mussolini is not far off.
Beautiful Mary Parton (Kristin Scott Thomas) meets two men who fascinate her: Rowley Flint (Sean Penn), a married American with a reputation for womanizing, and a soulful Austrian refugee (Jeremy Davies) whose violin playing is so poor that he is banished from the party.
Mary is in a quandary. Sir Edgar Swift (James Fox), a rich English civil servant much her senior, has proposed marriage. He expects a governorship in India, and she would make an attractive ornament for his new post. The offer seems advantageous, since 12 years of marriage to a drunk have left her widowed and broke. She is living in an ornate villa provided by the Princess (Anne Bancroft).
The plot turns melodramatic as Mary spends a passionate night with the refugee. Two mornings later, he ends up on her bedroom floor, a bullet through the heart. She enlists Flint to help her avoid a ruinous scandal. But, of course, the fascist police are not buying the coverup.
"Up at the Villa" is the result of a husband-and-wife collaboration: Philip Haas directed, and Belinda Haas wrote the script based on a W. Somerset Maugham novella. The early part of the film moves along intriguingly. But the English stuffed shirts and their vapid wives become cliched, and the sudden plot turns lack credibility. The overlong ending brought unsolicited laughter from the preview audience. It seemed almost like "Masterpiece Theater" as done by "Saturday Night Live."
Kristin Scott Thomas, again the languorous, troubled beauty, lends her professionalism to a difficult role. Sean Penn as a polished, tuxedoed playboy takes getting used to. But he is a vastly talented actor, and he can almost get by with lines like "I love you - isn't that enough?"
Bancroft always brings delight to her roles (witness the current "Keeping the Faith"), and she scores again as the cynical, manipulative Princess. Fox is stuck in the role of the Britisher whose upper lip is the stiffest. Derek Jacobi is wasted with brief appearances as a penniless emigre reduced to conducting tours for foreigners.
The only admirable character is the hapless young Austrian, played impressively by Jeremy Davies.
On the plus side: Florence never looked lovelier than with the lush photography of Maurizio Calvesi.
The USA release was produced Geoff Stier. Rated PG-13, perhaps for adult themes. Running time 115 minutes.
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo
 Load-Date: May 5, 2000

 

End of Document
