

Back to nature, with the world at your fingertips
The Associated Press
September 27, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel
Length: 808 words
Dateline: LANCASTER, Pa.
Body




Ah, the wilderness. The wind in the trees, the song of the birds, the chirping of your modem as it connects to the World Wide Web.
Many campgrounds today are making sure that people trying to get back to nature will be able to jump on the information superhighway too, by wiring up campsites for telephone hookups to access their local Internet provider.
While in the old days, people went camping to get away from phones, radios and television, today's campers are a different breed, says Shelly Korzniecki, manager of Flory's Campground in Ronks.
Many have already traded in campfires for microwaves and the starry sky for cable television. And they're now looking for campgrounds where they can get their e-mail and surf the net, she says.
In fact, of the 197 campgrounds that belong to the Pennsylvania Campground Owners Association, 77 now offer some kind of access to the Internet, said president Beverly Gruber. Some provide a phone line in the camp store or have pay phones that can be used.
The more costly method is to make phone service available at the site. That is still cheaper than what some campers are now doing - using their cellular phones to connect to the Internet, Korzniecki said.
Flory's Campground is spending several thousand dollars this fall to wire 18 of the campground's 71 sites for telephone hookups to let campers dial their local Internet provider and get e-mail messages, do their banking, send a photo, surf the Web or conduct business.
Those roughing it can even attach an answering machine to the phone line if they want, Korzniecki said.
Campsites with phone lines will be $ 3 per night higher than those without.
 
 ---
 
 Israel scales back the number of tourists expected in 2000
JERUSALEM (AP) - Scaling back their original estimates, Israeli tourism officials now say they expect only 3 million, not 4 million visitors in the Holy Land in 2000.
The new figures are based on hotel reservations and flight bookings, says Tourism Ministry spokeswoman Orly Doron. This year a total of 2.5 million visitors are expected.
Doron says there is still time to drum up more business.
"There is a chance that number will rise if Israel invests money in marketing campaigns, which we intend to do," she says. "Israel is not a place that is too crowded for the year 2000."
The Israeli tourism industry could also get a boost from a visit by Pope John II to Israel and the Palestinian areas. The pontiff told Israeli and Palestinian youths recently that he plans to visit their lands - his firmest commitment yet. No dates have been set, but the visit is likely to take place in March 2000.
In another sign of deflated expectations, Israel's Airports Authority reportedly has decided to postpone plans to build a temporary terminal, which would have accommodated a surge of tourists.
 
 ---
 
 Ride free on the Paris metro on millennium weekend
PARIS (AP) - Travelers in the City of Light will ride free on the Paris metro over the New Year's weekend as part of a millennium markdown announced by the transport ministry.
Train travelers also will benefit from cheap tickets to any destination in France.
Paris is one of Europe's top tourist destinations, and the city is expecting an unprecedented flood of visitors to welcome the 21st century.
The subway will run all night in Paris and the suburbs to help ease traffic jams expected in and around the capital.
Train tickets to any destination in France departing from Paris between Friday, Dec. 31 at 5 p.m. and noon Saturday, Jan. 1 will cost $ 16 (100 francs).
Regional cities also are planning special millennium transportation services at low prices.
 
 ---
 
 Poll indicates few would pick Oklahoma for a vacation
TULSA, Okla. (AP) - Despite a $ 2.5 million advertising campaign, a new poll indicates few people would pick Oklahoma as their vacation destination.
In a telephone survey commissioned by the state Department of Tourism and Recreation, only 2 percent of 514 people questioned said Oklahoma comes to mind as a vacation spot.
The poll found that Florida was the favorite destination for a leisure vacation in the next 12 months, followed by California. Texas and Colorado were tied for third.
The telephone interviews were conducted July 16 through Aug. 13. The respondents came from Texas, Oklahoma, Missouri and Kansas, said Sandy Pantlik, communications director for the tourism department.
Most people's knowledge of Oklahoma is generally low, the survey found, except that the state is known as a good place to see Indian or American Western culture.
"The dry, dusty, 60-year 'Grapes of Wrath" image is still a problem, unless you have been to Oklahoma," the survey concluded.
Visiting family and friends and current residence were the two primary reasons for taking a trip to Oklahoma, the survey found. The top two reasons for not visiting were "no desire to go" and "nothing to do."
 Load-Date: September 27, 1999

 

End of Document
