

Beauty of Alaskan preserve definitely in eye of the beholder
The Associated Press
October 10, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; Washington Dateline
Length: 957 words
Byline: By H. JOSEF HEBERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Jim Waldman of the Wilderness Society has been there only once, but he remembers it as "like nothing I've ever seen" and one of "the most spectacular wildlife areas in North America."
But when former Sen. Malcolm Wallop, R-Wyo., visited the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, he saw nothing special. He recalls a fellow senator and first-time visitor getting off the airplane and looking across the flat tundra in the northeastern corner of Alaska and remarking, "Is this it?"
Far above the Arctic Circle, a 100-mile long strip of land that is the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge has emerged as a hotly debated issue in the presidential campaign between GOP nominee George W. Bush and his Democratic rival, Al Gore.
Bush wants to develop its oil. Gore wants it to stay off limits to drilling because of its environmental and ecological value.
Designated for protection in 1960 by President Eisenhower, the refuge has been a flashpoint for environmentalists for years, while at the same time coveted by some of America's biggest oil companies.
While environmentalists like Waldman view the refuge as nothing short of North America's version of Africa's Serengeti Plain, oil executives are eager to tap the riches below the frozen tundra - anywhere from 5.6 billion to possibly 16 billion barrels of oil.
Twenty years ago, Congress banned oil development in the refuge 50 miles east of the rich but declining Prudhoe Bay oil fields along Alaska's North Slope. Oil industry lobbyists and Alaska's congressional delegation have sought to undo that ever since, while others in Congress have tried to end the debate by declaring the refuge's oil-rich coastal plain a permanently protected wilderness.
Neither side has been successful.
But as part of his energy plan, Bush has made oil drilling in the refuge a top priority, arguing it could be done without harming wildlife and the refuge's environmentally valuable ecosystem.
"It will produce a million barrels a day. Today we import a million barrels from (Iraqi President) Saddam Hussein," Bush argued during last week's debate with Gore.
Calling the refuge one of America's "environmental treasures," Gore said the potential oil find is not "a fair price to pay to destroy precious parts of America's environment."
Few issues set off alarm bells as quickly in the environmental community as talk of oil drilling in ANWR (pronounced AN-wahr) - as the refuge is commonly called.
"It's like nothing you've ever seen in your life," says Waldman, who is the Wilderness Society's point man in Washington on the refuge. "This place is so special that we shouldn't be willing to take any risk with it."
The refuge, which covers 19 million acres in the northeastern corner of Alaska, consists of starkly different geography with a broad diversity of wildlife and vegetation, thundering rivers and jagged mountains.
But it is the northern coastal plain and rolling foothills - 15 to 50 miles wide sandwiched between the towering peaks of the Brooks Range and the Beaufort Sea - that has oil geologists excited.
That is where the oil is.
And it is also where each summer millions of migratory birds and waterfowl - some from as far away as Argentina and China as well as America's own Chesapeake Bay - nest and feed on the thawing tundra, cottongrasses, plants and shrubs.
It is where 150,000 porcupine caribou gather each summer in massive herds and give birth to their young, finally departing in the early fall. The summer arctic sun never sets and temperatures average 40 degrees, reaching into the 80s on occasion.
In winter the plain takes on the look of a snow-covered wasteland, a denning area for polar bears who seek out the deep snow to wait out the winter. Added to the year-round mix are wolves, musk oxen, grizzlies and an occasional moose.
No matter what assurances are given, oil development will risk destruction of this isolated haven for the wild, says Waldman, echoing the fears of most other environmentalists.
But Wallop, who now heads Frontier for Freedom, a conservative advocacy groups, counters: "To say you can't drill there is nothing but emotional. It has nothing to do with reality."
Like Wallop, Sen. Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska, is convinced oil development and protection of the refuge and its wildlife can go hand in hand.
Modern drilling technology will leave little impact on the land, says Murkowski, adding that as for the caribou, "we've been protecting them for centuries and will continue to do so."
But major questions remain: How much oil is there? And could it help lower gasoline prices?
Only one exploratory well has been drilled in the refuge and its findings are secret. Based upon geology, the government estimates that the refuge almost certainly has 5.6 billion barrels of oil and there is a good chance it contains twice that, most of it economically recoverable, but only if oil sells at $25 a barrel.
By comparison, since 1978, about 12.9 billion barrels of crude have been taken out of the nearby Prudhoe Bay fields, says Floyd Wiesepapa, a petroleum engineer at the federal Energy Information Administration.
It is estimated that the ANWR fields could produce about 1 million to 1.35 million barrels day, a little bit less than the 1.4 million barrels a day provided the United States by Saudi Arabia last year.
But even if leases were sold today, oil would not likely begin to flow out of ANWR for a decade and then may have little impact on either prices or global oil markets, many energy experts say.
"As long as the Persian Gulf nations have a lot of (cheap) oil, they're going to dominate the world market whether we allow drilling in environmentally sensitive areas or not," says Jerry Taylor, an energy expert at the free market-oriented CATO Institute.
 Load-Date: October 11, 2000

 

End of Document
