

BEIJING: by the terror.
June 23, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 814 words
Body




Madame Li's youngest child, a girl aged 11 at the time the "struggle committee" came to attack her family, was psychologically traumatized. She never recovered, never went to work, never married.
Unable to overpower her or win her to their side, Madame Li's tormentors took away her salary and medical care. Her husband was sent to a distant farm labor camp; unable to attend school, her older daughter and son enlisted in the army.
Fearless, she refused to give in. "I wouldn't support the leftists. I disagreed with the persecution of good people," she says. "Anyway, everyone must die sometime. The question is whether the death means something or not."
Gravely ill with anemia, she only managed to survive with the help of kind neighbors and, eventually, by seeking Premier Chou En-lai's intervention.
Like Madame Li, many Chinese believe the Cultural Revolution was far too successful in wiping out much that was good of China's traditions: the concept of right and wrong, courtesy, filial piety, kindheartedness.
In the past year, President Jiang Zemin has launched a cultural movement of his own - one apparently intended to fill the spiritual vacuum left by the decade, although its aims seem the antithesis of Cultural Revolution iconoclasm.
Jiang's "spiritual civilization" campaign to remake China in a cleaner, politer image seems intended to promote the Confucian values of propriety, order, respect for elders and tradition that were reviled as feudal and bourgeois during the Cultural Revolution.
In place of the model commune Dazhai is Jiang's prototype community of Zhangjiagang - a glistening east China city where, according to the state-run media, no one ever throws litter or spits on the streets.
But Communist Party leaders now rarely comment on the Cultural Revolution itself. Scrutiny of the party's record then could invite questions about the Tiananmen crackdown and other embarrassing episodes since it seized power in 1949.
"The people of my generation all came out of the period of the Cultural Revolution, and we indeed suffered from that disaster," Cui Tiankai, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, said in a recent briefing.
"The conclusion about the Cultural Revolution has long been made. Moreover, we believe we should look forward instead of living in the past."
But many intellectuals, as a class the key victims of political persecution throughout the ages, feel more must be done to ensure the memories do not fade.
"Nowadays, many young people have no idea what the Cultural Revolution was all about," said Yu, the economist. "China certainly cannot afford to forget the lessons the Cultural Revolution taught."
Revered novelist Ba Jin, who was labeled a class enemy, banned from writing and forced to clean drains during the Cultural Revolution, has called for a museum similar to the Auschwitz Memorial Museum that documents Nazi atrocities.
"We should earnestly learn lessons from this bitter experience," Ba said. "The 10-year calamity taught people to be silent, but the 10-year blood debts force the silent people to cry out."
The magazine China Youth Newspapers and Periodicals Panorama reported in January that such a museum was to be built in Shanghai's newly developed Pudong industrial district. But Shanghai officials contacted by telephone said they had not heard of that plan.
The era has become part of China's cultural landscape.
Cultural Revolution restaurants cater to the nostalgia of middle-aged Chinese who were sent to the countryside in the late '60s.
Mao's Little Red Book is a souvenir item hawked to foreign tourists. His deteriorating corpse still on display in his mausoleum in Tiananmen Square, Mao has become something of a folk hero. Laminated portraits of the chairman adorn many a Chinese taxi dashboard.
Many Chinese believe the tendency toward Cultural Revolution-style extremes is latent in their national character. It's a tendency to go overboard without thinking, which author Yu Guangyuan describes as "Ah Q'ism" - based on the 1930s allegory by respected novelist Lu Xun, "Ah Q," about a man who never thinks for himself.
Some fear leftist ideologues could regain at least some control if there is no smooth transition after the ailing Deng dies. Hundreds of thousands of people who took government and party posts during the Cultural Revolution remain in place and many are resentful of economic policies that have allowed some people to get rich while others struggle.
But few Chinese today believe their nation would again lurch into the extremism of the Mao Tse-tung era. China is no longer shut off from the rest of the world and neither Jiang nor his peers have the charisma or power to command such a crusade.
In today's profit-oriented China, pragmatism rules.
"The majority of people learned the lessons from the Cultural Revolution," Madame Li says. "No one would accept that sort of thing now."
End Advance for Sunday, June 23
 Load-Date: June 23, 1996

 

End of Document
