

Ben Stein: Living the Revenge of the Nerds
The Associated Press
April 17, 1998, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1282 words
Byline: By DOUGLAS J. ROWE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Ben Stein is living The Revenge of the Nerds.
The bespectacled, smug-looking egghead who speaks in a monotone is dining at his favorite restaurant after a long day of taping four installments of his game show, "Win Ben Stein's Money." And before long he has a gorgeous blonde sitting next to him.
"My show is a giant commercial for me," he says between bites at Morton's in Beverly Hills. "And it's a commercial that sells me to all the people I went to high school with who wish they were me. I think we all want to impress the people we went to high school with."
Corinna, his late-arriving dinner companion who's obviously quite impressed with him, pipes in: "You worked hard to get what you got, and a lot of people don't."
"Oh, people in my high school worked very hard," he corrects. "I went to a high school with super-energetic high-achieving people - super-energetic high-achieving maniacs."
His fellow alumni at Montgomery Blair High School in Silver Spring, Md., include Watergate reporter Carl Bernstein, actress Goldie Hawn and TV newswoman Connie Chung. Stein's resume, though, may be the most eclectic of all of them.
After graduating from Yale Law School as valedictorian in 1970, he became a poverty lawyer in New Haven, Conn. He also went through a long-haired period during which he raised money for the Black Panthers, participated in protests and opposed the war in Vietnam. He then worked as a trial lawyer for the Federal Trade Commission in Washington, D.C., before writing speeches for President Nixon in 1973-74. (Connections didn't hurt: his father, Herb Stein, was then chairman of Nixon's Council of Economic Advisers.)
Ben Stein has written 15 books (seven novels, eight nonfiction, including "A License to Steal: Michael Milken and the Conspiracy to Bilk a Nation") and he still teaches law at Pepperdine University in Malibu, Calif.
"I had no idea what I was going to do when I grew up," he says. "I just knew that I was going to have to work for a living. It was my great hope that at the age of 21 my parents would reveal to me that I had a secret inheritance, but when that didn't happen I realized that I would have to work.
"I did not like being a lawyer at all. … It's the worst job I ever had, being a trial lawyer. Hated it. And I mean really hated it," he says in a voice that has a little more range and inflection than what we hear in his movies and on television.
He loves writing - for Barron's, The Wall Street Journal, The American Spectator and other periodicals - but dislikes "being modestly paid."
Ever since the 1986 comedy hit "Ferris Bueller's Day Off," the 53-year-old Stein has happily worked as an actor, usually playing a variation of himself: an owlish, superior, pedagogic know-it-all. He's played a science teacher in "The Wonder Years," and served as a pitchman in various TV commercials.
It's that image of a nearly insufferable Renaissance Man that led longtime TV producer Al Burton to wake up one morning with the title if not the idea for a game show, "Win Ben Stein's Money."
"The title, when it came to me, was just surefire," says Burton, whose experience as a producer goes back to his days with composer-pianist-actor Oscar Levant.
Andrew Golder, an executive producer with Burton, says they developed the Comedy Central show "from ground zero."
They came up with two fresh twists to an old formula: the host becomes a contestant in the final rounds, and he risks his own money. Actually, the production company, a Walt Disney subsidiary, puts up the $ 5,000 for each show, but Stein's motivation is that the less his competitors win the more of that pot he gets to keep.
"It really is as much a comedy show as a game show," Golder says, standing on the set after shooting a week's worth of shows.
The categories alone can amount to as many as 30 jokes a show, he notes. Among them: "Don't Put Descartes Before the Horse," "Chewed in Italy but Liechtenstein" and "There's a Right Way and a Hemingway."
Added to the whole mix, there's the unlikely chemistry between the host and sidekick Jimmy Kimmel, who plays the idiot to Stein's savant. "Pure luck on my part," Kimmel says about how he and Stein clicked.
For his part, Stein addresses the philosophical question of why it's unseemly to show off how smart you are when it's OK for people to show off how athletic they are, how graceful, how beautiful, how artistic …
"I think that goes back to smart, nerdy kids being teased at school for being smart and nerdy, whereas you're never teased for being a great athlete. I think it has to do with envy," says Stein, whom Burton calls "the universal nerd."
As happy as he is with the success of "Win Ben Stein's Money," which has three Daytime Emmy nominations and began a fresh run of shows on April 15 with a Tax Day special, Stein covets a star-vehicle sitcom.
"I really expected to have my own sitcom some time ago," he says. "I don't understand why I don't, to tell you the truth. I think something's wrong."
His concept: He's teaching at a high school in Nevada, and the school is next to a secret government installation ("Area 51"?) "so some of my students are a bit unusual."
Still, his acting career never would have happened if he hadn't been living in Los Angeles, Stein says. Before he did "Bueller," he was asked to be in a knockoff of "Fast Times at Ridgemont High" that was being shot near his house.
"If I lived in Cincinnati, or Des Moines, or Austin, Texas, it wouldn't have happened," he says. "My friend, Joan Didion, who's a really smart woman, says in one of her books, 'You can't win if you're not at the table.' And by being in L.A. I was at the table, even though I didn't even know what the game was."
He knocks on the wood of the Morton's table and says he feels "blessed." He adores his 10-year-old adopted son - "he's a god, he's a god" - and has written a soon-to-be-published book about his relationship with the boy. And he says he has a "wonderful, wonderful wifey - we're sort of separated but she's a wonderful wifey."
He explains that they just don't spend that much time together. He and Alexandra Denman, an entertainment industry lawyer, met at Yale. They have been married, divorced and remarried, and he vows: "I will never - I say this without fear of offending Corinna since I'm usually much too old, fat and slowwitted for her - but I will never be married to anybody else besides Alex. Ever. Ever."
As much as he loves Los Angeles, Stein says, "I'm not everybody's favorite person in this town. Because as a Republican fan of Richard Nixon, that puts me on the other side of the fence from most people in this town."
Stein still enjoys returning to Washington, where he spends up to a week each month when he's not busy with the show or other projects. He mainly visits with his father (his mother died last April) and friends, bicycles along the Potomac and eats at his other favorite restaurant, Aquarelle.
And he sees Washington as being more power-obsessed than Los Angeles.
"I always remember when I was working at the White House everybody would be talking to you and they'd always be looking over your shoulder to see who was more important that they might be able to talk to. It was a very uncomfortable experience."
He once went to a party at the British embassy when he had long hair, and Washington Post reporter Sally Quinn came up to him and said: "You must be somebody really important to have hair that long and be at a party as fancy as this."
He informed her that he was there with his parents, and that he was a lowly lawyer at the FTC.
"She said, 'Really?!' And I said, 'Yeah, really.' And she said, 'OK, bye."'
So he was blown off that quickly.
"Isn't that funny? Because I was nobody," he says.
 Load-Date: April 17, 1998

 

End of Document
