

Bethlehem: Making Manger Square match up to the Christmas cards
November 6, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 674 words
Byline: By MELISSA McCORD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BETHLEHEM, West Bank
Body




Manger Square is getting a makeover for the millennium.
In time for the 2,000th birthday of Jesus and the extra tourists expected with it, city planners aim to turn Manger Square - now an asphalt parking lot crammed with exhaust-spewing tour buses - into a picturesque piazza with trees and fountains.
Visitors who know Bethlehem only from Christmas cards are often shocked to find a town of close-packed buildings and crowded streets.
"The first time I came here in 1984, I nearly died when I saw Manger Square," said Bairbre Du Biurca of Ireland. "I had this image from my childhood of a cozy little inn."
The Manger Square renovations, based on the designs of a Swedish architect, will start after Christmas. Organizers hope to be done by the millennium, slated to bring as many as 4 million visitors to Bethlehem, a town of 50,000 Palestinians. The Swedish government is funding the work with a $ 2.5 million donation, thinking it will help peacemaking overall.
The square abuts the fourth-century Church of the Nativity, built over the grotto where tradition says Jesus was born.
Under the renovation plan, the square's asphalt will be ripped up and replaced by patterned tiles, with trees and fountains lining the edges. Rows of souvenir shops selling olive wood nativity scenes and faded postcards will remain in place.
"It will be nice for people to have a seat and relax and not see a parking lot full of buses," tour guide Nidal Korna said as he surveyed the crowded square.
A police station on the square will be torn down and replaced with a civic center holding an auditorium, a museum of art and religion and a restaurant.
The center will serve as a base for pilgrims, said Michel Nasser, who represents the city on the "Bethlehem 2000" committee preparing the celebrations.
The parking lot for the tour buses is to be moved a quarter-mile away from the square, and visitors will have to walk past city shops and restaurants to get to the Church of the Nativity.
This might help revitalize the city's economy, said Korna, the tour guide. Now, visitors usually step off their buses and walk directly to the church without ever seeing the rest of the city.
Bethlehem merchants have complained that Israeli tour guides keep the pilgrims from exploring the Palestenian-run city, scaring off the visitors by raising security concerns.
City planners also hope to fix up the inside of the Church of the Nativity.
Mosaics on the walls have chipped and scarred. Paintings of apostles on the interior's 14 pillars have faded almost beyond recognition. The ceiling in the grotto is blackened with centuries of candle soot. Gaping holes in the grotto's plastic wall coverings point to where tourists ripped off pieces as souvenirs.
However, the Greek Orthodox, Armenian and Roman Catholic clergymen running the shrine must agree to the work first, something that may not happen very quickly.
The rival denominations are notoriously possessive about their turf, and have been known to go at each other with broom sticks during arguments over control in the church. The last major repairs were carried out in the 1920s.
"It is hard for them to agree. Hopefully, we can come to a solution, but we have no commitments from either side," Nasser said.
Nasser said church leaders did agree that the city could remove black telephone and electrical wires crisscrossing the rough stone facade of the church, and place them underground.
The city will also install spotlights to illuminate the facade.
Bethlehem came under Palestinian control in December 1995 as part of Israel's withdrawal from West Bank towns. Christmas during 28 years of Israeli occupation was often been a gloomy affair, with snipers posted on the rooftops around the church and Israeli troops frisking pilgrims before they entered the square.
Nasser said that after Israel's 1995 withdrawal, Bethlehem did not have enough money to fund the renovations.
"This has been a dream for a long time," he said of the Swedish-funded plan. "The year 2,000 gave us an occasion to convince donors to give us money."
 Load-Date: November 6, 1997

 

End of Document
