

Bills Approved on the Last Day of the 104th Congress
October 4, 1996, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 333 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Bills approved by the House on Friday, the last day of the 104th Congress, and sent to President Clinton:
DATE-RAPE DRUG: Imposes penalties of up to 20 years in prison for misuse of Rohypnol and similar powerful tranquilizers used to render potential rape victims helpless. Imposes up to a three-year penalty for simple possession. H.R. 4137.
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY: Subjects the White House to 11 civil rights and labor laws now applied to private companies. Congress applied these laws to itself last year. The Senate removed provisions establishing an inspector general and chief financial officer at the White House. H.R. 3452.
COMMEMORATIVE COINS: Directs the minting of coins to commemorate black Revolutionary War hero Crispus Attucks, the breaking the color barrier in major league baseball by Jackie Robinson, the death of former first lady Dolley Madison, the opening of the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial in Washington, Yellowstone National Park, the death of George Washington and the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial. H.R. 1776.
FEDERAL COURTS: Numerous provisions streamlining the operation of federal courts, including the elimination of a special court to hear cases involving the reorganization of insolvent railroads and changes in procedures for reappointing bankruptcy court judges. S. 1887.
FOREIGN NURSES: Extends through September 1997 the visas of foreign nurses working in the United States under a program designed to ease nursing shortages in rural areas and inner cities. S. 2197.
HUMAN RIGHTS: Establishes scholarships and fellowships for exiled Tibetan and Burmese students and professionals; expands exchange programs for human rights leaders from China, Hong Kong, Vietnam, Cambodia, Tibet and Burma; extends favorable immigration treatment by one year for Jews and Christians persecuted in the former Soviet Union and Southeast Asia; bans aid to Mauritania, except humanitarian assistance, unless it rigorously enforces its laws against slavery. H.R. 4036.
 Load-Date: October 4, 1996

 

End of Document
