

Candidates speak on the issues
The Associated Press
January 29, 2000, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 2966 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Body




The Associated Press asks the presidential candidates questions on the issues three days a week. Here are excerpts of their answers so far:
TRADE: Should the United States seek free or liberalized trade agreements with more nations?
Democrats:
Bill Bradley: "Yes. Agreements to lower trade barriers open export markets and create opportunities for Americans to earn more … but they must take full account of the impact of trade on the environment and labor."
Al Gore: "Yes. As president, I will ask Congress for the power to reach new trade agreements and open new markets to our goods and services. But wherever necessary, I will also ask for and use the authority to negotiate labor and environmental protections in those agreements."
Reform:
Pat Buchanan: "The U.S. should negotiate reciprocal trade treaties with all nations, treaties that erase our monstrous trade deficits, assure U.S. economic independence and put our manufacturers and workers before any claims of a mythical 'global economy."'
Republicans:
Gary Bauer: "The United States should seek free trade agreements with more nations because our workers and businesses have proven year after year that they are the most productive in the world. I am concerned about the multinational trade agreements of recent years, including the one that created the World Trade Organization, that left millions of American workers and farmers at a competitive disadvantage."
George W. Bush: "Yes, I am a strong advocate of free and fair trade. I believe we'll be prosperous if we embrace free trade, and I'll make it a priority to obtain new negotiating authority."
Steve Forbes: "I strongly support tearing down trade barriers and opening new markets to American goods and services as a way to create better American jobs and increase economic growth. I propose a new North Atlantic Free Trade Agreement between the U.S., Great Britain and Ireland, and free trade agreements with Japan, Australia, New Zealand."
Alan Keyes: "The United States should negotiate trade agreements with nations but based on the individual needs of the United States and each trade partner nation."
John McCain: "Yes. I believe in free trade. I supported NAFTA and GATT (North American Free Trade Agreement and General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), and I believe U.S. participation in the WTO will continue to be beneficial to expanding our business opportunities around the world."
---
ARTS: Do you support federal subsidies for the arts?
Bradley: "Yes. The arts have enriched the lives of Americans, as well as our economy."
Gore: "I strongly believe in encouraging and supporting the arts and would continue the current policy of support."
Buchanan: "No. The National Endowment for the Arts has subsidized projects that are blasphemous, degraded and obscene."
Bauer: "No."
Bush: "I believe we should continue federal funding for the arts, but give states a greater say in how the funds are spent. I don't believe we should spend public money to support obscene material or denigrate religion."
Forbes: "I oppose federal subsidies for the arts. Taxpayers should not be forced to subsidize offensive and/or obscene artwork."
Keyes: "No."
McCain: "No … because I believe it is not proper to use tax dollars for what many Americans feel are the obscene and inappropriate projects this organization has supported."
---
MISSILE DEFENSE: Does America need a national missile defense system to defend itself against nuclear attack?
Bradley: "A national missile defense system has not been adequately tested, so it's too soon to say that it is an effective way to defend America against nuclear attack."
Gore: "The decision to proceed toward deployment of a national missile defense system needs to be based on: 1. the level of our confidence in the technology; 2. its impact on our ability to protect arms control; 3. an assessment of the cost, and 4. an evaluation of the threat."
Buchanan: "Yes. The U.S. must not allow a 30-year-old ABM treaty, with a defunct Soviet Union, to prevent us from defending our people from a nuclear missile attack."
Bauer: "As one of my first acts in office, I will order deployment of a strategic missile defense to begin defending the American people against nuclear attacks."
Bush: "Yes. At the earliest possible date, my administration will deploy anti-ballistic missile systems, both theater and national, to guard America and our allies against attack and blackmail."
Forbes: "We could construct viable missile defense systems for ourselves and our allies in Europe, Israel, Japan, Taiwan, and South Korea - to name a few - by integrating new missile defense innovations with existing technologies on the Navy's Aegis cruisers."
Keyes: "Yes."
McCain: "Yes. I believe the American people can and must be protected from the possibility of a missile attack on our soil."
---
DEATH PENALTY: Should the death penalty for federal crimes be expanded? If so, how?
Bradley: "I'm not currently proposing expansion, but might consider an expansion in the future if circumstances warrant it."
Gore: "As president I would continue to support the death penalty and expansion of it where appropriate."
Buchanan: "Both the U.S. and state governments should keep the death penalty as both a deterrent and a just means of retribution and punishment."
Bauer: "I support the death penalty for federal crimes and have an open mind on extending it to additional areas."
Bush: "More than 60 federal crimes are already subject to the death penalty, and I do not believe that needs to be expanded."
Forbes: "In the future, if a compelling case can be made that the death penalty for federal crimes should be expanded, I would be open to such an argument."
Keyes: No response.
McCain: "I would consider further expansion of capital punishment laws for other specific crimes that warrant the death penalty."
IMMIGRATION: Should legal immigration be increased, decreased or maintained?
Bradley: "I believe the current level of immigration should be maintained."
Gore: "Maintained."
Buchanan: "Legal immigration should be reduced to 250,000 newcomers a year, both to assimilate the 30 million who have come here in recent decades, and to ease the downward pressure on the wages of U.S. workers."
Bauer: "I would lower the number temporarily in order to assess the Clinton-Gore administration's neglect in preventing illegal immigration."
Bush: "I support increasing the number of H-1B visas to help meet America's need for more high-tech workers, and I support expanding the H-2A temporary agricultural workers program so that willing workers can help meet America's labor needs."
Steve Forbes: "I do not support increasing legal immigration, except in the area of H1-B visas for high-tech workers to work side-by-side with American scientists and engineers."
Keyes: No response.
McCain: "I strongly support ample legal immigration. … I have strongly supported dramatically expanding visas for qualified high-tech workers who can help America maintain its world leadership in the information technology revolution."
---
INTERNET TAXES: Should Internet commerce remain exempt from sales taxes to encourage the growth of online business or should it be subject to the same taxation faced by storefront companies?
Bradley: "I supported the moratorium on taxation of electronic commerce."
Gore: "I supported the Internet Tax Freedom Act, which President Clinton signed into law. The act imposed a three-year moratorium on state and local tax and trade issues associated with electronic commerce and comparable sales activities."
Buchanan: "We should have a five-year moratorium on federal taxes on Internet sales and e-commerce to let this business develop."
Bauer: "Internet commerce should remain exempt from sales taxes."
Bush: "I support the current moratorium on Internet sales taxes and would extend it for several more years to determine the full impact of e-commerce on our society."
Forbes: "I know e-commerce is a new frontier giving families more control over their lives, creating new jobs and boosting economic growth. That's why a critical part of my 'New Economy Plan' for the 21st century is a permanent ban on special, new Internet taxes."
Keyes: No response.
McCain: "As president, I will keep the Internet a tax-free zone."
---
FARM SUBSIDIES: The federal government spent a record $22.7 billion last year in direct payments to farmers. Is Washington spending too much money on farm subsidies?
Bradley: "Government support has not been helping the family farmer. In the past seven years, 7,000 small farms disappeared while the number of large farms grew by more than 1,000."
Gore: "The fact that we have spent billions of dollars in emergency aid in the last two years shows that the 1996 Freedom to Farm Act, designed by the Republican Congress, doesn't work in a climate of declining crop prices and turmoil in foreign markets."
Buchanan: "We need a trade policy that puts U.S. farmers and manufacturers first. Until we get it, let's help the farmers out."
Bauer: "This is not too much, given the severity of the commodity deflation and Washington's broken promises about opening foreign markets for our farmers."
Bush: "I believe the long-term solution to our farm problems is to open foreign markets and increase demand for U.S. agricultural products. I have supported disaster relief to help our farmers weather crises and programs to help transition to a market economy."
Forbes: "In the short term, some emergency economic assistance to American farmers can help offset some of the effects of Washington's deeply harmful policies of high taxes, high interest rates and over-regulation. But American farmers and ranchers know government assistance is no long-term solution."
Keyes: No response.
McCain: "Yes. The 1996 Farm Act was intended to decouple farmers from bureaucratic crop controls and implement groundbreaking, cost-effective reform. Instead, the bill catered to special interests and did little to reform the system."
---
SCHOOL VOUCHERS: Do you support allowing parents in areas that are poor or with bad schools to use tax money to subsidize private education?
Bradley: "I do not support any measures that divert funding from public to private schools."
Gore: "No. I oppose any proposal that would divert funds from our public schools."
Buchanan: "Tax dollars for primary and secondary education should be spent on those schools that parents choose for their children."
Bauer: "Yes."
Bush: "My proposal says any school that receives federal Title I funds must measure student improvement. If, after three years, student performance does not improve, the federal funds should be given directly to the parents to use as they see fit, including private education."
Forbes: "I strongly support school choice, especially for low-income parents. No mother should be forced to send her child to a bad school. As president, I will immediately turn federal education funds into block grants for states and local communities with this directive: Give parents the freedom to choose schools that work - public, private and parochial."
Keyes: No response.
McCain: "Yes. I have proposed an initiative to empower lower- and middle-income parents whose children attend our poorest performing schools with the ability to place their children in the best learning environment for their particular needs. This $5.4 billion plan would fund a nationwide test of school vouchers without diverting funds from the public school system, because it is paid for entirely by eliminating inequitable and unnecessary corporate subsidies."
CHINA-TRADE: Should China be granted permanent normal trade status with the United States?
Bradley: "Yes."
Gore: "Yes."
Buchanan: "No."
Bauer: "No."
Bush: "I support permanent normal trade relations for China."
Forbes: "China should not receive permanent normal trade status with the U.S. Instead, China's behavior and trade status must be carefully reviewed and debated every year."
Keyes: "No."
McCain: "I believe maintaining economic and diplomatic relations with China serves our national interests."
---
CUBA: What conditions would Cuba have to meet for you to favor dropping the embargo?
Bradley: "We should end the embargo when there is a government in Cuba that allows democratic participation in the political process, grants economic freedom, and ends its absolute control over civic institutions, religious practice and expression of opinion."
Gore: "We will not normalize relations with Cuba until it is democratic."
Buchanan: "I would isolate and ostracize Fidel Castro as long as he is in power. But I would try to aid the Cuban people who are our friends, whose freedom Castro denies and whose lives could be improved by access to U.S. food, medicine, and civilian goods."
Bauer: "Fidel Castro should resign and his successors should schedule free and internationally supervised elections. When that process is complete, all sanctions can be removed."
Bush: "I believe there should be no changes in United States policy toward Cuba until three conditions are met: free elections, free speech and freedom for political prisoners."
Forbes: "Until Castro falls and the people of Cuba hold free and fair elections, we should not lift the trade embargo."
Keyes: No response.
McCain: "In order for sanctions against Cuba to be lifted, the Cuban government would have to make demonstrable steps toward democratization and free market reforms, vastly improve its human rights record and cease its policy of seeking to undermine U.S. interests abroad."
---
VIETNAM WAR: Do you believe the war served America's interests and hastened the collapse of communism?
Bradley: "The Vietnam War began with the honorable intention of serving America's interests but turned into a tragedy for both America and Vietnam. The outcome was certainly not in our interests. Communism collapsed because America won the war of ideas - democratic institutions and market economies build strong societies while authoritarian governments with command economies stunt productivity and stifle human expression."
Gore: "The Vietnam War was one of the most painful and costly experiences in American history. Although I served in Vietnam, like many Americans I saw the war as an experience that contributed to doubt and cynicism about America's future. In the end, the war proved to be unable to prevent the collapse of South Vietnam and its eventual absorption by the North. I do not believe that the Vietnam War hastened the collapse of communism. Communism's ultimate collapse occurred because the Soviet system was so weak at the core that not even Gorbachev's efforts at reform could save it.
Buchanan: "The Vietnam War was a noble cause, bravely fought by U.S. soldiers. While Southeast Asia was lost, U.S. arms were never defeated, and the Vietnam vets bought Asia the vital time it needed to become as free, dynamic and prosperous as it is today."
Bauer: "Costly and heartbreaking as the war was, it retarded communist expansionism in Asia and bought precious time for the non-communist countries of that region to develop their free institutions."
Bush: No response.
Forbes: "American leadership to stop the spread of communism was the morally right thing to do. But Lyndon Johnson's prosecution of the war - and the lies that were told to the American people - was a disgrace. Thousands upon thousands of Americans lost their lives. Americans lost faith with the politicians in Washington, and for a time in themselves. When we make a commitment of U.S. troops, we must give them the tools and the leadership to finish the job.
Keyes: No response.
McCain: "Let me begin by saying that I have no reservations about the United States fighting to prevent North Vietnam from imposing its will on the South, and on neighboring countries. I have no moral reservations about the role I played during the war. The manner in which the war was fought, however, is where many, myself included, question the entire exercise. Suffice to say that I am not particularly enamored of the political leadership that dictated the rules under which the military had to operate. That U.S. policy was never to win the war by defeating the adversary but rather deny him victory over the South and was a formula for disaster. I strongly supported normalization of U.S. relations with Vietnam in 1995 to advance U.S. interests and help put the war behind us."
---
LABOR STANDARDS: Would you favor a ban on products made by child labor or under unsafe or unhealthy conditions from being sold in the United States?
Bradley: "I have called for the WTO to prohibit all trade in goods produced with forced child labor."
Gore: "The United States currently supports initiatives that ban the importation of products produced by forced or indentured child labor. I support these and other initiatives aimed at protecting children from exploitation."
Buchanan: "The U.S. should impose tariffs on countries that use child labor to deny these regimes any benefit from the exploitation of children. And keep those tariffs on until the regimes take children out of their sweatshops."
Bauer: "Yes. The United States must not divorce its values from trade policy."
Bush: No response.
Forbes: "One of the important issues I have raised in this campaign is stopping slave labor products (from adults or children) from being sold in the U.S. Communist China has a particularly loathsome record in this area. As president, I will work to stop this and will impose sanctions on companies that engage in such practices."
Keyes: No response.
McCain: "I have supported legislation banning the importation of goods into the United States manufactured by child or slave labor. Defining 'unsafe' or 'unhealthy' labor conditions, however, lends itself far too much to subjective analysis by interested parties in both business and labor. Therefore, I would ensure that cases are reviewed individually."
 Load-Date: January 30, 2000

 

End of Document
