

Changes dateline from LONDON; What next, the world wonders, now that Bush has won
December 13, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 850 words
Byline: By THOMAS WAGNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TOKYO
Body




The final result in the U.S. presidential election set off a sigh of relief around the world on Thursday, but concerns also emerged about what will happen next, given the deep divisions in the American electorate, court system and Congress.
Television stations in Japan and other countries in the Asia-Pacific region interrupted programming Thursday morning for live coverage as Vice President Al Gore conceded to George W. Bush, after weeks of vote recounts in Florida and court rulings about the disputed result.
"I think Al Gore made the right decision. People have become bored of the whole thing. He can try again in four years. And when he does, people will remember him in a much better image," said Lee Jung-soo, 27, an official at a public relations company in Seoul, South Korea.
"A prolonged confusion like this will have a very negative effect on the U.S. politics and economy. I believe Gore is doing the right thing as vice president and politician," said Kim Soo-min, 29, an Internet web master, in Seoul.
In Taipei, a leading 24-hour cable news channel, TVBS, broadcast Gore's speech live as a reporter provided a simultaneous translation in Mandarin. TVBS followed the speech with analysis about how the victory by Bush will change politics in Washington.
TVBS also showed scenes of speeches and debates in which Bush mentioned Taiwan. Of special interest was an earlier speech in which Bush had said that if China attacks Taiwan, the United States must come to the island's defense.
Concerns also emerged in other countries about issues such as the new foreign policy that will emerge in the United States under Bush.
Ham Sung-duk, a political science professor at Korea University, said the sharply divided U.S. electorate and Congress, which split nearly down the middle between Republicans and Democrats, could cause a change in U.S. policies toward North and South Korea.
Under President Clinton, the United States persuaded North Korea to halt its long-range missile tests and supported the South's "sunshine policy" that began the long process of reconciling its many differences with the North across the world's most heavily armed border.
"Under President Bush, U.S.-North Korea relations may deteriorate because of his expected hard-line stance regarding North Korea's missile and nuclear issues. That, in turn, could adversely affect president Kim Dae-jung's sunshine policy," Ham said.
In Sydney, The Australian newspaper said in an editorial that the protracted race to the White House had no winner, only losers.
"As the curtain comes down on the presidential aspirations of Democrat Al Gore, the real loser of the election is the U.S. political system and its fundamental components - the legitimacy of its electoral machinery, the independence of its judiciary and the credibility of its politicians," the paper said.
"We appear to have a winner. But there is no joy in this victory, only a grim relief that this long election night is almost over," the Sydney Morning Herald wrote in a front-page editorial. "There will be American-style pageantry, and grand speeches about the best democracy in the world. But the myths have gone. The masks are off. The people have seen the underbelly of their politics, and they know," it said.
In Japan, an editorial in the Nihon Keizai Shimbun newspaper worried about the "struggle that divided the United States in two by partisanship," including its court system, including the Supreme Court, whose close ruling ended the presidential contest.
Many people in Hong Kong said they preferred Gore because they believed he would represent stability and deal better with the Chinese leadership in Beijing. Bush is viewed as more of an unknown, and some worry that in a worst-case scenario that he could meddle unduly in the delicate status quo between Taiwan and China.
The two rivals have been governed separately for a half century, but China claims Taiwan as a renegade province that must someday be reunified with the mainland, and Beijing has vowed to retake the island by force if necessary.
"I don't like Bush so much because he takes a tougher line toward China," said Sandy Lau, a 29-year-old nurse. "I don't think it will be bad, at least in the short term, unless he encourages Taiwan to declare independence."
Bush has his fans in Hong Kong, however.
"This is good for the Hong Kong economy," said Kevin Chung, a surveyor. "If the U.S. stock market does well, then the Hong Kong stock market will do well also."
Others worried about what will happen next in the slowing U.S. economy, whose imports and phenomenal growth helped the Asian region out of its 1997-1998 financial crisis.
"What matters for people like me is the economy. When the U.S. economy is in bad shape, it affects our economy and my business will get hurt. That's what I am worried about," said Cho Eun-young, 30, a clothes shop owner, in Seoul.
Front-page stories about the U.S. election result also appeared across London.
"Bush is the 43rd President," declared The Times.
"Finally … It's President Bush," said The Guardian.
"Gore finally gives up hope," said The Independent.
 Load-Date: December 14, 2000

 

End of Document
