

China's budding legal system a mixed blessing for the masses
January 18, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1104 words
Byline: By ELAINE KURTENBACH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIJING
Body




For 12-year-old Zhang Lin, China's legal reforms brought escape from an abusive father and stepmother, and a better life with her mother.
For a group of senior citizens and other low income people living on Beijing's Xinyuanli street, it meant compensation for illnesses caused by fumes from a nearby paint factory.
China has taken great strides toward erecting a modern legal system since it began building one almost from scratch in the late 1970s. Ordinary citizens increasingly turn to the courts for legal redress, and find help.
Criminal code revisions that took effect Jan. 1 make it more difficult for police to detain suspects for long periods without trial. They also give suspects earlier and better access to lawyers. And lawmakers are considering erasing political crimes long used to silence democracy campaigners.
But old habits die hard. The new laws often are ignored, abused or enforced arbitrarily by a judicial system still steeped in the traditions of authoritarianism stretching back to the Qin Dynasty of 221-207 B.C.
For veteran political activists like Wang Dan and Wei Jingsheng, the legal reforms have merely provided the ruling Communist Party with new means to punish dissent.
Instead of "counterrevolutionary crimes" - a term due to be expunged from the criminal code - Wang and Wei both were convicted of trying to subvert the government and sent to prison.
And the new limits on detentions do not affect the ability of the police to send suspects to "education through labor" camps for up to three years without trial.
It is in less politically sensitive areas where China's legal changes have had their greatest impact.
"Before 1979 there basically were no laws, aside from a family law and criminal law. There were no lawyers. No concepts of equity and no implementing regulations," said Laurence J. Brahm, an American lawyer who works in Beijing and who was involved in the first efforts to draft new laws.
The new requirement for law offices to provide some free legal services are helping ordinary Chinese navigate unfamiliar legal channels and overcome their traditional reluctance to tangle with authorities.
Lawyers at Beidou, a private law firm, helped the 13 households of No. 49 Xinyuanli file a suit in Beijing's Chaoyang District Court and win each the equivalent of $ 240 in damages for their discomfort from the factory fumes.
"Most of these people lack the resources or the skills to prepare legal documents and file a lawsuit. They need our help," said lawyer Wang Jie, one of the firm's 70 lawyers.
Beidou was the only firm willing to help when 12-year-old Zhang Lin's mother sought to gain custody of her daughter after the girl was deprived of food and beaten by her father and stepmother, Wang said.
The court ruled Zhang should live with her mother, who had lost custody after she was divorced from the girl's father. It also ordered the father to make monthly child support payments.
The creation of a legal system became imperative when China opened to the rest of the world in the late 1970s after three decades of economic isolation and intermittent political chaos.
Few foreigners were willing to invest anything until they were assured legal protection. So, beginning with foreign investment laws, the government has enacted legislation creating a legal system that is relatively complete - at least on the books.
"A whole language was created within 15 years. The legal system that in the West began evolving in the Middle Ages has been set up in less than 20 years," Brahm said.
The change reflects a consensus within the leadership that China needs a more impersonal, modern legal culture.
The national legislature, the National People's Congress, once a mere rubber-stamp for the Communist Party, is gradually assuming a policymaking role.
The congress enacted China's first Criminal Procedure Law in 1979. The 1996 revisions of that law are intended to provide better protection of some rights guaranteed under the constitution, including the right to legal defense.
Authorities acknowledge that the system has many loopholes and that virtually everyone, from biased or corrupt judges to ordinary citizens trying to skirt laws, is ignorant of the concept of the rule of law.
Seeking legal redress in the courts can still be a risky, time consuming business. This is particularly true for foreigners, some of whom have found themselves confined to hotel rooms and deprived of passports after Chinese partners convinced local authorities to take their side in business disputes.
A top judge, Ren Jianxin, recently complained at a national judicial conference that local courts and police were breaking laws, taking people hostage and "openly disregarding facts and laws."
Brahm said he advises foreign business clients who complain about legal problems to seek other solutions first.
"Arbitration or lawsuits are the last, last, last resort," he said. "If you go chase it in the courts, you are not going to get anywhere."
The government's current "strike hard" campaign against crime is typical of the tendency to revert to autocratic traditions in dealing with social problems that the leadership considers serious.
The human rights group Amnesty International estimates 4,620 death sentences were reported between April and September as part of the campaign.
"Only when we enforce a draconian law can we enjoy stability and civilization. Only when we severely punish perpetrators without mercy, can law-abiding people live and work in peace and contentment," the newspaper Legal Daily said in a recent editorial.
In a recent study of the criminal law revisions, the New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights noted that Chinese still are denied the right to remain silent, to post bail or to seek writs of habeas corpus - the chance to challenge the lawfulness of their detentions.
Despite the new provision for earlier access to legal counsel, in cases involving state secrets, police can deny detainees their right to counsel or prevent them from meeting in private with their lawyers.
The impact of the reforms is likely to be limited, particularly for politically sensitive cases, the U.S. group said.
Constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech and assembly are routinely ignored.
Liu Nianchun, a labor activist sentenced to three years in a labor camp, filed a lawsuit questioning his imprisonment. But he found lawyers were afraid to take his case.
"As soon as people hear that the defendants are the Municipal Public Security Bureau and the municipal government, they say, 'It's best that we don't take it,' and you don't go looking for lawyers," said Liu's wife, Chu Hailian.
 Load-Date: January 18, 1997

 

End of Document
