

Chinese find fertile ground in the desert for introducing West to new goods
June 23, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 1118 words
Byline: By SCOTT LINDLAW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ADELANTO, Calif.
Body




There's not a whole lot in this patch of Mojave Desert. A boarded-up Air Force base. A big trucking terminal. Cheap, open land.
But in this wasteland, a group of Chinese businessmen have found paradise.
Developers recently broke ground here on Da Zhong Hua Wholesale Town, which will house as many as 1,000 Chinese firms selling high end goods. It's part of a Chinese government-backed effort to introduce Western consumers to China-made products.
The developers believe wholesale buyers from throughout North and South America will flock to Adelanto, 100 miles northeast of Los Angeles. They'll take shoes, furniture, clothes, tools and electronics home for re-sale.
The developer "sees that there is a great demand for Chinese companies who want to sell their products to America, the biggest market," said Lam Fong Ng, general manager of Da Zhong Hua, an import-export concern that is building the project.
Local officials are thrilled with the prospect of an employment and tax-revenue dynamo reviving a region that lost 5,000 jobs and $ 15 million in yearly sales revenue when nearby George Air Force Base closed in 1992.
"For us it means jobs, and jobs mean more homes and being able to service our existing residents better," City Manager Mike Sakamoto said.
But military investigators and observers have raised security concerns about the foreign presence some 35 miles from the crown jewel of U.S. military flight-test installations.
Shortly after the Jan. 24 groundbreaking, Air Force investigators questioned City Councilman Ted Hartz about the project, asking "if I had any information of anything detrimental to our country, or our city here," Hartz recalled.
The investigator, Thomas Spring, a special agent with the Air Force Office of Special Investigations, said from his office at Edwards Air Force Base: "I just like to keep track of all the foreign establishments in the area."
Later he said he didn't mean "all," but refused to elaborate.
Capt. Steve Murray at the Air Force Office of Special Investigations in Washington, said the agency is "sensitive to any potential change in the counterintelligence environment near Air Force installations worldwide."
Sitting in his office, Ng laughs at such suspicions.
"We are pure businessmen. We are talking about business, not politics," he said through an interpreter. "We have never heard any opposition to this project. I only see smiling faces."
---
The 50-acre wholesale town will encompass 20 blocky, white buildings of glass and stucco.
The first phase is due for completion in July, but its opening date will depend on how quickly Chinese proprietors obtain visas, Ng said.
Chinese manufacturers will move goods to the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach on Cosco - the Chinese government-run shipping line - and other ocean-going carriers, he said.
The goods could be warehoused at the ports or perhaps at the old George AFB, which is less than 2 miles away.
Producers could fly lighter goods into the old base, recently reincarnated as Southern California International Airport, should cargo carriers begin flying there.
Importers will, according to the plan, buy goods at the wholesale center and ship them by train or truck to their destinations. Directly across the street from the complex is a Roadway trucking terminal, one of the West's largest.
About 70 percent of goods at the complex would be sold wholesale. The retail sales would tap the large Asian-American population in Southern California.
The United States' trade deficit with China reached $ 40 billion last year. But Da Zhong Hua sees Chinese companies still desperate to crack the American market, and U.S. consumers likely to snap up well-made but inexpensive goods.
 
 ---
Da Zhong Hua's partners are two Chinese quasi-government entities: the China Export Bases Development Corp. - part of the National Foreign Trade Ministry - and Conbo International Group, which answers to the Guang Zhou municipal government in southern China.
Those two concerns have put up some of the money to build the $ 50 million complex, but company officials wouldn't disclose how much.
The Chinese are anxious to develop the recognition that Japanese marques such as Sony have long enjoyed. Many Sony products are made in China, yet Chinese products have yet to achieve synonymity with quality.
"China has many famous brand products. But they are famous in China," Ng said. "Of course they are high quality, but few Americans know it.
Da Zhong Hua will emblazon its name on certain goods that meet its standards, charging suppliers who wish to use the trademark a $ 50,000 fee per product.
The developer will provide legal, accounting, translation and other services to customers at low fees, "so as to make them feel as if they were doing business at home even though they are in a strange and distant country," a glossy Da Zhong Hua brochure says.
In addition, the interiors will be decorated with steel Chinese good luck symbols and the movie theater will show exclusively Chinese movies.
The vast majority of firms will be from mainland China and Hong Kong and even Taiwan, which the government and Da Zhong Hua officials view as part of mainland China. The phrase Da Zhong Hua, which translates to "the greatness of China," is meant to imply ethnic unity.
 
 ---
Several Adelanto officials acknowledge they had security questions when they first considered the project in 1995, but concluded that because China had most favored nation trading status, they wouldn't worry.
Nevertheless, City Manager Mike Sakamoto pledged "to make sure that those businesses that are going to operate here are operating here with the full concurrence of our own government."
"Rest assured we will be working with the State Department, and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, all the appropriate federal government agencies, to make sure that we're all doing everything properly," Sakamoto said.
Among the companies considering buying a unit at the wholesale town is a Chinese bullet manufacturer, J.J. Ammunition, known until 1995 as May Quei International Inc., said a company official who spoke on condition of anonymity.
It recently won approval to build and store ammunition at two facilities within a couple miles of Da Zhong Hua.
J.J. Ammunition is buying equipment and materials from the Chinese government's arms company, China Northern Industrial Corp., or Norinco. Representatives of Norinco were charged last year with smuggling thousands of assault rifles into the United States.
 
 ---
In Adelanto, there has been virtually no opposition to the project.
"It's in the middle of the desert, dude," Vietnam veteran Corky Barrier said from his seat at the bar in the local Veterans of Foreign Wars post. "Show me the money."
 Load-Date: June 23, 1997

 

End of Document
