

Clinton: 'Listen to the children' to shape the new millennium
The Associated Press
December 31, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 575 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Relieved that technology was behaving itself, President Clinton led the nation into welcoming a new millennium with splashy celebrations and a prediction that humankind will in the 2000s turn away from bigotry, oppression and poverty.
He spent time with children from around the world before welcoming more than 300 guests in black tie and formal gowns to a roast lamb dinner at the White House and presiding over a star-filled and fireworks-lit televised party at the foot of the Lincoln Memorial as the century ticked away. The White House called it "an unforgettable midnight moment."
"We celebrate more than the changing of the calendar," Clinton said in one of the day's ceremonial speeches. "We celebrate the opportunity to make this a true changing of the times, a gateway to greater peace and freedom, to prosperity and harmony. If we listen to our children, they will tell us the future we should build."
Throughout the day, Clinton was kept up to date on the Y2K computer rollover and on events in a far-off Kremlin, where Boris Yeltsin, an unlikely and sometime s uncertain partner, peacefully yielded the presidency of Russia.
Clinton and first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, sitting with an audience of diplomats in the soaring, arched-glass atrium of the Ronald Reagan Federal Building, listened as children from Bangladesh, Indonesia, Jordan, Mexico, Nigeria and Russia asked for a new century built on peace, prosperity, security, unity, and cooperation.
"For all the billions of people who came before us," said Clinton, "it has been left to this generation to lead the world into a new millennium, to use our freedom wisely, to walk away from war and hatred toward love and peace."
"When people look back on this day 100 years from now, may they say … that in the 21st century our children went further, reached higher, created bigger and accomplished more because love and peace proved more powerful than hatred and war."
Clinton began Millennium Day at the National Mall, craning his neck to watch skydivers float to safe landings. He helped stow artifacts of 20th century America - including Army dog tags and a public library card - into a time capsule to be opened at the end of the 21st century.
The president found a happy omen in the beautiful January weather - crisp but clear. "The sun is still rising on America," he said.
But the serious celebrating was an evening affair, starting with dinner and dancing in the White House and a pair of tents covering both the Rose Garden on the West side of the mansion and the First Ladies Garden on the East.
An estimated 320 people - most on the list of the nation's rich and famous and creative - were invited to dine with the Clintons. Hundreds more were invited to a late night party to end with dancing until breakfast is served sometime after dawn.
After dinner, Clinton and guests were moving to the Lincoln Memorial for a $12 million, nationally televised New Year's Eve show with actor Will Smith as host. Celebrities including actor Robert Duvall, singer Jessye Norman, basketball star Bill Russell, former fighter Muhammad Ali, former Sen. John Glenn, actress Diane Keaton and many others.
An 18-minute film about America's past and future by director Steven Spielberg was to be projected on three giant video screens. Arizona Sen. John McCain, a Republican presidential candidate, was chosen to honor the men and women who have served in the U.S. armed forces during the 20th century.
 Load-Date: January 1, 2000

 

End of Document
