

Declining greenback hurts Japan more than the United States, so far
The Associated Press
January 12, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 799 words
Byline: By SETH SUTEL, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The dollar has lost more than a third of its value against the yen since last summer, but for now, the country that seems to be worrying the most about it is Japan.
The strengthening yen is hurting Japanese exporters like Toyota and Sony just when Japan's economy is mired in its deepest recession since World War II. That helps explain why Japan's central bank sold yen for dollars Tuesday in an effort that lifted the U.S. currency, at least briefly, from the 28-month lows reached Monday.
The dollar's fall from August's eight-year highs isn't expected to show up soon on stickers of Japanese cars and price tags of VCRs, but travelers returning to Japan for the first time since last summer may find their dollar buys a lot less in an already expensive country to visit.
So far, U.S. financial authorities do not appear to see the dollar's slide as a threat. Despite frequent assertions from top U.S. officials in favor of a strong dollar, there was no sign that the Federal Reserve joined the Bank of Japan in propping up the dollar in the open market.
On Tuesday, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin insisted the administration's advocacy of a strong dollar remains in place. "I'll just repeat what I've said so often, which is a strong dollar has served us well and our dollar policy is absolutely unchanged," he told reporters in Washington.
For now, currency experts agree that the shift in the dollar's fortunes against the yen is being felt far more in Japan than in the United States.
"It is a bigger issue for Japan, where the economy is in a much more precarious situation," said Bob Sinche, a currency strategist at Citicorp.
The dollar's surge from historic lows in 1995 through last summer's peak has bolstered the U.S. economy by helping to keep the prices of imported goods low. By curbing inflation, the strong dollar has given the Federal Reserve leeway to lower interest rates. Three rapid-fire rate cuts last fall are keeping borrowing costs low and have been a factor behind the stock market's rally and keeping alive the American economy's second-longest expansion ever.
But a prolonged slump in the dollar could also be felt in the United States. Eventually, Japanese manufacturers would be forced to raise prices for goods sold in the United States even though it would make it easier for American companies to compete in the Japanese market.
Trade tensions already are high between the countries, with the United States on Tuesday warning Japan to act quickly to halt a flood of cheap steel shipments to U.S. markets or face trade sanctions.
By making U.S. stocks and bonds less attractive to international investors, a weak dollar already has led to higher interest rates on U.S. bond markets. It could also push down American stock prices if foreigners start pulling money out.
At the same time, rising bond yields in Japan appear to be leading some major investors there to keep their money at home. This trend may be accelerating with the end of the Japanese fiscal year coming up in March.
Another factor weighing down on the dollar is the prolonged impeachment battle in Washington. "Any time you have a crisis of confidence in the leadership of a country, the currency suffers," said David DeRosa, former currency trader who now teaches international finance at Yale School of Management.
The deep economic problems in Brazil, a close neighbor to the United States, are also seen as a negative for the dollar. The sharp declines in Brazilian stocks this week, including a plunge of nearly 8 percent plunge Tuesday, have been keeping the dollar reined in, currency traders say.
Despite the political problems in Washington and the economic woes in Latin America, many experts agree that most of the reasons for the dollar's volatility against the yen has more to do with Japan than with the United States. They point out that the dollar has hardly changed at all against other major currencies such as the British pound and Canadian dollar since last August, when it began falling against the yen.
"This has been a yen volatility story rather than a dollar volatility story," said Citicorp's Sinche. "It was an overshoot on one side, and now we're getting an overshoot in the other direction."
The dollar's decline against the yen has also come at the same time as the birth of Europe's new unified currency, but it does not appear that the euro has established itself as a challenger to the dollar as the world's dominant currency.
But the advent of the euro is clearly of prime concern to Japan, which fears that the euro could supplant the yen as the world's No. 2 currency after the dollar.
The Bank of Japan's intervention in currency markets came just as Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi was wrapping up a trip to Europe during which he called for greater stability in currency markets.
 Load-Date: January 12, 1999

 

End of Document
