

Disoriented pilot 'flew the plane into the ground,' investigator says
The Associated Press
April 1, 2000, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 323 words
Byline: By TOM PARSONS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JACKSONVILLE, Ark.
Body




The Air Force has determined that the deaths of three U.S. servicemen during the aborted landing of a C-130 transport in Kuwait last year stemmed from pilot and crew error.
The air crew failed to follow procedures and made an improper approach to a runway, according to Col. Frank Laras. The pilot also didn't keep an eye on instruments and became disoriented, not realizing how close the plane was to the ground or how far it was from the runway at Al Jaber Air Base southwest of Kuwait City, he said.
"Basically, yes, he flew the plane into the ground," said Laras, who headed the Air Force investigation of the crash.
The plane hit the ground, breaking its landing gear, then flew back into the air and made an emergency landing without landing gear on a foam-covered runway at nearby Kuwait International Airport, Laras said.
The pilot and three other crew members could face disciplinary action by the Air Force, according to Col. Joseph Heimann, a lawyer with the Air Mobility Command. No decision on that has been made, he added
The flight engineer has been cleared to resume flying, Laras said, but the other three remain grounded, performing other duties at Little Rock Air Force, officials said, pending a decision on disciplinary action.
The plane, assigned to the 61st Airlift Squadron at the air base here, was ferrying 86 military passengers the 23 miles from Kuwait International Airport to Al Jaber before dawn on Dec. 10. Three passengers were killed when shafts that raise and lower the plane's main landing gear - four wheels in the middle of the fuselage - broke from the impact with the ground and penetrated the plane's metal skin, according to Laras' report. Also penetrating the plane's skin, Laras said, were structural beams to which the landing gear assemblies were attached.
Seven other passengers were injured, two of them critically, the report said. The two badly injured airmen are expected to recover completely.
 Load-Date: April 2, 2000

 

End of Document
