

During the war, Vietnamese journalist-spy lived in two worlds
The Associated Press
April 29, 2000, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 763 words
Byline: By RICHARD PYLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam
Body




During the war he lived in two worlds - on the surface a high-profile journalist for Time magazine who mingled with South Vietnam's power elite; below it, a Viet Cong commander working for the communist North.
Now, at age 73, Pham Xuan An sits with bare feet caressing the cool tile floor, a retired general at ease in his living room. Behind the couch is a painting of deer in a forest glade. Fish glide aimlessly in a tank. The sound of city traffic is buffered by the trees in An's front yard.
"I fought for two things - independence and social justice," An said of the wartime role he successfully hid from his journalistic colleagues in Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City.
Taking old pictures and a collection of dog-eared press cards from a file cabinet, An recalled events that earned him the respect of his fellow journalists, the trust of the South Vietnamese officials he secretly was working against and the silent appreciation of his real bosses in communist North Vietnam.
The slender, smiling An was the chief Vietnamese reporter for Time magazine's Saigon bureau during the war, but was best known as the unofficial voice of "Radio Catinat" - the nickname of Saigon's political rumor mill.
From the Givral coffee shop on the corner of Rue Catinat - now Dong Koi (Uprising) street, An doled out tidbits of information and political scuttlebutt to his Vietnamese counterparts who worked for other foreign news organizations. They in turn dutifully reported back to their own offices.
Given the South Vietnamese penchant for convoluted political intrigue, the potential for mischief was immense. But An says he never dispensed disinformation or communist propaganda.
"The truth was that I knew many things that I never told anyone," he said, laughing. "And because of this I was able on a couple of occasions to save Time from major embarrassment by telling them that a certain piece of important information was not true."
An said among the things he knew, but did not report, was the Cambodian military's plot to overthrow Prince Norodom Sihanouk in 1970, and the date of the final attack on Saigon in 1975.
Born in a mental hospital - then the only medical clinic in Bien Hoa, east of Saigon - An was drafted by the colonial French military, worked for weekly newspapers and studied at California's Orange County Community College. At various times he also was a bookkeeper, customs official, teacher and even a cyclo (pedicab) driver.
"That is the way to know the people," he said.
But An's life was most influenced by his early association with the Vanguard Youth, a nationalist movement opposed to the colonial French, in 1945.
"They didn't know anything about communism, but believed in the ideas of independence, freedom and happiness," he said. "It fit into the Vietnamese aspirations of nationalism."
When the United States pledged to support the French in their war against Ho Chi Minh's communist Viet Minh, the choice for An was clear.
"The Vietnamese were a thirsty people for independence," he said.
Asked whether he was a true believer in the communist insurgency against the South, An replied without hesitation. "Absolutely." But he said the U.S. involvement with South Vietnam was "not really a mistake."
"That is a very long story," he said. "It was the beginning of the Cold War. … How could you know (what would happen)?"
During what Vietnam calls the "American War," he was one of the few Vietnamese reporters accredited to the U.S. Military Command. He seemed so well-informed that many American friends suspected he worked for the CIA.
When South Vietnam started to unravel in the face of the North's final offensive in 1975, An had time to get his own family out of the country, and worked feverishly to save key friends, including Saigon's former security chief - marked for death if caught by the communists.
Thus the shock when, after the fall of South Vietnam on April 30, An revealed himself to be not only a spy but a senior military officer on the communist side.
Though it has been widely reported that he was a colonel in the North Vietnamese army, An says the truth is that he was a "regimental commander in the liberation forces" - the Viet Cong. "I was a commander with no troops," he said, laughing.
Vietnam's communist leadership was cool to An in the years immediately after the war, but in 1990 he was made a one-star general.
"I told them that I was so familiar with five armies - the Viet Minh, the French, the Viet Cong, the Americans and the South Vietnamese - that I should have five stars," An said.
"I don't think they understood my sense of humor."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY107
 Load-Date: April 30, 2000

 

End of Document
