

DYING CORAL: Global warming killing the spectacular Seychelles reefs
The Associated Press
January 11, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel
Length: 609 words
Byline: By SARAH CARPIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VICTORIA, Seychelles
Body




Global warming is killing the coral in the spectacular Seychelles reefs, a major tourist attraction that draws scuba divers from around the world.
The reefs are on the verge of extinction, says Dr. Thomas Goreau, an American environmentalist.
Goreau examined the reefs surrounding the Indian Ocean archipelago in December and found that warming water has killed 80 percent of the coral and badly damaged the rest, as it has in much of the rest of the world.
The damage is especially severe around the tourist islands of Mahe, Praslin and La Digue, where 95 percent of the coral is dead, says Goreau, president of the U.S.-based Global Coral Reef Alliance. Global warming is the root cause of reef destruction, he says.
"I think we're right up to the limit of what the corals can stand," Goreau told a briefing of government officials and environmentalists at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the capital, Victoria,
Part animal and part plant, coral reefs consist of thousands of small organisms and an outside cover of a single-cell plant that radiates distinctive bright colors. The reefs are home to a fourth of all marine fish species.
When the water warms to a certain temperature, the corals respond by bleaching themselves - expelling the algae that give them color and provide nutrition. The condition weakens the coral, sometimes fatally.
Goreau, who is conducting a worldwide study of reef erosion, says the only area that has escaped the bleaching is the central Pacific. Besides the Seychelles, the s, Bahrain, Sri Lanka, Singapore and Tanzania have been especially hard hit.
"Ninety percent of all corals in Indonesia are already dead, and the Caribbean islands are just beginning to experience the same phenomenon," Goreau says.
Wide-scale bleaching was observed beginning in the 1980s and the rate at which reefs have been dying has increased dramatically over the past two years.
Goreau says the zone of warming sea temperatures moved north during the second half of 1998, affecting the Maldives and Sri Lanka. Ocean temperatures also rose from New Guinea to Japan.
Sea temperatures around the Seychelles, normally around 84 (29 Celsius), have reached 91 (33 Celsius) this year and are expected to continue rising, accordingGoreau.
The World Meteorological Organization says the Earth's average surface temperature this year - an estimated 58 - is the highest since temperatures were first measured with thermometers in the mid-19th century.
Besides tourism, the dying coral reefs threaten fishing, the Seychelles' other economic mainstay. Red snapper, the most sought-after fish here, depend on the reefs for food.
Low-lying islands in the 92-island archipelago also face severe beach erosion if the barrier reefs break apart.
The Seychelles government has made efforts to preserve the environment, but the problem of disintegrating reefs is international in scope, says Riez Aumeeruddy, aquaculture manager for the Seychelles Fishing Authority.
"The problem is that there is very little that this government, or indeed any single government, can do to address the situation," he says. "We cannot do much by ourselves because we can't stop global warming."
Efforts are under way to help salvage what is left of Seychelles' huge coral reefs.
Goreau has begun a pilot project of reef restoration with the government. The project calls for attaching electrical cables to underwater metal cages. The contact between the cables carrying a low-voltage causes calcium carbonate and magnesium dioxide to form on the cage, speeding up the growth of coral.
Goreau urged the World Bank to provide funding for this and other reef conservation projects in the Seychelles.
 Load-Date: January 11, 1999

 

End of Document
