

Excerpts from town hall meeting on Iraq in Columbus, Ohio, with Secretary of Defense William Cohen, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and National Security Adviser Sandy Berger. Questions were asked by members of the studio audience and by CNN viewers who telephoned.
The Associated Press
February 18, 1998, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1279 words
Body




ALBRIGHT: During the next hour and a half, we plan to discuss with you why the confrontation between Iraq and the world matters to us as Americans, how it developed, and what our strategy is for settling it in a way that leaves us, our friends in the region and the entire world safer.
Iraq is a long way from Ohio, but what happens there matters a great deal here. For the risk that the leaders of a rogue state will use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons against us or our allies is the greatest security threat we face. And it is a threat against which we must and will stand firm.
In discussing Iraq, we begin by knowing that Saddam Hussein, unlike any other leader, has used weapons of mass destruction even against his own people.
In fact, he is a repeat offender, having used them both in the battle and against his people.
When the Gulf War ended seven years ago, Iraq was required to destroy such arms, and a special United Nations commission called UNSCOM was created to verify that and to see that weapons would not be replaced.
Despite repeated Iraqi obstruction, UNSCOM has uncovered and destroyed more of those deadly weapons than were demolished during the entire Gulf War. But the evidence is strong that Iraq continues to hide prohibited weapons and materials. There remains a critical gap between the number of weapons we know Iraq produced and the amount we can confirm were destroyed.
There is only one way to learn the truth. UNSCOM's inspectors must have free, unfettered and unconditional access to people, documents and facilities in Iraq.
That is what we're demanding, and that demand has been echoed repeatedly by the U.N. Security Council and by the world.
Unfortunately, Saddam continues to deny UNSCOM access to dozens of suspect sites. He's also trying to discredit UNSCOM and to change its character so that it will no longer be independent and its inspections no longer credible.
As President Clinton made clear in his strong speech yesterday at the Pentagon, the United States will not allow this to happen. Iraq must permit U.N. inspectors to do their jobs as the Security Council has directed. If this does not occur, we must be and we are prepared to use military force.
We support U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan's plan to visit Baghdad this weekend to gain Iraq's full compliance with Security Council resolutions. A peaceful solution remains our preferred option, but it must be a true, not a phony, solution.
Make no mistake, if we use military force it will be because Saddam Hussein has refused to accept a peaceful solution. If we do not use force, it will be because Iraq has finally agreed to give UN inspectors the access they need to do their job.
PROTESTERS: One, two, three, four, we don't want your racist war. One, two, three, four, we don't want your racist war.
ALBRIGHT: The United States…
PROTESTERS: One, two, three, four, we don't want your racist war! One, two, three, four, we don't want your racist war!
ALBRIGHT: … I would like to finish my statement. …
First of all, I'd like to repeat and say that the United States does not challenge Iraq's territorial integrity, nor do we want to see the Iraqi people suffer any further. Our problem and the world's problem is with Iraq's leaders. And today those leaders have a choice.
They can allow U.N. inspections to proceed on the world's terms or they can invite serious military strikes on ours.
 
 COHEN: Thank you very much, Madam Secretary. And let me say that for the past 24 years I've had an opportunity to represent the great state of Maine in the United States Congress, and I've attended many town meetings, none nearly as loud as this, nor as large. …
Walt Whitman said he heard America singing. I hope we can hear America sing and not shout during the course of today's hour-and-a-half discussion. …
Saddam holds the keys to ending this crisis, he holds the keys in his hands, he simply has to let the inspectors back in to do their job. And that's precisely why we're here today to explain why it's important. Thank you.
 
 BERGER: Dealing with the threat that Secretaries Albright and Cohen have described, the threat from Saddam Hussein demands constant resolve by the United States and by the international community, and, at times, action.
As long as he remains in power, we must be prepared to response firmly to reckless actions that threaten the region and our interests.
And we've done that successfully over this decade. President Bush led the Gulf War coalition that ejected Iraq from Kuwait and imposed tough conditions for a cease-fire, including that he destroy his weapons of mass destruction. President Clinton struck hard at Iraqi intelligence headquarters after its agents plotted and sought to carry out the assassination of President Bush in 1993. And when Saddam threatened to walk over Kuwait again in 1994, massing his troops on the border, once again we immediately deployed our troops, ships and planes to the region and Saddam backed down.
And when the Iraqi army forcibly seized Irbil in northern Iraq, we extended the no-fly zone over Iraq, taking control of the skies over Iraq from the southern suburbs of Baghdad to the Kuwaiti border.
Now we need to summon that will again.
What are the alternatives to this approach? Clearly, as Secretary Albright has said, we want a peaceful solution. That is the best option.
But it must be a peaceful solution that establishes the right of the U.N. inspectors to go in the country wherever they believe they have to do go to get rid of his weapons of mass destruction.
Now the alternatives -- some have suggested that we should basically turn away. We should close our eyes to this effort to create a safe haven for weapons of mass destruction. But imagine the consequences if Saddam fails to comply and we fail to act.
Saddam will be emboldened, believing the international community has lost its will. He will rebuild his arsenal of weapons of mass destruction, and some day, some way, I am certain, he will use that arsenal again as he has 10 times since 1983.
Now others suggest that, since Saddam is the problem, the only effective solution is a ground invasion that would remove him from power. …
The costs and risks of that course of action, in our judgment, are too high and not essential to achieving our strategic interests as a nation: containing the threat Iraq now poses. It would require a major land campaign and risk large losses of our soldiers. We do not support that option.
There is no question that the Iraqi people and the world would be better off without Saddam and we would gladly work with its - a successor regime that is ready to live in peace with its neighbors and resume its place in the family of nations. We've worked with Iraqi opposition groups in the past and we will continue to do so in the future.
But let me just conclude with this thought, one that President Clinton raised yesterday.
In order to understand why this is so important, we must remember the past and imagine the future.
The 20th century - the lesson of the 20th century is - and we've learned through harsh experience - that the only answer to aggression and to outlaw behavior is firmness, determination, and, when necessary, action.
In the 21st century, the community of nations may see more and more of this very kind of threat that Iraq poses now, a rogue state with biological and chemical weapons.
If we fail to respond, Saddam and all those who follow will believe that they can threaten the security of a vital region with impunity. But if we act now as one, we will send a clear message to would-be tyrants and terrorists that we will do what it takes to protect our security and our freedom in this new era.
 Load-Date: February 18, 1998

 

End of Document
