

EXPLORING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY; Chinese, Americans argue over money and dolphins
The Associated Press
April 16, 2000, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 730 words
Byline: By JOE McDONALD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIJING
Body




Young and playful, 11-foot-long whales splash around a tank at the Beijing Aquarium, pressing their noses to a glass wall to peer out at crowds of giggling children.
Both sides are serenely unaware of the legal battle raging around them.
Highlighting the pitfalls of cross-cultural business deals, the whales and their neighbors, the dolphins and sea lions, are the focus of a squabble between the 13-month-old aquarium and the American firm hired to supply and care for them.
JV China Inc. of Lompoc, Calif., complains it hasn't been paid in nearly a year. The two sides have traded accusations of mismanagement, breech of contract and endangering the sea mammals that are the crown jewel of a prestige project for the Chinese capital.
"This is a really good lesson in doing business in China," said Tim Desmond, a veteran animal handler who with two partners owns JV China.
Such spats are hardly new in China, but this one is unusually sensitive. It involves a high-profile facility run by the capital's city government and built as part of celebrations in 1999 of the half-century of communist rule.
The $85 million aquarium is on the grounds of the Beijing Zoo and is owned by the zoo and private Chinese investors.
Housed in a huge, circular building near the elephant pen, the aquarium also has sharks, tropical fish, turtles and other sea life.
But the whales, known as false killer whales, are the real stars. Children and adults crowd around their tank and take each other's pictures with the animals in the background.
Desmond's company provided the animals under a six-year, $11 million contract. It also was to run daily dolphin and sea lion shows and teach the Chinese staff how to care for the creatures.
JV China brought in eight false killer whales, eight bottlenose dolphins, 10 sea lions and eight South American sea lions.
Desmond, whose firm worked on the movie "Free Willy" and has consulted for aquariums in the United States, Canada, Mexico and Asia, speaks highly of Beijing Zoo officials and their concern for animal welfare. He said the firm turned down a half-dozen jobs in China before coming to Beijing in part because of the zoo's commitment to build a first-rate facility.
But Desmond said attendance was low after the March 1999 opening and the aquarium seemed to run short of cash. He said JV China was last paid in June.
The facility debuted in a crowded aquarium market in Beijing, which already has two smaller aquariums. Tickets also are beyond the reach of many families at 80 yuan ($10) for adults, limiting the pool of potential visitors.
Desmond said the legal trouble began in February when the Americans suspended the dolphin and sea lion shows for lack of payment, though they still look after the animals. He said the aquarium responded by trying to cancel JV China's contract and force it to sell its animals.
The company accused the aquarium of failing to maintain a safe home for the animals. It said broken gates had dangerous sharp edges and claimed the aquarium refused to supply chlorine for the water, causing a health threat.
The Americans also accused their Chinese partners of trying to steal the animals.
"We had a bad couple of weeks when people did some things they now regret," Desmond said. "It started with a bad move, but we're now into serious, much more coolheaded negotiations."
Li Junmei, secretary of the board of the aquarium company, Beijing Lida Aquarium Ltd., declined to discuss financial details of the dispute. But in a written reply to questions, she denied the aquarium had failed to provide chlorine or do adequate maintenance.
"All our actions are taken to guarantee the health and safety of the animals," the statement said.
In the interests of the animals' well-being, the two sides agreed to keep the Americans on hand long enough to complete training for the Chinese staff, Desmond said. He said the whales especially need close attention, and the six whales here are the biggest grouping of that species in captivity.
"We don't just want to take our money and walk out," he said. "We feel we have an ethical obligation."
The financial terms are under negotiation.
Despite legal bills that Desmond estimated at about $100,000, he said the firm hasn't lost interest in finding work with other Chinese aquariums.
"We knew that it would be a difficult environment," he said. "I'm not afraid to do business in China after this."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY192; AP Graphic GLOBAL LOGO
 Load-Date: April 17, 2000

 

End of Document
