

Fatigues, crawls, and chasing the rabbits: Americans flock to "boot camps" but not boot camp
The Associated Press
March 13, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1570 words
Byline: By RAVI NESSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Cold, frustrated and impossibly tired, Jennifer Bowden flings out her elbows and knees in a struggle to belly-crawl through a sandpit in the freezing darkness.
Her arms sizzle with pain, her clothes fill with chunks of snow and dirt and her face stings from the frosty darts of a pre-dawn snowfall.
"It's the snowpit of what?" her instructor barks down on her. "Love," Bowden and her teammates gasp.
Under the shadow of New York's skyscrapers, in Central Park, a retired Navy Seal named Jack Walston is giving the seven men and eight women a taste of military life.
Just a taste, however.
Two hours later, Bowden is sipping Earl Grey tea in her office as she updates her boss in London on a pending financial deal. The only hint of the ordeal this 29-year-old investment banker has been through is the pantsuit she wears to hide her bruised legs.
Call it military chic - not fun and games with paint balls but the marriage of boot camp and yuppiedom through a ferocious regimen of squat thrusts, thigh-igniting drills, and hundreds of sit-ups. Two weeks of hell for $495.
Twenty-five years after the end of the Vietnam War, the techniques of grunts and leathernecks have been appropriated by young professionals to manage a business, learn teamwork or just get in shape without actually enduring basic training or going to war.
Corporate go-getters listen to speeches from retired generals-turned-motivational speakers, and seek enlightenment in books such as "Five Star Leadership," "Semper Fi: Business Leadership the Marine Corps Way" and "The West Point Way of Leadership."
Some turn to Dean Hohl's four-day Army Ranger-inspired leadership course in the hills, fields and dense woods outside Louisville, Ky.
Thousands don spandex and huff through hourlong "boot camp" classes in fitness clubs across America.
"It's a little bit of the virtual experience of the rigors of a military style workout without actually having to go down to the draft board," says Ann Marie Miller, fitness training manager for New York Sports Clubs. "People get to pretend to be something they are not."
This new chic dovetails with a level of respect for the military not seen since before the Vietnam War.
In 1971, with troops mired in Vietnam, only 27 percent of Americans expressed a great deal of confidence in the military, ranking it fifth on a list of the nation's most respected institutions, according to a Harris poll. By 1998, the figure was up to 43 percent, putting it first in the poll's rankings.
Lucian K. Truscott IV, scion of a famous military family, bitterly remembers dances in the late 1960s where women refused to speak to him because he wore a West Point cadet's uniform.
Today, another military scion, Sen. John McCain, is heralded as a moral hero for his stoicism as a prisoner of war in Vietnam.
This rebound follows a string of military victories, or at least perceived victories, in Grenada, the Persian Gulf and the Balkans, which projected the image of an effective fighting force, says David King, a professor of public policy at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, who studies confidence in the military.
"The military isn't messing up in the eyes of the public," he says.
Movies such as "Saving Private Ryan" have added to the hosannas. The newfound reverence for the military also reflects a new generation revolting against its parents' resistance to the Vietnam War, King says.
"But it may well be fickle because it is based on images, not experience," he says. "Children of the boomers have been experiencing war virtually."
It certainly doesn't seem to be pushing them to enlist.
"In an economy that is making not only millionaires but billionaires out of 20-somethings, who on earth is going to give that up for 20 weeks on Parris Island being called a puke?" says Christopher Buckley, social commentator, author and editor of the lifestyles magazine Forbes FYI.
"For many of today's youth, enlisting in the military is an alien thought," the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a private group, said in a two-year study of military culture. "With the number of veterans dwindling, local advocates and role models are fading in number."
A recent recruiting crisis has sent the military scrambling to keep 1.4 million Americans under arms. The Army is offering signing bonuses of up to $20,000 and the Pentagon is trying to enlist Tom Cruise, Harrison Ford and Steven Spielberg to film promotional commercials.
The Pentagon's public relations machine hasn't snared Joe Raby, a 27-year-old stockbroker slogging through the Central Park course.
The military, he says, "gives you good training, but I think you're far better off going to college."
Raby says he is fascinated by the idea of "using weapons and using your body as a weapon," but not by military life - "Three or four years of doing a job and not really getting paid for it."
Jennifer Bowden imagines the discipline and structure of military life might actually be liberating. But she's also an avowed pacifist. "I don't want to kill anyone."
Bowden, whose father was a marine and whose grandfathers fought in World War II, joined the course to prepare for a spring climb up Alaska's Mount McKinley.
Her ordeal in Central Park has taught her new respect for the pain soldiers endure.
"This humanizes the military for me," she says. "But it doesn't make me any less ambivalent about it."
Dean Hohl, a 30-year-old ex-Ranger, is nothing if not gung-ho about the military.
He says that since 1996 he has pushed about 1,000 corporate managers through his Leading Concepts boot camp, a $3,000 training course in barracks living, paintball-shooting and ration-eating sprinkled with state-of-the-art business philosophy.
"If you can lead people into battle and come out alive, why can't you lead them through corporate America? The parallels are exact," Hohl says.
Truscott, who was discharged from the Army in 1970 for publishing an article about soldiers on heroin, now writes novels of foul play in the armed forces. He finds this military chic ridiculous.
"All that stuff is corporate America dreaming that they can influence goofballs by sending them to some goofy school," he says. "It's just an incremental change from 20 years ago when corporate executives from IBM went to Outward Bound. It's all hokum. They're not really learning anything."
It takes years to absorb military values, Truscott says. "Take one of your corporate managers and put him in the Army for two years and take him out and then he'll be a different guy. That's what changes attitudes, not some two-week Rambo course."
At Domino's Pizza, some would disagree.
About 250 franchisees and restaurant managers have humped through Hohl's Kentucky course and have emerged more gung-ho about the company, according to Paul Zarb, Domino's national director of corporate training.
Zarb, who took the course two years ago, says he learned the importance of planning and making sure everybody can execute every part of the plan.
"You can take that down to a pizza store on a Friday night. If every person in that store knows how to do every other person's job, it works that much better," Zarb says.
Back in frigid Central Park, 34-year-old Walston is giving his trainees the full benefit of his nine years in the Seals.
The 1 1/2-hour morning workout consists of runs, calisthenics and the occasional crawl through the snowpit, pull-ups on construction scaffolding, and dashes over the slides, jungle gyms and rocky outcroppings of a playground turned icy obstacle course.
"This is not an aerobics class and I am not an aerobics instructor," he tells the class in a granite voice softened only slightly by his Texas drawl. "I am not here to coddle you."
And he doesn't.
One day, Walston leads the group through a circuit of sit-ups, flutter kicks, crunches and various stomach-rippers - over and over, again and again, until everyone has done 800 abs-of-fire repetitions.
Then 50-yard hops, high-knee runs and moving thrusts through six inches of snow.
The torture changes daily.
During one run, a woman suffers an asthma attack and is accidentally left behind. Furious, Walston makes everyone dive into the roadside snow for "chase the rabbits" - hands stretched forward on the ground and legs furiously pumping back and forth in place.
Then the speech:
Walston talks of teamwork and sacrifice, of a Seal he knew who picked up a grenade thrown at his team and tried to toss it away. He lost his right arm, right eye and right teeth for his team.
"Think about it," Walston growls.
He says nearly 2,200 people have taken his course since 1997, mostly in New York, Dallas and Houston, where he lives. The group in Central Park includes a painter, a lawyer, a couple of schoolteachers and a party of hotel managers.
For the hard-core masochist, Walston offers a sleep-free, 24-hour amphibious course. Participants run 10 miles - the last half of it carrying 25-pound sandbags - paddle kayaks a few miles, swim 2,000 yards and pair up for a 1 1/2 mile run carrying a log.
That's the warmup.
One of the Central Park trainees is Patty Orlando, 25, a former teacher searching for a new career. Orlando wanted a challenge? After a 1 1/2-mile run on the first day she flails for a tree to keep from passing out.
But, by the end of the course, she feels stronger, more disciplined and possessed of a deeper respect for the military.
"If we can survive this," she says, "we can survive anything."
End advance for Sunday, March 19
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY347-350 of March 13
 Load-Date: March 20, 2000

 

End of Document
