

Fed spent $ 833 million in June to prop up the Japanese yen
The Associated Press
July 30, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 774 words
Byline: By SALLY JACOBSEN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




A dramatic intervention in currency markets last month to support the foundering Japanese currency cost U.S. financial authorities $ 883 million. It was the first time the U.S. Federal Reserve sold dollars on global currency markets since 1992.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York on Thursday provided the first details of the joint market intervention carried out with Japanese authorities on June 17, when the Japanese yen appeared to be in a freefall.
At the time, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin had announced the coordinated intervention but gave no details of the extent of the operation. Currency traders had estimated that the United States sold around $ 2 billion to buy yen and that Japan sold a similar amount.
But in its quarterly report, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York said the sum was $ 833 million. "It was the amount that seemed effective from our side," said Peter R. Fisher, executive vice president of the New York Fed. He gave no figures for the Japanese sales.
The New York Fed acts as the agent for the Treasury Department and Federal Reserve in executing U.S. foreign-exchange policy in the open market.
The action was taken after the Japanese currency appeared to be in a freefall, tumbling to an eight-year low against the dollar. Traders were pessimistic the Japanese government would take tough measures needed to bolster its economy, even though officials had announced several efforts to do so.
"In mid-June, we had a dollar-yen market that was really moving very much all in one direction," Fisher told a news briefing. Market participants, he said, were positive about holding the dollar, but negative about the yen.
"It also was evident to the U.S. monetary authorities that … the market was not accurately anticipating the policy reforms and initiatives of the Japanese government," he said.
With the market so strongly set against the yen, "we had a situation … that an intervention operation could have some impact" in changing traders' positions, he said.
The exchange activity began at 7:55 a.m. EDT on June 17 when the dollar was trading at 142.21 yen, and continued off and on until about 9:20 a.m. Orders were placed by phone and, for the first time, electronically to professional foreign exchange brokers to sell dollars for yen.
At the start of the operation, Ryutaro Hashimoto, the Japanese prime minister who recently stepped down, pledged the government would make necessary repairs to its economy.
The intervention gave an immediate lift to the yen, driving it up to 136.51 to the dollar at the close of the June 17 trading session. Since then, the yen has slid further, again on pessimism about the nation's economic outlook. It traded at 143.66 to the dollar late Thursday, but that still was below its low for the year of 146.78, reached June 16, a days before the U.S. intervention.
On Thursday, the Japanese Parliament chose Keizo Obuchi as the new prime minister. He has selected former Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa to be finance chief and lead the country out of its worst recession in decades.
Japan's weak economy has threatened to worsen the Asian financial crisis, which has battered stock and currency markets throughout the region. A strong Japanese economy - a big buyer of goods and services from its neighbors - is needed to help pull the region out of its doldrums, U.S. officials say.
The June 17 intervention marked the first time since February 1992 that American monetary authorities had sold dollars to try to influence the markets. At that time, the government sold $ 150 million for yen over two days.
The last time the United States intervened in the currency markets was in the July-September quarter of 1995 when, in a coordinated campaign with other central banks, it spent $ 1.13 billion to buy dollars, selling yen and marks. Its action sent a signal that Washington wanted the dollar higher as it rose from post-World War II lows of just under 80 yen to the dollar.
"For the United States monetary authorities, intervention is the exception, not the rule," said Fisher. "We presume that markets go along very well without us and occasionally conditions come up which warrant intervention."
The June activity ended a record string of 10 quarters with no U.S. intervention in the currency markets.
In its report, the New York Fed said the $ 833 million used in last month's intervention was split evenly between the U.S. Treasury Department's Exchange Stabilization Fund and the Federal Reserve System.
The report said that as of June 30, the central bank and the Treasury's fund jointly held $ 31.2 billion worth of yen and marks, up from about $ 30 billion at the end of March.
 

 

 
 Load-Date: July 31, 1998

 

End of Document
