

Floridians fight big business in the battle of Fisheating Creek
August 17, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1274 words
Byline: By TOM WELLS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PALMDALE, Fla.
Body




In the country song "Chattahoochee," Alan Jackson sings of parking along the river with girls and gathering there with buddies to drink beer and build "a pyramid of cans in the pale moonlight."
In this out-of-the-way area of South Florida, where Spanish moss hangs from cypress trees, Brahma cattle graze and a lot of people wear pointy-toed cowboy boots, Fisheating Creek has long been the place to hang out.
The hunting and fishing is so popular around here that the Glades Inn motel in nearby Moore Haven has signs in its rooms that advise guests: "No cleaning game or fish in the room."
Palmdale Baptist Church baptizes people in Fisheating Creek's slow-moving waters. A couple got married there. The initials of scores of kids are carved into a giant cypress tree by a swimming hole.
But if a billion-dollar corporation ultimately wins out in court, there will be no more public outings on the stream, which starts with runoff in Highlands County to the north, winds through Glades County and empties into big Lake Okeechobee to the east.
In a Circuit Court trial in June, a jury decided in favor of environmental groups that were suing the corporation. The state's constitution, like those of many other states, says that if a waterway is navigable, it belongs to the public.
But the corporation, Lykes Brothers Inc., of Tampa, appealed and the case now appears headed toward the state Supreme Court.
A coalition of environmental groups, including the Sierra Club and the Florida Wildlife Federation, sued Lykes, which owns hundreds of thousands of acres in Florida, mostly in citrus orchards and ranchland in Highland and Glades counties, which are traversed by Fisheating Creek.
"This was one of the worst examples of corporate greed and overreaching that I've ever seen and the people of Glades County stood up for eight years against them and finally won," said attorney David Guest, who represented the environmentalists.
Lykes has long maintained that it wants to close off public access to the creek to prevent cattle rustling, poaching and vandalism of its property.
The attorney for Lykes Brothers, Buddy Blain, said during the trial that there is no written record that Fisheating Creek was ever navigable.
The recent court battle has reminded people just how important Fisheating Creek has been to generations of families, going back to the mid-1800s.
This is where people from all over the United States come to get away from it all. For the locals, it's a way of life.
"This has always been a part of my life," says Ray Hendry, who found that the creek was frequently on his mind when he was in Vietnam in the 1960s.
"Everything was wide-open. I don't mean there weren't any fences, but the gates were unlocked."
Hendry's father, Pete Hendry, grew up on Fisheating Creek. At 73 he bears a resemblance to the old horror movie star Boris Karloff. It's hard to keep your eyes off his bushy eyebrows as they jump up and down when he talks.
"We made a living off the creek. We killed alligators and sold their skins to a company in St. Louis," he says, recalling how he and his dad would pole a flat-bottom skiff. "I don't remember how much the skins went for, but we got 12 cents a pound for frog legs back in '32, '33 and 8 cents a pound for rabbit."
In the early morning, the fog hangs in the cypress trees laden with Spanish moss, gray and scraggly like an old witch's hair. The scene takes on a primitive, prehistoric look with the 1-foot to 2-foot high cypress "knees" growing up from the roots. Like clouds, the knees take on the shape of all sorts of things - a hunchback, a peddler with a sack on his back, a praying angel.
A sharp eye can detect where wild hogs have dug holes in the sand in search of grub worms. Occasionally there are the tracks of wild turkey, deer, bobcats and panthers.
A huge cypress along the edge of the creek bears scores of initials, many doubtlessly carved into the bark by people who were hopelessly in love.
On one big branch is carved the message, "We love you, Donnie." That was Donnie Martin, 30, killed when he was thrown from a Jeep. He got his wish that his ashes be spread over the creek at the site of the tree where he, too, used to swim.
"The creek was a great place for teen-agers to park and neck. I imagine there's been some children conceived along there," says the younger Hendry, 50, a man of few words except when he is talking about his two sons and a daughter and Fisheating Creek.
In Vietnam, he won a bronze medal for heroism. When the armored personnel carrier he was in was destroyed by a mine and the rest of the men in the vehicle lay wounded or dying, Hendry climbed atop the vehicle, manned a machine gun, and while bullets whizzed around him, cut down waves of Viet Cong, forcing them to retreat.
Asked if he won a medal in Vietnam, he replies, "Uh, yeah." Silence. Asked if it was true he beat back a Viet Cong attack, he says, "Something like that."
Hendry's skin looks as leathery as his Justin's cowboy boots, which have holes in the bottom. The sun and the humidity are relentless, and a visitor begins to appreciate the toughness of the men who settled Florida and the cowboys who rode the range around here.
Hendry and his father own a campground. There are about two-dozen trailers, some belonging to people who live there year-round and others belonging to people who come for several months each year to hunt and fish.
After he came back from World War II in France and Germany, Pete Hendry got a job as a camp cook for cowboys who rode the range and rounded up cattle for branding.
"We always had lots of beef, but we'd get kind of tired of it. So I had this fishhook in my hat," he says. "I would cut a sapling for a pole and get a little green frog for bait.
"I'd get a dozen or so perch out of Fisheating Creek in no time."
Oh, the things Pete Hendry has seen. Three boys who were rustling cattle and didn't heed ranchers' warnings to stop. Shot dead with a high-powered rifle.
The tick fever epidemic among cattle in the late '40s when he was a range rider for the former State Livestock Board. Canoe trips. Spending vacations on the creek, the family camping out.
Pete Hendry and his wife of 52 years, Ona, are comfortable now. A nice home, a big Buick in the carport. But the titles on his bookshelves proclaim the sense of adventure he still feels - all 57 volumes of Zane Grey's Western novels, Howard K. Smith's "Last Train From Berlin," and W. Somerset Maugham's "Of Human Bondage."
Pete says the creek has been a part of the lives of five generations of Hendrys, including his great-great-grandfather, Robert Hendry, who along with his wife died in a smallpox epidemic in Florida in 1863.
A copy of the probate will listing Robert Hendry's worth tells of a Florida of a different era: "One slave Nancy 46 $ 850. One slave Lewis 10 years $ 1,400. One slave Abigail 3 years $ 550. 22 head meat hogs $ 240 … "
Palmdale today has only one building on U.S. 27. Back in the '30s there was a train depot, four gas stations, two grocery stores and a hotel. The only thing left is a two-story building with a small restaurant and grocery store, and it is closing up for lack of business.
Tom Kilgore, 79, of Indianapolis, Ind., who has been coming here since 1985 with his wife to stay six months out of the year in their trailer, says it will be "a sad day" if Fisheating Creek is cut off from the public.
He says he and and a fishing buddy catch up to 40 bass a day on the creek, turning loose all but a few that are kept for meals.
"It's getting to the point that you're going to be trespassing if you get off I-95," he says. "It's more and more you can't do the things you love to do."
 Load-Date: August 17, 1997

 

End of Document
