

For Hong Kong, the Final Year of Colonial Rule Begins
June 30, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1213 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HONG KONG
Body




In the village of Kam Tin, an hour's drive from the skyscrapers, trading pits and piledriving din of the city, it's almost quiet enough to hear the clock that ticks in the mind of Hong Kong.
The steady, inexorable countdown is entering its final year, leading to the climactic midnight of June 30, 1997, when China takes back Hong Kong and closes the book on Britain's imperial glory.
But such enormities of history are secondary for Hong Kong's 6.3 million people, caught up in the complex machinery of transferring an entire city-state and capitalist titan to the sovereignty of a communist power.
In places like Kam Tin, where the timeless certainties of village life still survive, the mood is slightly more relaxed.
Here, where the green hills fade into the vastness of China, the village headman receives a visitor by an altar commemorating those who fell in the fight against the British colonizers a century ago.
To Tang Kam-lung, 44, it all boils down to replacing "the rice flag" - the Union Jack, which resembles the Chinese character for rice - with "the five-star flag," the Chinese communist banner.
The headman, who doubles as village cab driver, believes the villagers are different from Hong Kong's urban people, many of whom fled the 1949 communist takeover of China.
"They just want to get rich and emigrate. They don't have roots here," he says. "But for us, this is our home. We have no money to go away."
Still, Tang acknowledges the benefits of living in a well-run British colony.
"From the standpoint of national pride, we definitely want to go back to Chinese rule," he says. "On the other hand, we like this system so much that we want to stay under the British."
For Hong Kong, the way to 1997 has been a long, bumpy ride into the unknown, held on track by little more than a piece of paper in which Beijing promises no change for 50 years - a separate, highly autonomous Hong Kong, shielded from Big Brother by the patriarch Deng Xiaoping's concept of "one country, two systems."
Will the promises be kept? China repeats, over and over, that they will. But with China itself going through tumultuous change, who guarantees that the regime that made the promises 12 years ago will still be at the helm a few years hence?
"People always ask me, what do I think it's going to be like after 1997? And the only honest answer I can give is that your crystal ball is as good as mine," Canadian Consul Garrett Lambert told Hong Kong radio in early June.
A population made up largely of refugees from communism finds it hard not to be distrustful of China, and pessimists see bad omens in China's declared intention of rolling back some of Hong Kong's democratic freedoms.
China is changing, reply the optimists, and Hong Kong is the catalyst, exporting its democratic, capitalist ways into the heart of the communist giant.
"Chinese people come to Hong Kong a lot," says David Chu, a pro-China legislator. They "are already asking this question: They're Chinese, I'm Chinese, and if they can do it, why can't we? This is happening and this is good."
To China, Hong Kong's 156 years under Britain are a historic insult, and its rectification is irreversible. The deal was signed by Britain and China in 1984. But the date for the handover was set when Queen Victoria was still on her throne.
China had already ceded Hong Kong and Kowloon to Britain for good in 1842 and 1860. But in 1898, the British expanded Hong Kong deeper into China by taking a 99-year lease on Kam Tin and the rest of what they called the New Territories. That lease is now being applied retroactively to the whole of Hong Kong.
Hong Kong's optimists repeat, mantra-like, their conviction that Hong Kong is China's cash cow and that the Chinese will therefore leave it alone.
"I can tell you, hand on my heart, that they never once gave me the impression that they want to steamroll things," says legislator and businessman Paul Cheng, who frequently meets Chinese officials. "They're very serious about this. They want Hong Kong to be successful."
What worries many, however, is a feeling that Chinese officials give sweeping assurances, only to undercut them when it comes to specifics.
Concepts like elections, democracy and press freedom "may mean very different things to Hong Kong people and the Chinese government," pro-Beijing activist Tsang Yok-sing wrote in his column in the South China Morning Post.
But China realizes this, he says, which is why it has guaranteed to let Hong Kong's own post-1997 courts have the last word.
Independent courts, universal suffrage by 2007, a home-grown chief executive - the autonomy promised by China indeed seems remarkable. But Hong Kong democrats say the facts on the ground tell a different story.
They are most concerned at China's insistence on rolling back the modest democratic reforms engineered by Gov. Chris Patten. China plans to disband the colony's first wholly elected legislature and replace it with a temporary, appointed legislature.
Then there is China's intent to repeal some of the free-speech laws enacted in the 1990s, on the grounds that it wasn't consulted.
Later this year, a 400-member Selection Committee, closely managed by China, will choose a chief executive to succeed the governor. But the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest political group and a strong critic of China, has been frozen out of the proceedings.
Big business, which is dominant on the committee managing the change of sovereignty, has come under fierce attack from Patten for signing on to China's plans to roll back Hong Kong's freedoms.
Meanwhile, the two sides' economies are already intertwined, and Chinese big business is adopting an ever-heightening profile in Hong Kong.
Hong Kong's government-owned radio broadcasts daily lessons in Mandarin, the mainland language, while expatriate civil servants are taking crash courses in Cantonese, the Hong Kong dialect, to improve their chances of keeping their jobs after 1997.
The Jockey Club and Golf Club have dropped "royal" from their title, leaving the Yacht Club as the last holdout.
Queen Elizabeth II's portrait is disappearing from coins and stamps. Textbooks are to be revised to include more Chinese history.
Hong Kong is "influenced by the Western way of thinking," publisher Rodney Chui told Hong Kong radio. "After 1997 everybody should think more in terms of the Chinese."
But the desire among Hong Kong Chinese to keep a link with Britain was evident in March when 200,000 people lined up outside the immigration office to beat the deadline for obtaining British passports.
The public's favorite for post-1997 chief executive is Anson Chan, Patten's deputy and a protege of the British colonial system. Pro-China candidates barely register in the opinion polls.
Simply put, Hong Kong people have grown used to Western-style freedoms that are alien to China - a pugnacious press, open political debates, telephone hot lines for complaining about anything from dirty buses to bungling bureaucrats to bad language on TV.
"Hong Kong people have been used to this kind of freedom for so many years," says Tsang Kin-shing, a legislator and perennial anti-China demonstrator. "Anybody can go out on the street and shout at the governor. If China tries to control this freedom, there will be conflict and bloodshed."
 Load-Date: June 30, 1996

 

End of Document
