

From the temple to the Hill, a bit awkwardly
September 4, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 472 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Yes. Yes. Yes.
One word at a time, three Buddhist nuns in ankle-length robes and big spectacles sketched a journey to the material core of American politics.
Congress hadn't seen anything like it in some time: these monastics from the Hsi Lai Temple near Los Angeles, testifying under immunity from prosecution Thursday about their role in the Democratic fund-raising controversy.
Congress has heard from mobsters and movie stars. And this Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs has put a CIA agent behind a screen to protect his identity.
Now came the three women in brown, their hair shorn to a quarter inch, trying to explain how Buddhist traditions of tending friendships without strings led their temple to kick in to the Democratic campaign.
"Yes," said the Venerable Man Ho, admitting she destroyed documents about a 1996 lunch at the temple attended by Vice President Al Gore. "I threw them away."
"Yes," testified the Venerable Yi Chu, temple treasurer. She asked devotees to write checks and said the temple would reimburse them. Investigators call that money-laundering.
The third witness, the Venerable Man Ya, was one of those people who wrote a check and said she was reimbursed.
Tax-exempt religious organizations are not allowed to give money directly to political campaigns. People are also not allowed to give under someone else's name.
In a Democratic list of returned contributions, an unidentified party auditor had this to say about why a particular $ 5,000 donation was given back:
"It was a temple, you idiot!"
The temple's name, Hsi Lai, pronounced "she lye," means "coming to the west." The temple is run by an order that is active in charity, broadcasts on the radio and has a gift shop.
Chinese culture is commonplace in the Southern California area where the temple is located but is somewhat alien to much of official Washington, and some senators struggled to deal with it.
Part of the nuns' joint statement complained about "cultural insensitivity and ignorance regarding Buddhist precepts," including a committee member's disparaging remarks made earlier.
That member, Republican Sam Brownback of Kansas, apologized to the nuns for having said of a supposed Democratic scheme, "No raise money, no get bonus."
Mostly expressionless, facing members of Congress against the backdrop of a marble wall, the nuns, their lawyers and a translator sat through daylong questioning.
"In Buddhism we talk about making friends," Man Ho, temple administrative officer, said in hesitant but clear English. "That's not political."
Deputy committee counsel Sandy Mattice made no allowances for the spiritual nature of the witnesses. He fired rapid, just-the-facts questions, and said later "my western lawyer's mind" was not convinced cultural differences were relevant.
"They had enough knowledge," he said, "to cover their tracks."
 Load-Date: September 4, 1997

 

End of Document
