

Fujimori, man of patience, awaited the exact moment to strike
April 23, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 804 words
Byline: By LYNN F. MONAHAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




On a hot, languid afternoon in Lima, President Alberto Fujimori moved like a stalking cat and pounced when his prey was off guard.
Four months of fear, tension and the tedious boredom of Peru's hostage crisis shattered in a flash of explosions and bursts of gunfire when Fujimori seized the "precise moment" to strike - during an impromptu soccer game.
The Tupac Amaru rebels who had held 72 men hostage since invading a glittering diplomatic party on Dec. 17 didn't have a chance.
"The information was so precise and detailed that I didn't waver for a single minute in giving the order for this rescue operation," a beaming Fujimori said after the dramatic Tuesday afternoon rescue of 71 hostages.
All 14 rebels, who took over the Japanese ambassador's mansion in a desperate gamble to free hundreds of their comrades from Peruvian jails, were killed in the assault. One captive and two soldiers also died.
Fujimori, whose younger brother Pedro was among the hostages, acted when the intelligence service told him the time was ripe - what he called the "precise moment."
With the use of electronic devices apparently hidden in a tunnel dug beneath the main reception hall and rigged with explosives, Fujimori knew that eight of the guerrillas were playing soccer in the main reception hall of the mansion.
Until the raid, Tuesday seemed like just another slow day at the mansion, a day that would drag on like all the other days for the past six weeks since negotiations between the rebels and government broke down.
The standoff between rebels and the government had seen many attempts by Peruvian and Japanese diplomats to achieve a peaceful solution without releasing rebel prisoners.
It finally had settled down to a test of wills between two stubborn, determined men: Fujimori and rebel chief Nestor Cerpa.
Peru, which reportedly received technical advice and sensitive listening equipment from the U.S. government, painstakingly tracked the rebels' movements. They knew where they were, what they said and how they were armed. They knew, too, where the hostages were.
One hostage said they had been warned minutes beforehand of an impending attack.
Lima's El Sol newspaper reported today that a retired navy admiral, Luis Giampietri Rojas, had been notified about the raid via a radio transmitter that he had kept hidden.
In recent weeks, the commando force that carried out the lightning strike had rehearsed the rescue over and over again. They took over an island near Lima and built a mockup of the mansion. They dubbed their mission "Operation Chavin de Huantar" for a pre-Inca civilization in central Peru 2,500 years ago that was known for its adoration of the puma.
Stealth and timing were the key.
Cerpa and his three top lieutenants were fighting the inaction and boredom with a game of close-quarter soccer with four other Tupac Amaru guerrillas. They were relaxed as the hot afternoon sun beat down on the mansion. Fujimori saw his chance.
At 3:17 p.m. he gave the order. Moments later the attack began.
"We had a 10-minute warning," said another of the hostages, Bolivian Ambassador Jorge Gumucio. "They gave us instructions to throw ourselves to the ground and not move for anything."
According to Gumucio, the attack began with an explosion in the tunnel under the reception hall, killing or injuring the eight soccer-playing rebels instantly. Then, in a blur of gunfire, smoke from the explosions and running commandos with white ladders, the soldiers rushed in.
A Lima newspaper said today the soldiers entered the residence through a tunnel that led to three points within the compound - the kitchen, the main living room and under the tent set up in the back garden for the cocktail party.
La Republica said professional miners brought in by police started building the tunnel in January, with four-man teams working in four-hour shifts. It said police played martial music over huge speakers outside the residence to mask the sound of the digging.
A small team stormed through the double doors of the compound's outside wall Tuesday and charged the front of the building.
As the intensity of the shooting increased, commando teams carrying light machine guns zigzagged through the compound and took over the roof. In an instant, they were in front and in back of the mansion.
A loud blast shook the front of the colonnaded building, said to have been designed after the antebellum home in "Gone With the Wind." Smoke rose as the soldiers blew open the front door and burst inside.
The AP learned that besides 11 guerrillas killed in the initial blast and the fighting that followed, three others could not be found. Soldiers, who suspected they were hiding, blew up part of the compound to eliminate them.
It all went "professionally," said Gumucio, who had huddled in a corner of an upstairs room as the bloody drama unfolded.
 Load-Date: April 23, 1997

 

End of Document
