

Georgia scientists hunting for plants that may hold the key to healing
The Associated Press
February 14, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: State and Regional
Length: 1377 words
Byline: AP Sunday in the South, By CHARLES SEABROOK
Dateline: ATHENS, Ga.
Body




For centuries, people in India have cleaned their teeth with the twigs of the neem tree, a relative of mahogany. They have smeared neem-leaf juice on skin disorders, drunk neem tea as a tonic and placed neem leaves in their beds, cupboards and closets to drive away bugs.
To these people, neem has miraculous powers.
Similar stories can be repeated for thousands of other plants around the world used by native people to treat infections, pains, fevers and other maladies. Scientists have begun paying serious attention to this medicinal folklore, because from the plants may come the next miracle drugs against cancer, heart disease, parasitic infections and the like.
Now, several University of Georgia researchers will become the latest cadre of specialists scouring the tropics for therapeutic plant species. Under a new $ 2.5 million, five-year federal grant, the UGA scientists will focus on the homeland of the Highland Maya people in the southern Mexican state of Chiapas. Five research teams from other institutions are conducting searches in eight other countries in Latin America, Africa and Southeast Asia.
The new research greatly expands previous efforts to find medicinal plants. Although pharmaceutical firms have trekked for decades through the tropics for plants with therapeutic value, the forays picked up steam in the 1980s when the National Cancer Institute contracted with the Missouri Botanical Garden in St. Louis, the University of Illinois in Chicago and the New York Botanical Garden to gather thousands of plant specimens in the rain forests of South America, Asia and Africa. Extracts from the leaves, stems, flowers, bark and other parts of the plants were screened for anti-cancer properties.
Out of about 14,000 plant specimens collected so far, extracts from about 2 percent have been found to have anti-cancer potential, and may be candidates for more rigorous testing and possible drug development.
But under a new federal program that began in 1992, the international search for therapeutic plants - a process called "bioprospecting" - has been greatly widened to look for treatments for other ills.
At the same time, the program is designed so that the development of powerful new drugs from natural products can provide an economic return for native people in Third World countries. That, in turn, will encourage the sustainable use of native plants and other natural resources.
"The potential rewards (from bioprospecting) should provide benefits to the source country and local communities that are the stewards of these resources," says Joshua Rosenthal of the National Institutes of Health's Fogarty International Center. Moreover, he notes, the sharing is a requirement under the 1992 United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity, which has been ratified by more than 170 countries.
The program means that much of the rain forest land - now being lost at a rate of 50 million acres a year - may not be cut for wood products and agriculture; rare plants and animals won't lose their habitats; and residents won't resort to environment-damaging activities to escape crushing poverty.
The Georgia team "will discover, isolate and evaluate plants that might have medicinal value and then use them to help develop the local economy of the Highland Tzeltal and Tzotzil Maya through sustainable production," says Brent Berlin, an anthropologist who directs UGA's Center for Latin American and Caribbean Studies.
The plant search is sponsored by a consortium of agencies that includes the National Science Foundation, the U.S. Agency for International Development and the National Institutes of Health and its Fogarty International Center. The six research teams, including UGA's, are known as International Cooperative Biodiversity Groups. The UGA group includes eight senior researchers and several graduate students in biochemistry, anthropology and molecular biology.
In large part, the program was developed out of concern that over the decades, some drug companies committed what Berlin says was the equivalent of plunder by taking plants from a country, developing them into medicines with high commercial value, and leaving almost nothing behind for the host country that supplied the natural product. Similarly, the National Science Foundation says that one pitfall of bioprospecting is the danger of falling into a new form of colonialism - extracting and exporting raw materials from developing countries without increasing the capacity of the countries to develop and export their own products.
This time, native people and host countries will participate in the projects and command a large share of any economic benefits from the medicinal plants.
Judith Butler, an intellectual property rights lawyer at UGA, has been working closely with Berlin, his colleagues and Mexican officials to develop agreements that will provide adequate legal protection for Maya participants in the project.
A systematic search for plants that may hold cures for diseases is a daunting task. There are more than 220,000 flowering plant species in the world, but only about 2 percent to 5 percent have been tested for possible effectiveness against diseases, even though indigenous peoples have used the plants for centuries.
Driving the scientists in their search is the knowledge that nearly 80 percent of the 150 most commonly prescribed drugs are derived from plants and other organisms. The heart drug digitalis, for instance, was derived from foxglove. Aspirin came from the white willow tree and penicillin from a fungus.
Several years ago, scientists at Eli Lilly and Co., while searching for an anti-diabetes drug in plants, found instead two powerful anti-cancer drugs, vincristine and vinblastine, in the rosy periwinkle.
The tropics are the focus of most of the plant surveys because climate, varied terrain and rainfall make tropical rain forests a vast botanical garden of biological diversity. However, the rapid loss of these places to logging, agriculture and other purposes has prompted a new urgency in the search for therapeutic plants.
Berlin and his wife, anthropologist Elois Ann Berlin, who is a co-leader in the plant inventory portion of the project, have been collecting information for the past 11 years on how the Highland Maya use various native plants to treat a wide range of illnesses. The Maya's homeland is the world's third richest in numbers of vascular plant species because of the diverse habitats and terrain found in the region, from mountains to deep valleys.
The Berlins and other members of the UGA group, working with native people and local scientists, will focus initially on nearly 900 commonly known species in the Highland Maya's homeland. Many of these species have been used for centuries by Maya people in medicinal preparations to treat ailments ranging from infections to stomach maladies. But the chemical properties of these medicines remain largely unknown.
"We need to determine what the key ingredients are and what parts of the plants are medically necessary," Elois Ann Berlin explains. "We now have a good idea of the most important species that are used in traditional curing by the Highland Maya; we just don't yet know how they work."
Eventually, thousands of other plants will be scrutinized. The work could start as early as March if Mexican collecting permits and agreements on intellectual property rights can be finalized by then. The Georgia researchers will collaborate with scientists from Mexico's El Colegio de la Frontera Sur.
Extracts from the plants will be screened at UGA and other institutions for indications of an effect against more than a dozen maladies. Extracts that show promise will undergo additional testing, and more specimens of those plants may be collected.
If an extract shows promise against certain diseases but cannot be patented, the plant's pharmacological properties and potential use in the growing international herb market will be documented. "This could provide a major economic growth model for Chiapas and other areas," Elois Ann Berlin says.
"We . . . want to actively promote beneficial plant species in home gardens and community medicinal plants projects, since this knowledge is seriously threatened due to rapid cultural change," she adds.
 Load-Date: February 14, 1999

 

End of Document
