

Highlights of New Year's Eve celebrations around the world
The Associated Press
December 31, 1999, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1522 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Highlights of New Year's celebrations. Events take place at midnight local time, unless otherwise indicated.
 
MILLENNIUM ISLAND, Kiribati
 
Dozens of revelers and journalists descended on this usually vacant island, renamed for the occasion, to welcome the millennium. Dancers in swaying grass skirts, illuminated by moonlight and glowing torches, sang on a dark tropical beach. The president of Kiribati, Teberuro Tito, took a burning torch from an elderly man and handed it to a boy in a ceremonial passing of time.
 
GUAM
 
Hundreds of worshippers on this U.S. territory attended a midnight fiesta and Mass at Dolce Nombre de Maria Cathedral-Basilica. They sang a 200-year-old native Chamorro hymn seeking protection in the new year - including help against any Y2K bug.
WELLINGTON, New Zealand
 
Six sky divers saw the millennium dawn as they descended at sunrise from 12,000 feet above the International Date Line into the South Pacific ocean, where they were picked up by a waiting boat.
 
SYDNEY, Australia
 
An estimated 1 million people lined the harbor shores of Australia's largest city to see one of the world's biggest fireworks displays. Barges with illuminated, multicolored, three-story-high mythical sea creatures floated around Sydney Harbor. Lasers bounced off the shells of the landmark opera house and skyrockets burst over Sydney Harbor Bridge, which was lighted by a huge glowing smiley face.
 
TOKYO
 
Millions of people headed to Buddhist temples and Shinto shrines to wish for good fortune in the Year of the Dragon. Monks rang out the old year by clanging their temple bells 108 times - once for each of the 108 evils of the world.
 
IMJINGAK, Korea
 
On the southern edge of the demilitarized zone, thousands of South Koreans posted carefully folded millennium wishes in a barbed wire border fence, wishing for peace with communist North Korea and reunion for families long separated by the conflict on their divided peninsula.
 
BEIJING
 
Torchbearers in imperial-era regalia lighted signal fires on watch towers on the Great Wall; a few miles from Tiananmen Square, President Jiang Zemin and members of the ruling Communist Party Politburo celebrated the new year at the Century Altar - a sundial-shaped monument built for the celebration.
 
JAKARTA, Indonesia
 
The Indonesian capital rang in the new millennium with a giant brass gong that its crafters said would make the Earth tremble. The 6,600-pound gong, more than 6 yards across, was believed to be the world's biggest.
 
DILI, East Timor
 
Thousands jammed East Timor's main square, singing "Today Starts Tomorrow," composed to celebrate 2000 and the territory's recent vote for independence.
 
INDIA
 
The Dalai Lama and thousands of Hindu and Buddhist monks sang hymns of devotion on the banks of the holy Ganges River.
 
THE HOLY LAND
 
Rabbis barred Jerusalem hotels from throwing New Year's Eve parties since it's the Jewish Sabbath and no millennium for the Jewish state. Not so in Palestinian-run Bethlehem, birthplace of Jesus Christ where midnight was marked with the release of 2,000 doves.
 
CAIRO, Egypt
 
Fireworks and an electronic opera inspired by an ancient Egyptian myth about the sun's journey from dusk to dawn entertained about 50,000 revelers at Egypt's pyramids, funerary monuments built more than 2,000 years before the birth of Christ.
 
MOSCOW
 
Across its 11 time zones, Russians held the world's most widespread New Year's celebrations, from the Far Eastern port of Vladivostok to Red Square. Boris Yeltsin's abrupt resignation announcement dominated holiday conversation but did not disrupt most party plans.
 
TANZANIA
 
About 900 people climbed Mount Kilimanjaro to welcome the new century from Africa's highest mountain.
 
ISTANBUL, Turkey
 
Red and blue fireworks exploded over two of Istanbul's greatest landmarks, the Haghia Sophia and the Blue Mosque, as Turks welcomed the millennium in the former capital of the Ottoman and Byzantine empires.
 
HELSINKI, Finland
 
Finns braved 10-degree temperatures to watch dance shows on Helsinki's cathedral steps and what was billed as the biggest fireworks in the city's 450-year history.
 
VILNIUS, Lithuania
 
Lithuanians celebrated with fireworks and a special "millennium bonfire" set alight by lasers.
 
ATHENS, Greece
 
Giant columns of light shot skyward from the Acropolis and bathed the 2,500-year-old Parthenon in a bluish glow. WARSAW, Poland
 
Thousands of Poles swayed and sang in the squares outside Warsaw's Royal Castle and the Opera house, which was decorated by tall lamps to create a "millennium cake." As midnight tolled, the lights went out, symbolizing the year's end.
 
TIRANA, Albania
 
Ordinarily, Albanians celebrate the new year by firing weapons into the air. But Tirana residents said this year it appeared celebratory gunfire was much lower than normal, with the only thunder coming from huge fireworks displays around the country.
 
SARAJEVO, Bosnia
 
For the first time since the end of the Bosnian war, a public celebration was organized in Sarajevo for Bosnians who couldn't afford to throw their own parties.
 
VIENNA, Austria
 
Austrians said farewell to a century which saw their country defeated and dismembered in two world wars with a concert of Johann Strauss' famed Blue Danube waltz in the capital, Vienna.
 
PRAGUE, Czech Republic
 
A blast fired from a historical canon on a square off the historical Prague Castle heralded 2000 in the Czech capital.
 
BERLIN
 
The centerpiece of Berlin's celebrations - 44-mile-high towers of light beamed into the sky from 250 high-powered floodlights at the Victory Column - was obscured for all but those closest by fog and a haze from fireworks.
 
AMSTERDAM, Netherlands
 
Fireworks filled the night sky across the Netherlands - the only time of the year when they are legal.
 
CAPE TOWN, South Africa
 
Nelson Mandela returned to his one-time prison in a somber recollection of the country's freedom struggle as part of a celebration on Robben Island, where he spent 18 of his 27 years in jail.
 
ALGIERS, Algeria
 
Fog horns boomed in the bay and security forces fired guns in the air in Algeria, a Muslim country that nevertheless maintains New Year's traditions from its days as a French colony.
 
PARIS
 
The Eiffel Tower's 40-foot digital clock faded momentarily before finishing the last of 1,000 days counting down to the new millennium, but the City of Light lived up to its name with a cascade of fireworks installed by mountain climbers on the landmark structure.
 
GREENWICH, England
 
As Big Ben chimed midnight and world air traffic control computers rolled into 2000 Greenwich Mean Time, hundreds of fireworks were set off in waves along the River Thames, and Queen Elizabeth II toasted the new millennium with a glass of champagne and a kiss for her husband, Prince Philip.
 
MADRID, Spain
 
Spaniards swallowed a grape and made wish with each of the 12 chimes of midnight - a tradition that dates back to 1916, when vine cultivators devised the strategy to take advantage of a bumper harvest.
 
ANTARCTICA
 
The Sun crested over Dibble Glacier, marking the first 2000 sunrise. (The midsummer sun there had not actually set.) Farther south, U.S. Geological Service scientists moved the South Pole, an annual adjustment made on the moving ice sheet
 
MEXICO CITY, Mexico
 
Mexicans are entertained by mariachi bands while the more spiritual raise their arms from atop the famous Aztec pyramids at Teotihuacan to channel energy from the millennium's final sunset. CUZCO, Peru
 
Peruvians re-enact ancient purification rituals and offerings to the moon at Sacsayhuaman, an Incan stone fortress in the Andes. Musicians, actors and dancers perform rites enhanced by wind and thunder machines.
 
PANAMA CITY, Panama
 
Panama broke out in a national celebration at noon - 12 hours early for the millennium but at the moment when the United States handed over the Panama Canal.
 
WASHINGTON
 
The United States officially enters 2000 with drop of time ball down U.S. Naval Observatory mast.
 
NEW YORK
 
Times Square is transformed into a pristine pedestrian mall for revelers there to witness a 1,070-pound Waterford Crystal ball drop and frolic amid fireworks, laser lights, balloons, 4,000 pounds of confetti.
 
PHILADELPHIA
 
Some 2000 "Rocky" wannabes' charged up the steps of the Philadelphia Museum of Art on New Year's Eve morning. PORT CLINTON, Ohio
 
City on Lake Erie, self-proclaimed world's walleye pike capital, drops an 18-foot fiberglass fish down a rope.
 
TUCSON, Ariz.
 
Indians bless sunrise in 10-day New Millennium First Peoples' World Fair and PowWow.
 
LOS ANGELES
 
Count 'em: 2,000 folk dancers, a 2,000-member marching band, 2,000 gospel singers, 2,000 line dancers; 2,000 drummers - afternoon entertainment around L.A. with finale the lighting of the Hollywood sign and fireworks.
 
HONOLULU
 
Laser lights flash giant numerals on Diamond Head, the rim of extinct volcano, counting down last 10 seconds. Then: "Hawaii 2000."
 
FRENCH POLYNESIA
 
Midnight in last region on Earth to enter new millennium includes Tahiti's World's Parade, with floats representing assorted islands and foreign countries, laser lights and fireworks on beach. On Bora Bora, church choirs raise their voices; dancing until dawn.
 
 Graphic



 
AP Graphic WORLD WATCH 2000
 Load-Date: January 1, 2000

 

End of Document
