

How Clinton wants to spend the budget
The Associated Press
February 2, 1999, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 5542 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




President Clinton's proposed budget by agency and issue:
 
 SOCIAL SECURITY
CLINTON: The budget calls for spending 62 percent of government surpluses that are expected over the next 15 years - a projected $ 2.76 trillion - to help bolster Social Security's cash reserves. Without help, the retirement program is expected to run short of cash in 2032, during the baby boomers' old age.
Clinton wants the government to invest about $ 700 billion of the cash in the stock market to try to increase its value - the first time Social Security reserve money would be invested privately. With the rest, Clinton would use a complicated accounting strategy to simultaneously pay down the national debt and obligate more of the country's future resources to Social Security. Administration officials say the plan would keep Social Security from financial crisis until 2055.
Clinton is asking Congress to work with him to decide if more fundamental changes to the program are needed.
He also has proposed using an additional 12 percent of government surpluses over the next 15 years - or $ 536 billion - to subsidize new 401(k)-style retirement savings accounts for most working Americans.
GOP: Republican leaders have agreed to set aside 62 percent of expected government surpluses while lawmakers discuss Social Security's future, but they disagree on the specifics of Clinton's plan. They are strongly opposed to having the government invest in the stock market, saying free enterprise would inevitably be corrupted by politics. They also have accused the president of using funny bookkeeping that would compound debts already owed to Social Security by the rest of the government without saying how they will ultimately be paid.
LAST YEAR: Clinton had asked lawmakers to hold off spending government surpluses during a year of town hall meetings on Social Security's future.
 
 DEFENSE
CLINTON: The Pentagon would get $ 261 billion in new spending in 2000, including the largest pay raise for military members in nearly two decades - 4.4 percent in 2000, followed by five consecutive increases of 3.9 percent. Nearly $ 3 billion would go for Bosnia peacekeeping and enforcement of no-fly zones over Iraq. Clinton wants $ 4.25 billion for missile defense in 2000. He asks Congress for two new rounds of base closings - in 2001 and 2005.
The request for $ 261 billion is actually lower than the $ 264 billion the Pentagon received this year, as measured in outlays, or actual dollars spent in the budget year. But Clinton proposes the budget increase to $ 269 billion in 2001 and reach $ 318 billion four years later.
The administration has said it is increasing defense spending by $ 12 billion in 2000 and by $ 112 billion through 2005. The $ 12 billion, however, represents the difference between what the administration had said a year ago it would spend in 2000 and what it now proposes. Much of the $ 12 billion is savings from low inflation, not new money.
The budget for the CIA and other intelligence agencies is secret.
GOP: Republican proposals are roughly in line with Clinton's, calling for increased spending to modernize weaponry, improve troop living conditions and invest in missile defense. But the Senate Armed Services Committee already has proposed pay increases bigger than Clinton's.
LAST YEAR: Congress approved $ 264 billion for the Defense Department in the current year, including $ 4.5 billion in extra money to improve overall preparedness and pay for Bosnia and Iraq operations.
 
 TAXES
CLINTON: From families with young children and to the beleaguered steel industry, scores of beneficiaries are targets of tax credits and other tax relief totaling $ 36.2 billion over five years. Among those aimed at the middle class: a credit of up to $ 500 for stay-at-home parents caring for infants under age 1 and a $ 1,000 credit for people providing long-term care for elderly and/or disabled people.
Disabled workers could take a $ 1,000 credit for costs associated with their jobs, employers would be encouraged to provide health insurance and the steel industry would get $ 300 million in breaks to combat foreign dumping. There are also credits for purchase of certain fuel-efficient cars, corporate investment in poor areas and preservation of open spaces.
Some of these credits are more complex than they appear. For instance, each parent caring for an infant under age 1 qualifies for a $ 250 credit, or a $ 500 credit for two children. But for three or more children, the credit remains $ 500.
The administration proposes $ 82 billion in new or increased taxes, led by a 55-cent-a-pack cigarette tax that would raise $ 34.5 billion over five years. Sixteen corporate tax loopholes would be closed, raising $ 7.1 billion. In total, the package envisions 79 new or increased taxes, mostly on business.
GOP: Republicans are pushing a broad across-the-board income tax rate cut of at least 10 percent, as well as relief from the "marriage penalty" that hits millions of two-earner couples and elimination of the estate tax on inheritance.
LAST YEAR: The president proposed $ 24.2 billion in tax relief and $ 106.5 billion in new revenue, again led by tobacco taxes that never materialized.
 
 CENSUS
CLINTON: Since the regular national head count takes place in 2000, the administration's proposed Census budget for that effort skyrockets to $ 2.9 billion, more than double the current spending.
Funding is included to collect a large national sample for use in double checking the accuracy of the count.
GOP: That plan to use sampling is anathema to Republicans, who insist on sticking to the traditional counting methods. Congress is likely to try to block any money earmarked for that statistical effort, but that could be complicated by the fact that statisticians say using only traditional methods would make the count even more expensive than using sampling. Watch for long political battles over this agency.
LAST YEAR: Republicans filed suit seeking to block the Census Bureau's plans to use sampling and won a 5-4 Supreme Court ruling that numbers derived by that method can't be used to apportion seats in the House. The administration, however, still wants to use sampling to check accuracy and improve the totals for other uses.
 
 TOBACCO
CLINTON: The government would raise $ 8 billion by imposing a new 55-cent-a-pack cigarette tax and by tacking on a 5-cent tax that wasn't supposed to kick in until 2002. Even without new legislation, the 24-cent cigarette tax is set to jump by 10 cents per pack next year. Under Clinton's plan, the tax would rise to 94 cents per pack in 2000.
Over five years, these new tobacco taxes would raise an additional $ 34.5 billion - a substantial chunk of the total $ 82 billion in new taxes and fees.
Beginning in 2001, Clinton also counts on $ 18.9 billion over four years by recouping money gained by the states under settlements with tobacco companies. Many of these state lawsuits sought reimbursement for the costs of treating sick smokers in Medicaid. Because the federal government pays 57 percent of Medicaid, the Clinton budget assumes that the federal government will be able to recoup its share of the settlement money.
GOP: Republicans oppose all new taxes, including cigarette taxes. As for recouping of state tobacco money, Republicans and Democrats in Congress are backing legislation to bar the federal government from seizing these dollars.
LAST YEAR: Clinton proposed new cigarette taxes as part of his comprehensive tobacco legislation, which died in Congress.
Clinton: The centerpiece of the law enforcement plan is a 21st century police initiative to spend $ 1.28 billion over five years on local police, prosecutors and prevention programs. But the biggest surprise was a $ 20 million request to pay for a civil lawsuit against tobacco companies to recover money spent on tobacco-related health care. A tobacco suit has been authorized, but drafting hasn't begun. The money would pay for 40 lawyers and their support and $ 5 million in expert witnesses.
The new police initiative will follow Clinton's program to put 100,000 more local police officers on the street, that will reach its goal this year. About $ 600 million of it would pay for hiring or retaining 30,000 to 50,000 officers. New officers would be put in crime hot spots and some distressed cities would get help retaining officers from the previous program. The rest would pay for hi-tech equipment, new community-based local prosecutors and prevention programs aimed at school violence.
The budget would add 60 FBI agents and 55 prosecutors to fight computer crime. After adding 1,000 Border Patrol agents each of the last three years, Clinton calls for no increase and no additional drug enforcement agents.
Clinton would reduce other aid to state and local government by $ 1.4 billion, eliminating a $ 750 million in state prison grants, a $ 523 million local law enforcement block grant and a $ 250 million juvenile justice block grant program.
One of only two Cabinet agencies to increase in employees - by 30 percent - during the administration, the Justice Department would rise to 129,000 employees, adding 4,000 mostly at new prisons.
GOP: Though annoyed that Clinton's cops program drew him support from law enforcement groups long loyal to the GOP, Republicans have never voted against the money. They are expected to fight elimination of the prison grant program they devised and might take money for it from prevention proposals they scorn.
LAST YEAR: Congress added 1,000 Border Patrol agents and might do so again this year. A major juvenile justice bill failed because Democrats wanted prevention programs and Republicans wanted incentives for trying more juveniles as adults and to end building separate juvenile cells. The administration got $ 95 million in youth crime prevention and is seeking the same amount.
 
 MEDICARE AND LONG-TERM CARE
CLINTON: The president wants 15 percent of government surpluses expected over the next 15 years - a projected $ 686 billion - to bolster Medicare. With that cash infusion, the health insurance program for the elderly and disabled, now expected to run short of money in 2008, could hold on until 2020.
Clinton also wants to further curb Medicare payments to hospitals, labs and medical equipment suppliers, require new participation fees from health care providers and spend more to fight fraud. But Medicare's yearly costs are still expected to rise by about $ 60 billion over the next five years.
Clinton is asking Congress to work with him to decide if more fundamental changes to the program are needed.
Separately, Clinton is proposing a new $ 1,000-a-year tax credit to help families pay for long-term care for elderly or disabled relatives - something not covered by Medicare. The administration estimates 2 million Americans would benefit, at a cost to the government of $ 5.5 billion.
Clinton has also reintroduced a proposal to let some people as young as age 55 buy Medicare coverage from the government, saying it would help about 300,000 older Americans now lacking adequate health insurance.
GOP: Republicans leaders, who want some of the budget surplus for income tax cuts, have not said whether their plans would leave money for Medicare. Before making any decisions about the program, they say they will await recommendations from a bipartisan advisory commission due to report March 1. Most GOP lawmakers don't like the idea of opening the already overburdened Medicare program up to younger Americans. But many support tax credits for long-term care expenses.
LAST YEAR: After trimming billions from Medicare payments in 1997, lawmakers were besieged by complaints from health care providers who say they're stretched too thin. Congress mostly stood its ground, but further spending curbs proposed by Clinton this year are sure to be controversial.
 
 CHILD CARE
CLINTON: Head Start, child care and foster care programs would get increased spending. The budget calls for $ 6.3 billion over five years to expand the tax credit for expenses to families earning up to $ 59,000 a year and to families in which one parent stays home to care for children. It seeks $ 7.5 billion over five years to offer more child care subsidies to working poor families. For Head Start, Clinton wants a $ 607 million boost, to $ 5.3 billion, in order to serve an additional 42,000 children. The budget seeks $ 500 million to help children in foster care who turn 18 by letting them keep their public health insurance.
GOP: Head Start has found considerable support among Republicans, as well as Democrats, in Congress. GOP leaders have preferred across-the-board tax cuts to more child care spending.
LAST YEAR: Clinton proposed a $ 22 billion child care program, which went nowhere in Congress, though there was GOP interest in aiding stay-at-home parents. After some skirmishes, Congress approved bipartisan legislation renewing the Head Start program, though its budget must be approved annually.
 
 HEALTH INSURANCE
CLINTON: The budget tries to get health insurance to people who work for small business, those with disabilities returning to work and legal immigrants.
It asks for $ 44 million in tax credits to encourage small businesses to join coalitions to offer health insurance to workers. It seeks $ 2 billion over five years to help people with disabilities keep Medicare and Medicaid when they return to work and a new $ 1,000 tax credit to pay for needed adaptive technology and other special expenses.
The budget allows $ 1.1 billion over five years for states to offer Medicaid and the new children's health insurance program to many immigrants, including children, pregnant women and those with disabilities. Immigrants would be eligible even if they arrived in the country after enactment of the 1996 welfare bill. The money would also restore disability and food stamp eligibility for these immigrants. States would be able to extend Medicaid for three years to foster children who turn 18.
The Indian Health Service, which provides health care to American Indians and Alaskan Natives, would see an increase of $ 170 million next year, and it would get an additional $ 82 million from higher reimbursement rates by Medicaid.
GOP: Republicans also want to encourage small businesses to join in health insurance purchasing groups. And bipartisan legislation to aid people with disabilities who want to return to work is pending in the Senate. But the GOP has been cool to restoration of benefits for immigrants, saying people should not come to the United States expecting public aid.
LAST YEAR: The House approved legislation aiding people with disabilities, though it did not include the centerpiece - letting them keep government health benefits when they return to work. It died in the Senate. Some food stamp benefits were restored for legal immigrants. Last year, Republicans gave the Indian Health Service considerably more than the president requested.
CLINTON: The National Institutes of Health would get a $ 320 million boost to its $ 15.6 billion budget. That's a 2 percent increase for NIH, the nation's biggest financer of medical research. It includes an additional $ 35 million for AIDS-related research, totaling $ 1.8 billion, and a new $ 50 million National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine.
The Food and Drug Administration, the nation's top consumer protection agency, would get a massive 17 percent increase, or an additional $ 190 million. It would be the agency's first raise after six years of flat-lined budgets that have left it millions in the hole. The money is to help the FDA approve new medical therapies faster, better inspect drug and food manufacturing plants to ensure their products are clean and safe, and better track side effects.
The FDA also would get doubled funding, to $ 68 million, to ensure that stores enforce the law that customers must be 21 to purchase tobacco. But the increase also includes $ 17 million in proposed fees charged to the makers of foods and medical devices, which those industries have successfully opposed in past years.
Health agencies also will receive $ 230 million, an increase of $ 71 million, to prepare a response to potential biological terrorism. The money will go toward research on smallpox and anthrax vaccines, a stockpile of drug treatments and to support 25 "local response teams."
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention would receive an extra $ 213 million, bringing its budget to $ 2.6 billion. That includes a 19 percent increase for CDC to track and prevent emerging infectious diseases, like the threat of a new flu pandemic.
GOP: For the NIH, Republicans have outspent Clinton for several years as part of their goal to double its funding by 2003, and the GOP is expected to pass a much larger increase again this year. The FDA has never fared as well, as Republicans oppose its attempts to regulate tobacco. However, some Republican leaders have signaled support for some increased funds to speed up new products.
LAST YEAR: Congress passed a 14 percent increase, giving the NIH $ 15.6 billion to spend in 1999. That was above Clinton's request for a 9 percent increase. Congress left the FDA's budget flat after rejecting attempts to impose user fees on the food and medical devices industries, and approved small increases for the CDC.
 
 EDUCATION
CLINTON: Education spending would be $ 34.9 billion, including $ 3.1 billion for permanent student loan programs. The new request is an 11.3 percent increase over last year's spending and closely resembles last year's goals.
Clinton called for $ 1.4 billion for the second year of funding for a program to hire 100,000 new teachers and for $ 22 billion in 15-year bonds for building and renovating schools. The White House lost a similar construction plan last year.
Education Secretary Richard Riley also disclosed plans Monday to triple to $ 600 million an after-school and summer program aimed at helping 1.1 million failing students catch up, increase programs in migrant, bilingual and Indian education, and create new programs to boost teacher recruitment and training.
The administration also proposes to end subsidies for private banks' lending to college students. Clinton sparred with Republicans over the program, which was negotiated in last year's renewal of the higher education law.
GOP: Republicans say they're disappointed that the president did not fund local education blocks grants designed to give states and districts local flexibility and increased $ 5 billion in state special education grants by 1 percent. The GOP is looking at its own school construction proposals and wants to see results before doling out another round of funds for new teachers.
LAST YEAR: Congress approved a $ 33.1 billion plan for education programs, a 12.6 percent increase. Charter schools got a hefty 25 percent boost to $ 100 million.
 
 FOREIGN AFFAIRS:
CLINTON: Foreign affairs would receive $ 21.3 billion in 2000, an increase of $ 1.25 billion over the baseline budget for 1999. Included is $ 241 million for the former states of the Soviet Union to prevent leakage of nuclear secrets. The request is part of a much larger program involving other federal agencies.
Also planned is $ 900 million in support of the Wye River agreement reached last October between Israel and the Palestinians and $ 726 million for embassy security, a high priority issue since the bombings of two U.S. embassies in East Africa last year. The administration also asked for $ 3 billion over five years for the construction of about 50 new embassies starting in 2001. In addition, $ 921 million is being sought for payment of back dues to the United Nations and $ 295 million for counternarcotics activities.
A variety of Africa initiatives would boost U.S. outlays for that continent by $ 158 million in 2000. To provide nonmilitary support for Iraqi opposition groups, $ 10 million is being requested, up from $ 3 million in 1999. Another $ 10 million is requested to help developing countries monitor the movements of suspected terrorists at airports. For heavily indebted poor countries, the administration is seeking $ 50 million for a trust fund to finance debt relief.
One of the few programs slated for cuts supports democratic development in Eastern Europe. No new funds are being sought for Poland, Lithuania and Slovakia because all have "graduated" out of the program. They had received about $ 25.2 million combined in 1999. The overall program for Eastern Europe for 2000 is $ 393 million.
Defending the overall request, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said in a statement that the proposed budget for foreign affairs represents only 1 percent of the total budget. "And that one percent makes a huge difference in the day-to-day lives of all the American people," she said.
GOP: Perhaps the most contentious issue concerning Republicans has been repayment of back dues to the United Nations. An effort to achieve a compromise settlement last year fell through when Republicans agreed to go along with repayments of back dues in exchange for an anti-abortion amendment. Clinton vetoed the legislation.
LAST YEAR: The $ 21.3 billion for 2000 compares with $ 22.4 for 1999. The new request is higher than the baseline request for 1999 because of an emergency supplemental of $ 1.8 billion approved by Congress last fall for embassy security upgrades.
 
 AGRICULTURE
CLINTON: The Agriculture Department would get $ 55.2 billion in 2000 to fund a range of programs from food stamps to food aid and rural water programs. One major omission from the budget, however, is money to reform crop insurance for farmers. Both Republicans and Democrats have expressed interest in revamping the program this year so that farmers are more protected and not as reliant on emergency aid programs, like the $ 7 billion deal passed last year to help farmers. Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman issued proposals Monday for revamping the crop insurance program but said he would leave it up to Congress to decide how to pay for it.
Clinton has also proposed $ 72 million, or a 24 percent increase, to boost food safety efforts within the USDA and Food and Drug Administration, including money for increased inspections and better research. Nearly $ 22 billion would fund the food stamp program, a $ 293 million increase over the current level. The administration has proposed restoring food stamp eligibility to 15,000 legal immigrants who entered the United States before Aug. 22, 1996, and have reached the age of 65. A pilot project that would provide school breakfasts to all children regardless of income is funded with $ 13 million.
GOP: Republican leaders are mostly unhappy with Clinton's lack of a plan to reform crop insurance. They are also likely to be fiercely opposed to a proposal that would require meat and poultry companies to pay "user fees" for government inspection services. That plan has been rejected six years in a row.
LAST YEAR: The current year's budget is actually about $ 8.2 billion higher than Clinton's 2000 proposal, mainly because of large aid packages last year for U.S. farmers and Russia.
CLINTON: The administration wants to spend $ 45.5 billion on transportation, an increase of about 8.6 percent. Once again, there's more money for highway and aviation safety and more to reduce traffic congestion and improve air quality. There's also spending aimed at triggering economic growth, including about $ 180 million in loan guarantees for U.S. shipyards.
Meanwhile, the Coast Guard, which is overseen by the transportation secretary, would get $ 4.297 billion, up about 6.7 percent.
One noteworthy decline is in the Surface Transportation Board, whose $ 15 million budget would be cut to $ 1 million. The department wants to have the board subsist off of user's fees.
GOP: Republicans are talking about dedicating all money collected from airline ticket taxes to aviation improvements. Currently some of that money is banked and contributes to an overall budget surplus. The GOP may also fight the administration's proposal to raise the so-called passenger facility charge, a local airline ticket tax that is used for airport construction.
LAST YEAR: The administration and the GOP found themselves in agreement on transportation. Not only did they join to approve the nation's largest highway spending bill, $ 203 billion, but they agreed that all money collected by the gas tax would be spent on road, bridge and mass transit improvements.
 
 ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES
CLINTON: The administration wants increases for most environmental programs, especially new initiatives to protect natural heritage lands, combat urban sprawl by preserving open space and "common sense" programs to address climate change.
The budget proposes a $ 1 billion "land legacy initiative" that includes $ 900 million, about half funneled through states, to buy land so it can't be developed.
To help cities combat sprawl, the budget proposes new "Better America Bonds" - financed by $ 700 million in federal tax credits over five years - to be used by communities to set aside "green spaces" and promote better urban planning. It's part of a $ 1.2 billion "livability" initiative aimed at preserving open space while reducing traffic congestion and air pollution.
The president wants a $ 730 million increase in spending on research into such areas as global warming, energy efficiency and renewable energy. In addition, a $ 200 million "clean air partnership fund" would be set up for early investment in climate change programs.
GOP: Congress rejected many of the same climate initiative last year, accusing the administration of trying to implement the Kyoto climate treaty without Senate ratification. Some Republicans will view the $ 200 million "clean air fund" as an effort to impose the climate agreement. While much of the proposed $ 900 million in spending for new land purchases may get a warm welcome in Congress, there likely will be arguments over where the money should be spend. Some Republicans favor using the money to improve existing parks, not to buy new land.
LAST YEAR: The administration won more money for energy efficiency programs and as part of a last-minute budget agreement and got an additional $ 200 million for climate change technology. Federal land purchases for conservation were about $ 320 million, a third of what the administration is proposing for fiscal 2000. Last year, after declining budgets, funding for the Environmental Protection Agency was increased by $ 300 million to $ 6.9 billion.
 
 HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
CLINTON: As a reward for the agency's progress in eliminating fraud and waste, the president is requesting a $ 2.5 billion increase for the Department of Housing and Urban Development over the next several years. For fiscal 2000, HUD's budget would be $ 34.4 billion, up from $ 33.2 billion.
The budget would allow HUD to add 100,000 housing vouchers to the 1.6 million it now provides to poor and low-income residents. It also proposes $ 150 million to designate 15 urban areas over the next decade as empowerment zones, a classification that gives federal grants and tax breaks to businesses that invest in poor, rundown regions. The administration also is seeking an additional $ 25 million in block grants to states for local housing problems, and an extra $ 10 billion to increase the number of loans through the Federal Housing Administration.
GOP: Republicans are concerned about the number of new programs being proposed and their price tag. They also accuse the administration of cutting $ 190 million in funding for programs for the elderly and disabled.
LAST YEAR: Congress enacted many of HUD's funding requests, and Housing Secretary Andrew Cuomo called it the agency's "strongest budget in a decade." Congress reshaped public housing laws and authorized new housing vouchers for the first time since 1995. It also increased FHA-insured loans to $ 208,000.
 
 VETERANS AFFAIRS
CLINTON: The Department of Veterans Affairs would get $ 44 billion, a $ 200 million increase in a hold-the-line budget that's essentially been frozen since 1997's budget-balancing plan.
The budget includes $ 18.1 billion for medical care, including a fresh $ 50 million to help homeless veterans, $ 250 million to combat hepatitis C, $ 106 million for long-term care programs for American's aging veteran's population of 26 million and $ 56 million to pay for a nationwide smoking cessation program for veterans who began smoking while in the military.
Proposed legislation also would authorize the VA to cover the cost of veterans seeking emergency care outside of VA hospitals and clinics because there's no local VA facility, but at no extra overall cost.
GOP: Republicans believe the administration's budget is based on faulty assumptions, including that the VA administration will be able to shave $ 1.1 billion in costs through management efficiencies. Critics also question the VA's ability to collect up to $ 750 million from insurance and co-payment programs to off set veterans' medical costs.
LAST YEAR: Congress approved more than $ 43 billion.
 
 NASA
CLINTON: The president wants $ 13.6 billion for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, down slightly from last year but still containing money for the international space station and several new programs.
New plans include $ 50 million for a small unpiloted airplane to be developed to fly over the surface of Mars in 2003, the 100th anniversary of flight on Earth. Other new initiatives include earth-science satellites and programs in artificial intelligence.
In aviation, the budget eliminates the program for development of high-speed aircraft, while including new programs in aviation safety and ultra-efficient aircraft engine development.
GOP: Congress has been critical of the Russia's major role in the space station and may raise questions about NASA reprogramming of funds to meet any potential problems in this area.
LAST YEAR: NASA's budget was also reduced slightly in fiscal 1999, as it has each year since 1994.
 
 ARTS
CLINTON: The administration is asking Congress to use some of the expected surplus to spend $ 128 million next year on the National Endowment for the Arts, which hands out grants to local arts projects and agencies. Bill Ivey, the new chairman, said he expects to announce later what he plans to do with any additional money he may get.
GOP: Republican leaders generally view that request as too much.
LAST YEAR: Congress came up with $ 111 million for the NEA for the current year, less than Clinton had requested. But because some Republican leaders had sought to eliminate the agency and its budget entirely, NEA supporters in both parties considered that figure a victory.
 
 TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CLINTON: Commercial TV stations for the first time would be required to pay a fee on their existing analog TV channels that would raise at least $ 200 million annually under legislation being proposed in the budget. Proceeds from the so-called lease fee would help federal, state and local governments upgrade communications systems used by fire, police, emergency rescue and other public safety agencies.
Broadcasters in the past have managed to kill legislative efforts to impose any new fees on stations, and they're likely to oppose them again. National Association of Broadcasters President Edward O. Fritts said Clinton's proposal would jeopardize the partnership between government and free, local broadcasters under which "broadcasters provide community interest and public service programming in exchange for a small slice of the spectrum." He said the NAB documented $ 6.8 billion in public service programming and fund raising for local charities provided by broadcasters last year. "To suggest that $ 6.8 billion in public service is somehow inadequate for use of a sliver of the spectrum is nothing short of sheer folly," he said.
Broadcasters have been given a second TV channel to convert to higher-quality digital television. When the switch is complete in 2006, broadcasters are required to return their analog channels back to the government. When a broadcaster does that, it will no longer be required to pay the fee, which has support from public interest groups.
The administration also is proposing legislation to prevent communications licenses from being tied up in bankruptcy court. Congress opposed similar efforts by the administration and the Federal Communications Commission to do this last year. The measure would permit the federal government to quickly reclaim licenses that haven't been paid for and wind up in bankruptcy court. Top bidders in an airwaves auction three years ago filed for bankruptcy and the FCC had trouble getting back the licenses to re-auction them.
Overall, the administration proposed giving the FCC around $ 230 million for fiscal year 2000. The agency's current budget is $ 192 million.
GOP: Republicans in Congress, with a few exceptions, have opposed imposing new fees on broadcasters. On the bankruptcy issue, Republicans generally oppose such a measure. Republicans for the most part oppose increasing the FCC's budget.
LAST YEAR: The administration and the FCC did get a bankruptcy provision into a massive year-end spending bill, but the language was taken out.
 Load-Date: February 2, 1999

 

End of Document
