

Hun Sen calls for genocide tribunal by the end of the year
The Associated Press
June 6, 1999, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 441 words
Byline: By KER MUNTHIT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia
Body




Fearing that aging Khmer Rouge leaders may die before justice can be served, Cambodia's prime minister has called for a genocide tribunal to be convened before the end of the year.
So far, two Khmer Rouge leaders have been arrested and are facing trial in the movement's genocidal 1975-79 reign: guerrilla army chief Ta Mok, 72, and security chief Kaing Khek Iev, known by his revolutionary name, Duch.
Several other top guerrilla chiefs live freely in Cambodia after negotiating defection deals with Prime Minister Hun Sen in recent years that led to the dissolution of the Khmer Rouge.
Hun Sen said prosecutors should put on trial as many guerrilla leaders as possible, stressing that he has not guaranteed immunity to any defected Khmer Rouge.
"The genocide was committed by a regime, by a political group, against the Cambodian people," he told French journalists in an interview broadcast on local television Saturday.
"So the cases dealing with Ta Mok and Duch do not seem to be sufficient to guarantee justice for the Cambodian people," he said in the interview, which seemed to have been conducted during a trip to France last week.
"I think that if we try harder we can proceed with this affair before the end of 1999," he said.
"This process should hurry up because those who are to be tried are more than 70 years old. Therefore it is not good if they die before the trial takes place," he said.
An estimated 1.7 million people died of starvation, disease, overwork or execution during the radical communist movement's rule.
The Cambodian government and the United Nations are currently negotiating the formation of a special tribunal for the Khmer Rouge after Hun Sen refused the creation of an international court.
Instead, Hun Sen says foreign judges and prosecutors will be allowed to participate in a Cambodian trial of the guerrilla leadership.
A high-profile test of the Cambodian judiciary will come Monday when ex-Khmer Rouge commander Nuon Paet is tried for the murders of three Western backpackers in 1994. Foreign diplomats and U.N. observers will attend the trial.
Hun Sen said he had assured French leaders that "this process will be conducted fairly … in order to ensure justice for the victims."
But the father of Jean-Michel Braquet, one of the victims, called the trial a "farce" and accused Hun Sen's government of manipulating the hostage crisis and Nuon Paet's arrest in order to curry international favor.
Jean-Claude Braquet told The Associated Press after arriving in Phnom Penh that he did not blame Nuon Paet for the death of his only son. He said he would make detailed accusations against others when he attends the trial.
 Load-Date: June 6, 1999

 

End of Document
