

Immigrants Bring the Practice of Female Circumcision to the U.S.
December 1, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 642 words
Byline: By LISA M. HAMM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The brutal practice of female circumcision - genital mutilation - isn't confined to primitive cultures in Africa and Asia.
Thousands of girls in the United States also are being mutilated in immigrant communities that consider the practice a rite of passage.
"When people migrate they don't give up their beliefs or their culture," says Asha Samad, a women's studies professor at the City University of New York and director of the Somali Association for Relief and Development.
Although it's impossible to determine the extent of female circumcision here, because it's done underground, thousands of Somali, Ethiopian, Eritrean and Sudanese refugees have come to this country in recent years fleeing civil war and famine.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that about 270,000 females in the United States were circumcised in their home countries or are at risk here.
Mimi Ramsey, an Ethiopian-born activist living in San Jose, Calif., estimates that 10,000 to 13,000 girls in America are at risk of "castration."
The 43-year-old former nurse, who suffers chronic pain from her own childhood circumcision, recounted stories of a father who took his 5-year-old daughter into a bedroom, turned up the stereo to drown out her screams and circumcised her with a carving knife; of girls who went to visit Africa and came home cut; of men who told her they will circumcise their daughters no matter what because they don't want them to "jump from man to man" like American women.
"We've heard of cases where circumcisers are brought to this country to perform circumcision on more than one girl," says Jessica Neuwirth of New York-based Equality Now, an international organization that works to protect women's rights.
Congress outlawed genital mutilation on Sept. 30, capping a two-year effort spearheaded by Rep. Pat Schroeder, D-Colo.
The law, which takes effect March 29, will make it a crime to circumcise or remove any part of the genitalia of a girl under 18, except for medical reasons. The penalty is up to five years in prison and a fine of up to $ 250,000 for individuals or $ 500,000 for organizations such as hospitals.
Attorney Surita Sandosham, executive director of Equality Now, says the law would apply even if a child were taken out of the country to undergo the procedure.
The Department of Health and Human Services also has been ordered to educate immigrants on the health consequences of the practice and educate medical professionals about treating circumcised women.
Dr. Carol Horowitz first encountered mutilated women while working in a Seattle clinic for Somali refugees, where she handled a myriad of delayed gynecological and obstetrical complications.
Horowitz, now a researcher at Mount Sinai Hospital's Department of Health and Policy in New York, cautioned that immigrant communities and women who have undergone the ritual must be treated with sensitivity and respect, not judgment.
"We have a clash in values: our values and our patient's values," she says. "And we need to learn how to resolve these, for our sake and our patients' sake."
Harborview Medical Center in Seattle recently drew criticism for its efforts to accommodate Somali immigrants who asked doctors to perform one of the least-severe forms of circumcision on their daughters. The hospital has asked the state attorney general's office to examine whether performing a minor operation would violate the new federal law.
California on Sept. 23 implemented a law making female genital mutilation a crime. Legislation also has passed in Minnesota and North Dakota, and is being considered in several other states.
New York Assemblywoman Barbara Clark has been working for three years to outlaw the practice. Clark acknowledged that traditions should be respected.
"But if they're inhumane," she says, "we ought to be willing to say: This can't happen here."
 Load-Date: December 1, 1996

 

End of Document
