

In a Town of Cynics, the Hurt Lingers
June 8, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 909 words
Byline: By LAURA MYERS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Jay Burgess was in his first meeting of the day at the State Department when Carol Rodley interrupted.
"The secretary's plane is down," said Ms. Rodley, part of a just-formed State Department task force responding to the Croatia crash.
It was just after 10 a.m., Wednesday, April 3. Burgess, the Commerce Department's liaison to State, played a key role in arranging the trade mission to the former Yugoslavia. He knew that Commerce Secretary Ron Brown and many of his co-workers and, yes, friends, were on the plane. He knew they might be dead, but like all of Washington that day, he held out hope for miracle.
"We're continuing to struggle with our losses," he says today, more than two months after the tragedy. "We're still hurting here. Obviously, we miss them all, every day. And that's true still."
What followed after news of the crash broke - the frustratingly long search for the doomed flight in a violent storm and the discovery of the victims' bodies hours later - has been widely reported around the world.
And finally, this past week, the U.S. Air Force concluded its investigation. It blamed everything from mistakes by military commanders and pilot error to outdated navigation equipment as contributing to the crash on a rugged Croatian hillside where all 35 aboard perished.
That should be the end of the story. But one lingering question, or curiosity, remains. How did a town famous for its cynics manage to keep hope alive so long on that tragic spring day, so full of life and death.
"We're pessimistically optimistic," Michael Brown said then, that day, long after night had fallen on his father's life half a world away.
"I remember the phones just wouldn't stop ringing," says Ms. Rodley, who helped coordinate the task force on the crash. "People thought it unthinkable to get up and go home before it was wrapped up."
About 50 people worked 'round-the-clock in shifts for four days in the task force room where televisions tuned into each network and CNN carried images of grief, including the Americans' homecoming in black hearses.
"Sometimes the State Department is a sad place to work," said Nancy Ely-Raphel, head coordinator of the task force. She lost her husband, U.S. Ambassador to Pakistan Arnold Raphel, in a mysterious midair plane explosion over Pakistan in 1988. "Our duty is to the families. In a situation like this, many are incapable of making decisions. We're here to help."
Long-distance chaos and confusion made the job tougher and provide clues as to why Americans and many families were unsure what to believe that day.
For the first few hours, the U.S. government worked on the assumption that the T-43 aircraft, the Air Force's version of the Boeing 737 airplane, had gone down in the Adriatic Sea where debris was spotted.
At the White House, President Clinton and his advisers met in the Situation Room. Presidential spokesman Mike McCurry, asked to confirm Brown's plane had crashed, said, "At the moment, we just don't know."
Clinton canceled plans to attend a news conference at the Justice Department, where Attorney General Janet Reno told those awaiting the president, "I think we should all pray at this point."
A red herring report of an unknown plane landing in Zagreb prompted temporary optimism that Brown's plane had taken a detour.
When it was finally reported - by Croatian authorities - that Brown's plane had gone down in the mountains just north of the Dubrovnik airport, workers at the State and Commerce departments grew resigned.
"When a plane is in the water you always think that maybe, just maybe, someone could have survived," says Burgess. "Once we knew it was down on the ground, I lost a lot of hope at that point."
Then the Croatians found a survivor. A woman.
"My first thought was it was my deputy, Naomi Warbasse, who went in my place on this mission," Burgess said.
The survivor, Shelly Kelly, was a member of the flight crew. Discovered in the tail, the only intact section, rescuers described her as having "minutes, not hours" to live. U.S. helicopters couldn't reach her in the storm. Transported by stretcher on the ground, she died en route to a hospital.
That night, State Department spokesman Glyn Davies confirmed that all aboard the plane were "presumed dead." But later - hours after Croatian police had made an initial body count - Davies retracted the statement, saying the victims were still considered missing.
One White House official, requesting anonymity, explained: "When there is an incident overseas, we almost always want to rely on U.S. officials rather than international ones. Initial reports from overseas are almost always erroneous, so we have to be very, very careful."
The U.S. military didn't arrive at the crash site until early Thursday morning to confirm what everybody by then knew: no survivors.
Victims' families had been told what to expect, but some went to bed not knowing the fate of their loved ones. They prayed for mercy.
On Thursday, the grieving began, for Brown, 11 other Commerce workers and the other government and U.S. businessmen who died.
On Friday, the church services put a public face on the mourning.
On Saturday, the dead came home to American soil in a tear-stained ceremony at Dover Air Force Base.
At the State task force, activity halted for the first time in days as people watched the line of black hearses pull away in the setting sun.
"The phones had finally stopped ringing," said Ms. Rodley.
In the silence, there was hope no more.
 Load-Date: June 8, 1996

 

End of Document
