

In Central Asia, modern leaders revive the rule of the old khans
August 24, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1300 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ASHGABAT, Turkmenistan
Body




Every morning, schoolchildren in this desert nation rise from their desks and pledge allegiance to their country - and, more importantly, to President Saparmurat Niyazov.
"For the slightest slander, let my tongue be lost," they chant in unison. "At the moment of my betrayal to my motherland, to her sacred banner, to my president - let my breath stop."
In classrooms, at government gatherings and on state-run television, this requisite oath sets the stage for the daily worship of Niyazov. A portly, Soviet-era holdover, he has spent lavishly to build a cult of personality while the economy has languished, turning the impoverished young nation into a personal fiefdom.
Niyazov, a jowly, white-haired man of 57, is the most striking example of the strongmen who dominate the five Muslim countries of Central Asia that received independence in the 1991 breakup of the Soviet Union.
In Turkmenistan's 5 years of independence, Niyazov has built palaces, mosques and airports bearing his name; erected statues and larger-than-life portraits in the most remote towns and villages; put his face on all the currency; and renamed roads and cities in his honor.
He's even renamed himself - now answering to "Turkmenbashi," or leader of all Turkmen.
There's virtually no escaping his presence. Deep in the Karakum Desert, along a sun-baked strip of highway, hand-painted road signs offer up homilies from the president.
"We shall turn our country into a blooming garden," reads one sign implanted in the parched sands.
The Central Asian leaders dream of restoring long-faded glory to an isolated territory that was ruled by the likes of Genghis Khan and Tamerlane, and which provided the bridge between Europe and Asia for centuries with its fabled Silk Road.
Though most former Soviet lands struggle with imperfect democracies, the Central Asian leaders consistently have resisted moves toward genuine elections, a free press and other modern political institutions.
Four of the five Central Asian presidents came to power when their republics were still part of the Soviet Union. Niyazov became the Moscow-approved president of Turkmenistan in 1985 and held onto power after independence. He still leads the former Communist Party, now renamed the Democratic Party.
The leaders have ditched the communist ideology, yet clung to authoritarian rule by reviving the Central Asian tradition of powerful khans who ruled over the soaring mountains and vast deserts with absolute authority.
All five appear firmly entrenched, without any serious opposition, and are likely to lead their countries well into the 21st century.
Meanwhile, the entire region struggles economically. Projects to tap oil, gas, gold and silver reserves all are moving much more slowly than forecast, leaving much of the area's nearly 54 million people in poverty.
"Despite the initial optimism at independence, all the leaders have reverted to authoritarian rule," said Ahmed Rashid, a Pakistani journalist and author of the book, "The Resurgence of Central Asia."
"I think this will eventually lead to a crisis because these countries have large numbers of young people who aren't finding any real opportunities," he said.
Niyazov and other leaders often refer to the "Asian path" of development, meaning they want foreign investment to help their anemic economies, but intend to maintain strict political control.
Asked about the lack of political freedoms, Niyazov said Turkmen society was not yet "ripe for democracy." He pointed to the many political, economic and social crises in many former Soviet republics, and said Turkmenistan had chosen to introduce changes gradually.
"We will always take into consideration the social protection of our people when we introduce reforms," he told reporters during a visit to Moscow earlier this month.
In Soviet style, the government provides free housing, water, gas and electricity, but salaries average about $ 40 a month and the state still controls all major industries. Niyazov is a micro-manager and no one makes an important decision without his prior approval, diplomats say.
When the president enters a room, admirers occasionally greet him by kissing his hand, which sports an enormous diamond ring. When he takes charge of a meeting, he singles out officials, who stand up and get either an upbraiding or words of praise. When Niyazov has finished addressing them, they sit down silently.
Such behavior has deep roots in a region with a long history of authoritarian leaders and no Western-style democratic traditions. The Central Asian leaders also argue that they need to portray themselves as powerful figures to help establish national identities and maintain order in a turbulent region.
When the leaders look to the north, they see Russia's nascent democracy and free-market system as a messy failure. To the south, Afghanistan's civil war represents tribal politics and Islamic fundamentalism run amok. Across the Caspian Sea to the west, the restless Caucasus Mountains region appears a cauldron of instability.
"The situation in Turkmenistan compared to other (former Soviet) countries is more stable and quiet," said Alty Orazov, a spokesman for Turkmenistan's Foreign Ministry. "Under the president's program, Turkmenistan is developing in its own way."
The president's way is self-aggrandizement through expensive projects, though Turkmenistan was the poorest of the 15 former Soviet republics and its economy has been shrinking since independence.
With fewer than 5 million people and huge oil and gas reserves, Turkmenistan will always have the potential to be not only prosperous, but filthy rich.
Yet, since independence, annual gas production has fallen by more than half - and the one thing the president hasn't been able to build is an export pipeline that can ship Turkmenistan's energy wealth to the world.
The pipeline issue hinges on resolving larger political and economic problems in the region, but Niyazov has pressed ahead with grandiose building schemes as if the gas revenues were already in the bank.
His latest showpiece, a $ 60 million presidential palace designed by French architects, was inaugurated in April. The huge, white-marble palace, with a tan, Islamic-style dome on top and expensive European furnishings inside, stands in the center of the capital.
Despite chronic water problems in this thirsty country, water cascades down terraces in front of the palace, while ordinary citizens receive water in their apartments only part of the day, if at all.
To distance his country from Russian influence, the president ordered that the Latin alphabet replace the Russian Cyrillic alphabet as the official written form of the Turkmen language - which has no script of its own.
Schoolchildren now learn the Latin alphabet, but the switch has left many adults functionally illiterate - unable to read road signs, official forms or the state-run newspapers which dutifully obeyed the order to replace the Cyrillic letters that were used here for the past century.
To find voices of discontent one need only cross the street from the presidential palace to the national library, where the staff receives salaries equal to $ 30 a month.
No new books have been purchased since independence and the library relies heavily on old magazines and newspapers donated by Western embassies, a senior librarian said.
Foreign aid groups and embassies offered to connect the library to the Internet and put its card catalog on a computer system free of charge. The proposals were rejected, though, because official policy requires Turkmenistan to be self-sufficient.
"I don't understand these policies. Can you imagine a country that spends so much on palaces, but doesn't spend any money on books?" said one exasperated librarian who refused to give her name. "You can say our library is dying."
 Load-Date: August 24, 1997

 

End of Document
