

Interreligious understanding in the Holy Land from the ground up
The Associated Press
March 25, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1464 words
Byline: By JULIA LIEBLICH, AP Religion Writer
Dateline: MAALE ADUMIM, West Bank
Body




During his Middle East pilgrimage, Pope John Paul II called for more dialogue among religious faiths in the land where "God chose to pitch his tent." Under a goat-hair tent on a recent afternoon, a Muslim and Jew were having just such a talk.
The two men sat on either side of a fire, next to cross-legged children on mats. Behind them on a hill, row upon row of stone houses in Maale Adumim, the West Bank's largest Jewish settlement, dwarfed their encampment of tents and tin shacks.
Hamad Abu Daoud, in a red-and-white keffiyeh, is the leader of the Jahalin, a Bedouin community. His guest, Jeremy Milgrom, in a blue workshirt, is a rabbi.
They exchange small talk about family in Arabic, punctuated by the long silences of men who have spent time together. They discuss the 25 volunteers Milgrom oversees who tutor the Bedouin in English. And they address the pressing news: orders from Israeli's military government in the West Bank that the Jahalin leave this land for a settlement near a garbage dump where it will be difficult to herd their sheep.
There is no talk of God; there are no references to the Torah or Koran. No talk of interreligious understanding. But to Milgrom the experience is distinctly religious.
"He opens his home to me," says the rabbi. "The root of a religious atmosphere is a spirit which is shared."
While the pope's impassioned call for harmony among the faiths has received international attention, the ongoing work of interreligious understanding in Israel and the Palestinian Authority is more often unheralded and hidden. It's less about one-time dialogues between leaders, like Thursday's troubled encounter between the pope, Israel's chief rabbi and a Muslim cleric, than about sustained relationships between more private people in a society that says such bonds shouldn't exist.
The groups are as varied as their participants. The Sisters of Sion, a Christian group in Jerusalem, teach Bible classes aimed at promoting interfaith understanding, while the Interreligious Coordinating Council hosts Jewish-Christian and Jewish-Muslim dialogue groups.
Some projects try to steer clear of political issues. Others, like Rabbis for Human Rights, stem from a belief that religious and political concerns cannot easily be separated. And unlike secular Arab-Israeli coexistence groups, they are driven by the belief that they are God's partners in repairing the world.
Milgrom is field director of Rabbis for Human Rights, which includes Orthodox, Conservative, Reform and Reconstructionist rabbis. They are committed to such efforts as rebuilding homes of Palestinians and Bedouins evicted by the Israelis to make way for Jewish settlements.
Rabbi David Rosen, an Orthodox rabbi who heads the Israel office of the Anti-Defamation League, says that most Orthodox Jews aren't interested in such interreligious efforts. Nor for that matter are devout Muslims, except for a few scholars.
"The vast majority of this society has not come here or is not here for a modern democratic pluralistic experience," he says. "In what I call the pre-modern section here, there is only one truth … So what on earth is the purpose of dialogue?"
Political tensions between Palestinians and Israelis make the prospect of sitting around a table and talking about God - even sitting around a table at all - unfathomable to many Muslims and Jews, as well as Palestinian Christians, a minority within a minority.
Still, the number of interreligious groups is growing, says Rabbi Ron Kronish, director of the Interreligious Coordinating Council. Ten years ago, he says, he had 23 groups; now there are 67, and that doesn't include unaffiliated grassroots programs. Today, he says, most groups are run by immigrant Western Christians and Jews. In the future he hopes to see more native Israelis and Palestinians involved in efforts he believes will prepare people for peace after politicians sign the treaties.
For Yehezkel Landau, a Jewish peace activist and administrative director of the Open House community center, "Israel is God's laboratory for justice and compassion."
This lab is a stone house in the city of Ramle, where three dozen Arab children play each morning in a yard with a tricycle traffic jam.
Landau's wife, Dalia, grew up in that house, which her family was told was abandoned. Not until 1967, when Bashir Al-Khayri, a Palestinian lawyer, knocked on the door and asked to see his old house, did Dalia learn what really happened: Israeli soldiers had driven the Al-Khayri family from the property in 1948 during an expulsion of Palestinians from the area.
Later Al-Khayri's blind father came to visit, and asked to touch the lemon tree in the backyard that he had planted years before. He caressed it, and cried, Dalia later wrote.
Visits to one another's homes followed, but the budding friendship ended suddenly when Al-Khayri was sentenced to 15 years in prison for his role in a bomb attack in an Israeli supermarket that killed several civilians. Though devastated by what she saw as a betrayal, Dalia couldn't escape the feeling that the house was not hers alone.
After Bashir was released in 1984, Dalia sought him out to talk about the future of the property, which she had just inherited. Eager to dedicate the house "to some healing purpose," she offered to sell it and give the proceeds to his family. He had another idea: to turn the house into a center for Arab children. She did, and from that beginning it has taken on a broader interreligious mission.
Since 1991, The Open House has been run by Yehezkel Landau and Michail Fanous, a Palestinian Christian educator and city council member. Fanous grew up attending both Christian and Jewish schools and has heard the fears of each side. "Both sides say of the other: 'They want to kill us,"' he says.
Today the Open House is dedicated to bringing Christians, Jews, and Muslims together "in the spirit of their common forefather Abraham through whom 'all the families of the earth shall be blessed."' The staff runs a summer camp for 100 Jewish and Arab youth and an Arab-Jewish parents' network, in addition to the day-care center for Arab children who would otherwise lack preparation for school. "It's affirmative action for Arabs," says Fanous. "You cannot coexist if you don't exist by yourself," he says.
Nadia Milad, 26, a Palestinian Muslim, says she took a job as a secretary at Open House because "we need such things in Ramle. We live here with Jewish people. We shop in the market with them. But there isn't any real connection. Here we try to make an opportunity for Jews and Arabs to get to know each other (and learn) that children are very much the same."
Rabbis for Human Rights had similar ideas when it started the English tutorial program for the Bedouin. Every day five to 10 volunteers, usually visiting students, come to the Bedouin encampments.
When Brian Valenzuela, 21, heard his friends were involved, he said, "What's a Bedouin?" Now the Pentecostal Christian from Los Angeles is working with Muslims and Jews.
He has no intention of persuading them to become Christian, he says. "I'm here to help people out and explore other religions."
It's impossible to quantify change from looking at just one dialogue or a project, and the frustrations can be great. "I get no great pleasure out of dealing day in and day out with the deepest, darkest corner of Israeli society," says Arik Ascherman, executive director of Rabbis for Human Rights, who has been protesting the Israeli military's expulsion of hundreds of Palestinians from caves near Hebron.
But there are the moments that convince him his presence is felt.
"When I go and visit a family whose home has been demolished, parents usher out their children to meet us. One man said to me, 'We want our son to understand that not every Israeli comes to destroy our home."
A Palestinian representative in Hebron expressed a similar sentiment after the group replaced a Koran that had been destroyed when a school was vandalized.
"He said, 'You don't know how important it is for us to see positive role models of religious Jews,"' Ascherman says.
Often the interreligious encounters are as simple as the sharing of a meal.
At the Bedouin camp, Abu Daoud's grandson explains to Milgrom the meaning of the Muslim festival Eid al-Adha, while, in a nearby tent, a group of Bedouin women share lamb and bread.
An'am Sulaman, a 30-year-old woman who speaks some English, talks about the English classes and how good they have been for the Bedouin women.
When asked if she knows Milgrom's religion, she stops for a moment and considers.
"Jewish, I think," she says, turning to her friends for confirmation.
They nod.
"Yes, Jewish. We want peace with the Jews," she says, a sentiment the pope would enjoy. "If Muslims and Jews work together it will bring peace."
 Graphic



 
With AP Photo
 Load-Date: March 26, 2000

 

End of Document
