

Israeli-Syrian talks at impasse over return of the Golan
The Associated Press
November 27, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 950 words
Byline: By DONNA BRYSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUNEITRA, Syria
Body




Syrians want peace, but also they want the Golan Heights back - all of it, down to the last volcanic pebble scattered in the region's rich soil.
The Israelis are just as adamant about keeping their stakes in the strategic plateau, which they seized in the 1967 Middle East war and have studded with orchards and development projects. Syria fought to take back the Golan's 744 square miles in the 1973 war and regained a third of it.
Despite signals earlier this year of warming relations between Syria and Israel, the opportunity to resume peace talks, stalled since 1996, seems to be fading in the face of impasse. The United States is leading intense efforts to bring the two sides together.
Ali Zaza has awaited resolution for a quarter-century, ever since returning to his home, one of the few buildings spared in Quneitra city. Once home to 53,000 people, the provincial capital is now a ghost town of shot-up and flattened buildings.
Zaza, who fled in 1967, returned in 1974 to the house his father Tawfiq built. It was the only house on the block still standing.
"This is my city. I can only rest at home," Zaza said, adding he has grown used to the eerie desolation surrounding him. He's even found a way to prosper - Zaza, 63, his wife, four sons and three daughters run a small grocery story and cafe that serve the Syrian police who patrol Quneitra and the U.N. soldiers who survey the cease-fire line with Israel across coils of barbed wire just a few miles away.
The family tends bees and raises chickens behind a high wall that hides the sight of other homes flattened to waist-high stacks of concrete. Quneitra's 300-bed hospital looks as if it was used for grenade target practice. Schools, banks, mosques and churches are windowless hulks.
Zaza would like to see his hometown revived, along with the orchards and gardens that once flourished in fields enriched by ancient volcanic deposits. The Golan receives more rain than much of the rest of this arid country, and with hills providing a varied climate, the relatively small region was known for producing everything from bananas to apples.
"All the people would like to return, but where would they live? Everything is ruined, and nothing should be rebuilt until the Israelis leave," Zaza said, echoing the stance of his government.
The Syrian government says it won't even talk about peace until it is guaranteed the return of the region. Israel, conscious of the Golan's strategic importance, says it can't make such a promise about the outcome of negotiations before they even begin.
Syria has preserved Quneitra's ruins, accusing Israel of deliberately and systematically destroying the city as it retreated in 1973. Israel says the damage was done in fighting.
Quneitra is as much a monument to Israeli's destructive might as it is to Syria's bitter determination never to back down. Visible from the city's crumbling rooftops is a different kind of determination.
Israeli farms stretch almost to the cease-fire line, fruit trees in neat rows. On one hill in Israeli territory, windmills churn for electricity and water projects. Israeli communications towers rise on other peaks, pointed towards Damascus, the Syrian capital less than 45 miles to the north.
Mohammed Ali, the government spokesman for Quneitra, says that in this age of satellites and spy planes, Israel doesn't need the Golan to protect itself. The issue is Syrian sovereignty, not Israeli security, he insists.
"The whole world says the Golan is Syrian territory," he said. "Why do they keep it? Security? It's not true."
If Israeli-Syrian talks do resume, security will be high on the agenda. Israel is likely to demand Syria crack down on militant Palestinian groups who have headquarters in Syria, as well as on the Hezbollah fighters it backs who are trying to push Israeli troops out of neighboring Lebanon. Syria, for its part, may raise the issue of Israel's nuclear weapons capability.
Syria had welcomed the coming to power of Ehud Barak, saying his overwhelming election victory in May signaled the Israeli people's rejection of hard-liner Benjamin Netanyahu, who had frozen the Mideast peace process.
"We have seen four months of the Barak administration. Now we consider Barak's promises of peace as just promises. He has done nothing for peace, only offered words about peace," said editor Mohammed Khair al-Wadi, whose official Tishreen newspaper reflects government thinking.
With his military background, Barak may be particularly reluctant to give up the Golan vantage point, said Israeli political scientist Moshe Maoz, an expert on Syria.
"I can understand the Syrian position, they want a strategic gain," Maoz said, interviewed by telephone in Jerusalem from Cairo. "But the majority in Israel still object to any withdrawal from the Golan Heights."
"Everyone knows the price is the entire Golan Heights. The question is whether we are willing to pay," the Israeli analyst said.
If Barak is under pressure not to give up too much, Syrian President Hafez Assad cannot accept too little.
"You won't find any Syrian who would accept even one centimeter less than all of the Golan," said Syrian editor Khair al-Wadi. "We want all of the Golan. This is our land."
Syrians do want peace, said Firas Shammas, a fruit juice company sales manager who believes economic benefits would flow from settlement with Israel. But he said his countrymen, especially those who lost sons in wars with Israel, will want something more than new markets or foreign aid.
Egypt, Shammas noted, got the Sinai Peninsula back when it signed a peace treaty, and many of its people are still opposed to the peace.
"Maybe here it will be even harder," Shammas said. "There's too much pain."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY190-194
 Load-Date: November 28, 1999

 

End of Document
