

Israeli foreign minister affirms peace with the Palestinians is the goal
December 20, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 823 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton invited Israeli and Palestinian negotiators to the White House on Wednesday "to keep working on what we hope will be a successful process," Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said.
Albright said she detected from the region "a sense that there are new opportunities."
She said Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak has "changed calculations" and decided to run for re-election in February and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat "may see this also as an opportune time" for an accord.
Also, Albright said at a news conference, Clinton has "a truly abiding interest" and a unique role in peacemaking. He leaves office Jan. 20 after repeated efforts toward Mideast peace.
At the White House, spokesman Jake Siewert also was carefully upbeat in advance of the talks negotiators planned with the president and Albright.
"The parties seem more willing to engage directly," Siewert said, as the renewed peace talks moved through a second day.
The two delegations were calling at the White House, along with U.S. mediators, in what White House spokesman P.J. Crowley described as a stock-taking session.
Clinton is reviewing with the two sides the discussions they have had at Bolling Air Force Base in southeast Washington and will "see where we all go from there," Crowley said.
Meanwhile, Egypt's foreign minister Amr Moussa said Wednesday in Cairo the negotiations could produce an agreement if both parties have the political will.
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak held separate talks with Arafat and an Israeli envoy, former Cabinet minister Yossi Sarid, in the Egyptian capital.
Arafat said he had briefed Mubarak on the Washington talks and had listened to his advice. He did not elaborate and left promptly to return to Gaza.
Sarid told reporters the Washington negotiators would focus on three main issues: the future of the Al Aqsa Mosque compound in east Jerusalem, the Palestinian refugees and the borders of a future Palestinian state.
Here, Israel's foreign minister Shlomo Ben-Ami brushed aside the issue of Israel making concessions to gain an accord that has stirred concern among the Israeli public, especially if it will weaken Israel's control over Jerusalem.
"It's not a question of concessions, it's a matter of making peace," Israeli Foreign Minister said as he arrived late Tuesday to join the talks in Washington.
Siewert said the two sides are setting the pace, not the U.S. administration, and "we'll look to them to decide when and how they can move forward and we're ready to help," Siewert said.
While Clinton has often offered to do what he could to cement a deal, his spokesman said "we don't have any trips to the Middle East under consideration."
U.S. mediators Dennis B. Ross and Aaron D. Miller met separately Tuesday with the Israeli and Palestinian delegations at Bolling Air Force Base to set the stage for the negotiations.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak, taking a soft line, proposed Palestinian statehood in July, turning over most of the West Bank and Gaza to Yasser Arafat and giving the Palestinians control over parts of East Jerusalem.
Arafat held out for more - sovereignty over East Jerusalem and Israel's acceptance of millions of Palestinian refugees. After 12 weeks of bloodshed touched off by a Palestinian uprising, Barak appears poised to renew the offer or possibly better it.
At least that is the Palestinian expectation in the U.S.-hosted talks as thousands of Palestinians marched and protested in the territories. Shops and businesses were closed to back the stance taken by Arafat.
"There is only one clear solution, nothing else - that is full sovereignty over Jerusalem, all Jerusalem with all its parts and holy places," Palestinian negotiator Yasser Abed Rabbo was quoted as saying in the Palestinian newspaper Al Ayyam.
The State Department called the reopening of talks a "hopeful first step." But spokesman Philip Reeker also said "obviously, the violence has to stop as well."
"Violence can never produce an agreement, and only negotiations will be able to produce an agreement," he said Tuesday at the State Department. "There's truly no other way."
Barak and Arafat promised in October to stop the conflict, and it was muted on Tuesday. Over 12 weeks, 332 people have been killed, most of them Palestinians.
The talks at the air base were shrouded in secrecy, with reporters and the public barred. "I don't think making progress in these talks is benefited by making them public," Reeker said.
An Israeli diplomat, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the first step was to see whether the truce reached two months ago in Sharm el-Sheik, Egypt, would be implemented, and the second to decide whether there was a basis for negotiations on a settlement.
The scenario arranged by the U.S. hosts called for the separate meetings with American mediators that marked the first day, to be followed by three-way discussions and then direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians.
 Load-Date: December 21, 2000

 

End of Document
