

Kidnappers say two foreign hostages died in clash with military; LEADS with 6 grafs to UPDATE with at least 13 Basilan hostages rescued. Picks up 6th graf pvs, 'The rebels...'
The Associated Press
May 3, 2000, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 850 words
Byline: By JIM GOMEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOLO, Philippines
Body




A pre-dawn clash in the southern Philippines today between military troops and Muslim rebels who are holding 21 people left two hostages dead, guerrilla leaders said.
Military officials said they had no knowledge of any fatalities among the hostages captured last week from a Malaysian resort.
The clash on Jolo island apparently occurred when Abu Sayyaf rebels were transferring the hostages, who include 10 foreign tourists, to another location, officials said.
Troops seized the bamboo hut where the hostages had been held, but found no one inside. No bloodstains were evident and medicines a doctor had brought Monday were left behind, police said.
Meanwhile, at least 13 of 27 hostages who had been held by other Abu Sayyaf rebels in neighboring Basilan province were rescued today, said Lt. Gen. Diomedio Villanueva, chief of the military's Southern Command.
Soldiers spotted the rebels fording a stream just three miles from downtown Isabela, Basilan's capital, officials said. The hostages, who included 22 children, were kidnapped March 20 from two schools.
The rebels had offered today to release all their captives if the military halts its pursuit of them.
Troops overran their mountain stronghold over the weekend but found no hostages.
On Jolo, fighting between soldiers and rebels continued today after heavily armed guerrillas tried to escape from an encirclement by the military. At least two soldiers were killed and six injured, officials said.
Commander Robot, an Abu Sayyaf leader, claimed in a telephone interview with the local ABS-CBN radio network that one hostage was accidentally shot in the fighting and another died of a heart attack. He apologized to their families and said it was not the rebels' doing.
Another rebel leader, Abu Escobar, later repeated the claim in a call to another radio station.
Nur Misuari, the government's hostage negotiator, said he had conflicting reports about whether the two hostages were dead or only injured.
Escobar said the rebels would proceed with a previous threat to behead two foreign hostages if the military does not pull back from the rebels' hide-out. He said the troops had moved so close to the rebel hide-out that the kidnappers could see them.
Col. Ernesto de Guzman, chief of staff of the military's Southern Command, said the overnight fighting was very far from where the hostages are believed to be held and that the troops would stay put.
"We will not move in and we will not move out," he said.
Misuari said the rebels have refused to begin formal talks unless the troops are moved from the area. He also urged a halt to the military operations.
The 21 hostages were kidnapped April 23 from a Malaysian diving resort and brought to a bamboo hut on Jolo, about one hour away by boat. They have pleaded with the government to halt military operations in the area.
Journalists who accompanied a doctor to the bamboo hut Monday were able to interview the hostages, who complained of food shortages, fevers and infections. The doctor said most of the hostages appeared exhausted and dehydrated. She said she told the rebels that two captives need to be hospitalized, but the rebels did not immediately agree.
The hostages include tourists from Germany, France, South Africa, Finland and Lebanon as well as resort workers from the Philippines and Malaysia.
Several foreign countries have offered to help negotiate an end to the standoff, and a Finnish Foreign Ministry envoy, Holger Rotkirch, left today to join officials from Germany and France already in the Philippines.
An envoy from the Malaysian prime minister's office, Pandikar Amin Mulia, said today that Malaysia was ready to negotiate directly with the rebels.
The Philippine government, however, said it could take care of the situation alone.
"We've asked them to please give us the opportunity to handle the problem," presidential spokesman Ricardo Puno said today. If needed, he said, "we will get their advice and we will get whatever assistance they can give us. But the ball is in our court at this time."
The Abu Sayyaf is the smaller of two groups fighting for a separate Islamic state in the Philippines' impoverished Mindanao region, home of the country's Muslim minority.
The other group, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, claimed responsibility for several bomb explosions in the southern Philippines today that killed at least four and injured dozens.
The Abu Sayyaf rebels holding the 27 other hostages on Basilan claimed two weeks ago to have beheaded two of their captives, triggering the military assault on their stronghold.
Rebel spokesman Abu Ahmad told radio station DXRZ today that the guerrillas were willing to release all the hostages, including 22 children, to Vice President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo because "we want to concentrate on the negotiations for the other hostages" on Jolo. He said the rebels and hostages had left Basilan.
Macapagal-Arroyo said she would prepare for the hostage release.
The Basilan hostages were among about 50 seized by the rebels from two schools on March 20 for use as human shields. The rebels later released some of the captives.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos MLA101-105, AP Graphic PHILIPPINES HOSTAGES
 Load-Date: May 4, 2000

 

End of Document
