

Man of the West: Dole Escalating the Hard Line
October 18, 1996, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 730 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M.
Body




Republican Bob Dole accused President Clinton today of scandalous fund-raising abuses "involving the foreign corruption of America," and demanded an accounting from the White House.
"He didn't learn a thing from this national nightmare called Watergate that happened on our watch," Dole told a chilly campaign rally in an Albuquerque park.
It was one more step in his escalating attack on Clinton over ethics and integrity. Dole said foreign-linked campaign contributions to the Democrats amount to "hundreds of thousands of dollars they can't account for."
"I would say to the president, it's time for a complete accounting," Dole said. He said it should cover donations from people associated with Indonesian banking interests, an episode in which a fund-raising event was held at a Buddhist temple in California and any other foreign-linked contributions.
"Follow the money, answer the questions," Dole said. "Come clean, Mr. President, come clean Mr. President."
"This is really unbelievable," Dole said. "Every day we have a new scandal involving the foreign corruption of America. This must stop and it must stop today."
"Our elections are not for sale to some foreign influence or some foreign interest," the Republican presidential nominee said.
Republicans have been criticizing Democrats on the issue of foreign contributions amid reports of large donations to Democrats from individuals associated with an Indonesian financial conglomerate.
Foreigners who are legal U.S. residents are allowed to make campaign donations, as are U.S. subsidiaries of foreign companies if the money was earned in the United States. Over the years, both Democrats and Republicans have benefited from contributions allowed under those conditions.
Dole also pushed his 15 percent tax cut, promised that a Republican administration would maintain two major Energy Department laboratories in New Mexico despite Democratic claims they would be at risk, and added a pledge to keep nearby Kirtland Air Force Base open if he is elected.
"Nowhere has Bill Clinton's big government liberalism been more extreme than in his war on the West," Dole said. He said farmers and ranchers "have become the most endangered species in America" under Democratic environmental and land use regulations.
Then came the hard line on ethics and fund raising.
"We're going to start getting tough with this guy," Dole said, a variation on what has become a standard line since he stepped up his attacks five days ago.
The Republican presidential nominee was waging his offensive in Denver and at a home-state rally in Wichita, Kan., later today.
He contends Clinton has opened "a great political divide" between Washington and the western states.
"We are going to set things straight again," Dole said Thursday in Riverside, Calif. "We are going to end the war on the west and end the war on California.
"Whether the issue is property rights, conservation policy, regulation or taxes, our western states should not be taking orders from faraway potentates on the Potomac," Dole said.
Dole pledged a costly, intensive campaign to overtake Clinton in pivotal California, saying the president takes the state for granted but the momentum is with the Republican ticket. Dole was 10 points down in the latest poll, but said his own campaign surveys put the deficit at 8 points.
"We're going to put the financial resources out here that it takes," campaign manager Scott Reed said, and GOP sources in the state put the figure at $ 1.5 million each week through Election Day 2 weeks away.
By most estimates, that means funds will have to be diverted from other state campaigns.
Reed would not discuss that phase of the strategy, nor would he disclose how much money the Dole campaign will invest in television advertising in California, saying only that it will be millions and enough to win.
Republicans effectively conceded the state to Clinton four years ago. While Dole had promised that would not happen again, the decision to wage an all out drive for a California upset was not made until Thursday.
"I'm going to fight for California," Dole said. "We're in this race to stay … and we're going to win." California will award 54 electoral votes, 20 percent of the 270 it takes to win the White House.
Clinton has made the state a target since he got to the White House; he campaigned there on Thursday, too, on his 28th trip there as president.
 Load-Date: October 18, 1996

 

End of Document
