

Military Pushed China-Taiwan Crisis to the Brink
March 31, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1308 words
Byline: By ELAINE KURTENBACH, Associated Press Writers
Dateline: BEIJING
Body




Chinese President Jiang Zemin was inclined to be accommodating when Taiwan's president did the unthinkable and visited the United States last summer.
Then he heard from the military.
Bombarded by hundreds of letters each day from officers infuriated by his mild stance, Jiang quickly got the message that China must react strongly to the affront to Chinese sovereignty over the renegade island.
A month later, China's army was firing test missiles into the strait that separates Taiwan from the mainland as a warning to stop efforts to gain the island international recognition.
The pivotal role of the People's Liberation Army in shaping China's response to Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui's trip illustrates the growing influence of the military on the civilian leadership in Beijing.
Domination of the civilian government by the increasingly vocal, highly nationalist military will continue to have a telling impact on China's dealings, not just with Taiwan, but with the world.
The significance of the army's power goes well beyond the traditional areas of politics and national security. China's army runs a huge complex of factories, many producing civilian goods, and it controls other businesses throughout China and abroad.
When American diplomats threaten sanctions over Chinese trade practices, the army stands to lose as much as China's burgeoning private factories. The army is becoming linked to more and more of China's political and economic life, and the Taiwan crisis has shown it with particular clarity.
The crisis, the worst since China and Taiwan stopped exchanging artillery fire in the late 1950s, was initially a purely political issue between China and Taiwan. It started when Taiwan's president decided to attend a reunion at his alma mater, Cornell University, last June.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher assured Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen in May that Lee would not get a visa to visit the United States.
Several days later, the Clinton administration bowed to congressional pressure and granted Lee the visa, mortifying Qian and enraging Beijing. China accused the United States of helping Lee try to free Taiwan from the diplomatic isolation Beijing has imposed on the island it views as a rebel province.
Lee is campaigning to win United Nations membership for Taiwan and to expand the island's international role. Chinese leaders fear his ultimate goal is to declare independence.
His June 8, 1995, trip to New York brought to the boiling point tensions that have simmered since Nationalist Chinese forces fled to Taiwan after losing a civil war to the Communists in 1949.
Even before Lee's trip, Beijing was angry over his snub of Jiang's proposal in a Jan. 30, 1995, speech for talks on reunification.
Never before had Lee "displayed such nakedness and openness in preaching the separation of the motherland," said the People's Daily, the Communist Party newspaper.
Ill-will had been building for several years. U.S. arms sales and a visit to Taiwan by U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills in 1992 began a gradual adjustment of American policy in favor of greater recognition for Taipei's growing economic clout, much to China's consternation.
Taiwan's separate status has always galled the Communist regime. The loss of control of the island is one of the many humiliations China suffered from Western colonial powers a century ago, and Lee's welcoming by the United States was a further slap.
In a campaign that hit Jiang with up to 800 letters a day, hardliners in China's military declared they would rather rebuild Taiwan from scratch than let it be taken over by others, Hong Kong newspapers reported.
The military and the powerful Communist Party Politburo, meeting in secret sessions, goaded Jiang to take a harsh stance.
China lambasted the United States, canceled meetings and recalled its ambassador in Washington. In early July, it suspended negotiations with Taiwan on direct shipping, investment guarantees and other links and scuttled discussions of summit meetings in Beijing and Taiwan.
On July 21, Beijing fortified its message, firing two short-range missiles into seas just north of Taiwan. Four more missiles followed later in the week. Three weeks later, it staged 11 days of missile tests and live-fire war games.
The generals used naval exercises near the eastern port of Qingdao in October and air exercises in November to further flex their muscles.
On Dec. 2, pro-unification candidates did unexpectedly well in legislative elections in Taiwan, heartening those in China pushing the intimidation tactics.
News slowed in the weeks before the Feb. 19 lunar new year. But intelligence reports showed tens of thousands of Chinese soldiers massing on the coast of southeastern Fujian province opposite Taiwan.
On March 8, with Taiwan's presidential vote approaching, China fired the first of four ballistic missiles - believed to be armed only with dummy warheads - in seas near Taiwan's two main ports. The message: "We can cut off your lifeline to the world."
Warning China of its concern, the Clinton administration deployed groups of warships near Taiwan, further angering Beijing.
Defense Minister Chi Haotian declared it was the "holy task" of the army to protect national unity.
Along with the missile launches came two sets of war games. The last, closer than ever to outlying Taiwanese islets, ended March 25. A spectacular news report on Chinese television showed troops storming ashore in landing exercises, ships shooting missiles and torpedoes, and jets shrieking through the air over the Taiwan Strait.
However, China balanced its war games and strident rhetoric with reassurances that it did not plan to attack Taiwan. The defense minister, the vice chairman of the Central Military Commission and the chief of the army general staff all were quoted by the state-run Xinhua News Agency as saying international and regional peace and stability are important to China.
On March 17, Premier Li Peng said China would attack only if Taiwan declared independence or was invaded by foreign forces.
"Externally there must be a peaceful international environment and internally there must be a stable political situation," Li said.
On March 20, Washington approved a Taiwan request to buy Stinger air defense missiles and other weaponry. The same day, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a resolution demanding that China stop military moves to intimidate Taiwan and declaring that U.S. forces should defend the island from invasion or attack. The Senate followed suit.
China fumed, declaring that Taiwan is its "sacred territory," not a protectorate of the United States.
On March 23, Lee won the presidential election with a healthy 54 percent of the vote and quickly offered to grant China's demand for direct trade and telephone links.
China shrugged off its embarrassment and, reportedly after a hastily convened Politburo meeting, said the door was still open to discussion of Jiang's 1995 proposals for talks on reunification.
But Beijing said Lee must give up his campaign for more international recognition for Taiwan. Lee, in a post-victory interview, said he would not.
With Taiwan's voters returning Lee to office in the face of China's "missile diplomacy," the Politburo reportedly decided to give Lee two months to prove he does not plan to seek independence for the island.
The military is determined to hold a hard line. At the close of the latest war games, one of China's most powerful generals, Zhang Wannian, warned that force would be used if Taiwan "goes independent."
Jiang and other top civilian leaders are in no position to disagree. They are vying with each other to succeed Deng Xiaoping, the architect of China's economic reforms who is now too ill to run the country.
Only one institution nationwide has the clout to play kingmaker in that succession struggle: the military.
 Load-Date: March 31, 1996

 

End of Document
