

Mongolians struggle with the costs of capitalism
The Associated Press
May 16, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 1263 words
Byline: By J.L. HAZELTON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ULAN BATOR, Mongolia
Body




There's homegrown rap on the radio. Black-clad youths saunter down the streets along with nomads in traditional bright wool jackets.
Everything is for sale: Satellite phone calls. Apples and antifreeze. Cocker spaniel puppies. If you have the money.
Ulan Bator, with its rocky patches of bare ground, half-finished buildings, concrete slabs of Soviet-era architecture and people convinced driving is a freestyle sport, has the feel of a chrysalis, a city on the verge.
In the 10 years since peaceful demonstrations brought down the Communist People's Republic of Mongolia, this vast, sparsely populated Central Asian nation has been struggling to transform itself into a free-market democracy.
"The transition," as everyone calls it here, has been tough. Some are striking it rich, while others sink into persistent poverty. Mongolians are trying to think like entrepreneurs and voters, rather than looking at their jobs and rulers as permanencies.
Despite power struggles at Government House, Mongolians seem determined to continue their experiment with democracy and free markets. But how to do that is still in question.
After the pain of the past 10 years, the appeal of leftists favoring greater state control of the economy and higher wages is strong, and parliamentary elections are coming up this summer.
"I wouldn't say bad things about the previous society, but I also wouldn't deny all the good things brought by democracy today," said Pagamsuren, a 56-year-old grandmother who like many Mongolians uses only one name.
The latest challenge for Mongolia is a natural disaster. Drought, overgrazing and an unusually cold, snowy winter have brought mass starvation of livestock.
Camels, goats, sheep, horses and cattle provide everything from food and fuel to barter goods for the approximately one-third of Mongolians who still live a nomadic life.
The death toll could rise to 5 million head out of a herd of 33.5 million, a devastating percentage in an agricultural culture.
Prone to stoicism, Mongolians are taking it in stride. After all, times were tough before, too.
After Soviet aid ended in 1990-91 with the collapse of the Soviet Union, everything stopped working. The power plants. The factories. The people.
Street kids infested the capital. Alcoholism soared. Families broke up. Crime rose. Inflation hit triple digits. Food was rationed. A few years later, the assassination of a leading reform politician drew attention to rising corruption.
Today's economic figures are looking better, but the unofficial unemployment rate is estimated at 30 percent, and about 35 percent of the population lives below the poverty line.
Still, a lot of folks are striving to cash in on the opportunities of a free marketplace.
Beer bars proliferate. People are knocking huge windows into their apartment walls to turn them into storefronts. The signs for the new discos are in trendy English, not old-fashioned Cyrillic. Foreign investment capital is moving in on hopes for substantial mineral finds.
Not everyone is rising with the tide.
Hatanbaatar, Pagamsuren's 32-year-old son. hasn't had a job in three years.
His working life began with the fall of the People's Republic in 1990, when he graduated from the Military Institute and went to work for the Defense Ministry as a mechanic.
Laid off four years later, he worked at a power station for a few years, got laid off again, and there has been nothing regular since.
Sitting in his grandmother's little white house in a poor settlement on the outskirts of Ulan Bator, in his Nike cap and Harvard Funds T-shirt, he's a walking advertisement for globalization.
And he's learned the No. 1 lesson of capitalism: Personal responsibility.
"This was completely dependent on me," he says quietly, discussing his joblessness. "I don't feel jealous when I see the guys driving Mercedes around town."
Hatanbaatar's daughter, a round 4-year-old in boots with turned-up toes, squirms into his lap, offering comfort.
Mercedes can be found bouncing along Ulan Bator's crumbling roads, along with some big, shiny, four-wheel-drive sports utility vehicles. They share the streets with battered little Soviet-era Ladas and horse-drawn carts.
Hatanbaatar's mother is optimistic despite the hardship.
"I had a better life before, with the Communists, but today I'm full of belief that my life will get better," Pagamsuren says.
"Everyone had jobs, so we didn't suffer any financial problems. We never went without food," she adds eagerly from her perch on the bed. "Today my whole family has a hard life. No one has a job. Night and day I dream that one of my children will get a job."
The kind of people who drive Mercedes include a handful of newly rich young men who created their own jobs.
One of these entrepreneurs is Eddie Yadamsuren, a whirlwind of energy at 34 known to everyone here by just his first name.
His cell phone is always at hand. There's fashionable stubble on his round cheeks. His cargo pants could have come straight from the Gap.
With his brother-in-law, who knows how to cook, Eddie parlayed the $9,000 he sank into opening a pizza place three years ago into a group of restaurants worth more than $100,000. That's a lot of money in Mongolia, where a loaf of bread costs 150 tugriks, or about 15 cents.
Eddie now owns the original pizza shack, two chic pizzerias and a cozy Indian-Mexican restaurant.
Capitalism? "I love it!" Eddie says. "You can do everything you want."
Like a lot of Mongolians, Eddie went abroad to seek his fortune. He saved up while working in Germany. Many others go to South Korea to do factory work.
Eddie's upbringing set him up for success. His father was a director at a big state-owned company, and his mother traveled widely as an official of the Foreign Trade Ministry.
"Maybe she influenced me to dream about the West," says Eddie, who nevertheless grows misty-eyed recalling the sense of community he remembers from Communist days. "My parents gave me this, the opportunity to see the world with different eyes."
But Eddie doesn't welcome all the changes. He's worried about corruption. And people are longing for a strong leader who will take their side.
The politicians today, Eddie says, "They take care of the big businesses, but forget the people."
Since the revolution, power has seesawed between reformers and leftists.
Mongolians have not turned their backs on communism - Lenin's statue still stands in Ulan Bator - but 70 years of collectivization left a legacy of dependence.
"We used to just demand, demand everything. Now we're starting to understand that we have to work first," Prime Minister Renchinnyamiin Amarjargal says in an interview.
Hard work has been done. The economy grew approximately 3.3 percent in 1999, inflation is under control and the government says foreign investment has risen to 7 percent of gross domestic product, about half the Asian average.
"They really do want to have free markets here," says Doug McGay of Harrods Minerals Mongolia Ltd. "To me it's the place of the future for resources."
McGay, an Australian, expects Mongolia to grow rich on its minerals and hopes to reap his share of the wealth.
Hatanbaatar, the jobless man, sounds equally positive when he looks ahead to the summer elections.
"I think the lives of many depend on the government, and soon we'll have parliamentary elections, so everyone, to have a better life, should make good choices voting," he says.
So what is the right choice for Hatanbaatar?
Not the reformers. Not again. He's voting for the former Communists.
---
On the Net:
Mongolia Today magazine: http://www.mongoliaonline.mn/ 
End Adv for Sunday, May 21
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY313-314 of May 15, Graphic MONGOLIA
 Load-Date: May 22, 2000

 

End of Document
