

Names In The Game
September 16, 1997, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 856 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: VANCOUVER, British Columbia
Body




San Jose Sharks goalie Mike Vernon - who led the Detroit Red Wings to the Stanley Cup championship last spring and was voted winner of the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the playoffs - was left off the fan ballot for the 1998 NHL All-Star game.
Under a new format, the top NHL players representing North America will face the top NHL players from the rest of the world. The starting lineups for both clubs will be selected in fan balloting.
Only six goalies - Martin Brodeur (New Jersey), Sean Burke (Carolina), Guy Hebert (Anaheim), Mike Richter (New York Rangers), Patrick Roy (Colorado) and John Vanbiesbrouck (Florida) - were on the list released Monday by the NHL. The list was prepared by the NHL hockey operations department after consulting with the teams' senior general managers.
"The fan balloting leading up to the All-Star game should create all kind of discussion," league vice-president Steve Solomon said. "Who do you pick as your North American goalie? The quality of each team's lineup will be superb."
The game will be played Sunday, Jan. 18, at General Motors Place in Vancouver, just three weeks before many of the same players compete in the Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan.
Also left off the list was Edmonton's Curtis Joseph, who played goal for Canada in the first World Cup of Hockey tournament last year when the United States upset the Canadians in the best-of-three final.
Goalies on the World Team ballot are Dominik Hasek (Buffalo), Arturs Irbe (Vancouver), Nikolai Khabibulin (Phoenix Coyotes), Olaf Kolzig (Washington), Tommy Salo (New York Islanders) and Mikhail Shtalenkov (Anaheim).
---
LOUISVILLE, Ky. (AP) - Muhammad Ali returned home to ring Monday in the start of an international amateur boxing tournament that bears his name.
The former world heavyweight boxing champion slowly rose, smiled and rang the ringside bell three times during opening ceremonies for the inaugural Muhammad Ali Cup International Amateur Boxing Challenge at the Commonwealth Convention Center.
Members of the 21 nations represented in the event marched into the arena bearing the colorful flags of their home nations. The tournament began with 10 preliminary bouts in four weight classes.
The event is expected to raise more than $ 1 million for a planned Ali museum and education center in Louisville and several USA Boxing youth programs. It also will help determine members of the U.S. Boxing Team that will compete at the World Championships in Budapest, Hungary, in October.
"We are proud to be here on this unique occasion - a boxing competition in the name of the greatest of the great boxers the world has ever produced," Pakistan's Prof. Anwar Chowdhry, president of the International Amateur Boxing Association, said.
"It is my wish and desire that this tournament should become an annual feature. For a long time, we have been thinking about having such a tournament. Unfortunately, it never became a reality. But the magic name of Muhammad Ali was responsible for making it possible to have this tournament in this beautiful city."
Nearly 80 boxers from more than 20 nations are to compete in the tournament, including the U.S. team's top-ranked boxers.
---
TORONTO (AP) - Having signed with the Toronto Raptors, Tracy McGrady is looking ahead to more pressing issues such as winning the NBA's slam-dunk competition and rookie of the year award.
"I really think I have a good chance of winning (the slam dunk title)," McGrady - the team's first-round draft pick- said Monday. "Whatever you want I can give to you, that's all I can say."
The 6-foot-8 swingman signed a three-year, $ 4.7 million contract with Toronto, the most allowed under the NBA salary cap. Prior to the draft he agreed to a $ 12 million endorsement deal with Adidas.
"The rookie of the year award thing is for me to play my best," McGrady said. "If I do produce on the court, I can get more minutes to showcase my skills so then I can shoot for rookie of the year."
McGrady, a high school player last year, hopes to follow in the footsteps of Kobe Bryant and Kevin Garnett - high school stars who successfully made the jump to the NBA with the Los Angeles Lakers and Minnesota Timberwolves, respectively.
"Kobe is one of my best friends and he told me there are going to be times when I feel down because I'm not playing much," McGrady said. "He told me to stay focused because my day will come."
---
DURHAM, N.C. (AP) - Fargo-Moorhead's John Dittrich was voted Northern League General Manager of the Year, the independent league announced Monday.
Dittrich was selected in balloting by the eight-team league's field managers.
A native of Chicago, he was hired to head the team's front office prior to the club's inaugural season in 1996, when the RedHawks lost in the championship series to the St. Paul Saints. This season, Fargo lost a five-game series to Winnipeg in the divisional playoffs.
Before joining the RedHawks, Dittrich was the general manager of the Columbus RedStixx of the South Atlantic League, where he was named the league's Executive of the Year in 1995. He attained the same honor in 1989 as general manager of Greensboro.
 Load-Date: September 16, 1997

 

End of Document
