

Names In The Game
November 19, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 776 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: MILAN, Italy
Body




The death of middleweight Fabrizio De Chiara has created an outcry against boxing in Italy.
De Chiara's mother, however, made it clear she is against abolishing the sport.
"My son loved this sport. By opposing a ban on boxing, I simply respect Fabrizio's ideas," Carla De Chiara said in an interview Tuesday with a private Italian television station.
"I believe it's just fate. There have been deaths also in soccer and auto racing."
Some Italian politicians urged the government to take action against boxing. Suggestions ranged from banning the sport in Italy, banning it from television, or taking measures to reduce the risks.
De Chiara, 25, was declared dead at a Pisa hospital Monday, two days after collapsing in the ring when the referee stopped the bout in the last round.
"My son was stubborn, proud. He could not give up before the end of the match," the mother said, commenting on his opponent's claim that De Chiara looked exhausted at the start of the 12th and final round.
---
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - George Scott, lightweight champion of the obscure World Boxing Union, was charged with drunken driving, the newspaper Expressen reported Tuesday.
The Swedish boxer was released after a test that showed 0.054 percent alcohol in his blood when he was stopped Monday. He is likely to face fines and a suspension of his driver's license.
Scott, who defeated Naas Scheepers of South Africa on points in Sun City this month, told the newspaper he had a couple of beers before he drove his car home.
"I feel ashamed of what I have done, " Scott said. "But I will win another championship belt and that will be my way of apologizing to the Swedish people."
Scott, who was born in Liberia, turned pro efter winning the silver medal in the 1988 Seoul Olympics.
He plans to return to Sweden after six years in the United States.
---
TUCSON, Ariz. (AP) - A Pima County judge who violated judicial rules by helping Andre Agassi negotiate a $ 100 million contract thinks a two-month unpaid suspension is too harsh a penalty.
Superior Court Judge Lawrence Fleischman wants the state Commission on Judicial Conduct to reconsider its preliminary recommendation.
"The sanction is much more severe than called for by the facts of the case," wrote Tom Slutes, the Tucson attorney who represents Fleischman.
Fleischman helped Agassi negotiate the contract with Nike Inc. between August and December of 1994.
The code of conduct prohibits sitting judges from practicing law or acting as an adviser to a business.
Slutes filed a formal response to the commission, and asked it instead recommend an informal reprimand or censure.
The commission will vote Friday on a final recommendation to the Arizona Supreme Court, said Keith Stott, the commission's executive director.
---
LISBON, Portugal (AP) - A former Formula One driver, Britain's Jonathan Palmer, crashed head-on with a vehicle while testing a Honda passenger car on a mountain road, police said Tuesday.
The driver of the other car was killed in the crash Monday, while Palmer fractured his collarbone, arm and tailbone. He was released from the hospital and returned to the Britain for further treatment.
Palmer, 40, was in Portugal to participate in the filming of a promotional video on the Honda Prelude for the Japanese auto giant's British subsidiary. He was trying out the car for the first time.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - She sure doesn't look like Billy Payne, and she definitely lacks the Southern drawl. But Gianna hopes eventually to share the thrill Payne felt by bringing the Olympics to her city.
The 41-year-old former member of the Greek parliament is president of the committee bidding to bring the 2004 Summer Games to Athens. As with the effort Payne headed to make Atlanta an Olympic host, the Athens bid started as a longshot, but Angelopoulos-Daskalaki feels it's closing in as the voting by the IOC nears.
"We have a lot of strong elements. We are confident of our bid," she said Tuesday.
Athens lost to Atlanta as host of this summer's Centennial Games and offended some IOC members with an attitude that Greece had a right to the 100th birthday of the modern games. The Olympics were born in ancient Greece and their revival took place in Athens in 1896.
Angelopoulos-Daskalaki said the 2004 bid still encountered some residue from the 1996 defeat, but was trying to overcome that by stressing new sports facilities, a modern infrastructure, stable government and cleaner environment.
"We are proud of our history, but we don't depend on that to win Athens the games," she said. "We depend on the new city."
The IOC will pare 11 candidate cities to four or five finalists next March, then decide the winner next Sept. 5.
 Load-Date: November 19, 1996

 

End of Document
