

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
March 23, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 888 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: CHARLESTON, S.C.
Body




Arnold Palmer, honored by fellow golf course architects for his contributions to the game, says designers must maintain golf's traditions in their layouts.
Palmer was given the American Society of Golf Course Architects' 1999 Donald Ross Award for his contributions to golf and course design. Jack Nicklaus, Pete Dye, Rees Jones and Tom Fazio were among those attending the presentation Monday.
"I hope in what years I have left I can make a contribution that will make this game greater, that people can enjoy it more," the 69-year-old Palmer said.
In addition to his 92 victories - including four Masters, two British Opens, the U.S. Open and the U.S. Amateur - that helped popularize golf, Palmer heads a company that has designed more than 200 courses around the world.
He said his relationship with Nicklaus is one of the best he has ever had.
"It's the competition. Not just playing golf, but designing golf courses, building golf clubs. Just competing," Palmer said.
---
THE HAGUE, Netherlands (AP) - Crown Prince Willem-Alexander, the heir to the Dutch throne, can join the scandal-plagued IOC, government officials have decided.
Margo Vliegenhart, state secretary for health and sport, said the prince could join as soon as June if the IOC swiftly implements reform guidelines adopted last week.
"We are convinced that the IOC is seriously trying to clean up, but a final decision still needs to be made - based on how well it does," said ministry spokesman Gerart Rithagen.
Willem-Alexander's involvement with the IOC was temporarily suspended in February following the reports of bribery and corruption that engulfed the committee.
He joined the IOC at last year's Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan, but has yet to be officially sworn in.
The prince's position in the IOC was questioned in Dutch parliament amid the allegations that surfaced after Salt Lake City's successful bid for the 2002 Winter Olympics.
Although the prince was not mentioned in the scandal, parliament feared his name might be damaged through association with the organization.
---
MADRID, Spain (AP) - IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch has been subpoenaed to testify in the collapse of a chemical firm of which he was once a board member, according to published reports Tuesday.
Samaranch has been asked to testify in Barcelona on April 9, El Pais and El Mundo reported.
Samaranch left the board of the Ercros company six months before it declared bankruptcy in June 1992. He was replaced by his son, who testified in the case on Monday.
Samaranch, as head of the IOC, has been faced with the worst corruption scandal in Olympic history, a vote-buying scheme surrounding Salt Lake City's successful bid for the 2002 Winter Games.
---
AUGUSTA, Ga. (AP) - The dedication of a historical marker honoring Bobby Jones has been canceled because Augusta State officials complained they were left out of the ceremony, which was to be held on school property.
The marker was to be dedicated April 7 outside an abandoned clubhouse at Forest Hills golf course, which Augusta State owns. Jones won a regional tournament at Forest Hills in 1930 - four years before the Masters began at nearby Augusta National - and went on to win golf's Grand Slam that year.
Augusta State wanted the ceremony called off because the school wasn't asked to participate. The college's president, Bill Bloodworth, also said he believes the ceremony would have been lost amid the hoopla over the Masters, which begins April 8.
"Masters Week, in my mind, isn't a good week to do this kind of thing," he said Monday. "It could be a great opportunity if we do it at the right time, and when the right people are there, when it would get some attention."
More than 200 guests had been invited to the ceremony.
"It's a shocking embarrassment to have to call people and tell them it's off," said Ross Snellings, an organizer of the marker dedication.
Snellings has been trying to get Augusta State to restore the old Forest Hills clubhouse, which has been replaced by a newer building and has fallen into disrepair. The restoration would cost about $ 400,000 and would have to be approved by the state Board of Regents.
The $ 1,500 marker, approved in January by the Georgia Historical Society, was paid for by local preservation groups.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Former FIFA president Joao Havelange reacted angrily Tuesday to questions about charges that members of soccer's governing body were bribed to vote for current president Sepp Blatter.
"I am sad to see you only think of scandal. Why don't you think of all the good things that I've done for soccer?" Havelange responded to a reporter's question about the published report.
Havelange said the charges were fueled by "a part of the world that once held the power in the world of sports, didn't do anything with it, lost that power and now wants it back."
The allegations were first made in "How They Stole the Game," a book by British author David Yallop, which claims members of soccer's governing organization accepted cash bribes to ensure that Blatter would beat UEFA president Lennart Johansson in last year's FIFA presidency ballot.
Johansson was a strong favorite to win the FIFA election until Blatter joined the contest. In the weeks leading up to the June election, 20 FIFA members, mostly from African nations, changed their allegiances.
 Load-Date: March 23, 1999

 

End of Document
