

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
April 26, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 804 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




For Miami Dolphins running back coach Joel Collier, the images of the massacre at Columbine High School hit close to home.
While watching TV Tuesday, he learned of the fatal shooting rampage - and saw his 17-year-old niece fleeing the school.
"She was in choir when it happened," said Collier, who grew up in Littleton, Colo., where 13 people were slain at the school by two teen-agers who then apparently killed themselves.
His niece, Stephanie Homel, was uninjured, he told The Palm Beach Post.
Homel's choir teacher herded about 60 students into an office near the choir room. The room was just around one corner from the bloody scene in the library - close enough for the huddled group to hear the footsteps, yelling and most horribly, the laughter of the gunmen. They eventually managed to escape.
Collier, whose parents and sister's family live in Littleton, learned his niece was OK after making several attempts to get through on the busy phone lines.
"She's rattled," Collier said. "But the best part about it … is that she was open and talking about it the next day."
---
CINCINNATI (AP) - Cincinnati Reds owner Marge Schott went home Monday from a hospital after three days of treatment for breathing problems blamed on allergies.
The 70-year-old Schott had checked herself into Jewish Hospital on Friday, said spokeswoman Stephanie Savicki.
Schott underwent respiratory treatment for severe, seasonal pollen allergies, hospital officials said.
Schott said last week she had reached a deal to sell most of her shares in the Reds, including the controlling shares, to limited partners Carl Lindner Jr., George Strike and William Reik for $ 67 million. The deal still needs approval from team owners, which could come in June.
Schott has been the Reds' controlling partner since December 1984.
 
JERUSALEM (AP) - It was Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's election day dream: his Likud party beat the opposition while a centrist party watched from the sidelines.
Sunday's 3-2 Likud victory over Ehud Barak's One Israel faction in a charity soccer game was uncharacteristically good-natured amid a May 17 election campaign marked by bitter divisions and sporadic violence.
Netanyahu and Barak were not at the game in the packed indoor soccer court, citing pressing campaign issues.
Other senior lawmakers faced off while Center party candidates Amnon Lipkin-Shahak and Roni Milo refereed the event.
The game raised more than $ 75,000 for disabled athletes.
---
GOLDEN VALLEY, Minn. (AP) - Babe Ruth, Michael Jordan and the 1980 U.S. men's Olympic hockey team are among the favorite faces on Wheaties boxes.
General Mills is re-releasing the original packages featuring the 10 most popular Wheaties champions chosen by the public to mark the cereal's 75th anniversary.
The other winners, not ranked in any order, were Walter Payton, Lou Gehrig, Jackie Robinson, Cal Ripken Jr. John Elway, Mary Lou Retton and Tiger Woods. Gehrig was the first athlete to appear on the Wheaties box.
---
HOBOKEN, N.J. (AP) - Fifteen years after competing at the Sarajevo Olympics, world champion figure skater Elaine Zayak has returned to familiar ice.
But this time the 34-year-old isn't competing - she's coaching.
Zayak, the 1982 world champion, teaches 40 students six days a week at the Ice House in Hackensack.
She is healthy again after abdominal surgery in 1997, when doctors removed a potentially cancerous tumor.
"When I got out of the operation, I couldn't walk, I couldn't do anything," Zayak told The Record of Hackensack. "I've never felt pain like this. They had to cut through all my stomach muscles."
---
OMAHA, Neb. (AP) - Nebraska's 5-3 record in the Big 12 last season might suggest the Cornhuskers' talent has finally leveled off, but former coach Tom Osborne is defending the team.
The retired Nebraska coach told the Omaha World-Herald the Huskers will be back among the elite next season.
Osborne retired after the 1997 season, his 25th as coach. Each year from 1991-97, the Huskers won or shared conference or division titles in the old Big Eight or the current Big 12, going 50-2-1 against league rivals.
Last year's conference record was Nebraska's worst since 1976.
"Last year was one of the most difficult years I've ever seen Nebraska have in terms of a wide range of injuries to key people," Osborne said.
Osborne works for the Nebraska Foundation, which raises money for the university.
---
LONDON (AP) - Tottenham wing David Ginola edged Manchester United striker Dwight Yorke as the English league's player of the year.
Nearly 4,000 players voted on the Professional Players' Association award.
The French midfielder, who has six goals this season, was a surprise winner over Yorke, who leads the league scorers' standings with 27 goals.
The last Englishman to win the country's top individual award was England captain Alan Shearer in 1997.
 Load-Date: April 26, 1999

 

End of Document
