

Names In The Game musician of the same name; CONTAINS items on Sammy Sosa, Will
The Associated Press
April 9, 2000, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 671 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MIAMI (AP) - Board members of Sammy Sosa's charitable foundation are feuding over charges of mismanagement and theft at the organization's Broward County headquarters.
Arturo Sandoval, a founder of the Sammy Sosa Charitable Foundation, told Fortune Magazine last week that he has turned over information outlining the allegations to the IRS in Fort Lauderdale.
Sandoval, the foundation's secretary, claims money was spent on personal cars, that food and supplies are being stored in a Miami warehouse, and that the Chicago Cubs outfielder hasn't given any money to the foundation since donating a $2.7 million building in 1998.
That building houses a children's clinic in San Pedro de Macoris in the Dominican Republic.
The IRS does not comment on whether it is investigating tax filings.
Sandoval said he has been locked out of the foundation offices in Pembroke Pines since December, and hasn't been paid since November.
Foundation director Bill Chase told The Miami Herald that Sandoval is a "disgruntled employee" and dismissed his claims. He said the foundation has no plans to close.
"We aren't in financial trouble," Chase said. "These allegations are one-sided."
---
LONDON (AP) - Will Carling, who led England to three Grand Slams and a World Cup rugby final, retired Sunday, then delivered a stinging attack on national coach Clive Woodward.
Carling, who retired from international play in 1998 after leading England a world record 59 times, is skeptical that Woodward can build a team good enough to beat the Southern Hemisphere giants Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.
"Woodward has produced a team that can play awesome rugby, especially against the weaker sides, but his England simply aren't winning the crunch games," Carling said.
"We don't seem to have the ability, when Plan A is not working, to switch to Plan B or Plan C."
Carling's attack came a week after England lost 19-13 to Scotland and, having already won the Six Nations title, missed out on a Grand Slam.
---
LIVERPOOL, England (AP) - Leicester forward Muzzy Izzet, who has chosen to play soccer for his father's birthplace Turkey, will receive an apology from Everton after its fans jeered him because of the deaths of two Leeds fans in Istanbul.
"We will be writing to Muzzy and the Leicester chairman to apologize on behalf of our fans," Everton spokesman Alan Myers said.
"We work very hard to stamp out racism and this thing doesn't help the club and we want to disassociate ourselves from what happened."
Izzet was jeered every time he touched the ball in the 1-1 tie at Goodison Park Saturday because of his connection with the Turkish national team.
The two Leeds fans were stabbed to death on the streets of Istanbul the night before the team played Galatasaray in a UEFA Cup semifinal Thursday.
Several Turkish men are being questioned by police in connection with the stabbings, which has led to Leeds demanding that no visiting fans go to the return game at Elland Road April 18.
---
GREENVILLE, S.C. (AP) - Erik Sprogis of Greenville is adding to the portfolio of Masters golf tournament winners' autographs that his father started. Sprogis' father died in 1992.
The autograph collection dates back to the first tournament in 1934.
There are gaps. He still needs signatures from Hal Sutton, Tiger Woods, Mark O'Meara and Fred Couples. And his collection still lacks the autograph of 1941 Masters champ Craig Wood and 1934 winner Horton Smith.
Sprogis recently tracked down 1946 champ Herman Keiser and has sent a letter seeking his autograph.
Sprogis, a dentist, proudly shows off his collection to patients.
"It's neat to share with people," Sprogis said. "It's a piece of history. I haven't run into anyone with a collection like this. I have no way to value it monetarily. Sentimentally, it's priceless."
After his father's death, Sprogis inherited the Masters autographs. Gene Sarazen, Bobby Jones, Sam Snead, Byron Nelson, Ben Hogan, Arnold Palmer, Jack Nicklaus, Gary Player and Ben Crenshaw are among those whose signatures are part of the collection.
 Load-Date: April 10, 2000

 

End of Document
