

Negotiators look for peace pact for all of Mideast; ED: TOPS with 4 grafs to UPDATE with Blair House talks over, Clinton calling leaders to the White House; picks up 3rd graf pvs,
The Associated Press
December 16, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 905 words
Byline: By PAULINE JELINEK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Israeli and Syrian officials today resumed negotiations on a road map they hope will lead to peace between their two countries - and then the entire Middle East.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright met separately with the two delegations and then they held face-to-face talks at Blair House on a land-for-peace proposal.
President Clinton then called Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa to the White House for further talks.
He was expected to issue a statement saying another round would be held somewhere in the United States in a few weeks.
Departing his hotel, al-Sharaa said he didn't expect an agreement to be signed today. Israel already was looking toward a new round of negotiations, to be held sometime in January, Israeli Foreign Minister David Levy said.
Al-Sharaa said Syria wants to come to some sort of agreement in the year 2000.
Syria hopes to win back the Golan Heights it lost to Israeli forces more than 30 years ago and Israel wants recognition by the Arab state and improved security, though the first day of meetings Wednesday was reported stuck on procedural matters.
Today, though, the two sides moved on to issues of substance, an Israeli source said: a timetable for Israel to pull back from the Golan Heights, arrangements for the pullback and measures by the two sides to bolster confidence they can live in peace.
"We brought them here to demonstrate they are serious about peace and they've done this," White House spokesman Joe Lockhart said.
Clinton said Wednesday the talks were "going pretty well, but it's hard going."
Barak also acknowledged the difficult road ahead, saying Israel was "fully aware of the … seriousness, determination and devotion" that will be required to reach an agreement.
Though the White House sought to portray the tone of the meetings as conciliatory, al-Sharaa lashed out at Israel during the opening ceremony in the White House Rose Garden, accusing the Jewish state of uprooting a half-million Syrians when it occupied the Golan Heights after the 1967 Mideast war.
He also harshly criticized the international community, saying "the vision of the Arabs and their suffering" have been "totally ignored" for 50 years.
Syria's Al-Baath newspaper, the mouthpiece of the ruling Al-Baath party, said Syria has "entered the battle of peace" with a will equal to that exhibited during war.
Levy said Clinton and Barak were angered by al-Sharaa's speech, but that once Israel complained in an unequivocal manner and negotiators were out of the public eye, the atmosphere improved.
"We also laughed, all of us, and the tone and the atmosphere also changed during the hours we spent talking," Levy told Israel army radio from Washington.
All parties said a peace agreement between Israel and Syria would lay the groundwork for an end to the conflicts between Israel and its other neighbors in the Middle East. Israel has signed peace agreements with Egypt and Jordan, and negotiations are continuing on a pact with the Palestinians.
Al-Sharaa said a "just and comprehensive" peace "would indeed mean for our region the end of a history of wars and conflicts."
Jordan's King Abdullah II said the resumption of Syrian-Israeli talks "opens the doors for a just, regional settlement."
In Israel, Ariel Sharon, chairman of the opposition Likud Party, said the talks were being rushed by all sides for political expediency - Barak to divert attention from failed social policies, Syrian President Hafez Assad to save his ailing dictatorship, and Clinton for his place in history.
"The dispute is not about the need for peace. We need peace," Sharon said. "But it's about the way, the timing, and the price."
At the day's end, Lockhart made no claim of progress, nor did he suggest either side had modified its positions since coming to Washington for their first direct talks since 1996. This week's meeting was the highest-level ever held between the two nations.
The four key issues confronting Syria and Israel are the future of the Golan Heights, the timing of an Israeli pullback, the kind of peace that would result and security measures along the border between the two nations that have fought three major wars.
"It is not surprising there are real differences," Lockhart said. "The discussion is mostly focused on how to move forward."
At the opening ceremony, Clinton had spoken with cautious optimism, saying both sides were "prepared to get down to business. For the first time in history, there is a chance of a comprehensive peace between Israel and Syria and indeed all its neighbors."
The president met with both sides and then individually with al-Sharaa and Barak before the two Mideast leaders and their aides crossed Pennsylvania Avenue to hold their talks at Blair House.
Albright also met separately with them, and again with the two for 80 minutes at Blair House, where presidential guests often stay. After a short break, Albright held another meeting with al-Sharaa, joined by U.S. mediator Dennis Ross.
Neither the Israeli and Syrian delegations issued any statements. Lockhart said only that Barak and al-Sharaa had stated their demands and acknowledged that "the needs of the other side have to be addressed."
Barak and al-Sharaa did not shake hands at the White House ceremony, despite calls from photographers to do so. Clinton got beyond the awkward moment by saying, "We're going to work" - and ushered them back into the White House.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo WX8
 Load-Date: December 17, 1999

 

End of Document
