

Netanyahu: Before the Peace, Comes the Government
June 3, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 813 words
Byline: By DAFNA LINZER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Promising to keep the peace process on track, Prime Minister-elect Benjamin Netanyahu turned today to negotiations that could prove equally prickly: talks with potential coalition partners.
"I spoke with (Jordanian) King Hussein and (Egyptian President Hosni) Mubarak, I told them both what I told President Clinton, that I will meet with them at the soonest opportunity, but only after we build our government," Netanyahu told legislators of his Likud Party.
Radio reports said Netanyahu hoped to have the government in place by June 17, the first seating of the new parliament.
Netanyahu also said he has approached the Palestinians, who are especially nervous about his election, fearing a reversal of agreements made with the outgoing Labor government of Prime Minister Shimon Peres.
He said he asked his policy adviser, Dr. Dore Gold, to call Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's deputy to offer reassurances.
Palestinians were pessimistic, believing the Likud would behave as it had done when it was last in power, in 1992.
"We all know that Likud will drag us into formal negotiations without making any real progress," Palestinian legislator Hanan Ashrawi said.
In the sensitive government-building talks, Netanyahu already faces tensions among the contenders for ministries: religious parties traditionally get the education, interior and religion portfolios.
The parties scored 23 seats in the incoming parliament, an increase of seven, and their biggest ever showing - and were already vying for the plums.
"We have not decided yet how to divide the ministries," senior Likud member Moshe Katsav said after closing an agreement with the ultra-Orthodox Shas party.
Shas has reportedly agreed to give up the ideologically important education portfolio to the National Religious Party. But that leaves the financially powerful interior and religion ministries up for grabs.
The Likud also closed a coalition deal with the smaller ultra-Orthodox United Torah Judaism party, and were set to meet with the National Religious Party, with whom a deal seemed assured.
Netanyahu faces tensions within his own Likud party, with three logical contenders for the defense ministry - considered to be the No. 3 position in Israel, after prime minister and foreign minister.
Ariel Sharon was defense minister from 1981 until 1983, when he was forced to resign after Israel assumed some responsibility for the massacre of Palestinian refugees in the Sabra and Shatilla camps near Beirut.
Sharon masterminded the 1982 invasion of Lebanon and says he will never speak to Arafat, making him extremely popular among hard-liners.
Rafael Eitan, another contender, was chief-of-staff at that time and was reprimanded by an Israeli investigation into the massacre, which was carried out by Israel's Christian allies in Lebanon.
Only Yitzhak Mordechai, recently retired as the Northern Commander, has a record relatively unsullied by scandal.
Netanyahu's erstwhile rival in Likud, David Levy, is seen as a top contender for foreign minister.
Netanyahu has 45 days to present his choices for majority approval in the Knesset.
Likud representatives met with the members of the new centrist Third Way party today but failed to close a deal.
The Third Way supports continuing much of the peace process initiated by the government of Peres and his slain predecessor, Yitzhak Rabin.
There is considerable concern among left-wing Israelis, and among Arabs and Palestinians, that Netanyahu will stick to campaign promises to slow the peace process.
Third Way leader Avigdor Kahalani said last week that he would not join a coalition that backs down from peace commitments. On that score, he seemed satisfied today.
What troubled him was the Likud's apparent commitment to restore the power of a rabbinical say in Israeli society, which was eroded under the last Cabinet - the first wholly secular government in Israeli history.
"We are not willing to change the status quo about the religion here in Israel," Kahalani said.
Netanyahu narrowly won the May 29 vote with a campaign that blamed Peres for being soft on the Arabs and not preventing terrorist attacks that have killed some 200 Israelis in the past three years.
Four Israeli telephone repairmen were slightly injured today by a bomb hidden in an olive grove in a West Bank village - the first attack on Israelis since Netanyahu's election.
Over the weekend, Netanyahu pledged to strengthen relations with Jordan and Egypt and to pursue new agreements with other Arab states.
But he made no specific policy statements on issues his government will face immediately, like the planned Israeli troop pullout from the West Bank city of Hebron.
Syrian leader Hafez Assad today ruled out peace talks with Israel until he learned more about the positions of Israel's new prime minister.
Assad has demanded the return of the Golan Heights that Israel captured in the 1967 Mideast War.
 Load-Date: June 3, 1996

 

End of Document
