

On the Road, With Bob Dole
October 11, 1996, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 1226 words
Byline: BY HUGH A. MULLIGAN, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo.
Body




Presidential campaigning means 16 hours of numbing routine more than occasionally broken by frustrating, irritating moments.
Hecklers in Newt Gingrich masks. An airport pep rally drowned out by departing jets. Irate baseball fans at St. Louis' Busch Stadium jeering a homeplate autographing session with cries of "Move it out. We paid to see a ballgame, not a bunch of politicians." Church bells and factory whistles intruding on a speech at a plant gate.
"No audio," Bob Dole groaned when the sound system failed in Pittsburgh. "This may be one of my better days."
When things do go right, which is most of the time if you don't count poll results, it goes like this:
Flying 5,000 miles to 10 battleground states in a week.
Enduring a string of high school bands or rock groups playing "Dole Man" to the tune of Sam and Dave's "Soul Man."
Addressing the National Guard convention in Dallas and the American Legion in Salt Lake City and then delivering major speeches at two colleges on successive days.
Always asking what city you are landing in so you can deliver the ritual greeting on the tarmac without mistaking the fine folk in Covington, Tenn., for the fine folk in Covington, Ky., as President Clinton did recently.
Patiently listening to the same gripes about government bureaucracy from selected audiences of small-business men, teachers and parents at "Listening to America" meetings intended to showcase the candidate's caring side.
Chatting on the campaign plane phone with local radio talk show hosts.
Checking with campaign headquarters in Washington every couple of hours and memorizing the names of local GOP candidates to be recognized at each stop.
Working "the rope line" to shake hands with well-wishers and signing autographs 'til the fingers on your one good hand, the left one, go numb.
Somehow during this wearying week, the Republican presidential nominee also found time to record his weekly radio address; bone up on questions for the upcoming debates; confer by cell phone with Colin Powell, foreign policy adviser Jeane Kirkpatrick and President Clinton about the Iraq crisis; rewrite a values speech he deemed "inappropriately critical of the president;" attend several after-hours fund-raisers; and meet after midnight with GOP governors in two states Clinton won four years ago.
Bob Dole has been doing this sort of thing for 44 years, ever since he ran for county attorney in his native Russell, Kansas.
He has run for president "two and half times," by his own careful count, figuring the election is still weeks off. He also ran for vice president on the losing Gerald Ford ticket and has crisscrossed the country hundreds of times as Republican national chairman and Senate GOP leader.
"I love campaigning, been doing it all my life," Dole enthused, settling back at his work table on the campaign plane for a chat with this reporter, two years his junior. "It gets into your system. We were out the other night in Santa Barbara giving out autographs by flashlight."
Midway through a week of 16-hour days, he seemed relaxed and immune to jetlag. His only complaint was stiff fingers "from autographing footballs. With Jack Kemp on the team, we're getting a lot of those little footballs, and they're hard for me to handle."
Dole's stamina and enthusiasm for the road brought to mind 76-year-old Pope John Paul II, with whom this reporter has traveled on almost every continent in the past decade. As the GOP-chartered Boeing 727 streaked through fluffy clouds over the Rockies, Dole mused about what would happen if he and the pontiff cashed in their frequent flyer miles: "We might NOT put any airlines out of business, but we could fly free for six months."
In St. Louis, Dole joined Kemp under the broiling sun at Eero Saarinen's soaring 630-foot stainless steel arch for a two-hour rally. While perspiring journalists sought shade under the platform, Dole, whose only known hobby is acquiring a tan, flourished like a Kansas sunflower. Similarly, TV kleig lights, which left the rest of us mopping our brows and fanning furiously with his campaign literature, did not even tempt him to loosen his always carefully knotted tie.
Walking at his usual brisk pace, the candidate at one airport called out to a good ol' boy in a Dole straw hat leaning into a pay phone: "Tell whoever it is you're talking to Bob Dole says hello."
"It's my wife," the man called back. "She says hi, but she's still voting for Clinton."
Unruffled, Dole later poked his head into a stroller full of 9-month-old triplets. Two were asleep. The third stuck out her tongue at him.
At the headquarters of Casey General Stores among the cornfields of Ankeny, Iowa, he scrooched down at a play table loud with moppets in the day-care center. As network microphones hovered, he asked a dimpled darling "and how old are you?" She held up four fingers for a zero sound bite.
Only rarely did the age issue surface, and usually it was the candidate who brought it up. His favorite one-liner is to produce a copy of his favorite amendment, the 10th, which restricts powers of the federal government, and declare: "I wasn't there when the founding fathers wrote this, but Strom Thurmond was."
The generation gap yawned briefly at a church-run high school in Dayton, Ohio, when 15-year-old Brett Anderson was asked if he knew why Dole always shakes hands with his left. "Sure,' he replied. "His right arm got zapped by a machine gun in Vietnam."
Through it all, Dole betrayed no signs of tiring, while palpable fatigue gripped the press holding pen at the back of the plane. We were catching five to six hours sleep a night - less in Salt Lake City, where we waited until 2 a.m. for the candidate's statement on Iraq. Each time I attempted a catnap, a seat belt sign would blast from the intercom or campaign aides known as "muffins" would arrive - like hospital nurses awaking you for sleeping pill - with copies of almost the same speech Dole gave yesterday.
Often we landed in cities hours after the restaurants had closed and room service shut down for the night. We settled for pretzels and chips from the lobby machines and, once, cold pizza. The schedule left no opportunity to send out laundry, and by week's end the flower of American journalism emitted the fragrance of a locker room.
Baggage calls for the campaign plane came at 6:55 a.m., leaving little time for even a continental breakfast before the "morning sweep" when Secret Service agents and bomb-sniffing dogs probed carry-on bags and camera equipment.
Dole, who professes to watch his weight on the campaign trail, often began the day with a "long john," a chocolate-covered, calorie-loaded cruller that guaranteed no matter who wins the White House, junk food will not lack for national leadership.
No matter how early the wakeup call, a fresh-looking Dole appeared in faultlessly pressed gray slacks, blazer jacket and conservative tie, his hair carefully parted with the barber comb he keeps in his back pocket.
How does he do it mile after mile, day after day?
These questions brought to mind an incident on the last day of the pope's visit to New York just about a year ago this time. "And how is the Holy Father looking this morning?" the Vatican press secretary was asked.
He surveyed the bleary-eyed journalists assembled in the ballroom of the New York Sheraton and replied: "Better than anyone in this room."
 Load-Date: October 11, 1996

 

End of Document
