

On the back roads of South America, the Tibet Cafe flourishes
The Associated Press
April 22, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 589 words
Byline: KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: USPALLATA, Argentina
Body




The British traveler did a double-take when he saw the modern-day pagoda, its engraved stone columns and red-shingled roof rising up against the South American Andes.
Weary from trekking through the mountains, Tim Stewart puzzled over the apparition in a remote mountain village along the Argentine-Chilean border.
"Kind of weird, huh?" the 27-year-old London lawyer said. "You wouldn't expect to see a Tibetan-themed bar in the middle of the Argentine desert."
The Tibet Cafe is a remnant of Uspallata's transformation two years ago into the set for the Hollywood film, "Seven Years in Tibet." Hundreds of Hollywood actors and native Tibetans flooded Uspallata (pronounced oos pah SHAH tah) an arid village of 5,000.
With them came jobs and months of attention, a short-lived phenomenon the sleepy settlement still talks about over coffee and sodas at the Tibet Cafe.
Seeking an escape recently from the mountain sun, local resident Mariana Mojo slid into a corner chair and leaned against a wall filled with black-framed pictures of a bearded Brad Pitt surrounded by Tibetan monks in burgundy robes.
"This cafe reminds me of a different time, a different world," she said wistfully, glancing at the cafe's wooden bar decorated with miniature Buddhas and golden prayer wheels. "The place brings back really good memories."
When the camera crews left in January 1997 following three months of filming, the celebrity, hustle-and-bustle - and jobs - brought by the Hollywood production went with them.
In "Seven Years in Tibet" Pitt portrays Austrian mountaineer Heinrich Harrer, whose 1953 memoir was the basis for the film about his flight from a British POW camp in India to the northern Himalayan Mountains. There, Harrer stumbled across the Tibetan capital of Lhasa and befriended and tutored a young Dalai Lama.
The wilds around Uspallata - a bare and unending desert plain surrounded by Andean peaks - were chosen for the film's location after Chinese authorities refused to allow it to be filmed in Tibet.
Suddenly it was hard to get a room in the normally vacant Hotel Uspallata and the barren dirt roads leading to the town center - a gas station and a mini-strip mall of four stores - buzzed with commotion. Job opportunities in the struggling provincial town were no longer limited to a nearby army base, the hotel, or a handful of mom-and-pop restaurants grilling up Argentina's famed beef.
"Uspallata changed almost overnight, it was incredible. Big trucks were roaming around, huge crowds were gathering," Daniel Vicent Huittirrez, 20, recalled wistfully.
"People still talk about all the work then," said Juan Pizarro, 17, who made $ 30 dollars a day helping Pitt's security entourage. Now, he gets by doing odd jobs around town.
Huittirrez worked herding the animals used in the movie and preparing food for the crews. Now he's back to working the bar at the Hotel Uspallata.
Local officials had hoped Sony studios, which produced the $ 70 million movie, would give the town its towering sets and props so they could be used to promote Uspallata as a location for future movies.
When that failed, Carlos Maza, a local businessman, bought some of the props and the rustic dark-stained wood used to build the Tibetan village homes, and the Tibet Cafe was born.
Still, few Uspallata residents have actually seen the movie that brought their town into the spotlight: The closest theater is about 100 miles away in Mendoza, the nearest city.
"They say you can't even tell it's Uspallata," said Huittirrez. "But all of us here would recognize it."
 Load-Date: April 22, 1999

 

End of Document
