

Out with the old and colorful; in with the new and functional
The Associated Press
July 4, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 653 words
Byline: By PRISCILLA CHEUNG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HONG KONG
Body




Crowded, colorful and heart-stopping is giving way to shiny, hi-tech and functional.
When the wheels of Cathay Pacific Flight 251 bound for London leave a runway that pokes out into Kowloon Bay on Sunday night, downtown Kai Tak airport will be history.
During the night, workers will load tons of airport equipment on trucks and barges and haul it 20 miles to the edge of an outlying island. Seven hours later, gleaming new Hong Kong International at Chek Lap Kok opens for business.
It's a bittersweet time for Hong Kong, which has grown to love Kai Tak over its 73 years, despite its noise and roof-skimming approaches over Hong Kong. Chek Lap Kok, dedicated by Chinese President Jiang Zemin on Thursday and used by President Clinton for his visit last week, just won't be the same.
Chek Lap Kok's eight-level passenger terminal, one of the largest enclosed spaces in the world, features a metal wing-like roof designed by British architect Norman Foster. The $ 20 billion airport was built by flattening two islets and reclaiming land.
The glass-walled terminal gives a sweeping view of mountains, a glimpse of the ocean and plenty of sunlight - unlike the cramped, windowless Kai Tak. A driverless shuttle train carries passengers under the central concourse.
The timing, however, couldn't be much worse. Asia's financial turmoil has thrown Hong Kong into recession, and tourist arrivals are down nearly 25 percent.
Visits to Kai Tak have been soaring - at least by residents looking for a final thrill.
Chan Shuk-man, a chubby-cheeked 5-year-old, nestled in her father's arms on top of an airport garage and watched a Qantas jumbo jet arrive. The plane glided over apartment buildings that crowd rows of congested streets.
The child had a typical reaction to the typical Kai Tak landing:
"It's coming toward us," she said. "No! It's turning! Look! It's touching the rooftop. Dad, it's not going to make it. Wa...!" She covered her eyes.
Landings like that provided Kai Tak's unique appeal, and ultimately doomed it. The International Federation of Airline Pilots' Association recently rated it "critically deficient," and many have complained of the gut-wrenching approach.
Chek Lap Kok couldn't be more different. Its 6-million-square-foot terminal is nine times bigger. Unlikely Kai Tak, which is closed at night because of the noise over residential areas, the new one will run around the clock because of its more distant location. Ultimately, it is designed to take 87 million passengers annually.
Despite its size and architecture, the point of Chek Lap Kok isn't to dazzle.
"There's nothing unique in the airport," said Airport Authority spokesman Phillip Bruce. "Our aim is to take passengers in and out as quickly as possible."
The airport project includes a 4,475-foot-long suspension bridge, an express highway and a railway to link the remote airport to downtown.
Construction has been plagued by snags and disputes. Its opening was delayed by a dispute between China and Britain over funding when Hong Kong still was a British colony, and by problems in completing the railway.
And now Asia's economic crisis is dimming the airport's prospects.
The International Air Transport Association in February adjusted its five-year forecast of annual growth in passenger traffic in Asia to 4.4 percent, down from 7.7 percent.
The airport relocation also is putting strains on the airlines. Landing charges will be about 20 percent higher. Hong Kong-based Cathay Pacific airline has invested $ 1 billion in a new headquarters at Chek Lap Kok.
Meanwhile, passenger loads are at a 10-year low, and profits way down.
Still, tourism officials have plans for a new convention center and a 1,100-room hotel, Hong Kong's largest.
But flight attendant Beyonka Chan says Kai Tak's closure is a big loss.
"When you come down, you can see all the buildings and the people, all the hustle and bustle," she said. "It's a true Hong Kong experience."
 
 Load-Date: July 4, 1998

 

End of Document
