

People in the News
The Associated Press
September 28, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1281 words
Dateline: ANDERSON, Ind.
Body




Alice Cooper makes sure he leaves his ghoulish act onstage.
"All the people who tried to stay in character all the time are dead - Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, Jim Morrison," Cooper said. "It just kills you."
The 52-year-old rocker, whose real name is Vincent Furnier, has been recording since the late 1960s and recently released his 25th album. His stage show has included fake electrocutions and hangings, live snakes and straitjackets.
"It's all theater … it's like vaudeville with rock music," he said. "We never thought this would last for this length of time. We were a fly-by-night band."
--
LONDON (AP) - The show will go on for Jerry Hall, despite a burglary at her London home.
The 44-year-old ex-wife of Rolling Stone Mick Jagger learned of the theft when she came home Wednesday night. The former model, who is starring in the West End production of "The Graduate", said through a spokesman that she would still appear at Thursday's matinee and evening performances.
The Texas native has received mixed reviews as the seductive Mrs. Robinson, a part made famous by Anne Bancroft in the 1960s film.
--
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The Harlem Globetrotters have gone Hollywood - again.
The team, celebrating its 75th anniversary next year, will appear in comedian Adam Sandler's fall movie "Little Nicky." Team owner Mannie Jackson said the basketball stars had been featured in other films, but the Sandler movie is their first comedy.
"Appearing in the movie will once again remind many people that they're both talented players and wonderful, timeless entertainers," he said.
The Globetrotters, who mix court dexterity with fast-paced visual gags, plan to celebrate their anniversary next January with a Chicago gala featuring Elton John, Burt Reynolds, Dennis Hopper, Carl Reiner, Bob Newhart and Rob Lowe.
--
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - U.N. Secretary-general Kofi Annan, author Salman Rushdie and actress Susan Sarandon paid tribute to a Brazilian photographer who they said had captured the true face of suffering.
They said Sebastiao Salgado, whose exhibit opened Wednesday at the United Nations, shows the plight of refugee children forced to flee war, ethnic cleansing and extreme poverty.
Annan said Salgado's portraits of children from Rwanda, India, Turkey, Iraq, Vietnam and Angola were a reminder that "as billions of our fellow human beings are suffering, we cannot afford to look the other way."
Sarandon, a representative for the United Nations Children's Fund, said the pictures vividly portrayed the poverty and horror that hundreds of thousands of youngsters faced every day.
Rushdie called Salgado "the greatest reportage photographer in the world and a kind of genius."
--
ATLANTA (AP) - Location, location, location.
A restaurant bankrolled by heavyweight boxer Evander Holyfield is down for the count after marshals served eviction papers Wednesday. The building manager said the rent at Holyfield's New South Grill had not been paid in three months.
"We never had the business," chef and general manager John Akhile said.
Donna Gathers, executive director of the Sandy Springs Business Association, said the restaurant was between two office towers, making it difficult for potential customers to find.
Holyfield was in Sydney, Australia, and could not be reached for comment.
--
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - A former middleweight boxing champion has settled his defamation lawsuit against the makers of "The Hurricane," the critically acclaimed movie starring Denzel Washington.
Joey Giardello, whose real name is Carmine Tilelli, filed the federal lawsuit in Philadelphia this year against Universal Pictures, Beacon Communications and Azoff Films.
Terms of the settlement, reached Wednesday, were not disclosed.
Giardello alleged the film inaccurately portrayed him being "relentlessly pummeled" by Rubin "Hurricane" Carter in a 1964 title fight. He sought to have actual bout footage added to the end of the film and unspecified monetary damages.
"What we've essentially done is agree to disagree about that matter," said Gerson Zweifach, who represented the defendants. Zweifach said many boxing experts of the time disputed the judges' unanimous decision in Giardello's favor.
Giardello, a former middleweight boxing champion, said he is satisfied with the resolution.
"For 19 years, I fought the greatest fighters around and I beat Carter fair and square," Giardello said. "I just wanted to set the record straight, and I think it has been."
---
BUFFALO, N.Y. (AP) - When Hollywood power broker Harvey Weinstein of Miramax films received an honorary degree at the University at Buffalo, the man who makes and breaks careers was visibly shaken.
The co-chairman of the studio that has received 148 Oscar nominations and 42 Oscars received the honorary doctoral degree Tuesday at the University at Buffalo's Center for the Arts.
"I've received some honors in my life. I've been lucky that way," the one-time college dropout said. "But I can't tell you how emotional this feels."
Gripping a diploma, the former English major toasted his friends while addressing about 80 invited guests in the university's art gallery.
Weinstein took his first film class at the state university and later dropped out to pursue a career in entertainment. He has since had a hand in "Cider House Rules," "Good Will Hunting," and "Life is Beautiful."
"If his life experience didn't account for 20 credit hours, I don't know what will," said university President William R. Greiner.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Academy Award-nominated director Spike Jonze has joined the advisory board of AtomFilms in a deal that gives the company exclusive rights to short films he directs for two years.
Jonze directed last year's "Being John Malkovich," and has also directed music videos and short films. The four-minute "How They Get There" will debut later this year on the AtomFilms Web site.
AtomFilms, based in Seattle, acquires and distributes short films on its Web site and through DVDs, television, airlines and other outlets. The company made the announcement Wednesday at Digital Hollywood, a trade show being held this week in Beverly Hills.
Jonze will receive an unspecified amount of stock in the company and licensing fees for his films. He will advise the company on working with and recruiting new filmmakers and be available to mentor selected promising filmmakers.
"My role is to come at it from a filmmaker's point of view, giving any input I can and to be able to learn about entertainment on the Internet," he said. "I like the idea of some kid being able to make something with their video camera and being able to distribute it around the world."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Gloria Stuart was once a star. Then she became a star again. Now she has her own star.
The 90-year-old Oscar nominee knelt on the sidewalk Wednesday to unveil her star in the Walk of Fame, along with "Titanic" director James Cameron and several other cast members.
"I didn't expect all this stroking. I have never had such a wonderful period in my life since the past three years on account of Mr. Cameron's 'Titanic.' I wake up every day and say how lucky I am. God loves you and I do too," said Stuart, who played 103-year-old Rose Calvert in "Titanic."
"This is a great celebration of Gloria. But before we get carried away and nominate her for sainthood, I need to tell you she has a potty-mouth," Cameron joked.
"Titanic" represented a comeback for the actress, who starred in dozens of films in the 1930s and 1940s, including "Airmail," "The Old Dark House," "Here Comes the Navy" and "Poor Little Rich Girl."
Stuart is a guest star in the upcoming TV movie "The New Murder, She Wrote." She also stars with Mel Gibson in the upcoming film "Million Dollar Hotel."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY44 of Cooper, Washington, Stuart; AP Photo LON 105 of
 Load-Date: September 29, 2000

 

End of Document
