

People in the News
November 1, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1070 words
Dateline: BANGKOK, Thailand
Body




Make that "Doctor" Tiger.
Kasetsart University plans to give Tiger Woods an honorary doctorate of philosophy in sports science to honor his excellence in golf. He is a national hero in Thailand.
Woods, whose mother is Thai, will be in Bangkok to play in a tournament on Nov. 16-19. The degree presentation will take place Nov. 14.
---
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) - The boss has gone to bat again for the Ohio State Buckeye band.
New York Yankees owner George Steinbrenner and his wife, an alumna, are giving $1.5 million to the university to renovate a band room in Ohio Stadium.
"He's been a longtime friend to the athletic department," said Tom Hof, an associate athletic director. "He's always been a lover of the Ohio State band, and other bands."
The room is expected to be named the Joan Zieg Steinbrenner Band Center after Mrs. Steinbrenner, who grew up in Columbus. George Steinbrenner attended Ohio State before going to Williams College.
The band room is being built as part of the $187 million stadium renovation project.
---
CONNELLSVILLE, Pa. (AP) - Fabian and his wife have been sued by the hotel that was the site of their 1998 wedding.
The Nemacolin Woodlands Resort & Spa claims Fabian Forte and Andrea Patrick Forte still owe almost $5,130 on their $24,000 wedding bill.
"Everything was paid in full. Then five months after the wedding, I get a bill for a major amount of money," said Andrea Forte, the former Miss Pennsylvania in 1980 and Miss West Virginia in 1983.
She said the resort billed the couple for 120 bottles of wine along with beer and liquor.
"There's no possible way in the real world that 108 people had that much to drink. They would not have been able to make it out to their cars if they had," she said.
Fabian was a singer and actor in the 1950s and 1960s. His hits included "Turn Me Loose" and "Tiger."
---
LONDON (AP) - First Stephen King, now Frederick Forsyth.
The best-selling author is publishing a series of short stories exclusively on the Internet. Five stories, published by Online Originals, will be available to download for $2.99 each.
"I'm really just a techno peasant at heart but I like the idea that for just the price of a sandwich anyone, anywhere could sit down and read a story that I might have only just completed," said the author of "The Day of the Jackal" and "The Odessa File."
The first story, "The Veteran," is a tale of violent crime committed in London. It was available starting Wednesday. The other stories in the collection, titled "Quintet," will follow in approximately three-week intervals.
Forsyth has sold more than 60 million books worldwide.
King became the first famous writer to publish exclusively on the Internet when he released the first installment of his tale, "The Plant," in July.
---
LONDON (AP) - The Beatles plan to launch their first official Web site, complete with films and archive material.
The site will contain material contributed by Paul McCartney, George Harrison, Ringo Starr and John Lennon's widow, Yoko Ono, EMI Records said Wednesday.
It will launch on Nov. 13 to coincide with EMI's release of a new collection of The Beatles' biggest hits called "1." The site is based on the 27 tracks on the 79-minute compact disc, each of which has topped the charts in Britain or the United States.
The site also will feature 24 promotional films, single sleeves from around the world and charts from the Beatles' heyday in the early 1960s.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The Grammy Awards are staying on the West Coast, at least for another year.
Organizers announced Tuesday that the 43rd annual music awards show will be held in Los Angeles again next year.
"Hopefully this will end the rivalry with New York," Mayor Richard Riordan said of a past practice of alternating Grammy shows between the cities.
Next year's show - Feb. 21 at the Staples Center - will mark the third year in a row the event has been held here. The show was last in New York in 1998, at Radio City Music Hall.
The decision to return the show to Los Angeles came shortly after New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani got into a public feud with Michael Greene, president of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Academy officials insisted then that it had nothing to do with Giuliani.
---
DETROIT (AP) - Barry Sanders is getting married.
The former Detroit Lions running back plans to wed Detroit TV news anchor Lauren Campbell on Nov. 11 at Plymouth Congregational Church.
"It's going to be a very private and intimate ceremony," said Deborah Collura, news director at WDIV-TV. "Everybody at the station is wishing her all the best."
Sanders, 32, retired from the National Football last year. In his 10-year career, Sanders ran for 15,269 yards, just 1,458 short of Walter Payton's record. He lives in the Detroit suburb of Rochester Hills.
Campbell, 35, began working at WDIV in 1994 and is the weekend morning anchor.
---
LONDON (AP) - It was the first double dubbing of modern times.
Queen Elizabeth II on Tuesday knighted millionaire twins Sir David and Sir Frederick Barclay.
"I don't think it's happened before in recent history and I don't think it's going to happen again in a long time," Sir David said. "For us, it's a wonderful day."
The Barclay brothers, 66, have built an eclectic business empire and amassed vast personal fortunes. Among other assets, they own London's Ritz hotel and The Scotsman, Scotland on Sunday and Sunday Business newspapers.
Buckingham Palace said it was not known when two people last were dubbed knights in a single ceremony.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - Elton John's extensive photography collection is going on display.
The British-born pop star's 380 photographs from his private collection from his homes in Atlanta, France and England will be at the High Museum of Art in Atlanta beginning Saturday.
"I never get fed up with looking at images," John said Tuesday. "I can honestly say that of all the thing's I've collected in my life, nothing has endeared me more than collecting photography."
The exhibition, which primarily comprises vintage 20th century black-and-white photographs, emphasizes portraits, fashion and floral subjects.
John said his collection - more than 2,500 prints - depicts different stages of his life, including a battle with drugs.
One of the prints exhibited is a portrait of John by Chuck Close.
"I wanted it to be as honest as possible," John said. "It's me in the flesh. There's no touching up."
The exhibit will be at the museum until Jan. 28.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY44 of Woods, Steinbrenner, Queen Elizabeth, John
 Load-Date: November 2, 2000

 

End of Document
