

People in the News
The Associated Press
July 19, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1326 words
Dateline: STAMFORD, Conn.
Body




The city of Stamford has a question for Regis Philbin, and it's not multiple choice: Will you pay your tax bill? Philbin's final answer: No problem.
The host of ABC's "Who Wants to be a Millionaire" owes the city $138.20 in property taxes.
Philbin's 5.68 acre estate lies mainly in Greenwich, but a third of an acre is across the city line in Stamford.
Hope Hartman, a spokeswoman for Philbin at ABC, said Philbin thought the Greenwich tax bill covered both cities. Philbin, who also hosts "Regis and Kathie Lee Live," will resolve the matter as quickly as possible, she said.
---
HOUSTON (AP) - Ted Nugent would rather silence his guitar than his mouth.
Citing freedom of speech, the rocker is pulling out of an Aug. 22 concert with Kiss because the promoters want him to promise not to make offensive remarks.
Nugent raised the ire of Latinos at an April concert here when he criticized people who live in the United States but don't speak English and told them to return to their native countries. The profanity-laced tirade echoed similar comments at San Antonio concert a day earlier.
Local Hispanic community leaders are organizing a national boycott of Nugent.
"We respect freedom of speech but we objected to the demeaning manner in which he said his remarks and the effect it has on immigrant bashing," said Johnny Mata of the League of United Latin American Citizens.
"He needs to learn by being hit in the pocket book," Mata said.
---
LONDON (AP) - Even after a 45-year career, singer Shirley Bassey is not immune to stage fright, and she got a bad case of butterflies Wednesday.
She wasn't at a concert. She was made a dame by Queen Elizabeth II.
"I am shaking more now than I was before," said Bassey, 63, after the ceremony at Buckingham Palace. "I have got a lump in my throat and I am nearly in tears."
Bassey, best-known for crooning the sultry theme song to the 1964 James Bond film "Goldfinger," began her career singing in Welsh workingmen's clubs and went on to score 10 British top-10 hits.
British fans regard her as a national institution, and some lined up outside the palace with banners proclaiming "Congratulations, Dame Shirley."
---
HONG KONG (AP) - The author of "Jaws" wants to see a lot fewer shark fins, at least in soup bowls.
"Every bowl of shark fin soup involves killing an animal. Shark fins don't grow back," said Peter Benchley, who is touring Asia to campaign against industrial practices that kill sharks.
"Sharks have become much more the victims than villains," he said.
Benchley is working with the San Francisco-based environmental group WildAid.
Hong Kong is the world's biggest importer of shark fins, the group says. Shark fin soup is a status meal, and a bowl can cost as much as $90.
---
MAHWAH, N.J. (AP) - Impeached by Congress following his affair with a 25-year-old intern, President Clinton still reigns supreme among American children, according to a survey.
He beat out Pope John Paul II, Microsoft founder Bill Gates, astronaut John Glenn and basketball star Michael Jordan in the survey that asked children to name the world's most important person.
The survey, conducted by the World Almanac for Kids and released this week, offered readers age 6 to 14 the chance to win prizes by naming their picks and explaining their choices. It was contained in the 2000 edition.
Clinton, the choice of 30 percent of the respondents, was cited because of his peacekeeping negotiations, his improvements to education and because he is "the ruler of a free world."
The pope, who got 20.6 percent, helps make the world a better place, the children said. "My Mom" got 20.4 percent, "My Dad," 15.8 percent, and Gates 15 percent.
Others receiving votes: civil rights pioneer Rosa Parks, astronaut Neil Armstrong, "Harry Potter" author J.K. Rowling, slain civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr., first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, talk show host Rosie O'Donnell and soccer star Mia Hamm, who beat out God by a slight margin.
Frank McGuire, 10, of Orlando, Fla., won the top prize - an expense-paid trip to Washington, D.C. - for his entry, which named Bill Gates, Nelson Mandela and Chinese president Jiang Zemin. The entry was designed like a newspaper page and listed each of his choices' contributions to society.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The late Broadway producer David Merrick liked to terrorize theater critics. Take it from Clive Barnes, theater critic.
That way, Merrick could believe poor reviews were spite and good ones were the result of his handiwork, said Barnes, who writes for the New York Post.
Barnes and others gathered this week for a memorial service on the stage of the St. James Theater, where Merrick's "Hello, Dolly!" ran for years and his "42nd Street" finished its long Broadway run.
Zack Manna, executive director of the David Merrick Arts Foundation, said Merrick "was the last of the great American showmen, respected, feared, admired and hated but never ignored. He was no saint and he worked hard making sure people understood that."
Merrick produced many successes between 1944 and 1996, including "The Matchmaker," "Gypsy," "Carnival," "Stop the World - I Want To Get Off!" and "Oliver!" He also produced authors Tennessee Williams, John Osborne, Brian Friel and Tom Stoppard when others wouldn't.
Howard Kissel of the Daily News, author of a Merrick biography, said Merrick "timed" his April 25 death at age 88 well: A few days earlier, Broadway producer rival Alexander Cohen died, and his obituary ran on a Saturday. Merrick's ran in better-read midweek editions, and on Page 1.
---
MIAMI (AP) - International recording star Alejandro Fernandez is being sued by a celebrity photographer who claims he and his pregnant wife were assaulted by Fernandez and his entourage last November.
Lawyers representing Angel Mora and wife Celia Oliveira filed suit Monday in a Miami-Dade County court against Fernandez and Sony Discos.
The suit claims Fernandez and two Sony executives attacked the couple after Mora took a picture of the star outside the Sony Music building in Miami Beach. It contends the label is liable because the three were "acting within the course and scope" of their employment at Sony.
"We're looking to protect our clients' and all journalists' constitutional rights," Leoncio de la Pena, Mora's attorney, said Tuesday. "If it's on a public street, he has a right to take a picture."
Oliveira - three months pregnant at the time - claimed someone grabbed her, pushed her away and hit her in the stomach when she tried to videotape the fight between her husband and the others. The baby was apparently unharmed.
The couple seeks at least $75,000 in damages.
Defense attorney Mark Schnapp said he was confident the court would find the case without merit.
Fernandez had Billboard Magazine's top Latin album in 1998 and was in seventh place on the Latin top 50 as of last week with his newest album, "Entre Tus Brazos."
---
CHARLESTON, S.C. (AP) - An entrepreneur is criticizing Martha Stewart, saying the decor queen ruined one of her designer handbags in an issue of Martha Stewart Weddings magazine.
Mary Norton, president of Moo Roo Custom Handbags, said one of her handbags featuring silk gardenias was to appear in the summer issue of Stewart's magazine. Norton said Stewart's editors redesigned the bag for the photo shoot without consulting her.
The editors replaced the gardenias with live orchids and credited the design to Moo Roo in the magazine.
"She wouldn't take a Chanel suit and rip off the pockets," Norton said. "But because we're a small business, they just don't care."
Susan Magrin, a spokeswoman for Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia Inc., said it was clear from the caption that the handbag had been altered. She said Stewart apologized for the misunderstanding and offered to run a retraction.
Norton, however, wants a full-page advertisement, editorial or monetary reimbursement equaling the cost of a full-page ad.
"I feel somebody's got to stand up for small artists and craftsmen," Norton said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY44 of Philbin, Fernandez, Merrick. HK101 of Benchley.
 Load-Date: July 20, 2000

 

End of Document
