

People in the News
The Associated Press
June 16, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1574 words
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO
Body




What started as an attempt to honor Joe DiMaggio is turning into an ugly infield brawl.
San Francisco leaders tried to honor the native son by naming a playground for him. DiMaggio's estate sued in May, saying the spot - where the Yankee Clipper played sandlot baseball as a child - wasn't fit for the honor.
Now the dismayed city has asked a federal judge to dismiss the suit.
"Plaintiff offers no precedent or authority for the startling proposition that a city cannot name a landmark after a favorite son," city attorneys said in court papers.
Morris Engelberg, a trustee and attorney for Dimaggio's estate, based in Hollywood, Fla., has said naming North Beach Playground after DiMaggio "is both morally and legally wrong … You can't name something without permission."
The park was christened Joe DiMaggio North Beach Playground in February 1980, but because of bureaucratic delays, the name didn't become official until May.
To bolster its case, the city submitted to the court a declaration from DiMaggio's brother Dom about the importance of the playground to the DiMaggio brothers and the pickup games they played there.
---
LONDON (AP) - Madonna's filmmaker boyfriend escaped with a wrist slap after admitting he assaulted a fan outside the singer's London home.
Guy Ritchie was cautioned Thursday for common assault, a relatively minor charge, a Scotland Yard spokesman said.
Ritchie, director of the hit British film "Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels," was arrested May 17 after Jonathon Sanders claimed he was assaulted.
Ritchie said Sanders was an obsessed fan who had followed Madonna for weeks, lurked outside her home in the ritzy Kensington neighborhood and tried to get into her car.
"Guy pushed the guy. I'm not trying to justify what he did, but he'd had enough," said Kris Thykier, Ritchie's spokesman. "His girlfriend is five months pregnant, after all."
Sanders denied he was a stalker but admitted he enjoyed taking photographs of the singer.
---
TOKYO (AP) - Bill Gates' legal battles haven't soured him on the computer revolution.
The Microsoft founder received an honorary degree from a Japanese university Friday and told students information technology will remake the world in the next decade.
Last week, a U.S. judge ordered Microsoft to split into two companies.
Gates assured his young audience of Microsoft's commitment to continue building software, and predicted that student chores like note-taking would one day be done on computerized tablets.
"We're just at the beginning of this revolution," he said. "Even in the next 10 years, we'll do more to change society than we've done in the last 25."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Kathryn Bigelow and Luc Besson might not have kissed, but they've made up.
A settlement was reached Thursday in the American movie producer's $2 million suit against the French director. At issue was Besson's 1999 film, "The Messenger: The Story of Joan of Arc."
Although terms of the agreement were kept secret, Bigelow's attorney, Gregory Dovel, said his client was satisfied with the amicable settlement.
"She plans some day to get her movie made," he said.
Bigelow, whose producing credits include "Point Break," sued Besson in 1998, saying the two agreed in 1996 to make a Joan of Arc movie, "Company of Angels."
Bigelow's suit said that Besson walked off the project to make "The Messenger" when Bigelow refused to cast his wife, Milla Jovovich, as the lead.
Jovovich starred in "The Messenger." The movie was a flop in North America but critically acclaimed in Paris, where Besson has achieved cult status. Jovovich and Besson have since divorced.
---
BURBANK, Calif. (AP) - Jesse Ventura has managed to get himself jobs as a wrestler, actor and governor. Now he's trying to help soon-to-be-unemployed steel workers in his home state.
"I'm going to take this opportunity now, and you're going to help me," Minnesota's chief executive told host Jay Leno in an appearance Thursday on "The Tonight Show."
He explained that a taconite mine in Hoyt Lakes, Minn., is being shut down "and it's really tragic."
"If you want to move to Hoyt Lakes, Minnesota, and have 1,400 great workers, give me a call at the Capitol in St. Paul," Ventura said.
He stumbled a little when Leno asked what taconite is.
"Taconite is those little, like, kind of iron balls that they make things out of, I guess," Ventura ventured. "I'm not an expert on it, I'm just the governor."
For the record, taconite is a low-grade form of iron ore that is refined into higher-grade pellets that are used to make steel.
---
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Tim McGraw said he was trying to protect his children when he intervened between New York police and fellow country singer Kenny Chesney.
McGraw and Chesney were arrested June 3 in Orchard Park, N.Y., after officers said Chesney took a police horse without permission from a backstage area. Police said McGraw attacked them when they tried to stop Chesney.
In a statement, McGraw said he tried to intervene when he saw officers trying to "rip (Chesney) from the horse," even after Chesney had raised his hands to surrender.
"At no time did I throw any punches or put anyone in anything remotely resembling a choke hold," McGraw said. "One of the officers pulled his nightstick and hit me at least three times on my leg."
He said he also feared for the safety of his children, who were playing in the area.
McGraw, 33, husband of country star Faith Hill, was charged with felony assault, obstructing governmental administration, menacing and resisting arrest. Chesney, 32, was charged with disorderly conduct.
A court hearing is set for July 18.
Chesney has said he had permission to take the horse and that the incident was "blown way out of proportion."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Andy Dick has complied with rehabilitation terms under a program that could erase cocaine and marijuana possession charges from his record, a judge said.
Superior Court Judge Alice Altoon read a progress report Thursday and said the former "NewsRadio" actor appeared to be in compliance. She scheduled another hearing for Jan. 26.
Last August, Dick was ordered to undergo two years of rehab after pleading guilty to cocaine and marijuana possession as well as possession of a smoking device.
The charges stem from a car crash last year in which Dick, 33, toppled a utility pole near the Hollywood Bowl.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Bone Thugs-N-Harmony member Stanley Howse has been convicted of pointing an assault rifle at a man, despite the victim's testimony that the rapper was a friend who never pulled a gun on him.
Howse, 27, has been convicted seven times since the mid-1990s of crimes ranging from assault to spousal abuse, according to court documents.
The Grammy-award winning rapper, known as "Flesh-N-Bone," faces up to nearly 20 years in prison. He was found guilty of committing assault with a semiautomatic firearm and being a convicted felon in possession of firearms.
Sentencing was scheduled July 14.
Police said Tarrance Vickers told them Howse pulled an AK-47 out of a baby crib last December, loaded it and pointed it at him.
In testimony this week, Vickers disavowed just about everything police said he told them.
In a separate case, Howse is to appear in court Tuesday on charges of weapons violations, making a terrorist threat and resisting an officer in January at a relative's house in Los Angeles.
---
ATHENS, Ga. (AP) - Who says there's nothing funny about faith?
Jeff Foxworthy mixed humor and religion in a speech to about 4,000 United Methodists attending the denomination's North Georgia Conference annual meeting.
"Sophisticated people have retirement pensions; rednecks, we have the lottery," the comedian said Wednesday.
Foxworthy, who says in recent years he was born again and began taking his message on the road, spoke of his alienation from the church as a teen-ager.
"Sometimes we're out there doing God's work and we start wanting credit for our own righteousness," he said. "That's why I feel like a lot of people drop out of church, because they feel they can't measure up to that level of righteousness."
Foxworthy urged the audience to regard people as God would.
"God looks at some pretty insignificant-looking people in some pretty mighty ways, and I want you to remember that," he said.
---
PARIS (AP) - Isabelle Adjani has boycotted a state dinner honoring Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, decrying what she said were continuing human rights abuses in the North African nation.
In an interview published Thursday in the daily Liberation, the French film star said she turned down the invitation from French President Jacques Chirac to attend the state dinner Wednesday.
"I refuse to be an accomplice," said Adjani, whose father was Algerian. "There's still no justice worthy of that name in Algeria and 10,000 people are still missing.
"The government says the guilty parties have been killed or cannot be found, and whole families are attending sham trials. Meanwhile, Mr. Bouteflika is in Paris receiving the highest honors."
Adjani, 45, said she had great hope that Bouteflika, who became president last year, would bring peace to Algeria, battling an Islamic insurgency since 1992. The violence has left more than 100,000 people dead and led to charges of massive human rights abuses.
"Today, that hope has been wiped out," she said. "Algerians continue to die, perhaps less spectacular but equally abominable deaths."
Adjani has starred in such films as "Adele H," "Camille Claudel" and "Queen Margot."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY44 of Madonna, Gates; NY14 of Foxworthy, Adjani
 Load-Date: June 17, 2000

 

End of Document
