

Peruvian hostage-takers say they have 'all the time in the world'
February 17, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 418 words
Byline: By ANITA SNOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




Seventy-two men began their third month in captivity Monday, and the rebels holding them hostage said they have "all the time in the world" to wait for the government to give in to their demands.
The rebels from the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement reiterated that no one in the Japanese ambassador's residence would be released until the government frees hundreds of jailed rebels.
"Without an exchange, there is no way out," Issac Velazco, the rebels' spokesman in Europe, told The Associated Press late Sunday night in a telephone interview from Madrid.
"We are not going to surrender. The (rebel) command is prepared to take all the time necessary. We literally have all the time in the world."
The release of jailed rebels has been the rebels' main demand since they stormed a gala party at the diplomatic residence on Dec. 17 and took hundreds of people captive. Most of the hostages since have been released.
President Alberto Fujimori has refused to discuss trading jailed rebels for hostages.
Talks between the two sides began last week, but appeared to bog down during the third meeting on Saturday. No date has been set for the next meeting.
Patience with the hostage crisis - now the longest-running in Latin America - was wearing thin as the standoff entered its 63rd day.
"This is dragging on," said Roman Catholic Cardinal Augusto Vargas Alzamora of Lima. "The two sides must start direct talks over the concrete issue: the liberation of the 72 hostages."
At the same time, Peruvians have been touched by the plight of the hostages' families.
Hugo Sivina wrote to Japanese leader Ryutaro Hashimoto earlier this month, asking for help in getting his father - Supreme Court justice Hugo Sivina - freed in time for the boy's birthday celebration.
He turned 12 on Monday, his wish unfulfilled.
"Greetings for my papa," the boy told his father in a radio broadcast Monday morning. "I am fine, papa. I am very fine. I am strong. Despite the distance, I send you a big hug."
In Tokyo, meanwhile, the Japanese government's top spokesman criticized a TV network that had communicated with rebels and the hostages inside the residence.
Chief Cabinet Secretary Seiroku Kajiyama said TV Asahi, which set up a radio link when its reporter sneaked into the house on Jan. 7, should not have publicized the fact.
"If this has a serious effect (on the standoff), it would be unpardonable," Kajiyama said.
Asahi severed the radio link on Thursday after the Japanese government warned that the contact could threaten negotiations.
 Load-Date: February 17, 1997

 

End of Document
