

Picabo, Tomba provide intrigue; Seizinger, Maier the power
The Associated Press
February 1, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1104 words
Byline: By BOB BAUM, AP Sports Writer
Body




Picabo and Tomba: No more intriguing skiers have graced the Olympics.
Picabo Street, with her effervescent enthusiasm, unshakable confidence and nasty scar on a knee that's barely healed, is shooting for a triumphant comeback. Alberto Tomba, the Italian playboy who's among the greatest technical skiers ever, is seeking to punctuate his extraordinary career with a last hurrah in the Japanese Alps.
Their quests are perfect storybook fodder for Alpine skiing, one of the glamour events of the Nagano Games.
But while Street and Tomba will be the sentimental favorites in Japan, Germany's Katja Seizinger and Austria's Hermann Maier are more realistic picks, based on their dominant World Cup seasons.
No matter who's the big winner, at least snow is no longer a concern.
For anxious weeks, organizers worried whether there would be enough in Hakuba and Shiga Kogen, the mountain villages where the Alpine drama begins Feb. 8. About six weeks before the games, tourists, ski resort owners and Olympic officials gathered at a Hakuba temple to pray for snow.
"In troubled times we pray to the gods," Hakuba Mayor Nobuyuki Fukushima told a Nagano newspaper.
Their prayers were answered. A series of storms dumped more than 4 feet of snow on the mountains around Nagano.
Such is the quirky weather of Japan's mountains, where rapidly changing conditions could disrupt the Olympic schedule and the skiers' psyches.
"Weather can turn from sunny to rainy or snowy, from cold to warm, during the race," said Isolde Kostner of Italy.
The lack of snow wasn't the only problem. Months before the Olympics, the International Ski Federation complained that the men's downhill course at the Happo'one ski area was too short. The course was eventually lengthened by 279 feet, with Japanese authorities reluctantly allowing it to encroach into a national park.
The downhill course will be the scene of the Olympics' first event, where Maier will be favored despite sore shins.
Also a top contender in the super G, giant slalom and combined events, Maier won five races in a row during his first full season as a member of the Austrian World Cup team, before resting his shins on the advice of his doctor in late January.
The 25-year-old skiier already has as many points as last year's World Cup champion Luc Alphand of France earned in the entire season. He is nicknamed "The Alien" for his otherworldly abilities.
"I'm the best-placed skier from this planet," Austrian teammate Andreas Schifferer said after he finished second to Maier in the super giant slalom in Schladming, Austria.
Behind Maier are a seemingly endless string of Austrians who could contend for medals if they haven't been burned out by the extreme competitiveness of just making their country's Olympic team.
Among them are: Schifferer, Hans Knauss, Stephan Eberharter and Werner Franz in the speed races (downhill and super G); and Thomas Sykora and Thomas Stangassinger, the 1994 slalom gold medalist, in the technical races (slalom and giant slalom). Among non-Austrians, those to watch include Italy's Kristian Ghedina and Norway's Lasse Kjus.
The downhill favorites will not include America's Tommy Moe, the 1994 gold medalist who has languished far behind the Europeans since coming back from a knee injury two years ago.
With fellow American Kyle Rasmussen in the early stages of his comeback from a knee injury and A.J. Kitt even further behind, the downhill seems almost assuredly a European event.
Street, however, is still confident she can bring America a gold in the women's downhill, the event that was her springboard to worldwide fame when she took the silver medal four years ago in Lillehammer.
She finished fourth in a World Cup downhill in Italy two weeks before the Nagano Games, a sign that she may again be the best woman downhill racer in the world.
She became the first American skier, man or woman, to win the overall World Cup downhill championship, in 1995 and 1996. But when she seriously hurt her left knee in a crash while training in Vail, Colo., 13 months ago, she no longer was considered the favorite.
Instead, the 27-year-old Seizinger will be the front-runner for the downhill gold for the second Olympics in a row.
She has been a top World Cup contender since 1992. Known for a somewhat aloof personality, Seizinger has won a World Cup record-tying six consecutive races, three downhills and three super Gs, and has developed an outgoing, candid style in post-race interviews.
Seizinger's top competition includes Renate Goetschl of Austria and Deborah Compagnoni of Italy, the gold medalist in the super giant slalom in 1992 and in the slalom in 1994. Pernilla Wiberg, the defending world champion in the downhill, is coming back from injury. Warwara Zelenskaja of Russia won twice on the Hakuba course last year.
Then there is Street, who managed a 10th-place finish in her first World Cup race after her injury.
She delayed her comeback to continue her training so she could be at her best at the Olympics. She also knows the course.
Last year, with her leg in a cast, she climbed on the back of an assistant coach and surveyed the course up close. Since then, she has skied it in her mind thousands of times.
"All I could imagine was running it perfectly and getting a medal around my neck," she said. "I kept seeing it over and over again."
Street might not be the only American woman with a chance for a medal.
After finishing no better than 10th in her five previous World Cup seasons, 22-year-old Kristina Koznick of Burnsville, Minn., has a victory, two seconds and two fourths in slaloms this year.
"I'm getting better and better in each race," she said. "I hope to be perfect by the Nagano Olympics."
The favorite in the women's slalom is Sweden's Ylva Nowen, another skier who has emerged after years of mediocrity.
"It's new to me to be so popular, and somehow embarrassing," Nowen said. "People surround me, they want to know of my private life. I have always been by myself in the past."
In skiing, no one has had a more public private life than the irrepressible Tomba, whose fast-lane lifestyle and outspokenness have blended with his success on the slopes to make him one of Europe's most recognizable athletes over the past decade.
After last season, Tomba flirted with retirement. But with three gold and two silver Olympic medals already in his collection, he couldn't resist the lure of one more games.
At 31 and plagued by a sore back, Tomba has had a sub-par World Cup season. But he won his first World Cup slalom in more than a year in January, his 49th overall career victory.
"I'm here!" he proclaimed.
Just in time for his fourth Olympics.
 Load-Date: February 1, 1998

 

End of Document
