

Pilot, athlete, eldest son. Is he also the unknown soldier?
The Associated Press
May 24, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 888 words
Byline: By HELEN O'NEILL, AP National Writer
Dateline: FLORISSANT, Mo.
Body




They call him the Unknown Soldier, but Michael Blassie has never been unknown.
Not to his friend and flight leader, Jim Connally, who saw Blassie's plane nose-dive into the jungle in Vietnam.
Not to his girlfriend, Lou Pennebaker, who would have married him in a heartbeat when she was 20 - still would if only he could walk back into her life.
Certainly not to his mother, Jean, who, 26 years after his death, believes "it's time to bring Michael home."
Officially, Air Force 1st Lt. Michael Joseph Blassie is missing in action, one of more than 2,000 U.S. servicemen unaccounted for in Vietnam.
But a trail of evidence, from the stream near An Loc where some bones were found, to the identification lab in Hawaii where they were sent, to the Tomb of the Unknowns in Arlington National Cemetery where they were buried in 1984, suggests that the unknown soldier is very much known.
The evidence, including Blassie's wallet and dog tags found at the crash site, is so great that the remains - four ribs, a pelvis, the upper part of an arm - were exhumed earlier this month. They are being tested against DNA samples from as many as nine families who lost loved ones in the same region, around the time Blassie was shot down: May 11, 1972.
"He wasn't a genius. He just tried harder than everyone else," Jean Blassie says.
She is in her neat suburban apartment, surrounded by her other children, Judy, Pat, Mary and George. Their father, George, died in 1991.
The kitchen table is covered with photographs of Michael: the big brother arm-wrestling little George; the soccer captain leading the team to victory at the Air Force Academy; the boyfriend showing off his brand new red convertible; the pilot in his flight suit beside his A-37 fighter plane.
The pictures evoke memories and smiles. But it is the letters from around the country in the past few months that touch their hearts.
"It's like he has come back," Mrs. Blassie says of the 24-year-old son she couldn't bear to talk about for 10 years.
She recites a poem from a former girlfriend, a sweet, rambling piece about the handsome tennis player who took her to the prom.
She reads a letter from an academy graduate who named his son for Michael, the "sophisticated leader" he would have followed anywhere.
And she grins at the latest revelation - her son's connection to Lucille Ball. Michael was the actress' official escort when she shot the movie "Yours, Mine and Ours" at the academy in 1968.
"All this time, we never knew," Pat says.
There was so much the family didn't know. Especially when it came to Vietnam.
Now photographs arrive in the mail every week: Michael's bunk, the officer's "hootch," rows of concrete "igloos" where the planes were stored, the wooden platform where soldiers sunbathed between rocket attacks.
The photographs and letters are followed by phone calls, haunting glimpses into a world that was nothing like the one Michael described in letters home.
"We were just two young thinkers caught up in an insanity we accepted," wrote Jim Acquaviva, a fellow pilot.
"To suddenly hear his name again … I am not ashamed to tell you, I wept."
Tears well up in Blassie's siblings, too.
"I'm 13 years older than he was then," George says, holding a picture of Michael. "And I still look up to him. He still feels like my big brother."
"It's like he has become larger than life, and we are still the same," Pat says.
Back on College Avenue in north St. Louis, her first visit in years, she stops at the little red-brick house on the corner. The windows are boarded up and everything seems so small. But as she stands on the familiar stoop, it's easy to turn back time. It's easy to imagine the strains of a bassoon floating from the window of her brother's room, to smell the leaves he has just raked in the backyard, to see him racing home from school to sell newspapers across the street.
Pat climbs back into the police cruiser. The neighborhood isn't safe anymore and the cops insisted on escorting her. They tell her it's an honor.
There have been many honors in the years since Michael died. In 1984, at a ceremony at the Tomb of the Unknowns, President Reagan, voice breaking, added his.
"As a child, did he play on some street in a great American city? Did he work beside his father on a farm in America's heartland?"
In Meridian, Miss., Lou Adams Pennebaker watched on television and thought of the young pilot who had taught her golf and patriotism and love. They spent a year together before he left for Vietnam.
Through marriage, motherhood and divorce, Lou kept his photograph and his letters.
When his picture flashed on television a few months ago, she felt 20 years old again. Trembling, she walked up to the set and placed her hand on the screen. Then she called Michael's mother.
"It was like my whole life just exploded open," Lou said. "It was a blessing to have had that relationship. To have it come back is another blessing."
In Alaska, Chris Calhoon heard the news and remembered the day he led a mission into the jungle to recover Blassie's remains. Whisked off to a mortuary and later the Central Identification Laboratory in Hawaii, the bones were initially labeled "believed to be" Michael Blassie. The designation was later removed because it was felt the evidence was too slim.
"It's time," Calhoon says, "to finish something I thought was done in 1972."
 Load-Date: May 24, 1998

 

End of Document
