

Political Topics on the Ballot in Bookstores
July 19, 1996, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 1194 words
Byline: By RON BERTHEL, Associated Press Writer
Body




As America's political parties gear up for the November elections, books with political themes are among new titles campaigning for space on retail bookshelves in July.
In "The Choice" (Simon & Schuster), Bob Woodward of the Washington Post chronicles two years of preparations by Bill Clinton and Bob Dole for the presidential election. Woodward also evaluates Hillary Rodham Clinton and Elizabeth Dole as well as major former candidates, declared or potential.
Gary Aldrich alleges that there has been some hanky-panky in the Clinton White House in "Unlimited Access" (Regnery). Aldrich, a former FBI agent who did background checks on White House staffers, describes what he saw - theft, drug use and unauthorized access to classified documents - and tells how the first family sidestepped security procedures to hire friends.
Former senatorial press secretary John L. Jackley hits "Below the Beltway" (Regnery) in his Washington expose on how legislative decisions are influenced by special-interest groups and the lure of money, power and sex.
 
 "Unlimited Partners: Our American Story" (Simon & Schuster) is an updated version of a 1988 dual autobiography of Dole and his wife, former Cabinet member and currently on leave as president of the American Red Cross.
New Jersey Gov. Christine Todd Whitman, a future presidential prospect who removed herself from consideration as Dole's running mate, is the subject of two new books:
 
 "Growing Up Republican" (HarperCollins), Patricia Beard's chronicle of Whitman's rise to become the most prominent woman in the Republican Party, written with Whitman's cooperation; and
 
 "Christine Todd Whitman: The Making of a National Political Player" (Birch Lane) by Art Weissman, statehouse editor for the Asbury Park Press, based on interviews with Whitman, her family and friends, and political experts, allies and foes.
Had enough of politics? Other new books range from near-death experience to the Mafia, frontier Montana and Monica Seles.
Among nonfiction titles is "The Awakening Heart" (Pocket), Betty J. Eadie's sequel to "Embraced by the Light," her recent best seller in which she told about how a near-death experience changed her life. The new book offers more revelations made to her during her visit to "the other side."
In "Mr. Truman's War" (Random House), J. Robert Moskin chronicles the first five months of the Truman administration, which saw the defeat of Nazi Germany and Japan, the dawn of the Atomic Age and the onset of the Cold War.
Dan Wakefield's study of creativity explodes some of its myths, and shows how people can go beyond daily routines and habits to unleash their creativity, in "Creating From the Spirit" (Ballantine).
And in "Monica: From Fear to Victory" (HarperCollins), pro tennis champ Monica Seles offers an autobiography that spotlights her recent comeback from a stab wound that kept her off the courts for two years.
The list of new novels is headed by "The Last Don" (Random House), "Godfather" author Mario Puzo's latest saga of Mafia life. The Corleones make way for the Clericuzios, a New York family involved in a Las Vegas casino and Hollywood films.
 
 "The Solitaire Mystery" (Farrar, Straus and Giroux), Jostein Gaarder's encore to "Sophie's World," is about a father and son who drive from Norway to Greece looking for the boy's long-missing mother. Along the way, the boy finds a magnifying glass and a tiny book, whose tale of a shipwrecked sailor and a game of solitaire has links to his life.
Her fans will fancy Belva Plain's new novel, "Promises" (Delacorte), the story about how a friendship between two women is strained when one's marriage is threatened by adultery and the other learns there is something wrong with her Mr. Right.
In "Vanishing Point" (HarperCollins), Morris West's 26th novel, a New York banker disappears after he closes a huge deal in Paris, and the family enlists his reluctant brother-in-law to search for him.
Two narratives for the price of one - an attorney's firsthand account of her defense of a murder suspect, and a third-person account of the attorney's life - is offered in "Lily White" (HarperCollins) by Susan Isaacs.
Frontier tales abound in Penelope Williamson's "The Outsider" (Simon & Schuster) about a young Amish widow in the Montana Territory whose life changes after she saves a wounded stranger; and A.E. Hotchner's "Louisiana Purchase" (Carroll & Graf), a historical novel told through the life of Guy Laroule, French exile who co-founded St. Louis.
For fantasy fiction fans: "A Crown of Swords" (Tor), Book 7 of Robert Jordan's "The Wheel of Time" saga, about the search for a bowl that might end the world's heat wave and restore natural weather;
 
 "Gibbon's Decline and Fall" (Bantam) by Sheri S. Tepper, about women in search of a long-lost colleague they believe can stem a rapidly declining population;
And "Treasure Box" (HarperCollins), Orson Scott Card's story about a rich recluse who marries into a dysfunctional family and discovers that only he can stop his bride from unleashing an evil force upon the world.
Among new nonfiction books are two by women writing about their fathers:
 
 "Half a Life" (Crown) by Jill Ciment, whose father, unable to cope with the family's relocation, goes mad and is thrown out of the house; and
 
 "Stealing Home" (HarperCollins) by Sharon Robinson, a memoir by the daughter of baseball's Jackie Robinson.
Also: "Prophet of Rage" (Basic Books) by Arthur J. Magida, which the publisher claims is the first biography of Louis Farrakhan, leader of the Nation of Islam; "Lost and Found" (Viking) by Caroline Moorehead, about the 1873 discovery of the gold treasures of Troy, their disappearance and their recent resurfacing in Moscow;
 
 "Fighting With Allies" (Times), a history of the nearly 200-year alliance between the United States and England, by Sir Robin Renwick, former British ambassador to the United States;
 
 "Dead Season" (Pantheon) by Alan Berlow, about several murders in a small town in the Philippines;
 
 "The D.A." (Morrow) by Lawrence Taylor, a year on the job with Larry Longo, a deputy district attorney in Los Angeles; and
 
 "The Manhunter" (Pocket) by John Pascucci, former U.S. marshal who recounts his hunts for terrorists, spies, murderers and their ilk.
New fiction includes "Sacrament" (HarperCollins), Clive Barker's story of a man whose visions inspire a journey to resolve his past; "Encounter With Tiber" (Warner) by Buzz Aldrin and John Barnes, featuring a revived space race, radio signals from distant space and the first city on Mars;
 
 "Casting Off" (Pocket), Elizabeth Jane Howard's fourth and final volume of "The Cazalet Chronicle," which finds the family and England trying to rebound from World War II; "The Third Sister" (Donald I. Fine), Julia Barrett's continuation of Jane Austen's "Sense and Sensibility" featuring Margaret, the third Dashwood daughter;
 
 "On With the Story" (Little, Brown), 12 related short stories by John Barth; and "Sudden Fiction (Continued)" (Norton). edited by Robert Shepard and James Thomas, offering 60 new "short-short" stories, each less than 2,000 words, by Margaret Atwood, Alice Walker, Don DeLillo, Pam Houston and others.
 Load-Date: July 19, 1996

 

End of Document
