

Putting the Nuclear Genie Back in the Bottle Frustrates Some Scientists
November 10, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1316 words
Byline: By IAN MADER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Now that the world's nuclear powers have agreed to end all peacetime nuclear explosions, to protect man and Earth, some critics say man is tossing away chances to move mountains.
These scientists envision using controlled explosions to blast out vast underground storage caverns, stimulate oil fields, prevent earthquakes, generate energy and develop an asteroid defense for the planet.
The Chinese even have proposed blasting a 12-mile chunk from a mountain range to divert the Yarlung River.
China initially demanded an exemption for so-called peaceful nuclear explosions, or PNEs, during the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty negotiations in Geneva. China dropped the demand in July and signed the treaty Sept. 24 at the United Nations, after having successfully pushed a clause requiring the PNE issue to be reconsidered each decade.
The debate - all but over for now - asks whether mankind can be trusted with its own creation. The consensus is no, and that the nuclear genie should be stuffed back into the bottle.
Most scientists agree that peaceful-use explosions should be banned along with military tests. Any explosion can be studied for potential military applications. And the more nuclear bombs in the world, the more likely they could be used in war or by terrorists, the argument goes.
"The fact that you design a peaceful explosive in a different way doesn't mean that you couldn't put it in a plane and drop it on a city," says Richard Garwin, an IBM scientist who studied PNEs for the United States before they were abandonded here in the 1970s.
Some scientists, especially in China and Russia, chafe under the ban.
So does Edward Teller, the nonagenarian father of the U.S. nuclear program.
"In my mind the test ban is a huge mistake," Teller said in a telephone interview. "We are going to fail to understand what can be done with nuclear explosions. All the countries should benefit. The only thing I would forbid is secret tests."
Patricia Lewis, a former British nuclear physicist who now campaigns against nuclear weapons, says the treaty's clause requiring the ban to be reviewed every 10 years doesn't bother her. It would take overwhelming international consensus to again allow peacetime explosions, she says.
Still, scientists raise some intriguing possibilities for peaceful uses of nuclear blasts.
The Russians, before they discontinued their program in the 1980s, used underground nuclear explosions to stimulate oil wells, claiming a huge return on their investment. They said the energy produced by the extra oil was five to seven times that of the nuclear explosives.
They also used the bombs to staunch otherwise unstoppable gas gushers, and have created lakes, dug canals, and built dams.
Russian scientists told American colleagues last year they would like to devise a system of nuclear-tipped rockets to zap or deflect monster asteroids headed toward Earth.
Vadim A. Simonenko, deputy head of a nuclear laboratory in Chelubynsk, Russia, said he envisions space-age factories harnessing nuclear explosions as they float outside of Earth's atmosphere.
But Simonenko also said that earthquake-prone countries such as the United States and Japan should take note: Underground nuclear explosions could provide occasional nudges to the earth's massive tectonic plates, releasing stresses that cause large-scale earthquakes.
"Technological development is a permanent phenomenon," said Simonenko, reached via e-mail. "It can be continued or interrupted. It's like the choice of going two ways in the development of our civilization: to go to the jungle and eat bananas or to take the challenges Nature sends."
A report on a December meeting on peaceful nuclear explosions in Beijing between Chinese and Russian scientists - one of several in the year before the treaty was signed - said participants discussed the river project, which would curb floods downstream in Bangladesh while diverting water to thirsty regions in China.
Another Chinese proposal was to harness energy by detonating underground explosions - up to the equivalent of 10 kilotons of TNT each - and conducting steam in massive steel tubes to turbines at the surface.
"It's possible that this kind of controllable nuclear electric station will become the main energy supplier around the world in 30-50 years," wrote He Zuoxiu, a conference participant.
Garwin, who researched such power generation for the U.S. government, says it was deemed impractical.
And despite strides in limiting fallout from controlled explosions, governments worry about the health risks of radioactivity, which are difficult to quantify, Garwin says.
Milo Nordyke, a researcher at Lawrence Livermore Laboratory in California, is writing a book about the Russian PNE program abandoned in 1986. He says most peaceful applications are unworkable, but some are economically attractive, including the creation of underground storage areas.
"You could store oil under the North Sea," he says. "Instead of having to lay pipelines to Scotland or Norway, you could have gone a few thousand feet under the surface and created big reservoirs."
But the arms-control benefits of a test ban override any such applications, he says.
While an overwhelming majority of scientists agree that explosions for peacetime uses should be banned along with military development, a few want to continue testing nuclear weapons as a defense against a possible catastrophe - a monster asteroid colliding with Earth.
"People be careful," warns Russia's Simonenko. "The asteroid threat is a long-term threat, but a certain one."
Many scientists who have examined the asteroid threat in the past decade agree that a nuclear weapon would be the most efficient option against a catastrophic asteroid - one with a diameter of over one-half mile - if there is little warning.
But other scientists say there is a negligible threat of another monster asteroid or comet on the scale of the one suspected of wiping out dinosaurs 65 million years ago.
"The chances of this ever happening again are so remote that there's no need to think about it any further than we've thought about it already," says Clark R. Chapman, a planetary scientest in Boulder, Colo.
Still, the next Big One could come, and with very little warning.
Its legacy could be what Simonenko and a U.S.-Russian panel of scientists described in a 1994 paper as "a devastating climate change, dwarfing the 'nuclear winter' long feared as collateral effect of a global thermonuclear war."
Scientists in China and Russia have said they would like to test a nuclear bomb defense system. Simonenko advises "large-scale explosion research for technological applications and planetary defense."
Johndale C. Solem, a Los Alamos scientist who joined Simonenko in the 1994 paper, disagrees with him about the need for any testing.
"For one thing you wouldn't have some other asteroid around for a convenient target," he said. "If you had an incoming asteroid, you'd probably have several rockets for backup and then you'd simply launch them and go after it."
A nuclear explosion would be used in one of two ways. One would be to blow up the asteroid or comet. The more accepted method would be to detonate at some distance from the object to produce a "standoff" impact, keeping it intact but nudging it off its deadly path.
Other methods under consideration would use solar power or large lasers.
Teller maintains that the fallout danger from controlled, peacetime explosions has been overstated and would be less than that from nuclear power plants.
The Chernobyl accident killed dozens. He says the only death from U.S. peacetime explosions was a Japanese fisherman who unwittingly wandered into the danger zone of a test explosion in the Pacific in 1954.
"Some time in the future, maybe 20 years, maybe 200 years, using nuclear explosions will become common, and it will be very hard to show people why we shied away from it," Teller says.
 Load-Date: November 10, 1996

 

End of Document
