

Race for the Galapagos is between the tortoise and the goat
July 17, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 528 words
Byline: By DAVID BRISCOE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The race is on, and it's between the tortoise and the goat.
Goats, flourishing guayaba plants and other newly introduced plants and animals are threatening the fragile ecosystems of the Pacific's Galapagos Islands, wildlife experts say.
Tens of thousands of goats - as well as pigs, black rats and cats - are roaming the main island of Isabela, threatening the habitat of the islands' famous giant tortoises and other unique native species, according to an report released today by World Wildlife Fund.
Goats, introduced 50 years ago, now far outnumber the estimated 10,000 giant tortoises on the protected group of more than 100 islands.
"One very urgent threat is the wild goats," said the fund's program director for the island, Miguel Pellerano. He was interviewed in Washington before returning to Quito, Ecuador, late Wednesday.
He said the non-native creatures, even on some outlying islands, are intruding on the land and eating the eggs of birds and reptiles that have lived without natural predators "since the beginning of time."
The problem of foreign species is not new but has intensified in recent years. A hunting campaign last year killed an estimated 13,000 wild goats, the report said.
The islands and surrounding waters hold an estimated 1,900 plant and animal species found nowhere else on the planet.
All but 3 percent of the Galapagos, 600 miles west of the South American mainland, has Ecuadoran National Park status, but its human population has more than doubled in the last 10 years to nearly 15,000.
In addition to new species, migration from mainland Ecuador and commercial fishing threaten the islands' ecological balance, says the study, described as the most comprehensive analysis yet of the environmental, social and political factors affecting the islands.
"Anyone who visits the Galapagos and sees giant tortoises walking slowly through the short grass, sea lions sunning themselves on sandy beaches and penguins diving from the rocks appreciates instantly the importance of protecting these magical species," said World Wildlife President Kathryn Fuller.
The report comes in the 115th year since the death of evolutionist Charles Darwin, who studied Galapagos wildlife in developing his theories about the survival of species.
Ecuadoran President Fabian Alarcon, in a statement released today, said his government is working to improve laws "to conserve sustainably this privileged spot of the earth, so that both foreigners and Ecuadorians can count on being able to enjoy this part of nature."
Pellerano, in the interview, said the Ecuadorian government has been generally cooperative but needs to pay more attention to protecting waters around the islands.
Most directly affected are sea cucumbers and sharks, which are caught by fishing boats from Ecuador, Costa Rica and Peru, as well as some from Korea and Taiwan, where there is a big market for sea cucumbers and shark's fin.
World Wildlife, which works in scores of countries with the goal of saving life on earth, calls for a ban on all commercial fishing near the islands, strict limits on migration and creation of a system of inspections and quarantine to control species on the islands.
 Load-Date: July 17, 1997

 

End of Document
