

Refugees died by the hundreds in U.S. Korea retreat, vets say
The Associated Press
October 14, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1723 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - The Associated Press recently reported on the killings of up to 400 South Korean refugees at the hamlet of No Gun Ri during the 1950-53 Korean War. That story briefly mentioned other incidents in which witnesses said refugees died at U.S. hands. Here is a follow-up report on those episodes.
----
 
 By SANG-HUN CHOE
CHARLES J. HANLEY
and
MARTHA MENDOZA
Associated Press Writers
The American general looked out over the bridge. A mass of white, hundreds of South Korean refugees, was pushing toward him from across the Naktong River.
Those who were there remember the scene. It was Aug. 3, 1950, sixth week of the Korean War. Maj. Gen. Hobart R. Gay's 1st Cavalry Division, hammered by the North Korean army, had just retreated over the Naktong.
In the division commander's eyes, refugees posed a threat, a cover for North Korean infiltrators disguised in peasant white. "We must find a means to hold these refugees in place," he had told reporters just days earlier.
Now, as daylight faded, hundreds of men, women and children, ignoring American soldiers' efforts to hold them back, were shuffling over the Waegwan bridge, last crossing open to Gay's enemy, reported massing more than 15 miles to the west.
The general finally rose in his vehicle and gave a fateful command, said a veteran who was there.
"Gen. Gay stood up in the front of his jeep and shouted out, 'Blow the son of a bitch!'," ex-Lt. Edward L. Daily said.
The preset charges exploded, rapid fire, shattering the supports, dropping one of the bridge's hulking spans into the muddy waters of the Naktong.
"It was like a slow-motion movie," remembered Daily, of Clarksville, Tenn. "All those refugees went right down into the river." He estimated at least 200 died.
"It was a tough decision," Gay later wrote to an Army historian, "because up in the air with the bridge went hundreds of refugees."
Those deaths went unmentioned in the division war diary, but 10 years later were noted tersely in an official history, based on Gay's correspondence.
What happened that day at another Naktong bridge, however, and in the days before as retreating U.S. troops encountered throngs of refugees, went unrecorded except in the memories of those who were there.
On Sept. 29, The Associated Press reported that U.S. veterans, corroborating the accounts of Korean survivors, said their unit killed a large number of South Korean refugees beneath a railroad trestle at No Gun Ri, South Korea, in late July 1950. About 400 died in the shootings and a preceding air attack, survivors said.
In investigating No Gun Ri, the AP learned of the bridge blowings and two other incidents, machine-gun and mortar attacks on refugees.
This trail of dead civilians, many of them women and children, has been a hidden underside to a well-known chapter in U.S. military history, the southward retreat of three Army divisions into a defensible perimeter east of South Korea's Naktong River in July-August 1950.
The withdrawal, in the face of a North Korean invasion force, was often confused.
The U.S. Army itself told South Korean civilians, citizens of an allied nation, to head south. But the AP found in researching declassified Army documents that U.S. commanders also issued standing orders to shoot civilians along the warfront to guard against North Korean soldiers disguised in the white clothes of Korean peasants. Military lawyers call those orders illegal.
Twenty-five miles downriver from the Waegwan bridge that same Aug. 3, South Korean refugees were crowding across another bridge, seeking the safety of the American lines.
Ex-Army engineer Carroll F. Kinsman remembers the streams of white-clad humanity surging over the 650-foot-long Tuksong-dong span - women clutching children, old men, overloaded ox carts.
"We stayed up all that night and searched them," Kinsman, a sergeant with the 14th Combat Engineers Battalion, said in an AP interview. They found no infiltrators, he said.
Retreating Americans had not yet sighted North Korean units near the river around Tuksong-dong on Aug. 3, the declassified record shows. But American officers knew the enemy would arrive eventually. Pressed by a timetable, they proved unable to keep the refugees back from the bridge, rigged for instant demolition.
The veterans, men in their 60s or 70s, remembered that soldiers fired over the heads of the refugees and tried to warn them the bridge would be blown up.
"They tried to stop the refugees from coming across and they wouldn't stop. They were abutment to abutment," ex-engineer Leon L. Denis of Huntsville, Ala., recalled in an AP interview before his death Aug. 31.
The men of Company A, 14th Engineers, had taken two days to set 7,000 pounds of explosives on the steel-girder bridge. When the detonation order came at 7:01 a.m., "I said, 'There are people!"' remembered veteran Joseph M. Ipock of Jackson, N.J. "And they said, 'You have to blow it! There's no other way!"'
With the huge explosion, "it lifted up and turned it sideways and it was full of refugees end to end," said Kinsman, of Gautier, Miss.
"These people were on the bridge, and you saw the spans of steel flying and you knew they were killed," said ex-GI Rudolph Giannelli of Port Saint Lucie, Fla., driver for Col. Richard W. Stephens, the 21st Infantry Regiment commander who was the last officer across the bridge.
In separate AP interviews, Kinsman, Denis and Giannelli said hundreds of civilians were killed. Ipock said he could see only 30 or 40 refugees from his vantage point.
Kim Bok-jong, 73, a Korean who said he was 200 yards from the bridge, out of view around a hill, remembered that "people rushed back toward us and said many people died when the Americans blew up the bridge."
The dying did not end there, he said. Panicked refugee families stranded on the far shore after the bridge was destroyed tried to swim the river, Korea's largest.
"Many - I mean many - people drowned," Kim told the AP. "… Women with kids were exhausted before reaching the southern bank and disappeared under water. Sometimes kids were abandoned in the middle of the river."
The veterans said they don't know who gave the detonation order. The operation was noted in the 14th Engineers report with a simple "Results, excellent."
From the bridges, the U.S. Army units moved into defensive positions along the Naktong, in what came to be known as the Pusan Perimeter. They had arrived at the river after weeks of retreat through South Korea - and after countless, sometimes bloody encounters with refugees.
Four 1st Cavalry Division veterans told the AP that on Aug. 2, the day before the bridge blowings, they were among several dozen soldiers retreating toward the Naktong and being trailed by perhaps 80 white-clad Koreans.
In mid-afternoon, five North Korean soldiers - disguised in white - appeared in front of the Americans, they said. Veteran Edward L. Daily said the North Koreans opened fire and were quickly killed. Another ex-GI, Eugene Hesselman, remembered it differently, saying the intruders surrendered and were led away.
Because it was believed they came from among the refugees, said Hesselman, of Fort Mitchell, Ky., "we got orders to eliminate them (the refugees). And we mowed them all down. The Army wouldn't take chances."
Scattering too late, every man, woman and child was killed, Daily said. He and veteran Robert G. Russell said they found about 10 disguised North Korean soldiers among the dead. Hesselman said he doesn't recall that infiltrators were found.
"I didn't like to do it," said Russell, of West Fargo, N.D. "It was just pure survival at the time."
About a week earlier, a half-dozen 1st Cavalry Division veterans recounted, mortar fire was directed at possibly a few hundred refugees moving down a railroad track about 100 miles southeast of Seoul.
Americans had been ambushed the night before by North Koreans who mingled with refugees, said ex-GI James McClure. Now, he said, he spotted another white-clad group, including women and children, through his binoculars, and put in a call to a command post.
"The colonel contacted mortar and decided to kill them instead of allowing them through the line," said McClure, of Federal Way, Wash. He could not recall the colonel's name.
When the mortar fire hit, "there were legs, arms and bodies flying everywhere," McClure recounted. Veteran Henry Matthias of Baltimore said he believes about 70 refugees were killed.
Matthias said he and GIs around him didn't fire because "the North Koreans were coming in, but they were a long way away." Other ex-GIs said North Korean uniforms and weapons were found on bodies afterward.
Some officers and other Korean War veterans drew a distinction between killing civilians simply because of suspicions of enemy among them, and destroying a bridge - a strategic necessity - with refugees on it.
But others, looking back, said refugees on targeted bridges should have been protected - for example, by deploying soldiers to hold them back and retrieving the soldiers later by boat.
Three days after blowing the Waegwan bridge, Gay did send boats across the Naktong, to bring over 6,000 stranded refugees from the west bank, the declassified record shows.
The North Koreans did not appear in force on the west bank between Waegwan and Tuksong-dong until Aug. 7, four days after the bridges were blown, the record shows.
Killing of noncombatants was then - as now - a crime under the international law of war and the U.S. military code, military law specialists note.
Last year the South Korean government rejected, on a technicality, a compensation claim filed by survivors of the bloodshed at No Gun Ri in July 1950. But after the AP published its report on the deaths at the No Gun Ri trestle, the U.S. Army and Seoul government announced investigations.
In addition, since the Sept. 29 AP report, accounts have surfaced in South Korea and the United States of still other civilian killings at U.S. hands in the Korean War. Those reports have yet to be corroborated.
Stanley Roth, an assistant U.S. secretary of state, met with top South Korean officials Wednesday and said afterward the two governments would share information and jointly evaluate the results of their investigations into No Gun Ri. The Seoul government had sought such cooperation.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - AP Investigative Researcher Randy Herschaft contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1999

 

End of Document
