

Roane County woman became the most honored woman in the military - An AP West Virginia Member Exchange
The Associated Press
September 26, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: State and Regional
Length: 1069 words
Byline: By SANDY WELLS
Dateline: SPENCER, W.Va. -
Body




It was early morning. She was sterilizing instruments and assembling supplies for the day's first operation, a hysterectomy. It never happened.
"The doctor came in and said not to worry about setting up. He said the Japanese had attacked Pearl Harbor. He no more got that out of his mouth until they were there."
She could hear the planes, loud and scary, like zooming rattletraps. "Their planes sounded different than ours, like tin cans," she said.
Exploding bombs shook the windows. She held her ears. She ran to the window. "The planes were flying so close, I saw the pilots. I could see the whites of their eyes."
She's 91 now. She lives in a personal care home in Spencer. Once, she was famous. A file in the newspaper library bulges with clippings about her. The town of Spencer once honored her with a parade. Ralph Edwards featured her on "This Is Your Life."
She is now featured in a new book by Elizabeth Norman, "We Band of Angels: The Untold Story of American Nurses Trapped on Bataan by the Japanese."
The book chronicles the experiences of 77 Army nurses who battled disease, starvation and crude conditions to care for civilians and soldiers while imprisoned in the Philippines. Only 12 survive. Col. Ruby G. Bradley - the most decorated woman in American military history - is one of them.
On a recent visit, Ruby Bradley's story unfolds.
A vintage photograph on the cover of the book shows an open truck packed with smiling Army nurses. Finally free, they were on their way out of the compound. Immediately, Ruby Bradley's aged finger pointed to a beaming nurse seated in the truck, head wrapped in a turban, palm raised in a wave. "That's me," she said.
A farm girl and former teacher from Roane County, Bradley switched to nursing in 1933 and joined the Army Nurse Corps as a surgical nurse the following year. When the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor that fateful December morning in 1941, she was a 34-year-old administrator serving in the Philippines at Camp John Hay in Baguio, on Luzon Island, 200 miles above Manila.
At first, frozen by the sudden and deafening noise of war, she didn't know what to do. Within minutes, the casualties started streaming into John Hay Hospital. "Then I knew exactly what to do - stay and take care of them," she said.
On Dec. 23, when the Army evacuated Camp John Hay and the Japanese moved in, she ran for the hills to hide, accompanied by another nurse and a doctor, hoping to reach Manila. Betrayed by a couple who shielded them, they surrendered on Dec. 28 and returned to Baguio, to the camp that was now a prison compound.
They stayed in an abandoned barracks, 500 people in a structure intended for 75 soldiers. "The barracks hadn't been used since World War I, and oh, they were so dirty."
There were no beds. For months, nurses and patients slept on the floor.
She learned to ignore hunger as she tended to patients - "all the diseases anyone would have and babies, too." By the end of her 37 months in captivity, she would assist in 230 major operations and the delivery of 13 American babies.
In the meantime, existing mainly on rice, a half-cup in the morning and a half-cup in the evening, she shrank to 86 pounds. She shared her food with weevils, cockroaches and worms. "There were worms in the rice all the time. The older women who couldn't get out and walk would sit there and pick out the worms and bugs.
Guards didn't mistreat them, she said, but they were told if they tried to escape, they would be shot. "There's always somebody who doesn't listen. Two missionaries went out of the camp and we never saw them again."
On Sept. 23, 1943, Bradley was transferred to Santo Tomas Internment Camp in Manila where her reliable nursing skills in the camp hospital earned her the nickname "Angel in Fatigues."
By January 1945, the imprisoned nurses started hearing rumors that the Americans were near. "We used to imagine we heard the American tanks coming every day," she said. Eventually, they did hear artillery fire in the distance.
On Feb. 3 - a date to remember - she heard the tanks rumbling toward her. "Then we could smell American gasoline at the gates. We could hear American voices, but they couldn't get in, because it was boarded up." Two hours passed.
"About 9 p.m.," she said, "an American tank crashed through the gate. Our soldiers followed on foot. It was the best Saturday-night performance I'll ever see in my life."
A month later, on March 8, the Spencer High School band heralded her return. Well-wishers jammed the courthouse square, waving 'Welcome Home' banners.
In 1987, in a notebook kept by the late Mardell Depue Cottle, a Spencer nurse who published an account of Bradley's experiences, Bradley wrote: "Forty-two years have passed and that March 8, 1945, remains as one of the happiest days of my life. I am happy to be one of Roane County's own."
Two weeks after her liberation, she received the Bronze Star for meritorious achievement in the hands of the enemy. In October 1945, she was promoted to captain. In 1946, she received a second Bronze Star for achievement in connection with enemy military operations in the Philippines Dec. 8-23, 1941.
She worked in several base hospitals, then took advantage of an Army training program, enrolling in the University of California, where she earned a bachelor's degree in nursing education.
In 1950, one month after the start of the Korean War, she was overseas again, working as a combat nurse in evacuation hospitals as the Eighth Army's chief nurse.
There were more medals, ribbons, citations. Leaving Korea in June 1953, she was given a full-dress honor guard ceremony, the first woman ever to receive a national or international guard salute. Lt. Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor bestowed the First Oak Leaf Cluster to her Legion of Merit. She was entitled to wear seven Korean War battle stars.
"The medals went halfway up my shoulder," she said. She's not sure what happened to them. She doesn't know where her uniform is, either. "My nieces gave some things away. They didn't think they were worth anything."
On March 4, 1958, she was awarded the rank of colonel, an honor achieved by only two other women in Army history.
In 1963, she retired. For the next 17 years, she supervised a private-duty nursing service in Roane County.
In a 1991 interview, she said she didn't see herself as anything special. "I want to be remembered as just an Army nurse," she said.
 
 ---
Distributed by The Associated Press
 Load-Date: September 26, 1999

 

End of Document
