

Russia, the Balkans, the EU and missiles top NATO agenda
The Associated Press
May 24, 2000, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 703 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FLORENCE, Italy
Body




After nearly a year of resentment over last year's NATO air campaign against Yugoslavia, Russia's foreign minister came back to NATO today to resume talks on security.
Now it is the allies who are unhappy.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and her 18 fellow NATO foreign ministers were expected to make their displeasure clear to Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov during the first ministerial level meeting between Russia and NATO since last summer. They are unhappy with Moscow for holding formal talks with a Yugoslav official indicted for war crimes.
Gen. Dragoljub Ojdanic, the Yugoslav defense minister, held five days of talks in Moscow earlier this month. Ojdanic, like Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, has been indicted by the international war crimes tribunal in The Hague, Netherlands.
Ojdanic, Milosevic and three other Yugoslav officials are wanted for murder, persecution and deportation in the massacres of ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. The officials were indicted exactly a year ago today in the midst of the NATO air campaign against Yugoslav forces in Kosovo.
Russia is required under U.N. Security Council resolutions to arrest war criminals who enter its territory.
"I will make clear again we think it's inappropriate for an indicted war criminal to be hosted in Moscow," Albright told reporters just prior to meeting Ivanov.
NATO Secretary-General Lord Robertson said the alliance would put the question to Ivanov bluntly.
"Before we react, we'll wait to hear the answer," he said.
Despite the anger, NATO was eager to keep the meeting positive. Russia participates in NATO-led intervention forces in Kosovo and Bosnia, and NATO officials want to discuss a plan for future cooperation with Russia.
He said Ivanov's presence in Florence is a positive development and signals "that Russia intends to cooperate with the alliance in looking for solutions in the face of security challenges facing Europe."
Albright used her opening speech to announce a new American program that would make it easier for the NATO allies, as well as Japan and Australia, to buy U.S. arms. In some cases, one license would permit purchase of an entire system.
"The initiative is a package of 17 specific steps aimed at getting U.S. defense exports to NATO countries, Japan and Australia faster and more smoothly," Albright said. "All this translates into a sturdier technological foundation for NATO in the 21st century."
The State Department currently reviews 45,000 license applications a year, of which 12,000 are also reviewed by the Pentagon because of security concerns.
Meanwhile, tight security and small groups of demonstrators snarled traffic today, shutting down streets in the center of Florence. Various leftist organizations in Italy had issued a call to summon the "spirit of Seattle," referring to last year's World Trade Organization meeting, which was badly disrupted by raucous demonstrations.
The allied foreign ministers have several other topics to discuss during their meeting, including relations with the European Union, which is developing a defense capacity, and the National Missile Defense program being developed in the United States.
Russia and China strongly oppose the program, which calls for a small number of interceptor missiles designed to knock down incoming missiles launched by rogue states. Many of the allies also remain unconvinced that it is needed.
In addition, Croatia will be welcomed into NATO's Partnership for Peace, a sign that the former Yugoslav republic is now firmly on the road to democracy. Partnership for Peace is a program in which nonmember nations can participate in many NATO activities.
The 15-nation EU decided in December to take on a defense role, and over the past five months it has created new political and military committees to plan and implement humanitarian and peacekeeping missions in cases where the United States, or NATO as a whole, does not want to get involved.
In some cases, the EU may even want to use NATO assets. The EU plans to develop a 60,000-man rapid reaction force by 2003, capable of taking to the field within 60 days and sustaining itself for up to a year. This new EU capability, however, will require close coordination with NATO.
 Load-Date: May 25, 2000

 

End of Document
