

Solomon Island rebels fire cannons at the coast, drop demand that prime minister step down
The Associated Press
June 7, 2000, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 871 words
Byline: By RAY LILLEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WELLINGTON, New Zealand
Body




Fighting between rival rebel factions on the Solomon Islands intensified Wednesday, with one using a stolen gunboat to fire cannon rounds at coastal encampments set up by the other group, a Solomon Islands official said.
A rebel spokesman, Andrew Nori, said his side killed 100 enemies. He said he received the information from colleagues who fired a machine gun from the gunboat directly into a crowd of people, as well from others on the ground watching.
Nori said there had been about 300 to 400 armed men on the beach. "There were no civilians," he told The Associated Press. "They were all carrying weapons. They were not holding a picnic."
There was no immediate way to confirm Nori's claim. A Solomon Islands government spokesman and New Zealand officials said there had been a gunboat attack in the morning, but they had no information about deaths.
"It's true there was a shooting incident and there might well have been casualties," Alfred Maesulia, a spokesman for the Pacific island nation, said in a telephone interview.
New Zealand officials said earlier the shelling had hit a Catholic school, although a Catholic worker in the capital, Honiara, said no students were believed to be in residence because they were on holiday.
The shelling marked a major escalation of the weaponry being used in the dispute between rival islanders. The 1 1/2-year-old confrontation on the Solomon Islands exploded into a governmental crisis on Monday, with one rebel group seizing the prime minister.
Earlier Wednesday, the Malaitan rebels who captured Bartholomew Ulufa'alu (pronounced oo'-loo-faa'-loo) two days earlier dropped their demands that he resign. Ulufa'alu's political fate will be determined in a parliamentary session June 15, where he will face a no confidence vote, according to a joint statement released by the government and Nori, an attorney.
Ulufa'alu will no longer be followed by armed rebel guards, with normal police providing his security, and he "is at liberty to move out of and into his residence and offices at will," the joint statement said.
The deal will put the Solomon Islands closer to being "back into constitutional rule," New Zealand Foreign Minister Phil Goff said.
But an end to the political crisis isn't likely to stop the fighting between indigenous people of the nation's main island of Guadalcanal and migrants from the neighboring island of Malaita.
For 18 months, the rebel groups - the Isatabu and Malaitans - have skirmished on Guadalcanal, the country's main island and the scene of a pivotal battle between U.S. and Japanese forces in World War II.
The Isatabu want to rid Guadalcanal of thousands of settlers from nearby Malaita. The Malaitans complain they are being unfairly pushed off their land, and some accuse the democratically elected Ulafa'alu - who is from Malaita - of betraying them.
The current emergency began Monday when armed Malaitan rebels seized Ulafa'alu and demanded that he resign. On Tuesday, the country - 2,300 miles northwest of Wellington - appeared to be plunging into war.
Ulufa'alu came to a meeting of government caucus officials and told them he would leave "if that is the price of peace in the Solomon Islands," the nation's state minister, Alfred Sasako, told Australian television.
Four people were wounded Tuesday during a three-hour gunbattle between the two groups - the Malaita Eagle Force and the Isatabu Freedom Movement - on the fringe of the airport in the capital, Honiara.
After securing the area around the airport, the Malaita Eagle Force rebels early Wednesday deployed a stolen police patrol and with the cannon were "indiscriminately shooting" at nearby coastal villages, according to a New Zealand official in the Solomon Islands.
The 50-milimeter shells hit the Nazareth Apostolic Center - a Catholic missionary school - but it appeared students were on holiday and there were no immediate reports of injuries, said the official, who spoke on condition his name not be used.
A Solomon Islands government official reached by phone in Honiara said rival bands of rebels were fighting both east and west of town - with a group of migrants from Malaita much better armed after joining forces with paramilitary teams on Monday and seizing machine guns and ammunition from the Solomon Islands' armory.
The Malaita Eagle Force, which was formed a few months ago, now has the support of about half of the Solomon Islands paramilitary, he said.
Information about the crisis had been scant on Monday and early Tuesday because phone lines were cut, but communications were restored by Tuesday afternoon.
In New York, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan on Tuesday called on the rebels through his spokesman, Fred Eckhard, to release the prime minister and to resume peace talks "aimed at returning the country to normalcy and re-establishing democratic governance as soon as possible."
Goff, New Zealand's foreign minister, warned that "the international community will not accept a democratically elected prime minister being forced out of office at gunpoint."
The coup attempt was the second in the South Pacific in weeks. Armed rebels in Fiji are still holding the elected prime minister and more than 30 other people seized in a raid on Parliament on May 19.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos SYD101,103-106
 Load-Date: June 8, 2000

 

End of Document
