

South Korean president wins the Nobel Peace Prize
The Associated Press
October 13, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 916 words
Byline: By DOUG MELLGREN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OSLO, Norway
Body




South Korean President Kim Dae-jung won the Nobel Peace Prize on Friday for efforts toward reconciliation with North Korea that have prompted hopes for peace on the Cold War's last frontier.
The 76-year-old president, who emerged as a symbol of pro-democracy struggle during 40 years as an opposition leader under authoritarian rule in the South, said he wanted to share the honor with his people.
"I thank all the citizens who love democracy and human rights, who have supported these efforts with our people," he was quoted as saying by presidential spokesman Park Joon-young. "I will keep up my efforts for human rights, democracy and peace on the Korean peninsula, Asia and the world."
South and North Korea, foes on the battlefield a half-century ago, have warmed to each other more in the last few months than in a generation. Their armies remain locked in a standoff across a sealed border, but the mood on the peninsula is considerably lighter.
After patiently pursuing contacts with North Korea during the first two years of his presidency, Kim traveled to Pyongyang in June to meet with North Korean leader Kim Jong Il. The two countries then stopped propaganda broadcasts, held a reunion of separated families, opened border liaison offices and agreed to reconnect a cross-border railway.
Kim "is critical to this process and we are convinced that he will be strengthened by receiving this prize," Gunnar Berge, chairman of the Nobel Committee, said in making the announcement. "There may now be hope that the Cold War will also come to an end in Korea."
The prize is worth $915,000 this year.
The Nobel announcement was greeted with great fanfare in South Korea, where the media have been betting for weeks that their president would take the prize.
All South Korean television networks broke into their regular programming to report the news live from Oslo.
People surrounded large TV sets, cheering and clapping when the announcement was made. Newspapers splashed front-page banner headlines with the award. Hundreds of fireworks exploded over Seoul in a celebration funded by a private company.
"I have never been happier. I think this will have a positive effect on our relations with North Korea," said Soh Soon-chul, 44, an office worker in Seoul.
Kim entered politics in 1961 by winning a seat in parliament. He came to national prominence in 1971, when he almost beat then-dictator Park Chung-hee in a race that sent shock waves through ruling circles.
His time as an opposition leader included more than seven years in prison or under house arrest and four years in exile before he was elected to a single five-year presidential term starting in early 1998 - in the midst of the Asian financial crisis.
South Korea's near-bankrupt economy dramatically recovered in 1999, although concerns remain about the pace and scope of the government's economic reform program.
Speculation over Kim's prospects in Oslo had infused debate over Seoul's policy toward the North, which critics say is too solicitous. South Korea is donating grain and other aid to North Korea, and repatriated 63 former communist spies last month without asking for the return of Korean War-era prisoners in return.
The Koreas were divided into the North and the pro-Western South at the end of World War II. The Korean War ended with an armistice, not a peace treaty. Their border is the world's most heavily fortified.
This year's prize was a break with the committee's tradition of honoring both sides in a conflict, such as in Northern Ireland, the Middle East and South Africa, in the hope of pushing them toward a peace settlement.
Berge defended the decision not to include North Korea's Kim Jong Il, saying he did not think a prize to one side in the Korean conflict would sour the process because "North Korean will be totally dependent on people like Kim Dae-jung."
He also pointed out that the committee acknowledged the North Korean leader's role in the last paragraph of the citation.
"The Norwegian Nobel Committee wishes to express its recognition of the contributions made by North Korea's and other countries' leaders to advance reconciliation and possible reunification on the Korean peninsula," it read.
The peace prize, which went last year to the humanitarian organization Doctors Without Borders, capped a week of Nobel announcements.
The literature prize went Thursday to Chinese dissident writer Gao Xingjian, now a French citizen.
Americans James J. Heckman and Daniel L. McFadden won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics on Wednesday for developing theories on how people work and live, research that contributed greatly to employment training, public transportation, communication systems and other areas.
The physics prize was shared by Americans Jack Kilby, who co-invented the integrated circuit at Texas Instruments in 1958, and Herbert Kroemer; and Russian Zhores Alferov.
This year's chemistry prize went to Alan Heeger and Alan MacDiarmid of the United States and Hideki Shirakawa of Japan for their discoveries in the use of plastics to conduct electricity.
The medicine prize recognized Swede Arvid Carlsson and U.S.-based researchers Paul Greengard and Eric Kandel for discoveries about how messages are transmitted between brain cells, leading to treatments of Parkinson's disease and depression.
The prizes are presented on Dec. 10, the date the prize's founder, Swedish industrialist Alfred Nobel, died in 1896. The peace prize is the only one presented in Oslo.
On the Net:
http://www.nobel.no 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos OSL101, NY107-108
 Load-Date: October 14, 2000

 

End of Document
