

South Korea's president arrives for historic summit in the North
The Associated Press
June 12, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 956 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER TORCHIA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEOUL, South Korea
Body




The smiling leaders of South and North Korea applauded each other and shook hands near the North's capital on Tuesday in the first-ever meeting between the two sides' leaders - and the first step toward ending a half-century of enmity on the Korean Peninsula.
Arriving for the historic three-day summit, South Korean President Kim Dae-jung's jet landed at an airport on the outskirts of Pyongyang. His counterpart, Kim Jong Il, greeted him along with a military brass band, goose-stepping soldiers with fixed bayonets and women dressed in traditional, billowing Korean gowns.
"Kim Jong Il!" chanted the crowd lined up near a drab terminal at Sunan airport. Many people appeared overwhelmed with emotion, jumping, raising their hands and waving pink paper flowers. Kim Jong Il, who enjoys a personality cult in the reclusive, communist North, often receives such displays from his people.
The pudgy Kim Jong Il normally shuns publicity and rarely meets visiting dignitaries, but he appeared relaxed and was dressed in a khaki, open-necked shirt and trousers. He welcomed Kim Dae-jung, wearing a dark suit, at the foot of his plane.
The two leaders exchanged a few words while reviewing a military parade, strode down a red carpet and then left together in a black limousine bound for Pyongyang.
The summit offers the greatest hope for peace on the divided Korean peninsula in more than 50 years. Leaders of South Korea and North Korea have never met since the two countries were founded in 1948 in the Cold War's infancy, and the conflict between two populations that speak the same language and share the same ethnic roots has been bitter and bloody.
During the summit, Kim Dae-jung is expected to ask Kim Jong Il to agree to reunions of separated families, a summit sequel in Seoul and other conciliatory gestures in exchange for economic resources from the South. Though endowed with long-range missile capabilities, North Korea was unable to feed its own people in the late 1990s and today is reliant on food aid from its traditional foes: South Korea, Japan and the United States.
Before leaving Seoul, Kim Dae-jung said he planned to talk candidly with Kim Jong Il and hoped to learn about the thinking of the reclusive head of the totalitarian regime. He warned that the reconciliation process will be lengthy.
"I hope that it will be a turning point in efforts to remove threats to war and terminate the Cold War on the Korean Peninsula so that all 70 million Korean people in the South and North can live in peace," Kim said in a speech on a runway at a military airport in Seoul.
Reunification - the stated goal of both nations - also is likely to be a lengthy and difficult process. The first summit between leaders of East Germany and West Germany was held in 1970, two decades before the dismantling of the Berlin Wall.
Animosity and suspicion remain fresh in the Koreas a half-century after the communist North, backed by the Soviet Union and joined by Chinese troops, fought the pro-Western South and its U.S.-led allies.
The 1950-53 Korean War left up to 5 million people dead, injured or missing. Its legacy lingers most vividly at the Demilitarized Zone, a buffer area that separates hundreds of thousands of troops, tanks and artillery pieces on both sides of the border.
In 1994, concerns over the North's purported nuclear weapons program nearly triggered a military conflict. And North Korea's totalitarian government - based on a personality cult that virtually deifies Kim Jong Il and his late father and national founder, Kim Il Sung - had been reclusive for so long that reconciliation seemed a doubtful dream.
Yet driven partly by desperation for economic aid to rebuild its dilapidated economy, the North embarked on a new course over the last year, seeking diplomatic contacts with the outside world that culminated in the decision to host an inter-Korean summit.
The celebratory mood now is such that The Korea Times, an English-language daily, compared the summit to the 1969 landing of a man on the moon. "One small step for reconciliation, one giant leap for reunification," the newspaper declared.
North Korea barred foreign reporters from attending the summit, allowing only 50 South Korean journalists to join Kim Dae-jung's entourage. Kim's arrival was televised live in the South.
Korea's leaders have a host of touchy issues to resolve, among them North Korea's missile and nuclear programs and the 37,000 U.S. troops deployed in South Korea. Their role has been to deter the North, which is believed to have stockpiles of chemical weapons and one of the world's largest standing armies.
North Korea is hosting the summit in the mysterious style that it has often employed over the years. It delayed the meeting for a day without a clear explanation and has refused to announce the schedule, possibly out of concern for the security of Kim Jong Il.
The summit pairs two men whose careers reflect the political gulf that separates democratic South Korea and communist North Korea.
As an opposition leader, South Korea's Kim was jailed, sentenced to death and, he says, the target of four assassination attempts. He won election to the nation's top office on his fourth attempt, and he has received international accolades as a defender of human rights.
The North's Kim, on the other hand, was reared from childhood to succeed his father as head of a totalitarian state. He is suspected of masterminding terrorist attacks on South Korean targets, including the 1987 bombing of a Korean Air plane that killed all 115 people on board.
The two Kims planned to meet Tuesday and on at least one other occasion, and their governments have agreed not to use national flags and anthems to avoid political or ideological frictions.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos SEL101-106,XSEL101-104,111
 Load-Date: June 13, 2000

 

End of Document
