

Star Flyer recalls the glory days of clipper ships
April 11, 1997, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 910 words
Byline: By DENIS D. GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: STRAITS OF MALACCA, Malaysia
Body




They were called the "greyhounds of the sea" and "Gothic cathedrals," but their glory days were doomed by steam and the Suez Canal. The era of the great clipper ships lasted little more than two decades.
Now, one of these long and lean vessels, its sharp bow slicing the waves as sails swell aloft, rides again, the first passenger-carrying clipper in Asian waters for more than a century.
The Star Flyer comes complete with masts the height of 15-story buildings, a brass cannon, a parrot named Harry, and a captain who quotes Joseph Conrad, English novelist of ships and far-off shores.
"The northeast monsoon is just starting to blow. I'm looking forward to some good adventure in these seas," Capt. Jorgen Muller-Cyran said as the ship set off on its inaugural Asian voyage, sailing out of the Thai resort of Phuket into a humid night streaked with distant lightning.
Over the next seven days, the clipper covered 865 nautical miles, anchoring off tropical isles near Phuket, then veering southward along the Malaysian coast, through the historic Straits of Malacca to Singapore. It carried 135 passengers and a 65-member crew of 24 nationalities.
The Star Flyer, which began cruising in Asia last November, is hardly spartan. There are well-appointed cabins and a library with a marble fireplace. Teak, mahogany and burnished brass abound. The ship was to have carried more than 2,000 passengers by the time it completed its first sailing season in early April.
The stops on the Phuket-Singapore run include the islands of Surin, Similan and Rok Nok in Thailand, and Langkawi and Malacca in Malaysia. On the Singapore-Phuket trip, they are Pangkor and the Batong Group in Malaysia and the islands of Phi Phi, Dam Hok and Khai Nok in Thailand.
Prices for a seven-night cruise range from $ 1,395 to $ 2,395 per person, double occupancy.
The Star Flyer and its sister ship, the Star Clipper, also cruise the Mediterranean and Caribbean.
And while it's a faithful re-creation, Swedish businessman and yachtsman Mikael Krafft made concessions to the 20th century when his Miami-based Star Clippers built the vessel five years ago for cruises in the Caribbean and Mediterranean.
Engines can get the ship out of a jam or get it moving when there's little wind. The 36,000 square feet of lightweight Dacron sail are deployed based on experience rather than the computer, but electric winches are used in place of sailors clambering up the masts.
Most aboard on the inaugural voyage were Europeans and Americans in their early 40s, professionals who shun the discos and packaged pleasure of "love boat" cruising. Some were keen amateur sailors, like Jurgen and Angela Uhlmann of Wiesbaden, Germany, who exchanged marriage vows on the bridge as the clipper pulled away from Langkawi Island.
Others initially didn't know a slipper sheet bend from a flying jib, but readily attended classes on knot-tying and celestial navigation, helped with winching up the sails and, under supervision, took a turn at the wheel.
"Sailing is teamwork and discipline," the 60-year-old captain told passengers, urging them to take part. "A ship has a soul, a certain way of life, not always beautiful but you must get to know it."
Escaping the dreary life of his native northern Germany, Muller-Cyran has been on ships since the age of 16 and is a treasure of sea lore.
Slaloming through fishing fleets in the Straits of Malacca, he vividly described Arab and Chinese traders, Portuguese and British colonials, and pirates who plied these waters in centuries past. Pirates still board ships in the straits, even an occasional super-tanker, thus extra watch was set at night during the passage.
But the high point of the trip was the ship itself. And the magic, almost mystical moments - some eyes glistened with tears - came when the anchor was weighed, bells sounded and sails danced to life.
The Star Flyer departed the Surin Islands in the Andaman Sea just as the sun set behind their jungled hills. Almost everyone gathered on deck, watching the sails slowly unfurl and the 360-foot long vessel turn gracefully and with near silence towards the open sea. A quarter moon hung above the soaring masts.
Alas, the origin of clippers was hardly so romantic. Born in Baltimore, they were developed by American entrepreneurs eager to move valuable, sometimes perishable, cargo at the fastest possible clip. They carried gold from the rushes in California and Australia, tea and opium from China. Bulk cargo and passengers weren't regarded as cost effective.
"Last trip I astonished the world. This trip I intend to astonish God Almighty," boasted one of the many captains who set sailing ship speed records that have never been broken. The Sea Witch, for example, took only a mark-setting 74 days for the New York-China run.
But the heyday of the American clippers was 1845 to about 1860. The quicker and cheaper steamships won the business on the Atlantic, and the opening of the Suez Canal killed the clippers' trade route to the Far East from Europe.
Today, about 25 clipper-type ships are a-sailing, most of them in the service of a half-dozen navies which believe their trainees can develop better teamwork and get closer to the sea than aboard high-tech craft.
Only one original clipper ship, the exquisite Cutty Sark, survives. It was launched in 1869, the year the Suez Canal opened, and could transport 1.3 million pounds of tea over great distances. Now it is permanently docked in Greenwich, England.
 Load-Date: April 11, 1997

 

End of Document
