

STARTING AT THE TOP: Forbes Jr., A Candidate Made of Money
January 16, 1996, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 1429 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Like any other normal American kid, Steve Forbes got a weekly allowance - 25 cents - but first he had to do the chores.
Typical chore: bagpipe lessons. Every Saturday morning, Forbes and his three brothers were tutored in the art of coaxing sound from bagpipes. On Sundays, they went to church, wearing matching Scottish kilts and knee-high socks.
Today, he lives in a big white Colonial on a 500-acre spread in New Jersey's horse country. And under his control are an island in the Fijis, a 151-foot yacht, the Highlander; a Boeing 727, the "Capitalist Tool;" and castles in England, France, Morocco.
If Republicans want a climbed-the-ladder, earned-my-chance candidate for president, they'll have to look elsewhere. Malcolm Stevenson Forbes Jr. can't escape being the son of a famously eccentric father, with a strong personality of his own and perhaps a touch of noblesse oblige.
It doesn't strike him as untoward that he wants to start in politics at its zenith - the presidency.
Even if he has never been elected to public office, Forbes, 48, whose net worth is estimated by a competing magazine, Fortune, at $ 439 million, is a man of the world, an entrepreneur even as a lad. While fellow students at Princeton were out demonstrating against the war in Vietnam, he was founding a magazine for students, Business Today, which reached a circulation of 200,000 and still exists.
As the head of the Forbes Inc. publishing empire, and as the part-time chairman of the government board that oversaw Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty during the Cold War, he has conferred with Lech Walesa, Vaclav Havel, Helmut Kohl. When Yitzhak Rabin was killed, Forbes wrote in Forbes magazine about their four meetings over a 15-year period.
Friends describe Forbes as smart, worldly, and endlessly inquisitive.
A couple of years ago, Forbes and his best friend, Ken Tomlinson, editor in chief of the Reader's Digest, went to Yankee Stadium. Up to bat came Yankee third baseman Wade Boggs. On the scoreboard flashed Boggs' statistics - at-bats, hits and batting average.
"Steve looks up at the board and says, 'Something's wrong. They're 20 points off Boggs' batting average," Tomlinson recalls. "So we stop and do the math on paper, and, sure enough, the scoreboard is 20 points off."
Tomlinson is making a broader point: Forbes, he says, has a journalist's instinctive skepticism and a mind that won't quit working, even at the ballpark.
People think Forbes is shy but they misread him, friends say.
"Steve is someone who is comfortable in his own skin," says brother Tim, seven years his junior. "He is not driven by the need to intrude into situations. It is not shyness. He knows who he is. He is measured and tempered. He sucks things in. He is absolutely clear about what he believes in."
Says Michael Novak, a conservative theologian and author who has known him for a decade: "He is very different from his father, who was active and dashing and cut a figure like Teddy Roosevelt, and loved adventure, glamour and excitement."
"Steve seems bookish, like someone you'd encounter in the stacks at the library at Princeton," Novak adds. "But he's tough as a diamond inside. I've seen the sons of lots of rich men. I admire the way he's defined himself."
Comedian Joan Rivers claims she was the first to suggest he run. Waiting to go on TV's "Charlie Rose Show" several years ago, she heard what Forbes, another guest, had to say. She was impressed and gave him a friendly shove on the shoulder with this advice: "You're very smart! You ought to be president!"
But perhaps the real credit goes to economic consultant Jude Wanniski, a former Wall Street Journal editorialist and a proselytizer for the economic theory known as supply side. He urged Forbes to run for Democrat Bill Bradley's Senate seat as a step toward a presidential bid in 2004.
But five weeks after supply sider Jack Kemp decided against seeking the presidential nomination, Wanniski says he woke up - at 3 a.m. March 8, 1995 - and asked himself, "Why wait until 2004?" The next day, he faxed Forbes a long memo outlining how he could run and win. Forbes promised to think it over.
"Steve asked me why he should run and I told him, "There are nine candidates in the field. If you run there will be nine pessimists and an optimist,"' Wanniski says. Forbes agrees, calling his deficit-fearing rivals "root canal Republicans" and "gloomy-doomies."
Forbes Sr. lived life to the hilt. He motorcycled in China. He was the first to cross America in a hot-air balloon. He collected bejeweled Faberge eggs, worth millions. He squired Elizabeth Taylor about. He collected modern art and toy boats and toy soldiers. He lived in one of those estate houses that rich people give names to (the Forbes place is "Timberfield").
The father was a state senator in New Jersey, and ran twice for governor.
When Forbes Sr. entertained corporate and political chiefs and foreign leaders, he brought along son Steve, his first-born.
When he died in 1990, the four sons and daughter Moira shared the inheritance, but Steve got 51 percent control of the company, publisher of Forbes, a magazine for business leaders, American Heritage and a string of New Jersey weeklies.
"As my father liked to say," he grins, " 'There's nothing wrong with nepotism, as long as you keep it in the family.' "
Forbes Jr. has made the business into even a bigger success. The magazine's readership is golden: one in three subscribers is a millionaire.
And it has assured him of the deep pockets that enable him to pay for his campaign without government matching funds - and without government spending limits either.
By early January, he'd spent between $ 10 million and $ 15 million, his staff estimates, mostly on sharply honed TV ads. He surprised the professionals by ascending to second place in polls.
In Forbes magazine, he has a bully soapbox - and an influential audience. He writes a column, just as did his father and grandfather.
In the column, Forbes, disagreeing with a Supreme Court decision, wrote that maybe the justices "should be forced to take cold showers." He called Iran-Contra prosecutor Lawrence Walsh a "thug." He rose to the defense of disposable diapers against environmentalists who don't like them, writing "Don't tamper with Pampers."
He came out for uniforms for school kids. He defended ticket scalping as capitalism at work. And when the Senate voted to raise the capital gains tax, he asked: "Are they nuts?"
Mostly, though, he pounds one drum: stop taxing capital gains, which are the profits from the sale of stocks or other property.
Under the headline, "How to Get the Dow to 37,000," he offers this answer: "Eliminate the capital gains tax."
Forbes is close to libertarian in all his political views. He opposes the effort to outlaw abortion. He favors school vouchers, term limits, tax-free medical savings accounts. He would phase out Social Security for younger workers.
But it is economic issues that cause his political heart to pound. In an era when most politicians damn the deficit, the supply siders' dirty little secret is that deficits don't excite them. They think deficits will disappear of their own accord if taxes are cut and the economy is free to blossom.
His is a message of optimism and growth. "Ordinary people can do extraordinary things when given the opportunity," is his mantra.
He favors a flat tax. It is a catchy campaign issue, but beyond that he sees it chiefly as a mechanism to cut taxes.
He also favors tying the dollar to gold, printing fewer when gold rises in price and more when gold falls.
"What you need," he once told Rush Limbaugh, "is a money system that is out of the hands of politicians and has an anchor - and I hate to say this, because people think you're kind of crazy - like G-O-L-D."
A view like that, perfectly respected in some circles, could get him in trouble. Goldbugs are easily ridiculed.
Forbes is stiff before an audience and before TV cameras, but he radiates sincerity: 100 percent substance, zero percent style. In any backslapping derby, he would finish dead last.
Look at his office at the Forbes headquarters on Fifth Avenue: wooden paneling, a fireplace, two computers, a Lincoln bust, an original Gilbert Stuart portrait of Washington, four Churchill figures, 18 Agatha Christie first editions. Photos of Forbes with Ronald Reagan, with George Bush, with Bill Clinton, with Margaret Thatcher, with Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev, with the pope. Forbes with his five daughters and wife, Sabina. It is all old money, leather and Princeton.
After this, perhaps the Oval Office might seem cramped.
 Load-Date: January 16, 1996

 

End of Document
