

Still overshadowed, but the 'forgotten war' getting more attention
The Associated Press
June 17, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1371 words
Byline: By JOE WHEELAN, Associated Press Writer
Body




In the fall of 1950, the men of the 1st Marine Division were talking about the 5-month-old Korean War being over soon and shipping out for home. They were marching deeper into a deadly trap.
American soldiers and Marines had smashed North Korea's invading army in fierce battles at Pusan, Inchon and Seoul and were driving it back deep into its homeland.
"The plan was to be home by Christmas," recalls Win Scott, who was a 20-year-old machine gunner heading north with the Marines.
But China, worried about its exposed Manchurian border, had secretly assembled a 300,000-man army in the North Korean mountains.
After dark that Nov. 27, about 120,000 Chinese attacked the 15,000 men of the 1st Marine Division and 4,000 soldiers of the U.S., British and South Korean armies in the Chosin Reservoir area of northeastern Korea.
As bitter winds from Manchuria sent the wind chill tumbling to 75-below zero, the snow-covered hills swarmed with Chinese troops clad in white uniforms and armed with automatic weapons, grenades and mortars. They rushed the Marines' lines, guided by whistles, duck calls and bugles.
"Suddenly, there they were by the thousands," says Martin Russ, author of "Breakout," a 1999 history of the Chosin campaign. "Suddenly, the war was about to be lost by the United Nations forces."
The 8th Army, under attack by 180,000 Chinese on the other side of the peninsula, retreated south. The Marines, surrounded and threatened with annihilation, mounted an epic breakout from "Frozen Chosin" over the next two weeks, bringing out all of their wounded and most of their dead.
For all the shock over China's attack and the 2 1/2 years of bloody fighting that followed, the Korea conflict became the "forgotten war." Coming just five years after World War II, it ended indecisively. The veterans returned to an indifferent home front and kept their experiences to themselves.
"We were the silent ones. We didn't come home and say too much," says Mark Winget, a Marine from Oregon, Ill., who fought at Chosin.
Recent books and documentaries, the 5-year-old Korean War Memorial and news stories about civilian killings in the war's chaotic first weeks have raised the war's profile. But World War II and the Vietnam War likely will always overshadow Korea, many veterans of Korea believe.
"I think it's doomed to be that way," says Scott, of Waynesville, N.C., former executive director of the Chosin Few veterans association. "It was a short, very brutal engagement, and we kind of pass it by."
The war's most dramatic battle was Chosin, where 17 Medals of Honor and 70 Navy Crosses were awarded, more than for any single U.S. action. The Marines and other Allied troops killed or wounded more than 40,000 Chinese and knocked six of the 12 Chinese divisions out of the war. They lost nearly 2,400 killed and 10,000 or more to wounds or frostbite.
William Schreier, 74, a retired lieutenant colonel who lives in Hendersonville, N.C., was among 9,000 Marines at Yudam-ni, the farthest advance of the Chosin campaign, when 60,000 Chinese encircled and attacked them Nov. 27.
"Two battalions hit us. They were shouting, 'Marine, you die.' They hit us with illumination grenades, concussion grenades and 60 millimeter mortars," says Schreier, who was a mortar section leader on Hill 1282. At times, the outnumbered Marines fought desperately with bayonets, rifle butts, shovels and fists.
By morning, the 180 Marines in Schreier's company were whittled to just 14 effectives. Yet they still held the hill, and several hundred Chinese dead lay in the snow. "They were stacked like cordwood," Schreier says.
Scott, whose company reinforced Schreier's unit, recalls sharing a foxhole with another young machine gunner as waves of Chinese attacked. Convinced they were doomed, they pooled their sugar and cigarettes.
"We lined up all the sugar and cigarettes we had around the hole, and fired at the enemy and ate sugar and smoked cigarettes," Scott says.
Both lived, but Scott was wounded by mortar shrapnel that shattered an M-1 rifle slung across his back and narrowly missed his spine.
Scott rode out of Yudam-ni lashed to a trailer pulled by a Jeep. The wounded man next to him died during the long trip to Hagaru-ri, which had a crude airstrip and field hospital.
Hagaru-ri was just 14 miles away, but thousands of Chinese blocked the only road, so the Marines had to fight their way out, their frozen dead strapped to Jeeps and trucks. The column inched along as Marine riflemen on the ground and Marine pilots in the air blasted the Chinese from the ridgetops.
Many didn't think the Marines would get out. The Army advised trying to escape in small groups. The Air Force offered to fly Marines out from Hagaru-ri. Gen. O.P. Smith, the 1st Marine Division commander, responded that they would come out as a unit or not at all.
"They had never lost a campaign, and they expected to win this one," Russ says.
It was hard to tell whether the cold or the Chinese army was the worse enemy. Food and plasma froze solid. So did the morphine syrettes carried by Navy corpsmen to treat wounds; they took to keeping a couple in their mouths for quick use. Weapons needed special attention to prevent jamming.
Frostbite was endemic. To this day, Winget and others who suffered frostbite are bothered by circulation problems, arthritis and other cold-weather maladies.
Retired Gunnery Sgt. Ernie Pappenheimer, who heads the Chosin Few's Cold Injury Committee, which has helped win compensation for thousands of veterans, was wounded in the neck and shoulder at Yudam-ni. He was flown by helicopter to Hagaru-ri.
The swift evacuation was a mixed blessing. "I had my feet freeze, and my toes were amputated," he says.
The key to the Marines' breakout to Hagaru-ri was Lt. Col. Ray Davis' daring cross-country relief of Fox Company, whose 225 men held Toktong Pass against a five-day siege by thousands of Chinese.
Marching all night in 24-below-zero temperatures and blowing snow, Davis' battalion slogged over steep, rocky hills, wiping out Chinese positions. Winget, a platoon sergeant, says his men, exhausted by five days of solid fighting, weren't allowed any rest because they might freeze to death in their sweat. Many Chinese soldiers had, he says.
At daybreak on Dec. 2, Davis' battalion relieved Fox Company, which was down to less than half strength, opening the door to Hagaru-ri for the Marines.
East of Chosin, remnants of two shattered battalions of the Army's 7th Infantry Division also filtered into Hagaru-ri. Nearly half of the 3,100 soldiers had been killed when attacked by 23,000 Chinese; most of the rest were wounded or frostbitten.
Retired Army Col. John Gray of Mount Ulla, N.C., was wounded three times east of Chosin. "It was desperate hand-to-hand fighting," he says. "I have vivid memories of terror. Self-preservation was a driving force."
At Hagaru-ri, the 385 able-bodied Army survivors were placed under Marine command, and 4,300 wounded soldiers and Marines were evacuated by air. The Marines began their march to the Sea of Japan 60 miles away. Fending off constant attacks, they reached Hungnam a week later and boarded Navy ships with 90,000 North Korean civilian refugees.
In western Korea, the Chinese drove the 8th Army all the way to Seoul and beyond. After truce talks began in 1951, the war hunkered down into a World War I-type affair - raids and counterattacks launched from bunkers, hills taken, lost and retaken. It went on until a cease-fire was signed July 27, 1953.
Veterans remain divided over whether the war was worth it.
"Actually, I wonder what was accomplished there," says Donald Campbell, 81, a retired Marine major from Waldport, Ore., who was the forward artillery observer for Fox Company at Toktong Pass.
Scott, however, says South Korea is a free, prosperous nation because of the United States' willingness to go to Korea.
"To this day they will tell you they are just elated at what we did. A lot of these people do not forget," he says. "So it was worth it. But I lost a lot of good friends over there."
---
On the Net:
Korean War history: http://www.geocities.com/Pentagon/Quarters/6808/ 
Korean War Project: http://www.Koreanwar.org 
Chosin page: http://www.koreanwar.org/html/units/frontline/chosin.htm 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY331-333 of June 12, Graphic KOREA BATTLES
 Load-Date: June 18, 2000

 

End of Document
