

Students take to the streets against the government
The Associated Press
September 29, 1999, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 381 words
Byline: By ARTHUR MAX, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JAKARTA, Indonesia
Body




Besieged President B.J. Habibie rejected a call from a powerful political bloc today to give up his re-election effort but faced more pressure from students calling for reform.
Hundreds of students in trademark yellow shirts gathered on Jakarta's main traffic circle today to press for government reform and protest police action against students.
One student was killed and several were injured Tuesday in clashes with police on Sumatra island, Jakarta's newspapers reported today. It was the latest death after seven people were killed in rioting last week.
The students said they campaigning for political limitations on the powerful military, greater autonomy for Indonesia's 26 provinces and punishment for former President Suharto, who is under investigation for corruption.
"We are here to demonstrate against the very bad condition our country is in," said Iksan, of the University of Indonesia, who like many Indonesians uses only one name.
Meanwhile, the six-party Axis Force called on Habibie to reconsider his re-election bid, said Amien Rais, head of the National Mandate Party.
Habibie has come under sharp criticism for allowing an independence referendum in East Timor and for a major banking scandal that implicates the country's top financial managers.
According to Rais, Habibie said he would allow the People's Consultative Assembly, the nation's highest legislative body, to decide whether he should stay in office.
The alliance holds a key position between the country's two largest parties, Habibie's Golkar and the Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle, which is headed by Megawati Sukarnoputri. Megawati is Habibie's main challenger for the presidency, which will be decided in November by a special assembly of legislators and government appointees.
Golkar chairman Akbar Tanjung told reporters that Habibie remained the party's candidate for now, but it would discuss the position of the Axis Force. Habibie was elevated to the presidency last year when Suharto was ousted by student-led protests after 32 years of authoritarian rule.
In a tacit acknowledgment of the student's power, Rais and another top political leader, Abdurrahman Wahid, addressed the crowd of students at the foot of the Welcome Monument.
"Keep fighting for what you believe is right," Rais said.
 Load-Date: September 29, 1999

 

End of Document
