

Summit spokesman describes the issues as 'intractable'
The Associated Press
July 14, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 795 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: THURMONT, Md.
Body




President Clinton pushed ahead in an uphill struggle to steer Israel and the Palestinians into a settlement. Still, at the midpoint before his planned departure for Asia, the summit spokesman described the issues as intractable.
Under a blanket of secrecy, Clinton met Friday with Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak at the president's Laurel lodge in secluded Camp David., Md. He then walked over to Yasser Arafat's Birch cabin for a meeting with the Palestinian leader.
Concluding the day of sometimes tense negotiations, the three delegations met for a traditional Sabbath dinner in Laurel Lodge as guests of the Israeli prime minister.
Clinton and Arafat sat together at one of three round tables for a dinner that began with a blessing and the singing of a "song of peace."
P.J. Crowley, spokesman for the National Security Council said there could well be informal talks about the status of the negotiations during dinner, possibly followed by a more formal session later in the evening.
If Clinton he made any headway on the future of Jerusalem, the amount of land Israel will yield to the Palestinians or the fate of 2 million Palestinian refugees it was not evident at spokesman Joe Lockhart's briefing.
A diplomatic source told The Associated Press that at this stage there was no indication that the positions Israel and the Palestinians took into the talks had changed in any way.
While groups of experts met for the first time to wrestle directly with the core issues, Lockhart declined to say there had been progress at the summit, or even describe the meetings as positive.
"These are intractable issues," he said, "These are issues that go to the vital interests of both of the parties. So this is very serious."
In that vein, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright told a group of Palestinians that neither side can expect to get 100 percent of its demands satisfied, Lockhart said.
Asked if the American hosts might present proposals to bridge the gap between the two sides, the spokesman said: "We certainly would not eliminate any diplomatic initiative or effort that might help push the process forward," Lockhart said.
Late Thursday, returning from a speech to the NAACP in Baltimore and a stop in Washington to preside over the signing of a trade agreement between the United States and Vietnam, Clinton met with Israel's top negotiator, Shlomo Ben-Ami; had dinner with Barak, Arafat and their delegations; and then met separately with the two leaders, winding up at 1 a.m.
Enforcing the gag rule imposed on the two delegations, the American hosts barred members from visiting reporters in their press room here, far from Camp David.
A spokesman for Israel's opposition Likud Party, Limor Livnat, was ushered out of the press room by a State Department official after she had registered her objections to Barak's willingness to make concessions on Jerusalem and the Jordan Valley.
Barak signaled before the summit he was prepared to give the Palestinians a foothold in Jerusalem - Arafat wants to locate a Palestinian capital there - and also to turn over the strategic Jordan Valley to the Palestinians provided Israel could lease early-warning facilities.
"We are ready for compromises," Livnat said. But she said Barak was the first prime minister to discuss "giving up Jerusalem" and that, she said, would be a serious mistake.
The Knesset member said a majority of Israelis are opposed to Barak's position on the key issues.
In Washington, meanwhile, Hanan Ashrawi, a member of the Palestine National Council, said "in terms of addressing Jerusalem, and refugees and the boundaries, they still have not been resolved. I doubt they will be successful in this time period."
Albright left the talks for a few hours to meet in nearby Emmitsburg, Md., with seven senior Palestinian officials, including Ashrawi, who told reporters the group complained about being prevented from meeting with Arafat. "We weren't there as negotiators … we were there to represent the Palestinian political spectrum," she said.
Albright told the group the atmosphere in the Camp David talks was becoming increasingly difficult, a Palestinian source said.
And Lockhart later said Albright had told the Palestinians that as negotiators work through the issues "this process is bound to get harder."
The talks were expected to slow after sundown Friday, in observance of the Jewish Sabbath. While many members of the Israeli delegation are not religiously observant, there is a Biblical injunction that the Sabbath should be a day of rest, and to violate that openly could be politically dangerous.
Still, Lockhart left open the possibility of informal talks on Saturday. Full-scale mediation is to resume on Sunday, Clinton hopes to depart for an economic summit meeting in Japan next Wednesday.
 Load-Date: July 15, 2000

 

End of Document
