

Survivor: 'We Thought It Was The End Of The World'
June 26, 1996, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 461 words
Byline: By ADNAN MALIK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia
Body




Master Sgt. William Sine had just walked out of his room and was heading for the elevator when the bomb exploded.
"I closed the front door, and as soon as I got to the elevator, bang. It knocked me off the ground," the 39-year-old U.S. Air Force soldier told The Associated Press today from his hospital bed.
"The lights went off … and I realized the whole side of the building was falling," said Sine, of Warren, Ohio. He tried to care for the victims.
"There were some people dead. I could feel a lot of blood on my hands and I knew it couldn't be sweat because it was too thick," he said.
Sine, who was badly cut on the thigh, face and arms, is recovering at King Fahd Hospital in Dhahran.
He shares a room with Tech. Sgt. Jim Rangitsch, 35, of Billings, Mont., who was watching television when the blast ripped through the building.
"The only thing I could recall is flying glass and pieces of wall all over me," Rangitsch said. "I even saw the TV unit fall." He suffered minor cuts all over his body.
Minutes later, shocked onlookers filled the streets. One survivor thought it was the end of the world. Others cried or just sat down and cupped their hands to their ears.
Two short-haired Western men wearing jeans and T-shirts, apparently forensic experts, closely examined the ground in search of clues to Tuesday night's bombing.
The bomb, described by U.S. officials as containing up to 2 tons of explosives, ripped off the front half of an eight-story apartment building housing American soldiers at an air base in this eastern Saudi gulf city.
The blast left a crater 35 feet deep and 85 feet wide on the street just outside the housing compound.
A U.S. Air Force sergeant, slightly injured in the 10:30 p.m. blast, said: "I heard a deafening noise and then the windows shattered and the walls fell in."
"People were running everywhere," Staff Sgt. Tyler Christie, 31, of Fort Walton Beach, Fla., told the AP.
The streets soon were filled with dozens of police cars and ambulances in Al-Khobar, a suburb of Dhahran were the blast took place.
Glass from shop windows and car windshields covered the streets for several blocks in all directions.
Saudi police and troops toting semiautomatic rifles and shouting "Move! Move!" tried to shoo away onlookers and reporters. "Get them out of here," one officer barked to his men.
"We thought it was the end of the world," said Walid, a 22-year-old Saudi who was walking on a nearby street when the explosion went off, killing 19 Americans and wounding more than 270 at latest count.
"There were hundreds of people in the street. Some were crying. Some just sat on the ground and held their ears," the young man told The Associated Press.
By daybreak, the streets surrounding the blast were cordoned off by the Saudi security forces.
 Load-Date: June 26, 1996

 

End of Document
