

Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
May 20, 1996, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 440 words
Dateline: TOKYO
Body



Japanese Tot Travels 230 Miles
 Four-year-old Shin Okazaki has always been fascinated by trains. So on Saturday, he slid away from his parents and rode one 230 miles to Tokyo.
"He just got on the train because he was curious," the boy's mother, Misuzu, explained in a telephone interview Monday after Shin was back home safe and sound. "As a parent, I'm very embarrassed."
Shin made his escape late Saturday afternoon, when his parents thought he was outside playing. He sneaked into the nearby Nishi-Otsu Station in Otsu, central Japan, and apparently hopped a train to nearby Kyoto, Japan's ancient capital. From there, he transferred to a high-speed "bullet train" bound for Tokyo.
Back home, Shin's alarmed father called the police to report his son missing, and the police put out a nationwide alert.
Around 11 that night, as the bullet train neared Tokyo Station, a conductor noticed a 4-year-old boy sitting alone. Shin was taken to a police station, where officers discovered his name written inside his shoes. The name matched the one on the alert.
Shin's parents were notified, and on Sunday they traveled to Tokyo to retrieve him.
"They said he didn't cry at all," said Mrs. Okazaki. "If only he had cried a little earlier maybe it wouldn't have come to this."
 
 Lost Tot on Train
Using the newspaper story, find the vocabulary words listed below, and circle them in the article. Use the context of the story to help you figure out the meanings of each vocabulary word. Use a dictionary to check out your answers.
1) transferred; 2) fascinated; 3) retrieve; 4) bound; 5) alert; 6) slid; 7) ancient; 8) alarmed; 9) interview; 10) conductor.
a) frightened; fearful.
b) get and bring back.
c) conversation between a reporter and another person.
d) headed.
e) very interested and attracted.
f) changed from one public vehicle to another.
g) very old.
h) moved without attracting attention.
i) person in charge of a railroad train.
j) notice to be on the lookout.
 
 ANSWER KEY: a)8; b)3; c)9; d)4; e)2; f)1; g)7; h)6; i)10; j)5.
 
PART TWO
SAFE AND SOUND
Aren't you glad that Shin Okazaki returned home safely? Take control of another alarming situation. Write a story that begins with one of the three frightening predicaments listed below. Give your adventure a happy ending.
1) Brandon fell asleep while looking after his younger sister. When he awoke, the toddler was nowhere in sight.
2) Diana had promised her mother that she would return from the library by 4 o'clock. She was an hour late and she hadn't called home.
3) Pablo was on a hiking trip when suddenly he found himself surrounded by thick fog. Within minutes he lost contact with the other climbers.
 
 Load-Date: May 20, 1996

 

End of Document
