

The events of 1989; the long march to tragedy
The Associated Press
June 20, 1998, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1085 words
Byline: By JIM ABRAMS, Associated Press Writer
Body




The first act of the Tiananmen Square tragedy began, appropriately enough, with a death.
Hu Yaobang, a diminutive, quick-tongued man being groomed to succeed Deng Xiaoping as supreme leader, was a little too liberal, a little too eccentric, for his Communist Party comrades. He was purged as party chief in January 1987, when party elders needed someone to blame for student demonstrations that had erupted in Shanghai and spread to Beijing and other cities.
In death he would get his revenge.
On April 15, Hu died of a heart attack, and restless students had their cause for a more open society. Just as in April 1976, when thousands gathered on Tiananmen Square to honor the late Chou En-lai and carefully denounce the government, the 100-acre square in the center of Beijing became a magnet for those seeking to make Hu, never particularly endeared in life, a martyr for political reform.
For Western reporters, it touched off two months of relentless coverage - daily visits to the universities in the far north of the cities, countless miles of marching with students, sifting through the official press to gauge the next government move, nightly vigils on the square and the constant look over the shoulder, waiting for the crackdown.
Tens of thousands began streaming to the square to lay wreathes, and on April 22 party leaders attending a memorial ceremony for Hu at the Great Hall of the People on the west side of the square were confronted with 150,000 young people chanting for democratic reforms.
Students at Beijing universities began a class boycott, and the government responded by banning all gatherings. But police, under orders to avoid violence, gave way every time students marched on their lines. At times the nose-to-nose standoffs would last for hours. On April 27 trucks with unarmed soldiers circled the square, but marchers swarmed around them, shouting "Welcome 38th Army!"
After another huge, celebratory march on May 4, the 70th anniversary of a famous Beijing student uprising against foreign domination, it appeared the demonstrations might taper off. Party leader Zhao Ziyang, a reformist, praised both the tolerance of authorities and the reason of the students.
The student demands were modest, centering on press freedom, an end to government corruption and recognition of their independent student groups. But conservative Premier Li Peng refused to recognize the students, and the mid-May visit of Soviet leader Michael Gorbachev gave new impetus to the protests.
On May 13 some 3,000 were back on the square to begin a hunger strike. "We love truth more than rice," said the banners. In a nation that's often on the edge of famine, the willingness to give up food for a cause struck a chord among workers and intellectuals fed up with official corruption and the daily struggle to make ends meet. Support for the strikers swelled, and demands escalated, with marchers seeking the resignation of Li and the retirement of Deng.
Gorbachev's visit, hailed as ending 40 years of bad blood between Moscow and Beijing, became a major embarrassment. The traditional welcoming ceremony on the square had to be moved to the airport, and Gorbachev's motorcade couldn't even get to the Great Hall for a news conference.
On May 17, and again the next day, 1 million people took to the streets, with students overshadowed by factory workers, farmers, even police and soldiers.
Government tolerance was at an end.
Zhao, in his last political act, made a tearful, pre-dawn visit to the hunger strikers on the square on May 19, saying "we've come too late." The next day Li imposed martial law in Beijing and called in the military.
They were met with roadblocks put up by citizens on all the major thoroughfares, and, once again, the authorities hesitated.
Meanwhile, student leaders urged an end to the occupation of Tiananmen. Conditions on the square were squalid and they were all exhausted.
But students just arrived from outside the city insisted on staying; they were energized on May 30 when art students unveiled their "Goddess of Democracy," modeled after the Statue of Liberty.
Soldiers made an unarmed assault during the morning of June 3, but were turned back by crowds. Young soldiers, stunned by the reception, sat on the side of the road and cried. But that night troops in armored personnel carriers and tanks began moving in from the west. Crowds hurled Molotov cocktails and set burning buses in their path, and troops responded by opening fire. Bicycle pedicabs flew back and forth, carrying the dead and wounded.
Troops descended on the square and fired shots on adjacent streets, killing some as they left the area. By 4 a.m. on June 4 the square was surrounded, with several thousand students huddled around the monument to revolutionary martyrs in the center. A Taiwanese folk singer, Hou Dejian, negotiated their retreat and they marched out together, holding hands, crying and singing the Internationale.
Troops immediately occupied the square and destroyed the Goddess of Democracy. At least seven students leaving the square were crushed by a personnel carrier.
The final death toll may never be known. It is certain that hundreds died, perhaps thousands.
The killings continued the next few days, with troops firing on angry, often foolhardy crowds. On June 6, near the square, a young man blocked a line of tanks in a scene that has come to symbolize popular defiance of a repressive government.
Shots were fired, perhaps randomly, perhaps with the intent to scare, at the diplomatic quarters where reporters and other foreigners live. These families joined a frantic exodus of foreigners boarding embassy buses for the airport.
In the coming weeks troops also put down popular uprisings in Shanghai, Chengdu, Xian and numerous other cities around the country. Hundreds of student protesters were imprisoned, dozens of workers accused of crimes during the demonstrations were executed.
An office worker was sentenced to 10 years in prison for telling an ABC TV crew that 20,000 were killed in Beijing. A teacher who splashed paint on a Mao Tse-tung portrait received life.
The government survived, but with the distrust of many Chinese and many foreign nations that lasts to this day, even as the horror of Tiananmen Square fades. Deng Xiaoping, who opened China to the world, went to his grave known as the man who ordered the People's Liberation Army to open fire on the people.
 
 ---
Jim Abrams was AP bureau chief in China from 1986 to 1990. He now covers Congress in Washington.
 Load-Date: June 20, 1998

 

End of Document
