

The all-day, all-night scene of a deal in the works
The Associated Press
October 23, 1998, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 640 words
Byline: By SANDRA SOBIERAJ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUEENSTOWN, Md.
Body




A rising orange sun lit Palestinian chairman Yasser Arafat's motorcade as it rolled away from the meeting halls, all sides reportedly satisfied a Mideast peace deal was won.
Marine One's engines whirred.
Protocol said Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's motorcade would come next, followed by President Clinton, who planned a triumphant - but exhausted - return to the White House after a 21-hour end run at the peace accord.
The clock ticked. Minutes passed, then one hour, then nearly two. Finally, Netanyahu's limousine pulled from the long driveway; but no sign of Clinton. It was the first hint of a glitch.
Then Marine One's engines went dead.
White House press secretary Joe Lockhart telephoned the press pool waiting at the helicopter. "Obviously, we have hit a snag."
At 9:35 a.m., two hours and 38 minutes after Lockhart had trumpeted "an agreement has been reached" - and 23 hours after Clinton launched the overnight talks - the president and top aides were huddled in the same rooms where they'd hammered out the suddenly endangered deal.
The issue, reportedly: how to deal with Israel's last-minute demand for the release of Jonathan Pollard, an American serving a life sentence for spying for Israel.
The urgent hand-wringing stood in marked contrast to earlier images from the Wye River Conference Center, where Israeli, Palestinian and U.S. delegations bargained for an extended nine days.
In the official White House photo released late Thursday night, they looked like aged fraternity brothers pulling an all-nighter on their thesis: Clinton, Netanyahu, and Arafat hunched together at the table, pens in hand, a sheaf of papers before them.
Only their eyeglasses, rarely seen in public, betrayed the trio's fatigue.
The geese abandoned the Chesapeake Bay, Thursday tipped into today, the hour crawled past 4 a.m. and still the three leaders - attended by a cast of legal, technical and political advisers - haggled over details of peace.
As they went word by word through a U.S.-proposed text, Clinton administration spokesmen cautiously batted down reported breakthroughs, one by one.
"Those reports are highly premature."
"What I'm trying to convey is that I can't predict how these issues will be resolved, or IF they'll get resolved."
By 4:20 a.m., word spread optimistically from the Palestinian camp that a deal had been closed. The phone rang in the den of White House reporters. "We are close, but we are not there yet," a U.S. official said.
Lockhart weighed in that Clinton - who had already invested six days in the talks and canceled four political trips in the heat of America's campaign season - would stay put. The long-elusive peace agreement hung "in the balance," Lockhart said.
Back to the coffee urns.
In the great-hall dining room of the Wye Center, where peace negotiators holed up for nine straight days, some caught quick naps in comfy chairs in front of the blazing gas fireplace.
But when a fish and veal buffet was set up just before midnight, it was a working dinner for most. Jordan's King Hussein, with his wife, Queen Noor, had just dropped by to deliver a plea for tough choices.
Diplomats balancing dinner plates and draft language of the peace agreement shuttled between the two or three tables where working groups were stationed.
Reporters, kept two miles away, gleaned an idea of the goings on from a dozen White House photos released Thursday and early this morning, and from briefings by Lockhart and State Department spokesman Jamie Rubin.
They described Clinton's 20-plus-hour marathon drive, which began 10 a.m. Thursday, as the "most intense" session of this extended Mideast peace summit.
But Clinton was prepared to smooth the path. He brought his dog, Buddy, who delighted Arafat. With Netanyahu, Clinton bent the conference center's no-smoking rule and shared cigars at the bargaining table.
 
 Load-Date: October 23, 1998

 

End of Document
