

THE VIETNAMESE OF NEW ORLEANS: Catholic Vietnamese are double refugees.
The Associated Press
June 10, 2000, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1307 words
Byline: By DEBORAH HASTINGS, AP National Writer
Dateline: NEW ORLEANS
Body




Sometimes, when he is tired and his back aches, Tran Chuat wonders at the price he has paid for freedom.
Five years in which he never saw his wife or small daughter. Nineteen years of working 14 hours a day in this strange place called America, with its brash ways, so his family would know security and stability.
Nearly a lifetime of running. On Nov. 2, 1954, after "they cut my country in half," Tran left his birthplace in North Vietnam, which was given to the communists, and headed for South Vietnam. There, they were suspicious of his northern accent and Catholic religion, a gift from the colonizing French.
Two decades later, when all of Vietnam fell to communism, he ran again, riding a homemade raft into the sea. This time it wasn't just him. He had a wife, a son, and three daughters, the eldest of whom he left behind to care for her aging grandparents.
In a stampeding panic to board a refugee ship, Tran was separated from his wife and 7-year-old daughter, swallowed by a screaming throng that poured onboard, leaving hundreds behind on the raft.
He has been an outsider in his own country, and now in America. Most Vietnamese are Buddhist. In New Orleans East, in a community called Versailles, some 10,000 Catholics from North Vietnam have recreated a community with more than a few similarities to their homeland.
There is the weather - hot, humid and wet. There is the history of French domination and influence. But like so many other ethnic enclaves in this country, there is the separateness of being a group within a group. New Orleans is home to America's largest population of Vietnamese Catholics. But for the most part, the community exists in isolation.
Sometimes, when he lets himself think that far, it seems Tran has a foot in each world. And a heart in neither.
In 1975, Tran Chuat ran with 200 other families, all of them bobbing in the South China Sea like ants on a matchbook. There wasn't a spare inch on the raft. No one knew where they were going, except away.
Away from rampaging communists and certain imprisonment, if not death. Away from a country no longer theirs. Off the Ca Mau peninsula, some 300 miles south of Saigon, they prayed for a foreign ship to take pity on them.
One finally came. Grasping the hand of his 3-year-old daughter and carrying his sick, 9-year-old son, Tran felt himself being pulled farther and farther from his wife, Phuong Vu, who clung to their daughter, Marie.
Now 31, Marie vaguely remembers that day. "I was crying," she recalls. "I was holding my mother's hand, looking up at her. She was crying. Everyone was running, trying to get on the boat."
Someone pulled Tran's son out of his arms and hoisted the boy onboard. Tran had no choice. He scrambled after the child, still gripping the hand of his toddler daughter.
"Everyone was screaming," says Marie, who is now a U.S. Census worker and shares an immaculate duplex with her parents and grandmother.
Marie and her mother couldn't get to the other side of the raft. They stood weeping as the big boat began to pull away, growing smaller and smaller until it was a dot that sailed over the horizon.
Tran didn't know where he was going or whose ship he was on. Four days later, it docked in Guam. From Guam he flew to a U.S. refugee camp in Pennsylvania. From there, he went to New Orleans, where the Roman Catholic Church ran one of its biggest Vietnamese relocation programs.
"I not happy when I got here," says Tran, now 60. "I try to work very hard, anything to make the time be over. I did not know if my family going to die. In South Vietnam, they kill anybody they can kill."
After two decades in America, Tran's English still is rough around the edges. He didn't have time for schooling. He worked two jobs, which eventually left him disabled with a bad back. He hoarded money for the day when the rest of his family would arrive in this muggy, flat suburb just north of New Orleans.
Five years after Tran left, they were finally able to sneak out on a refugee boat and join him in Louisiana.
Here in Versailles, named after an apartment complex bought by American Catholics to house refugees, they were overwhelmed by the unfamiliar. Yes, they were surrounded by their own people in this community next to a NASA facility that used to boom with the production of space shuttle parts.
But in school and at work, they were surrounded by Americans whose round eyes looked at them with mistrust. The Vietnamese soon outnumbered black residents.The refugees worked hard, as shrimp fishermen in the Gulf of Mexico and restaurant owners serving Vietnamese-style coffee - rich and sweetened with condensed milk. They saved their money and bought the brick tract homes built for NASA workers. They planted gardens, an American hobby but a Vietnamese way of life. In their front yards they erected concrete statues of the Virgin Mary.
During the 1980s, Versailles began to look like Southeast Asia. Old men and women in conical hats cleared a swamp and planted a community garden stretching 20 acres to the bayou that runs through the neighborhood.
The newly built Mary Queen of Vietnam Church celebrated Mass in Tran's native tongue. Stores and restaurants opened with names such as Pho Quang, where the waitress recommends a noodle soup made from bean sprouts, "eye of rib," and osmosa.
Osmosa?
"Stomach from the beef. The insides," she says, pointing to her ribs. In the background, a tape plays. A woman sings, in Vietnamese, "My Heart Will Go On," the love theme from "Titantic."
At first, the transformation of Versailles created tension between blacks and newly arrived Vietnamese.
"Some of the black people and Vietnamese people didn't communicate so well," said Tran's daughter, Marie.
The problem, said Monsignor Dominic Luong, pastor of Mary Queen of Vietnam Church, was some in the black community mistakenly thought Vietnamese refugees received government favors including not having to pay taxes.
In a series of meetings with neighboring parishes, Luong said, "a bridge was built." He laughs at the memory. "The bridge was food."
Luong is only half-kidding. People come from all over Louisiana and Mississippi for the weekend market in Versailles where Vietnamese sell everything from fresh mint to live chickens.
Catholics from North Vietnam are used to suspicion. When Vietnam was partitioned in 1954, nearly 1 million Catholics fled to the south. There, old hostilities surfaced, not unlike the stereotypes that still exist in America between northern and southern states.
"For the ones in Versailles, freedom means the freedom to make money. They are cold people, driving people, Northerners. The Southerners say that for them, freedom means the freedom to think, to enjoy life," wrote Robert Olen Butler in "A Good Scent from a Strange Mountain," a collection of short stories, many set in Versailles, about the legacy of Vietnam. The book won a 1993 Pulitzer Prize.
For Tran Chuat, freedom means many things. It is what replaced the chokehold of communism in Vietnam and allows his family to worship without fear in Versailles. It is the opportunity to work as a carpenter and a City of New Orleans maintenance worker so his children could go to college.
Sometimes, he thinks freedom is wasted on Americans.
"In Vietnam, I don't lock my door," he says. "Here, I don't lock my door, they come and take everything out. Here, they come and put a gun in my side and save 'Give me your keys.' They take my car.
"They enough freedom to kill anybody, anytime."
Sometimes, when Marie thinks of all her family has been through, she wonders at the pain freedom brings.
She lives two lives. One in the insular community of Versailles. Another outside, where everything is loud and big and different.
"We live on this land," she says softly, "but we don't consider ourselves Americans."
On the Net: New Orleans Vietnamese Online: http:www.nolaviet.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY450-455 of June 5; AP Graphics LOUISIANA VIETNAM
 Load-Date: June 11, 2000

 

End of Document
