

The world will be tying up loose ends in millennium's final year
The Associated Press
December 26, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1389 words
Body




It will be a 365-day march to a December midnight and the next millennium. But along the way, the world in 1999 will try to tie up some loose ends.
Israelis and Palestinians face a May deadline for finding a way to live together permanently in peace. Northern Ireland is to convene its "unity" assembly after decades of strife. And the Panama Canal, a wonder of the early 20th century, will be handed over to Panama in time for the 21st.
In Europe, a new continental currency and an expanded NATO will debut. On a calendar full of election days, two stand out: Indonesia and Nigeria, giants struggling to shake off long spells of authoritarianism.
And 250 miles above it all, astronauts will be piecing together the International Space Station, readying it for its first live-in crew in January 2000.
The Associated Press asked correspondents around the world to assess the prospects for 1999. Here are their reports:
---
 
 Mideast
 
 By NICOLAS B. TATRO
JERUSALEM - A crisis is looming between Israel and the Palestinians over Yasser Arafat's plan to declare an independent state in May with or without Israel's approval.
The issue is likely to dominate Middle East politics and set the agenda for the Israeli election in the early part of the year.
Incumbent Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has vowed to annex Jewish settlements and West Bank land needed to maintain Israel's security if Arafat chooses to sidestep the negotiating process.
The crisis will come to a head on May 4, when Arafat contends the Israel-Palestinian peace accords expire, and he has the right to realize his dream.
It will take an all-out mediation effort by the United States to prevent a showdown and get the two sides to negotiate the most sensitive issues: the fate of Jerusalem, Jewish settlements, borders and the disposition of Palestinian refugees.
After the round of airstrikes on Iraq, U.S. diplomacy will be tested in trying to maintain a united front in the long-running faceoff with Iraqi President Saddam Hussein over U.N. inspections of military facilities and economic sanctions.
Support within the Middle East for Washington's hard line on Iraq was already weakening even before the latest attacks, in large measure because of the erosion of faith in the Israel-Palestinian peace process.
In Iran, the attempts at social and political reforms by President Mohammad Khatami remain under attack from hard-liners supported by the judiciary and clergy aligned with Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. At year's end, a mysterious string of slayings was aimed at Iranian dissidents and intellectuals.
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak's government appears to have contained Islamic militants after a six-year campaign, but the gap between rich and poor still holds the seeds of danger for his country.
---
 
 Europe
 
 By JEFFREY ULBRICH
BRUSSELS, Belgium - Eleven of the 15 European Union countries leap into the new year with a new single currency, trading in their marks, francs and lire for the euro.
Euro currency won't start circulating until 2002, so the currency at first will be an accounting factor in financial market, banking and business transactions.
Despite some initial uncertainty, some people see the new monetary system as the biggest step toward European unity since the creation of the Common Market.
A decade after the fall of the Berlin Wall, East is slowly joining West. NATO will accept Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic into the fold and the EU continues negotiations to bring in up to a dozen new members.
On the dark side of the ledger, the Balkans worry both East and West.
An upsurge in violence is threatening the cease-fire in Kosovo. On one side are the Serbs, who see Kosovo as an integral part of their republic, and on the other the province's majority Albanians who lost their autonomy 10 years ago and now are demanding independence.
The West is sending in 2,000 civilian observers in an effort to preserve the truce. NATO missiles and bombers remain poised, keeping pressure on Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to behave.
Bosnia, another Balkan tinderbox, is making slow progress, but there is no indication the 32,000 NATO-led peacekeepers there will be leaving anytime soon.
Many nations, now considered "outs," will spend 1999 trying to show the world why they should be counted among the "ins."
Countries like Slovenia, Romania, Macedonia, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania ache to join the European mainstream. Already members of organizations like the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the countries are eager for the big time - NATO and the EU.
---
 
 Latin America
By MICHELLE RAY ORTIZ
MEXICO CITY - Weak oil prices and natural disasters put many Latin American nations in a tough position heading into 1999.
Honduras and Nicaragua must rebuild from the devastation of Hurricane Mitch, and are seeking forgiveness of their total of $ 11 billion in foreign debts. Mitch killed more than 9,000 people across Central America, destroyed roads and bridges and left thousands homeless.
Peru, meanwhile, intends to spend $ 600 million on reconstruction from storms caused by the El Nino weather phenomenon earlier in 1998.
With oil prices at a 25-year-low, leaders in Mexico, Venezuela and Ecuador are preaching austerity and bracing for recessions in the face of plummeting export revenues.
Brazil, struggling with a huge public deficit, will try to restore investor confidence by slashing $ 23 billion from its government budget.
Panama, meanwhile, looks forward to taking possession of the Panama Canal from the United States on Dec. 31, 1999. But not before presidential elections in May; Martin Torrijos, the son of former Panamanian strongman Omar Torrijos, leads in early opinion polls.
El Salvador, Argentina and Chile also will elect new presidents.
The future of Mexico's Institutional Revolutionary Party, which has ruled since 1929, will be reshaped as presidential aspirants jostle in the party's first open primary.
The atmosphere will be friendlier when Mexico welcomes Pope John Paul II for a 3 -day visit in January.
A judge will determine whether two members of Argentina's former military junta will face trial on charges of adopting children taken from dissidents during its 1976-83 "dirty war," and Chile awaits the outcome of Spain's extradition request for former dictator Augusto Pinochet.
Colombia's new president, Andres Pastrana, is trying to engage leftist guerrillas in peace talks to end a 34-year conflict - and to attract foreign aid for programs to give farmers alternatives to growing drugs.
---
 
 Asia
 
 By YURI KAGEYAMA
TOKYO - Asian nations are struggling to turn around their crippled economies with hopes of curtailing the growing unemployment, poverty and, in Indonesia, stirring social unrest.
But many hope to turn the corner toward recovery. Key to that would be fixing the financial systems throughout Asia that are still in shambles.
The Japanese economy, which could potentially serve as an engine for regional growth, is likely to continue to shrink, wallowing in its worst recession in a half century.
Voter impatience with Japan's governing party is likely to come to the fore if parliamentary elections are held during 1999, as some expect.
More serious is the turmoil in Indonesia that threatens to explode ahead of general elections in June and the choosing of a new president that follows. Instability is sure to keep foreign investors away from the once booming nation and keep its economy spiraling downward.
Unemployment will likely persist in many spots, including Indonesia, Singapore, Hong Kong, South Korea and mainland China.
In Taiwan, which has escaped the worst of the economic crisis, parties will choose candidates for the presidential election in March 2000. Rhetoric in recent campaigns questioning whether the island should reunite with China at some point has kept Taiwan's relations with Beijing tense.
Next December, Macau will revert to Chinese rule after nearly 450 years under Portuguese administration. Although Macau will retain its political and economic system, tackling the Chinese gangs entrenched in the enclave is a sensitive issue.
The major challenge in South Korea is to clean up, under a new president, the bloated, debt-ridden business conglomerates that thrived on cozy relations with past military governments.
---
 Load-Date: December 26, 1998

 

End of Document
