

The trade deficit as the rosy glow of economic health
The Associated Press
April 22, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 562 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It occurs each month like a full moon, and it is accompanied by eerie howls and a chilling fear of evil spirits, says Dan Griswold.
He isn't speaking about the occult, though he does consider it something of a mystery. Griswold is an economist, and the subject he speaks of is the monthly report on the U.S. trade deficit, which he says is merely a neutral reflection of investment flow.
This is heresy, a position sufficient to raise the blood pressure of union members and many trade officials. It is the grist of warnings about exported jobs and growing foreign ownership of American assets.
For example, The Economic Policy Institute, a respected Washington think tank backed by labor, recently estimated that the United States could lose 1.1 million manufacturing jobs in just the next two years, in part because of a trade deficit with East Asian nations.
But Griswold, a member of the equally prestigious Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank, stands his ground. He maintains that the worriers see only negatives in the deficit, which climbed to $ 12.1 billion in February. There is a positive side too, he says.
The deficit, he says, reflects flush American consumers and an attractive climate for investment. It is an expression of confidence in the U.S. economy, of the willingness of foreigners to invest in American assets. It helps raise productivity. It keeps prices down.
Perhaps, but at a cost, and that cost is often stated in jobs, and in production that is seen as having been lost to the U.S. economy.
Union representatives contend that by importing from lower-wage nations we are in effect exporting American jobs; in fact, millions of jobs over the years of repeated trade deficits. And they are correct. But, says Griswold, the benefits are bigger.
What benefits? More jobs created than are lost. Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chief, says that every week 300,000 jobs are lost in the United States but that the figure is exceeded by job creation. Otherwise, how could joblessness by at a 24-year low?
And what of foreign control of more U.S. production facilities because of the money Americans leave abroad? Overstated, says Griswold. "Just ludicrous." He refers to a White House report showing foreign ownership rose only 2 percentage points in two decades.
A primary cause of the repeated U.S. trade deficits, he contends, is a consequence of our rapidly growing economy:
The strong economy adds consumer purchasing power and this purchasing power draws in imports; and an expanding economy leads to new investments, which draws in foreign capital seeking a secure outlet for funds.
Why, then, he was asked, do we engage in the monthly hand-wringing ritual?
Because, he suggested, of our intellectual residue from a mercantilist philosophy that viewed trade as war, with the victor being the one that could accumulate the most power - or gold. There was, therefore, little payoff from importing.
But there is, says Griswold, and he insists that most trade economists adhere to this view, and that economists who cannot see it that way are perhaps affected by the employer through which they earn their paychecks.
And the hand-wringing is aided and abetted by politicians, he said, and by the media too. He indicated that he had low expectations about politicians, but that "the people in the media should understand better."
 
 End Adv AMs Wednesday, April 22
 Load-Date: April 22, 1998

 

End of Document
