

The world is watching and wondering: Is it Gore, or is it Bush?
November 9, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 776 words
Byline: By JILL LAWLESS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Two days after the U.S. presidential vote and with no clear victor, observers around the world marveled Thursday at a rare spectacle - American election uncertainty.
In some quarters of the press, surprise at the deadlocked contest between George W. Bush and Al Gore turned to amusement.
For its headline, Switzerland's French-language 24 Heures played on a famous line from the Apollo 13 space crisis - "Washington, we have a problem."
"Forrest Chumps," read the front-page headline in Britain's tabloid Mirror, above a picture of the two candidates in Gump-like poses. "This election's like a box of chocolates," ran the kicker. "You never know what you're going to get."
The cliffhanger vote remained front-page news around the world as a painstaking recount continued in the state of Florida, whose 25 electoral votes could settle the election.
With nearly all the ballots counted, Bush led by less than 300 votes. Elections officials said the results wouldn't be certified for more than a week.
For many, the real lesson of this extraordinary election was its affirmation of the power of the individual. Japan's top economic daily, Nihon Keizai, said the election "made us realize the weight of each vote under the democratic system."
Around the world, newspapers had to backpedal from premature declarations of a Bush victory in their Wednesday editions.
"Bush celebration interrupted by recount in Florida," said Thursday's edition of Mexico City's Reforma newspaper. A day earlier it headlined: "The United States decides: Bush!"
Britain's tabloid Sun proclaimed: "It's Bush, It's Gore … oh, we give up!"
Beneath the humor, observers were split between those who viewed the deadlocked vote as evidence of a flawed electoral system and those who saw a robust democracy at work.
"It seems incredible to me how the elections are going in the United States, which is globally considered the father of democracy," said Alphonse Kwem, a worker in an Internet cafe in Cameroon.
European newspapers tried to help their readers get to grips with the unfamiliar electoral college system - and many found it wanting.
Sweden's Dagens Nyheter marveled at the fact that Gore may yet win the most votes but lose the election.
"The chaotic situation has made many demand a new election system," the newspaper wrote under the headline "The loser may become president."
Norway's biggest newspaper, Verdens Gang, agreed. "It is not in keeping with basic democratic principles for the one who gets the second-largest share of votes to win the presidential election," it said.
Denmark's Aktuelt newspaper said the fact that nearly half the U.S. electorate did not vote "is, in itself, a huge defeat for democracy."
But British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook declared the process "an excellent example of democracy in action.
"That's what we would expect from one of the world's greatest democracies," he said.
The Jakarta Post newspaper in Indonesia gave a "thumbs up" to the meticulous recount of ballots in Florida.
"As a fledgling democracy, Indonesia could learn much from … U.S. election and from the political maturity the American people displayed in adhering to their democratic principles," the newspaper said.
Others predicted the real losers would be the U.S. television networks that Tuesday night declared, then retracted, a Gore victory in Florida and later a Bush victory for president.
Switzerland's Le Temps called the debacle - which resulted in some world leaders offering Bush congratulations, before hastily taking them back - "the most extraordinary failure in the history of television."
"The obligation to announce the news before the news has happened will cost CNN and its sisters dearly," the newspaper said.
Cuban Foreign Minister Felipe Roque Perez, in New York on Thursday for a U.N. visit, drew a link between the election's outcome and frequent U.S. advice to other nations.
"I believe that those in the United States who have always tried to become judges of elections that take place elsewhere must be receiving a lesson of modesty and humbleness," Perez Roque said.
He added that Cuba would gladly send monitors for a new election if asked by U.S. officials.
Stock markets sagged under the uncertainty, with Tokyo's benchmark 225-issue Nikkei Stock Average finishing down 2.2 percent Thursday. European shares also ended the day slightly lower following a 5.4 percent sell-off on the Nasdaq on Wednesday.
Andy Penman, an analyst at Greig Middleton, said markets would remain unsteady until the election's outcome was certain.
"The danger is that it could go through the courts as part of a legal process, and the markets do not want to see that happening," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BEJ103,HK101,XMC101
 Load-Date: November 10, 2000

 

End of Document
