

The world beyond: International issues once again move markets
The Associated Press
September 12, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 765 words
Byline: By EILEEN GLANTON, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




How quickly we forgot.
After months of fretting over U.S. interest rates and rejoicing over U.S. corporate earnings, Americans were reminded this past week that the rest of the world can also move markets.
"The market has been obsessed with every wiggle in the statistical tape of the domestic economy," said Charles G. Crane, chief market strategist at Key Asset Management. "That's important in the short term, but to ignore what's happening outside the United States is to leave half the world off the table."
This past week, two of the world's most powerful nations served notice that their economies are expanding and experiencing many of the same benefits and strains that the United States has seen.
Word of higher interest rates in Britain and strong growth in Japan prompted some modest selling, but ultimately, U.S. investors shook off the news. The Dow Jones industrial average ended the week with a modest loss, and the Nasdaq composite index finished at a record high.
Some analysts feel the resurgence of international economies should have drawn more attention.
"The fixation on interest rates has deterred people from other economic factors," said Dan Ascani, president and research director at Global Market Strategists Inc. in Gainesville, Ga. "The market may regret that later on."
On Wednesday, the Bank of England raised interest rates. The move caught economists by surprise, but the bank's accompanying statement rang quite familiar with U.S. investors.
"A rise in interest rates was necessary to keep inflation on track further ahead," the central bankers said.
The Bank of England wants to be just as pre-emptive as the Federal Reserve in stopping inflation before it hurts the economy. The Fed has raised interest rates twice this year, and has suggested it may do so again in an effort to keep inflation from escalating.
"England is dealing with many of the same issues as the United States," said Ascani. For one, Britain faces a labor shortage that could force companies to pay more in order to hold on to skilled workers. And the demand for housing has fostered fears that the nation is headed for a 1980s-style boom - followed by a bust.
A day later, Japan delivered the news that its economic recovery is continuing. Japanese officials said the nation's economy grew 0.2 percent in the second quarter. Following a sharp increase in the first quarter, the report signaled to many that the battered nation is on the way to a stable recovery.
Japan's good news hurt the dollar, which tumbled to a three-year low against the yen. The dollar has been in a steady decline for much of the summer, contributing to the sluggishness of many U.S. stocks. The new low, some economists say, could have a more severe effect on markets.
"The dollar depreciation is beginning to scare off foreign investors" in U.S. stocks, said Sung Won Sohn, chief economist at Wells Fargo.
Foreign investors contributed mightily to the bull market on Wall Street. In 1998, as Asian and Latin American economies crumbled, foreigners bought U.S. bonds as safe-haven investments. The heavy demand drove bond yields lower, adding to the allure of stocks.
As global economies improve, investors around the world may return to overseas markets, economists say.
"Many international markets suffered so much in 1997 and 1998 that it left investors shell-shocked," Sohn said. "Now, they may jump back in at the expense of U.S. markets."
While the British and Japanese economies are expanding, analysts say the rest of the world remains unsteady enough to warrant concern. Russia is politically and fiscally fragile, Ecuador is sinking under debt and few Asian nations have matched Japan's rebound.
"When the crisis content diminished, it became easier to forget about the rest of the world," Crane said. "But it's not completely free and clear."
This past week, the Dow lost 50.02 points. A loss of 50.97 on Friday left the blue-chip index at 11,028.43.
The Nasdaq fared much better, ending the week with a gain of 43.95 points. The index rose 35.04 on Friday, hitting a new record close of 2,887.06.
The Standard & Poor's 500 index fell 5.58 for the week, rising 4.00 Friday to close at 1,351.66.
The Russell 2000 index, which reflects the performance of small-company stocks, gained 5.22 for the week, closing at 441.19 after gaining 3.42 Friday.
The Wilshire Associates Equity Index, which represents the combined market value of all NYSE, American and Nasdaq issues, ended the week at $ 12.35 trillion, off $ 3.305 billion from last week. A year ago, the index was $ 9.21 trillion.
End adv for weekend editions Sept. 11-12
 Load-Date: September 12, 1999

 

End of Document
