

The Writing's on the Wall: It's Election Time
August 15, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 472 words
Byline: By SAM F. GHATTAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon
Body




They move in under the cover of darkness. Armed only with ladders and brushes, they've struck nearly every wall, electric pole, tree, traffic sign and bridge. Not even Pigeon Rock has been spared.
The 150-foot-high landmark along the Mediterranean coast is just another bulletin board for activists trying to make their candidate's name - and beaming face - familiar ahead of parliamentary elections that begin Sunday.
With hundreds of candidates jockeying to sit in the 128-member, half-Christian, half-Muslim Parliament, Pierre Sadeq, a prominent cartoonist, noted that "We're running out of walls and poles."
Voting in the second parliamentary election since the end of the ruinous 1975-90 civil war will take place on five successive Sundays. Campaigning has been spirited in Lebanon, one of the few Arab countries to hold elections without an outcome determined in advance.
However, the vote will not change the fundamental fact that Syria, with 40,000 troops in the country, remains the dominant power broker. All ranking government officials, including members of Parliament, maintain a pro-Syria line on all key issues.
Rafik Hariri, the billionaire who's been prime minister since 1992, said Monday he would run for a parliamentary seat for the first time.
Hariri, who is backed by Syria's President Hafez Assad, is credited with restoring economic confidence through an ambitious plan to rebuild Beirut from the ashes of the civil war.
The prime minister, who hails from the southern provincial capital of Sidon, will run for one of the six seats reserved for Sunni Muslims in Beirut, where he long has been regarded an outsider.
Hariri is expected to easily win a seat, though more than two dozen candidates are contesting the six posts. Regardless of the outcome, it is virtually certain he will be asked to form the post-election government.
Anyone who posts a $ 6,000 deposit can run for Parliament, but only the winners get full refunds. Those receiving less than 10 percent of the vote lose the entire amount. The plan is aimed at avoiding a stampede of candidates.
It has failed.
Candidates beam from small color portraits in car windshields and from giant posters elaborately painted in oil or water colors on building walls. Slogans on giant cloth placards stretch from one building to the next across narrow city streets.
The contestants' faces and flowery mottoes also are nailed to the splendid palm trees on Beirut's seafront boulevard and on horse stables at the city's race track.
The pan-Arab newspaper Al-Hayat said the poster craze "exceeded anything reasonable and acceptable."
For some Lebanese who see the election as meaningless, the posters proved a provocation that couldn't be ignored.
Vandals and election opponents have torn up many posters and defaced others, spray painting slogans including "Boycott this farce."
 Load-Date: August 15, 1996

 

End of Document
