

The dog days have arrived in the business world
The Associated Press
August 16, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 609 words
Byline: By JOYCE M. ROSENBERG, AP Business Writer
Body




Deals come together, deals fall apart. The stock market plunges, shoots higher and then plunges again. Cotton farmers suffer, but fruit growers are flourishing.
Trying to spot a trend? The business climate is defying any and all attempts.
A look at what happened this past week:
WELCOME TO THE DOG DAYS OF SUMMER
Trying to assess the state of the global economy and the finances of U.S. companies and consumers could lead you into one those old half-full/half-empty debates.
For British Petroleum PLC and Amoco Corp. , things looks pretty positive. The two oil companies announced plans to merge, with BP paying $ 49 billion for Amoco. But there's a downside for some employees - to help ensure that the deal will pay off, the companies expect to shed 6,000 jobs, mostly in the United States, and save $ 2 billion annually by 2001.
There was little to celebrate for management at United HealthCare Corp. , forced to abandon an acquisition of Humana Inc.  because the price of United's stock, which was supposed to pay for the deal, has plunged recently. United will now focus on smaller growth and finding ways to grow internally.
United's stock has been one of the more notorious casualties of the continuing volatility on markets all over the world - Asia, Russia, Europe and on Wall Street. The Dow Jones industrial average fell 112 points one day, rose 90 the next day and then tumbled 93 the following day, finally ending up Friday with a loss of more than 173 on the week. Investors who a month ago thought the outlook for corporate earnings was good have now decided it's lousy.
But bond investors have been pretty happy. Their holdings have benefited from the downturn in stocks. And when the Treasury sold new 10-year bonds this past week, they had the lowest yields ever, meaning they sold for a better price.
There were mixed messages on bankruptcies, as government figures showed that federal bankruptcy filings by individuals rose 9.2 percent but business bankruptcies fell. The overall number of filings was more than 1.42 million in the 12-month period that ended June 30, a record for a one-year period.
Farmers are having a mixed summer. Drought in Texas and floods in California are sharply reducing the nation's cotton crop - by nearly a quarter according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture's estimates. The bad weather has forced the prices of some vegetables higher. But fruit is plentiful, and prices were down last month, the government said.
Analysts interpreted the economic figures as good overall. Consumer spending remained strong in July because Americans have jobs and they're not worried about what's happening in Asia. They weren't buying as many cars, but that's because General Motors was in the midst of a strike last month.
Productivity was down, but economists said that was probably an anomaly.
It's hard to know what to make of all this. And that is probably why the stock market is down 10 percent from the record highs it reached just a month ago - the glass is so murky right now that no one really can tell if it's half-full, half-empty or what.
 
 TICKER
A survey of fraud examiners points to an increase in workplace theft and fraud, but many employers aren't prosecuting employees who steal … The State Department suspended work on Boeing 's Sea Launch commercial rocket program after learning the company disclosed possibly sensitive information to Russian and Ukrainian partners … AT&T will charge some long-distance customers a minimum of $ 3 a month because it's losing money on people who don't make a lot of calls … This weekend marks the debut of Apple Computer 's new iMAC, which has generated 150,000 advance orders.
 Load-Date: August 16, 1998

 

End of Document
