

The Black-Hatted Ultra-Orthodox: The Real Soul of Israel?
October 6, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1091 words
Byline: By DAN PERRY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Yehezkel Farbstein can barely support his wife and two children. At 26, he studies religion up to 15 hours a day, survives on a meager state handout and forgos recreation. But he loves it, and yearns for the day when all Jews live this way.
"I would give anything for secular Israelis to all be like me," he says, shouting above the din in the main hall at the Mir Yeshiva.
And, he adds, if it is possible to impose a religious life on other Jews without violence, "I don't mind imposing."
Although outnumbered by secular Jews, Israel's ultra-Orthodox Jews are displaying a new militancy - born of their swelling numbers, unprecedented political clout and a new feeling of belonging to Israel.
In recent months, ultra-Orthodox activists have pelted police with dirty diapers, physically assaulted women in revealing dress, and compelled liberal Supreme Court Chief Justice Ehud Barak to travel with a posse of bodyguards.
The secular reaction is still mostly verbal, but the term "cultural war" has become commonplace. Prominent radio host Razi Barkai says he feels "no connection" to the religious, and others vilify the ultra-Orthodox as parasites for living off the dole and avoiding army duty.
"There is tremendous tension between religious and secular," secular author Haim Beer wrote in the newspaper Yediot Ahronot. "It will get violent."
On the surface, it is a conflict over interests: The ultra-Orthodox, many of whom are lifelong seminary students, are not self-sufficient and need state funds for housing, education and sustenance, money that comes from taxes paid by secular Jews.
But at the core is bitter philosophical debate: Are the Jews a nation or a religion? Can a Jew be secular? Can a democracy define itself as a "Jewish state"? Should politics and religion mix?
Their very engagement is a dramatic metamorphosis for the ultra-Orthodox, who initially opposed Jewish independence, believing Israel should be established only by a Messiah yet to arrive. For years, they shunned mainstream Israel and feared its secular leaders as they might foreign despots.
Now, it is secular Israelis who fear that efforts to build a liberal democracy in one of the world's least democratic regions may come undone at the hands of fellow Jews who want biblical law to dominate.
Concentrated in strongholds like north Jerusalem and the Tel Aviv suburb of Bnei Brak, the ultra-Orthodox are easily distinguishable from the secular majority. Orthodox men wear side curls, black top coats and black hats; married women cover up with long dresses and head scarves.
A prodigious birthrate - families of eight children are not uncommon - has turned the once tiny minority into a booming community, although the ultra-Orthodox still account for only 6 percent of Israel's 4.7 million Jews. The Education Ministry says the ultra-Orthodox share of pupils at elementary schools has risen to 10.3 percent from 5.7 percent in 1980.
Having grudgingly accepted the Zionist state, the ultra-Orthodox are starting to feel more Israeli and participate in its broader life.
The new reality became starkly evident after the May election in which nine of every 10 ultra-Orthodox voters backed Benjamin Netanyahu for prime minister, helping the hardliner win a narrow victory over Shimon Peres, the architect of the Palestinian peace accord.
Three religious parties also won an unprecedented 23 seats in the 120-member parliament, giving them a kingmaker role among the larger but nearly evenly divided secular parties. Paying back his political debt, Netanyahu appointed religious politicians to major Cabinet posts.
While the secular parties are sharply divided over how to make peace with the Arabs, that issue is secondary to the ultra-Orthodox parties, whose main concerns are ensuring Israel has a strongly religious character and defending their community's interests.
With the new clout, "the ultra-Orthodox have gone out of all control," says Ornan Yekutieli, a Jerusalem city council member from the secular Meretz Party. "They helped Netanyahu get elected, and now they are exacting a price, like the mafia."
Since May, Yekutieli has logged complaints from 37 women who say they were assaulted by ultra-Orthodox men who felt they were dressed immodestly. Police response has been minimal.
Pressed by the ultra-Orthodox, Netanyahu says he is looking into ways of limiting the power of the Supreme Court, which the ultra-Orthodox detest for its rulings supporting secularism.
When the court blocked a government decision for Sabbath closings of Jerusalem's Bar-Ilan Street, a main thoroughfare through an Orthodox neighborhood, thousands of ultra-Orthodox protesters clashed with police. Devoutly observant Jews view driving on the Sabbath by anyone as a desecration of the biblically mandated day of rest.
Secular critics also cite the government's approval of the construction of thousands of subsidized housing units earmarked solely for ultra-Orthodox Israelis.
Religious spokesmen argue all this is minor compared to secular encroachments on a longstanding balance in religious-secular relations.
They point to the many new movie theaters and restaurants that are open on the Sabbath and to growing demands for civil marriage and divorce.
They complain that Israelis' link to their cultural and religious roots has been weakened by 40-channel cable TV and rampant Westernization, with brand names from Tower Records to McDonald's flooding the country.
"Secular Israel is more secular than before, and this makes the ultra-Orthodox more militant also," says Menachem Friedman, a sociologist at Bar-Ilan University. "But both communities are paranoid about the other. I worry about the mutual demonization."
At the Mir seminary, whose 2,000 students receive a monthly government stipend of 800 shekels ($ 250), there is nothing but disdain for secular Israelis.
"I may have a lower standard of living, but they lead utterly empty lives," says Farbstein, an immigrant from Baltimore who has abandoned the Yiddish of his parents for Israeli-accented Hebrew.
His brother Simha agrees: "I truly pity the secular. They are not even Jews."
Yehezkel argues that efforts to build a Jewish state without religion are doomed. "You get completely lost in contradictions. Religion is the only rational course."
The new confidence of the devout is evident in their increasing proselytizing in secular areas and in the mushrooming religious radio stations.
"Our target is to reach out to nonbelievers," says Shlomo Benizri, an ultra-Orthodox lawmaker. "You call us missionaries; we call it Judaism."
 Load-Date: October 6, 1996

 

End of Document
