

THE MILLENNIUM: Touching the bases from Y1K to Y2K
The Associated Press
December 22, 1999, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 615 words
Byline: By FRED LIEF, AP Sports Writer
Body




Landmark sports moments of the millennium. Forget the videotape. Go to the parchment and quill pen:
Circa 1000 - A crude form of basketball takes hold among the Mayans of Mexico. Stone hoops more than 20 feet high are placed at either end of a court in the now famed ruins of Chichen Itza. The object of the game is to put a hard rubber ball through the hoop. Such is the reverence for this sport that it is said the winning team sacrificed itself to the gods. Mayan archeologists are unclear on how this affected the point spread.
1307 - With still 700 years to go, the millennium's clutch sports performance comes from William Tell. The legendary Swiss hero is arrested in his town square and the governor promises to free him on one condition: Tell must shoot an apple off his son's head. Tell, the most skilled archer in the land, steadies his crossbow and splits the apple. No evidence of beta blockers is found in Tell's urine sample.
1314 - King Edward II of England bans soccer and threatens those playing it with imprisonment. The game known as "mob football" is noisy, violent and unruly, with hundreds on a side kicking a ball from one end of town to another. Hooliganism is not yet an issue. The hooligans are playing the game.
1542 - The birth of Mary Queen of Scots, the first woman to play golf. Like her grandfather, James IV of Scotland, Mary is an avid golfer and during her reign the great St. Andrews course is founded. Mary infuriates the church by playing golf days after the murder of her husband, Lord Darnley. With golf the least of it, she spends the last half of her life in prison and is beheaded in 1587.
1603 - The Japanese emperor issues an edict making swimming compulsory in schools. Asian scholars are uncertain when students first begin bringing notes to be excused from gym class.
1626 - The Dutch buy Manhattan and introduce "Dutch pins" or nine-pin bowling. The game is popular and attracts gamblers. New York and Connecticut outlaw the game in the 19th century. To sidestep the law, 10-pin bowling is played. Descendants of Dutch settlers take no credit for the advent of polyester bowling shirts and team sponsorships by "Bernie's Bar and Grill."
1719 - James Figg opens the first academy for boxers in London. Figg's reputation as fighter, wrestler and swordsman is unchallenged and celebrated in verse. His bouts often feature more than two men and end when just one man remains standing. Figg becomes perhaps boxing's first promoter, staging at least one fight before King George I. The rich and the royal curry favor with Figg. From such roots Don King flowers.
1858 - Two Long Island teams compete in the first baseball series. Fans are charged 50 cents for the game at Fashion Race Course to cover the cost of the track. This is the first time spectators pay admission for a baseball game. Historians can cite no record of organizers soon demanding the need for "luxury suites."
1873 - A college administrator draws the line on university sports. Cornell students try to arrange a football game with the University of Michigan, hoping to meet halfway in Cleveland. When his students request permission for the trip, Cornell president Andrew Dickson White replies: "I will not permit 30 men to travel 400 miles merely to agitate a bag of wind."
1999 - As the Olympic bribery scandal snowballs, a doctoral student in history holds his ground. Andrei Siperco of Romania, the son of an IOC member, rejects airline tickets, expense money and a spot in a university from Salt Lake City bidders. "It didn't seem right," he said. So at the gateway of the millennium, with avarice and temptation at every turn, that noblest of creatures stands: an honest man.
End Adv
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo
 Load-Date: December 23, 1999

 

End of Document
