

The beetle that ate Brooklyn
May 3, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1599 words
Byline:  By MATT CRENSON
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It may be called Greenpoint, but Brooklyn's northernmost neighborhood is hardly a sylvan paradise.
On the east side, an elevated stretch of the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway hums like a hive of furious bees. To the west, the Manhattan skyline looms as a constant reminder that this city never, ever sleeps. And the neighborhood's northern boundary is punctuated by gargantuan metal storage tanks.
Maybe there were plenty of trees around in 1638, when the Dutch bought the place from the Keshaechqueren Indians, but not today. And especially not since the beetle came.
It appears the Asian long-horned beetle arrived in Brooklyn as a stowaway, buried in blocks of wood used to stabilize a shipload of sewer pipe from China. The beetles may have been in Brooklyn six or seven years before anybody even noticed them but, by last summer, they had saturated the neighborhood, chewing trees to sawdust.
Greenpoint isn't alone. Just about every community in the United States is succumbing to some kind of alien invasion.
In the Great Lakes, up and down the Mississippi and in many northeastern waterways, the zebra mussel clogs water pipes and blankets piers. The mussels are so abundant in some places that they've driven native species to extinction.
Then there's the tamarisk, a plant introduced by Western settlers in the 1800s. It has spread across most of the Western and Southern states, where it guzzles water so efficiently it literally can dry up streams.
In San Francisco Bay, which ecologists consider ground zero for alien species invasions, crabs from Asia and the Atlantic coast of North America share space with sea slugs from New Zealand and cordgrass from New York.
But it is trees that have suffered most. Early this century, a fungus wiped out the nation's chestnut trees, killing every last one. And because of yet another invader from Holland, the nation's elm trees are on the verge of extinction.
"Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free," it says on the Statue of Liberty.
But that sentiment wasn't too prevalent on a blustery morning in March, when an assortment of politicians, residents and federal officials shuffled around Greenpoint looking at what an inch-long insect from China had done to the neighborhood's trees.
Lorimer Avenue, once a shaded street, now has a series of dirt craters running down either side. Each one marks the spot where a tree used to be. In McCarren Park, 122 trees are gone. Altogether, officials estimate 30 percent of the neighborhood's tree canopy has been cut down since the beginning of March in an all-out effort to eradicate the Asian long-horned beetle.
"We're like the sacrificial lamb here," said 40-year Greenpoint resident Irene Klementowicz, as she stood amid the park's remaining trees.
She and her neighbors may feel like they've been singled out, but what's happened to Greenpoint has become all too common.
Biologists estimate that 4,000 plants and 2,300 animals in the United States came from abroad, introduced either by accident or through good but misguided intentions. Alien species come by sea, riding in cargo holds and the ballast water that ships use to stabilize themselves on the open ocean; by air, in shipments of fruit, plants and soil; and overland.
And as international commerce grows, so does the threat.
Most introduced species perish not long after they get here, and most that do survive don't cause a problem. But a few dozen are thought to have cost the U.S. economy $ 97 billion from 1906 to 1991.
Brooklyn's troubles began in August, when Ingram Carner noticed some funny holes in the Norway maples in front of his building on McGuinness Avenue.
At first, he thought vandals had drilled them. The holes went straight into the trunks and were perfectly round. And they were big, nearly a half-inch across.
Carner couldn't figure out how kids were doing it. Then, he began to wonder if it was kids at all. So he staked out the trees one afternoon.
"I must have been there about three or four hours," Carner said. "Then I saw this beetle."
It was about an inch long, shiny and black like obsidian. The bug had white spots on its back and a pair of antennae sticking out like horns.
"I'm almost 80 years old," Carner said. "I had never seen anything like this in my life before."
He called the city, which sent Division of Forestry inspector Harry Rothar to the scene. Rothar had never seen anything like it either.
So Rothar slipped a beetle into an envelope and sent it to Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y., where it landed on the desk of entomologist Richard Hoebeke. For the third time, somebody who thought he'd seen everything saw something new.
The bug looked Asian to Hoebeke, so he checked the university's collection of Asian beetles. Sure enough, there was a similar specimen in the Cornell collection. It was Anoplophora glabripennis, the Asian long-horned beetle.
Hoebeke called the feds. Within days, a swarm of entomologists had descended on Greenpoint.
"I was a bit skeptical about a cerambycid doing the type of damage that was described over the phone," said Vic Mastro, director of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service's Methods Development Center in Massachusetts.
But once he got to Brooklyn, his skepticism turned to dismay. The beetle already had gotten to just about every maple and horse chestnut in Greenpoint. Even the most vigorous trees were suffering.
"I've been with the agency for about 20 years," Mastro said. "In that 20 years, this is one of the top two or three that I've seen in terms of potential impact. Over the long term, this one could be right at the top of the list."
When he got to Brooklyn, Mastro said, he saw beetles drilling holes into young, vigorous trees, pushing out little heaps of sawdust as they went. Then the beetles would lay their eggs just beneath the bark of infested trees.
When their wormlike larvae hatched, the newborns immediately would start to eat xylem and phloem, the structures trees use to transport water and nutrients between their leaves and roots.
For even the healthiest trees, infestation by the beetle is a death sentence.
"There were a lot of trees where all of the top limbs in the crown were dead and there were a few limbs closer to the base of the tree that were alive," Mastro said. "Essentially, those trees had gone to tree heaven. They just didn't know it yet."
A panel convened by the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, a division of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, realized the beetle easily could spread across a large swath of North America. If, as the scientists had seen in Brooklyn, maples proved to be the beetle's favorite meal, the insect could decimate forests throughout the eastern United States.
It also could cripple the nation's maple syrup industry and threaten New England's tourist trade by eliminating the maple's reds, oranges and yellows from the palette of colors luring visitors each fall.
"We had some pretty good indications that we were looking at a real nasty player here," said entomologist Joe Cavey of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service.
A search of the scientific literature revealed that no pesticide or natural predator could be used to fight the beetles. In China, the most effective defense is a decoy - Chinese arborists plant poplar trees, the beetle's favorite of all meals, to distract the insect from other varieties.
So another panel of scientists was convened to consider the alternatives. They could quarantine the area that already had been infested, not allowing any cut wood to leave Greenpoint, and hope the beetle wouldn't spread. They could try to develop pesticides or find predators to control the beetle.
Or they could cut down the trees.
Naturally, the people of Greenpoint weren't too happy with that last idea.
"You're coming into our back yards and taking out 100-year-old trees that are practically a relative to me," lifelong resident Pat Ferris told officials on that blustery day in March.
By that time, 361 infested trees had been removed from Greenpoint's parks, playgrounds and streets. In the next month, the state planned to cut, chip and burn more than 200 infested trees in back yards and privately owned lots.
Greenpoint's maple and horse chestnut trees had to be sacrificed, officials explained to neighborhood residents.
"This is the first line of defense," said Michael Dombeck, chief of the U.S. Forest Service. "That's why it's so important to stop it right now."
The federal, state and city governments had pledged more than $ 4 million to replace each and every tree. But Greenpoint residents, long-accustomed to playing second fiddle to more glamorous parts of New York, remained skeptical.
"Once you take the trees down and the beetles are gone, you're gone," Ms. Ferris told the assembled dignitaries. "You want to protect the United States. We want to protect Greenpoint."
Michael Dunn, manager of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, assured the handful of Greenpoint residents huddled around him that the government would not just disappear from the neighborhood. The cut trees would be replaced with species resistant to the pest, he said, and the remaining maples and horse chestnuts would be monitored until three years after the day the last beetle is found.
But even so, the experts predict this isn't the last of the Asian long-horned beetle. Entomologists predict a few will pop up in Brooklyn this spring, forcing the destruction of more trees.
And there's always the chance more will slip into the country despite the efforts of government inspectors.
"We're not done with this yet," Hoebeke warned.
 Load-Date: May 3, 1997

 

End of Document
