

The sky - or the ballroom roof - is the limit for concert-ticket prices
The Associated Press
October 9, 1998, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 961 words
Byline: By DAVID BAUDER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Given the setting, Rod Stewart was politely asked to cool it with the soccer balls.
The shaggy-haired British rocker loves to climax his concerts by booting soccer balls into the audience. But amid the grandeur of a renovated bank headquarters on Wall Street, a misplaced kick could knock over a magnum of Dom Perignon or carom off a shiny marble pillar.
And people who have paid $ 15,000 for a chance to hear "Maggie May" don't want any unexpected items landing in their lap.
The concert lured singer Paul Anka, Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz and real estate baron Donald Trump, who were sprinkled among a gaggle of gowned models and their adoring dates. Waiters in tuxedos offered caviar on silver platters to Stewart's concert audience, who later dined on rack of lamb.
Stewart's opening night performance at the Cipriani Dinner Concert Series in Manhattan late last month is easily the most dramatic example of how the concert business has changed since the days of dollar cover charges in roadhouse bars.
Ticket prices have risen dramatically during the 1990s, to the point where paying $ 100 for a few hours of music isn't as shocking as it seemed just a few years ago. And the growing, lucrative market for corporate shows means an audience of teen-agers in jeans is an outdated image.
Small wonder that Stewart serenaded the Cipriani's crowd with "Some Guys Have All the Luck."
"This has been a great surprise for us. We kind of thought you'd just be sitting there," Stewart said when the Wall Street titans rose from their seats to dance and take roses from their table centerpieces to throw on stage. There's no telling if Stewart was sincere or just a veteran showman throwing malarkey; he wasn't talking later.
Cipriani's concert stage is in a building once renovated by the architects responsible for New York's historic Grand Central Station, but it had remained empty for several years. With such a majestic lobby, and the financially flush 1990s putting so much money in the wallets of tycoons who work nearby, the company thought the time was right for high-end entertainment.
Really high end.
Customers write checks for either $ 150,000, $ 125,000 or $ 100,000, buying a yearly subscription for a table that seats 10. The series includes dinner and 10 concerts at an intimate setting with no more than 820 people. The inaugural lineup also includes Diana Ross, Whitney Houston, Celine Dion, Aretha Franklin and Tony Bennett.
"There's really no model for it," said Louis Rose, the facility's general manager. "I think back to the old-fashioned dinner clubs that are long gone."
Cocktail hour begins at 7 p.m., with a fully stocked bar and the waiters circulating with appetizers. Guests descend a marble staircase for a candlelight dinner an hour later. The concert begins promptly at 9:15 p.m., after coffee and dessert is cleared away. Artists perform for a little more than an hour and the night is done.
"That's all they want," Rose said. "For a lot of these people, they don't want to be out that late. If they want to, they can always go out to a restaurant later."
It's the type of gig many artists would have winced at a few years ago. Remember John Lennon's crack to a royal audience to rattle their jewelry if they approved of the music?
But times have changed.
Cipriani's is far from the typical concert experience, of course. But even the typical event will lighten your wallet. The average price of a concert ticket increased from $ 32 to $ 37.50 between 1995 and 1997 - rising faster than tickets for movies, live theater or family shows, according to the Entertainment Marketing Letter.
Throw in some food and T-shirts, and the average cost of a night out for a family of four at a pop concert is $ 187.70, the trade publication said.
"It's definitely still cheaper than Broadway shows," said Gary Bongiovanni, editor of the concert trade publication Pollstar, "but it's catching up."
Pink Floyd, the Eagles and Barbra Streisand were the pioneers in taking ticket prices to new levels. They noticed their aging fans were becoming more affluent and figured if ticket scalpers can consistently mark up prices for good seats, they could, too.
The idea quickly spread.
"More and more artists and their representatives looked at what was happening and said, 'Why can't we do the same thing?"' Bongiovanni said. "Some were successful and some weren't."
Also relatively new to pop concerts is the idea of "gold circle" seating, or paying a premium price for tickets close to the stage. Sometimes, the gold circle is awfully wide, Bongiovanni said.
A lot of money is changing hands in the lucrative new world of pop concerts. Rose won't say how much Cipriani is paying the acts to perform, but it's rumored to be somewhere around $ 800,000.
Cipriani's idea is so new that some artists are uncomfortable with it; Streisand and Bette Midler declined offers. The act Rose had at the top of his wish list - the Rolling Stones - are plainly more familiar with the new business realities.
"They came back with a number that they would think about doing it for, but we couldn't touch it at this point," he said.
The Stones and other musicians participate in a new but expanding concert circuit of acts who are paid big money to entertain at corporate functions and private parties. Bob Dylan and his son Jakob's band, the Wallflowers, have never performed publicly on the same bill but they did for a corporate show, Bongiovanni said.
While the prices charged by Cipriani are enough to get heads spinning among most music fans, New York's financial row is obviously a much different place. While Rose gulped slightly at wobbling Wall Street's recent fluctuations, he had reason to be secure.
"We had most of the tables sold at that point," he said. "It was payment in full."
 Load-Date: October 9, 1998

 

End of Document
