

The market floats with the greatest of ease
The Associated Press
November 25, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 554 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




What in the universe is going on in the stock market, which all over again resembles a smiling cartoon-character balloon that escapes from a Thanksgiving Day parade?
A few weeks ago, all the world's worries had descended on investor spirits, suffocating them under a wet blanket of fears and uncertainties that ran all the way from Asian turmoil to their own household debts.
Suddenly, the depressive issues that were said in late summer to be fundamentally based, are of little concern at all. Never mind that they are still there; in the market's manic state they seem not to count.
The monetary and economic problems of Asia remain. Japan might have come up with a plan to deal with recession, but as yet it is an untested one. Russia is effectively bankrupt.
At home, gains in business profits are slowing, consumers continue to believe that they can spend more than they earn, and some stock market seers are talking about a 10,000-point Dow.
Of course, the Federal Reserve, fearful of a credit crunch and a perhaps an economic collapse, has helped. It helped also to avert what might have been a financial disaster by arranging the rescue of a huge hedge fund.
Still, such factors, provoked by essentially threatening events, can hardly supply the full explanation. Nor can it be explained by the gusts of rhetorical wind from forecasters who earn their money on volume.
A possible, although not complete, explanation may lie in the now-ingrained belief that whatever goes down must soon rise again like the sun. It's happened that way for years, so why not for years to come?
Old-timers know this isn't always true, at least not immediately. But the marketplace now is populated by relative newcomers who have never known the down-up formula not to work. It includes big portfolio managers.
For many months investors in this market have been buying on the dips, confident that a dip was a temporary thing, an opportunity rather than an omen. A dip, they say, does not a bear market make.
A sustained rise, however, requires that so-called fundamentals be in place - strong sales and profit margins; an overall strong domestic, and now global, economy; savings; even greater productivity gains.
These are just a few of the fundamentals that are not especially promising right now, and that in the past might have been cause to reflect. And they aren't the only factors ignored.
The computer problem that could become acute with the approach of the new millennium, must be dealt with. So must threats, however remote, of inflation and deflation. And the Asian flu has not been overcome.
But these are fundamentals, and who deals with such stuff these days? Utterly vast amounts of data on securities are available on the Internet and at the public library, but they are seldom investigated.
Instead, much information used by amateur investors is from securities dealers who earn their money on activity, and because of that, the data may be somewhat tinged. Such information is seldom offered without opinion.
There is nothing sinister in this; it's what brokers and their like do for a living. What might have sinister connotations is the faith so many investors have that someone else can make decisions for them.
With no mind of their own, could their fate be likened to that of the runaway balloon?
 
 Adv AMs for Wednesday, Nov. 25
 
 Load-Date: November 25, 1998

 

End of Document
