

The other side of the global economy
December 21, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 701 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Americans are beginning to experience the other side of the global economy, the benefits of which have been extolled by the White House and elected officials, economists, business people and other groups.
Now they may see how economic problems or decisions made many thousands of miles away can mean problems for them.
For better or worse, for richer or poorer, the global economy is upon us, and all its positives and negatives are set for an airing as Asian monetary and economic problems spread.
For U.S. manufacturers, it may mean shrinking exports and eroding domestic prices, and maybe jobs too. For Americans who might have to finance bailouts it could mean higher taxes. For farmers, it could mean declining exports because Asian buyers can't afford to buy.
These are some of the consequences of the overexpansion and overindulgence of these distant economies, their inability to pay short-term obligations to other nations and their desperate attempts to survive by cutting back their economies and their prices.
Meanwhile, decisions made at the recent Kyoto, Japan world conference on global warming could, according to critics, compel U.S. consumers to drive less and pay more for their cars and gasoline, and force a multibillion cleanup tab on American industry.
All this is part of the evolving global marketplace in which, advocates say, the United States, the world's biggest trader, has the most to gain of any nation, and which, critics respond, may have lots to lose as well.
It would be hard to deny that to date the United States has been an enormous beneficiary of the expanding marketplace. Worldwide liberalized trade policies, it is argued, provide each nation with the best of other nations, and at the best price too.
As a result, business flourishes, competition forces efficiencies, jobs are created, and incomes and living standards rise. And there is said to be a bonus too: As economies flourish, nations recognize their vested interest in preserving peace.
Despite Congress' reluctance to grant President Clinton fast-track authority to negotiate international trade and investment programs, these positive aspects of liberalized trade have become almost gospel in business circles and among many elected officials.
Here is a sample of the gospel:
Q. Does free trade destroy jobs for American workers?
A. Not at all. Opening up trade means more orders for U.S. goods and services, and that means additional hiring of workers to handle the heavier production schedules.
Q. Doesn't free trade hurt low-wage workers by sending jobs to low-wage nations?
A. No. Free trade creates a dynamic environment in which low-wage workers develop skills and advance into higher paying jobs. It's more rewarding to build advanced medical devices than sew clothes. And the number of these higher paying jobs rises as business expands.
Q. Doesn't buying imports, such as from Asia, drain too much American money overseas?
A. Perhaps for a time. But as that economy grow the money is then used to buy American goods.
This is the positive position on free trade, but there are consequences too. The global economy begets interdependence; decisions and events in one country eventually spread to a trading partner, as events and decisions in the Far East are now being felt in the West.
Dun & Bradstreet reports that U.S. manufacturing executives already expect a dip, however slight, in their fortunes over the next three months because of the Asian turmoil.
The American Enterprise Institute, a think tank, has published a book citing the possibility that a global climate treaty might force people to drive smaller cars in order to consume less fuel. And smaller cars, it reminds us, are involved in more fatalities.
Economist Edward Yardeni of the financial firm Deutsche Morgan Grenfel concludes that "competitive devaluation in Asia is bound to deflate U.S. import prices dramatically in 1998." That might look like good news - until corporate profits and jobs begin to fall.
And, anticipating an International Monetary Fund request for more U.S. funds, The Wall Street Journal asks if the aim of the money is to help the Korean economy or just to "bail out the good old boys" of world business, Korea's creditors.
 Load-Date: December 21, 1997

 

End of Document
