

The peasant and the prince: Cambodia's warring premiers
July 6, 1997, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 457 words
Byline: By ROBIN McDOWELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia
Body




The man behind the gun in this weekend's coup attempt is a jungle-hardened guerrilla with peasant roots. His target is a refined, monarchist more at home in a university classroom in the south of France than his bloody homeland.
Longtime rivals Hun Sen and Prince Norodom Ranariddh, the man he is trying to drive from power, jointly rule Cambodia in a coalition government formed after 1993 elections.
When required to appear together, they seldom exchange glances or address one another directly. Over time, each has surrounded himself with hundreds of bodyguards as protection against the other.
A former member of the murderous Khmer Rouge army, Hun Sen began his political career toting a gun and slinking through the jungles of eastern Cambodia. He brought cunning guerrilla savvy with him into politics.
It was Ranariddh's father, King Norodom Sihanouk, whose call to arms brought Hun Sen into the political and military fray.
Sihanouk, then a prince, was exiled in Beijing after being ousted in a 1970 U.S.-backed coup. He called for his people to join the little-known Khmer Rouge to resist the new regime.
Hun Sen was one of thousands who responded. When the Khmer Rouge captured Phnom Penh in 1975, launching a reign of terror that lead to 2 million deaths, most Sihanouk supporters were eliminated.
While Hun Sen fought in Cambodia, Ranariddh taught in France. A law professor at the University of Aix-en-Provence, Ranariddh was a political latecomer. His plump face, easy smile and squeaky voice made for comparisons with his popular father.
Unwilling to attack the Vietnamese province of Tay Ninh on the Cambodian border, Hun Sen, then a young regimental commander for the Khmer Rouge, defected in 1977 and joined a Vietnamese armed resistance force.
Eighteen months later he would return to Cambodia as the country's foreign minister in a government installed by occupying Vietnamese troops.
When the Khmer Rouge was ousted from power, Ranariddh answered a different call to arms. By 1982, he had joined a loose coalition with the Khmer Rouge set on driving Vietnamese forces from their country.
For almost a decade, Ranariddh's royalist forces fought side-by-side with the Khmer Rouge against Hun Sen's Vietnam-backed communist government.
The mutual battlefield animosity never died, even after Hun Sen, by then premier of Cambodia, and Ranariddh joined hands in a comprehensive peace pact in 1991.
Two years later, in U.N.-supervised elections, Ranariddh won, but Hun Sen muscled his way in by threatening renewed civil war.
Threats, intimidation and corruption have filled the years since, and neither man was expected to surrender power without a struggle. But a year before Cambodia's next election, the peasant has blindsided the prince.
 Load-Date: July 6, 1997

 

End of Document
