

The Movement and how it moved a country
The Associated Press
April 24, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1669 words
Byline: By DEB RIECHMANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Carl Oglesby never strayed far from the drumbeat of the anti-Vietnam War movement. He shouted into a microphone, revving up tens of thousands of demonstrators at the Washington Monument. He was shoulder-to-shoulder with protesters who swarmed the streets of Chicago during the Democratic convention, yelling "Dare to struggle. Dare to win."
At the end, he was alone. When communist forces captured the capital of South Vietnam on April 30, 1975, Oglesby marked the close of the war in silence, scribbling four words in his diary: "Red forces take Saigon."
He didn't call his anti-war comrades to reminisce about facing off against three presidents, who directed America's 10-year involvement in the war. He didn't toast the war's end. Too many lives, at home and abroad, had been destroyed and shattered.
"As I recall, there was a very small sense of vindication," said Oglesby, now a 64-year-old writer in Cambridge, Mass., reflecting on the 25th anniversary of the fall of Saigon. "There was just the sense that it had been this tragic waste."
America moved on, but post-Vietnam, it was a changed nation.
The United States had never been on the losing end of a war. American GIs had stormed San Juan Hill in the Spanish-American War, boldly slogged onto the beaches of Normandy in World War II and helped halt the march of communism in Korea. So, when troops weren't victorious in Vietnam, it was as if the North Vietnamese had "killed the John Waynes," writes Terry Anderson, a Vietnam veteran and history professor at Texas A&M University.
He believes Vietnam taught the United States two lessons: "America is not invincible" and "the presidents and their wise men who direct foreign policy cannot be trusted."
American soldiers left home when radio disc jockeys were spinning "I Got You Babe," a cheery pop tune by Sonny and Cher that topped the charts in 1965. Their younger brothers came home in the 1970s, shortly after Country Joe mocked the war at Woodstock, singing, "and it's one, two, three - What are we fighting for?"
In the decade in between, Americans got accustomed to images the like of which they had never seen: Young men burning draft cards. Protesters poking carnations into the barrels of M-16s clutched by military police officers at the Pentagon. A sobbing teen-age girl kneeling over one of four students killed at Kent State. Veterans throwing medals and ribbons on the Capitol steps.
It was all part of The Movement. The key syllable: "move." The call: Don't just talk about the nation's problems, get up and put your body on the line. Like the blacks in Greensboro, N.C., who sat down at a whites-only lunch counter in 1960 and demanded service. March - into clouds of tear gas if you have to.
At first, the movement simmered. Then it boiled.
To some, war was just wrong. To others, Vietnam was a pitch-black theater with no lighted exits. Some Americans did not buy President Lyndon Johnson's theory that if South Vietnam fell to communism, other nations would fall like dominoes. Others thought the war could have been won if the United States had unleashed its full military might.
Just months into his presidency, Johnson realized that the South Vietnamese could not prevail against the Soviet-backed Viet Cong and North Vietnam without substantial help from the United States. His own taped telephone calls on May 27, 1964 reveal his conflict.
"I don't think the people of the country know much about Vietnam and I think they care a hell of a lot less," the president told his friend, former Sen. Richard Russell from Georgia. Later that day, he told National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, "It's damned easy to get in a war, but it's gonna be awfully hard to ever extricate yourself if you get in."
But in 1964, after accusing the North Vietnamese of attacking U.S. ships in the Gulf of Tonkin, the president got congressional approval to escalate. U.S. Marines landed at Danang early the next year.
America was in.
In April 1965, political activists known as the Students for a Democratic Society sponsored the first big anti-war demonstration in Washington. About 25,000 protesters - roughly the same number of American troops in Vietnam at the time - rallied at the White House and then around the reflecting pool holding signs that said "End the War in Vietnam Now" and "Stop the Killings."
"We won't go" petitions circulated on campuses. Civil rights leaders worried that the war was draining resources from Johnson's domestic programs for the poor, and that a disproportionate number of the dead GIs were black.
By the end of 1965, there were 180,000 troops in Vietnam, and the government was getting ready to send in 160,000 more. Anti-war protests were getting louder, drowning out Barry Sadler's patriotic ballad about the Green Beret that began "Fighting soldiers from the sky ..."
Young people, intent on living outside boundaries set by parents, the government and society, began dressing in ways that screamed of nonconformity. They wore headbands, Army jackets, tie-dyed T-shirts. Long hair, beards and granny glasses were in. Students shared marijuana joints on campus.
Hippies flocked to San Francisco for a summer love-in 1967. Timothy Leary passed out LSD and advised followers to "turn on, tune in, drop out."
In October 1967, more than 100,000 protesters demonstrated at the Pentagon. They chanted and sang and lighted fires to keep warm. Troops eventually scattered them, kicking and hitting them with rifle butts. Hundreds were arrested.
The movement was becoming more militant, fueled by public opinion polls that in late 1967 began to show more Americans opposing Johnson's policies in Vietnam than supporting them. Moderates tried to retain control, but by 1968, the radicals ruled.
Early that year, communist troops launched the Tet offensive - surprise attacks on major cities, towns and military bases throughout South Vietnam. The South Vietnamese Army, celebrating the Vietnamese New Year, was caught off guard. The North suffered heavy losses and was repulsed, but the attack shocked Americans. Tet proved the enemy remained strong. Americans lost confidence in their government - and its truthfulness.
On March 31, 1968 Johnson stunned the country by announcing he wouldn't run for re-election.
"That night, I knew that we had won - that the anti-war movement had won," said Mark Rudd, who led student protesters in shutting down Columbia University in 1968. "We were in the car when we heard it. We were jubilant. We started screaming and yelling 'Wow, we did it. We did it."'
The nation would be shocked again and again that year.
The Rev. Martin Luther King was assassinated in April. Sen. Robert Kennedy, seeking the Democratic presidential nomination, was killed in June. Anti-war demonstrators converging on Chicago for the 1968 Democratic National Convention were told to come ready for a street fight, and they got one.
"The rhetoric of showdown and recklessness prevailed," said Todd Gitlin, former president of SDS. "Washington spoke of bringing Hanoi to its knees. We spoke of smashing the state, the state smashing us. … The confrontation at the Democratic Convention in Chicago was the grand climax of this state of mind."
Police and prosecutors battled back.
The government probed the anti-war movement for a communist connection. The FBI infiltrated protest groups. Radicals were indicted: The Oakland Six for their actions in California during "Stop the Draft Week," the Chicago Seven accused of conspiring to riot at the Democratic convention, the Catonsville Nine for burning draft files at a Selective Service office in Catonsville, Md.
Rudd, who lived in hiding for several years to avoid arrest, now believes his revolutionary activity was wrongheaded.
"It helped promote the perception that the movement was violent when the truth is that only a tiny fragment of the movement was violent," said Rudd, who teaches math at a community college in Albuquerque, N.M. "Through my own misguided conceptions of what to do, I possibly even helped weaken the anti-war movement, and therefore prolong the vicious war."
Shortly after President Richard Nixon took office in 1969, the number of U.S. military personnel in Vietnam peaked at 543,000. Peace talks were shaky. Not wanting to abandon South Vietnam, Nixon designed a plan to withdraw U.S. troops and enable South Vietnam to defend itself.
But Americans were impatient. They wanted out. In the "moratorium" of October 1969, millions across the nation paused in their daily routines and held peaceful sit-ins, vigils and rallies. Bells tolled, prayers were said, speeches read.
It was seen as the high-water mark of the movement. "It was not just countercultural shaggy people. It was small townspeople," Gitlin said. "This was a mass movement. It was everywhere in the country."
Still, the war raged on.
In April 1970, when Nixon ordered American and South Vietnamese troops into Cambodia, campus unrest rekindled. On May 4, 1970 National Guard killed four student protesters at Kent State University in Ohio.
It would be nearly three more years before a cease-fire agreement was signed in Paris. 2.1 million Americans had fought in Vietnam. Of them, nearly 58,000 died. But the peace was fleeting. North Vietnam attacked again.
On April 30, 1975, South Vietnam surrendered.
Anti-war demonstrators felt bittersweet vindication. They had gotten what they wanted. America was out of the war, but it took far too long.
"There was a great sense of relief that the shooting was over," says Oglesby, the anti-war protester, whose brown beard has now turned gray. "Then there was the reckoning of all those people dead."
He says the closest he came to any vindication was the 1995 book by Robert McNamara, Johnson's defense secretary, in which he said the war policies he advocated were "terribly wrong" and that he knew as early as 1966 or 1967 that the war could not be won.
"Good for him for saying that at least," Oglesby said. "But what an impact it could have made if he had said it at the time."
End adv for Sunday, April 30
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY329-331; AP Graphic U.S. IN VIETNAM
 Load-Date: May 1, 2000

 

End of Document
