

The P-8 summit: 'P' as in politics, '8' as in Russia
June 11, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 822 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Capitalism's premier summit meeting will play down economics this year as world leaders gather in Denver to embrace Boris Yeltsin as a full participant in crafting a new global order.
The G-7 is giving way to the P-8. "P" as in politics, "8" as in Russia.
The economic debates over interest rates and currency values that have occupied leaders' attention for the past 22 years will be relegated to one hour of talk on Saturday afternoon without Yeltsin present.
For the rest of the three days of meetings next week, Yeltsin will be a full-fledged participant discussing geopolitical problems at what is being called the Summit of the Eight.
While not as dramatic as the collapse of the Berlin Wall, the decision to make a bigger place at the summit table for Russia does carry its own symbolism.
"With Russia's participation in the summit and the enlargement of NATO, we are leaving the era of the Cold War even further behind and taking two important steps into a new era of ever-widening and deepening global integration," Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers said.
The world's seven richest industrial nations - the United States, Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada - have used their annual G-7 meetings over the past two decades as an unofficial steering committee for the global economy.
An increased role for Russia at this year's summit was a consolation prize President Clinton offered Yeltsin at a meeting in Helsinki, Finland, in March. Clinton hoped it would be enough of an inducement to persuade the Russian leader to drop his determined opposition to the addition of new members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Yeltsin did relent and in May participated in a signing ceremony in Paris for an accord designed to assure Russia that it has nothing to fear from NATO's plan to take in new members that were once aligned with Russia in the Warsaw Pact.
Beginning in 1991, when then-Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev attended the London economic summit as a guest of the Group of Seven countries, Russia has been playing an ever larger role. In 1994 in Naples, Italy, the political discussions were renamed the P-8 to formalize Russia's participation in those closing discussions.
But in Denver, Yeltsin will arrive when the rest of the leaders do, participate in the opening dinner discussion on June 20 and hold a closing news conference like the other leaders on June 22.
The normal highlight of previous summits - the economic communique - is being replaced by a political communique with the joint economic declaration being relegated to a lesser "statement" by the Group of Seven.
That statement will include the issues of interest rates, trade deficits and currency values that are the subject of the thrice-a-year gatherings of finance ministers and central bank presidents of the seven countries.
The political discussions involving Russia will cover such issues as terrorism, drug smuggling, nuclear proliferation, global warming and China's takeover of Hong Kong - as well as some economic issues such as aid to Africa and government bribery in which Russia is seen as having a role to play.
The issue of economic standing - the size of Russia's economy is far below the other seven - is being finessed by officially calling the gathering the Summit of the Eight, not the Group of Eight, leaving certain core economic discussions for the countries that have the biggest block of votes in such institutions as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
But that distinction is already beginning to blur.
"Some leaders like (new British Prime Minister) Tony Blair just say it's now the G-8," presidential spokesman Mike McCurry said Wednesday. "For all practical purposes (Group of Seven) has been abandoned because this is now the Summit of the Eight and President Yeltsin will participate fully in virtually all discussions."
The other summit nations are going along with the expanded role for Russia, although Japan at first objected, citing a longstanding dispute over possession of several islands Russia occupied at the end of World War II.
Some longtime observers of the G-7 process also are unhappy with the diminished role economics will play in Denver.
"This is just another inducement for the leaders to hold these political discussions and duck the hard economic issues the G-7 was originally set up to deal with," said Fred Bergsten, head of the Institute of International Economics, a Washington think tank.
But others applaud Clinton's efforts to integrate Russia into the global economy, including his promise to support Russia's entry next year into the World Trade Organization.
"There is a real effort to keep the Russian economic reforms on track," said Robert Hormats, who helped in U.S. planning for summits in both the Ford and Carter administrations. "This is a way to demonstrate that Russia is considered a great power and to reward them for accepting NATO expansion."
 Load-Date: June 11, 1997

 

End of Document
