

The Israeli campaign trail leads all the way to Moscow
The Associated Press
April 23, 1999, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 751 words
Byline: DAFNA LINZER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Israel
Body




In Israel, the campaign trail leads to Moscow and candidates vie for time with the Russian foreign minister with a fervor they once reserved for revered rabbis.
The three major candidates hope a photo with Igor Ivanov, a campaign jingle in Russian or air time on a Russian satellite channel will bring in crucial votes from immigrants from the former Soviet Union, who constitute 20 percent of the electorate.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who won by a narrow margin in 1996, ended a tradition of maintaining a cordial distance from Russia soon after calling May 17 elections.
He launched the new policy of warmth with a high-profile visit to Moscow and meetings with prime minister Yevgeny Primakov. Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon made two such trips within one month.
Aides to Netanyahu said the premier lobbied the International Monetary Fund for a $ 4 billion loan to Russia.
Israel is also circumnavigating the United States, its closest ally, in talks with Russian leaders over weapons technology transfers to Iran.
Sharon has refused to back NATO strikes against Yugoslavia, a position viewed favorably by the Russian-language press in Israel. In a recent interview, Sharon said he hoped his trips to Russia would yield the prime minister and the hard-line Likud party a larger slice of the immigrant vote back home.
Ivanov, who arrived 25 days before the vote, joined Sharon on a helicopter tour of war-captured territory - land the Likud hopes to keep. Later, Ivanov enjoyed a state dinner in his honor.
Ivanov, here at Sharon's invitation, made time for all the top candidates for prime minister - apparently hoping to assuage any concerns that Russia was favoring one candidates over another.
During Netanyahu's trip to Moscow, aides told reporters that Primakov had confided his preference for Netanyahu.
Ivanov met with opposition leader Ehud Barak on Thursday and he is to meet Yitzhak Mordechai, Netanyahu's former defense minister turned bitter opponent, on Friday.
Ivanov dismissed the reports of elections involvement.
"I know there are people who are trying to portray the development of relations between Israel and Russia as if it's connected to the elections, but there's no connection," he said.
Natan Sharansky, former Soviet dissident who heads an immigrant party, disagreed.
"Everything that's happening here now is connected to the election, that's just the way it is."
Both Barak and Mordechai, to the political left of Netanyahu, have their work cut out for them in getting the Russian vote.
The most recent wave of Russian immigrants have leaned toward right-wing candidates since they arrived in 1989 with the collapse of communism.
"Netanyahu is definitely the leader among Russian voters," said Boris Yentin, a news editor at Vesti, the largest Russian-language circulation daily in Israel.
Yentin said Netanyahu's recent trip to Russia had a major impact with immigrant voters "who want strong ties to a country where they still have family and business." Barak is thinking of making a similar trip 10 days before the election.
Netanyahu's appeal is based on three factors, according to Yaacov Ro'i, a Russian history professor at Tel Aviv university: an intense dislike for left-leaning politics; Netanyahu's campaign as a "strong" leader - "they don't like weakness of any kind;" and his hard-line stance on retaining war-captured territory.
"They can't understand why a small country like Israel would want to give back territory, when they come from a big country that didn't want to let go of an inch," Ro'i said.
Barak, who would be willing to trade land for peace with the Palestinians and Syria, has tried to reach out to the Russian community by other means.
Speaking through an interpreter to immigrant audiences across the country, he promises more money for immigration and better benefits for newcomers.
Signed copies of his biography are handed out by Barak's "Russian team," along with Labor party T-shirts, stickers and campaign literature - all in Russian.
Much to the delight of a crowd in the rural community of Pardess Hanna, the former general and pianist rattled off names of Russian generals, musicians, writers and scientists at a meeting last week.
Golda Blubeshtein, a 52-year-old who moved to Israel nearly 10 years ago, will be voting for a third time come May.
Barak said a lot of the right things, "but I'm still undecided," she said.
Her husband Moshe looked at her surprisingly and said "we're not so undecided," suggesting their votes were headed towards Netanyahu.
 Load-Date: April 23, 1999

 

End of Document
