

Three documentary films, all by women, look at the lasting legacy of war
The Associated Press
April 1, 1999, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1127 words
Byline: JEAN H. LEE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO
Body




Twenty years after her husband returned from Vietnam in a flag-draped casket, his dog tags encrusted with blood, Barbara Sonneborn woke up one morning determined to write about her grief.
Those first words begun as a letter to her husband became the Academy Award-nominated documentary "Regret to Inform," a poetic and powerful memoir that considers the legacy of the Vietnam War for widows on both sides of the conflict.
The lasting impact of another war compels Emiko Omori, director of "Rabbit in the Moon," to revisit the makeshift desert barracks where she and 120,000 other Japanese Americans spent World War II.
And 50 years after the Japanese army lost that war and thousands of its sex slaves were freed, Korean women have begun to step out of the shadows of shame to force the Japanese to acknowledge their war crimes. Dai Sil Kim-Gibson's feature documentary, "Silence Broken: Korean Comfort Women," gives voice to their pain.
"Silence Broken" made its worldwide premiere at the recent San Francisco International Asian American Film Festival. The two other movies are fresh from award-winning premieres at the Sundance Film Festival in Utah.
All three are about war, though none is about combat. Perhaps representing a new generation of war films, they focus not on the soldiers who fought and died but on the women and families left behind.
"Women suffer differently from men during war," says Omori, who also served as Sonneborn's cinematographer in Vietnam. "Women bear children and are the caretakers. They're not the ones with the guns; they're just trying to live their lives."
The films show how war, in robbing women of health, family and hearth, tested loyalty, faith and trust. They also question what compelled women to keep silent about their suffering for decades.
"I did find myself avoiding the war but it's something that informs our lives," Omori says. "It's still one of the first things someone will ask a (Japanese-American) stranger about our age: 'What camp were you in?"'
Sonneborn's husband, Jeff Gurvitz, went off to war in January 1968. She learned of his death eight weeks later, on the day she turned 24.
For years her husband's death haunted her. During those years vets were branded "baby killers." She encountered only one other war widow. When a tape he recorded arrived after his death, she packed it away.
"This was an unpopular war. We had another element to deal with, and that was: What did they die for? And what did they do when they were there?"
It took her 20 years to summon up the courage to listen to the tape of her husband's voice and to seek answers. In 1992, she went to Vietnam - where the war is called the "American War" - accompanied by translator Xuan Ngoc Evans, a South Vietnamese woman whose first husband was killed in combat and whose second husband was a U.S. soldier.
"I knew I had to do something about women, widows on both sides of the conflict," says Sonneborn. "It was so emotional, so profoundly emotional."
The film, produced by Janet Cole, is a moving mix of memoir, interviews and some stunning archival footage. It won a directing award in the documentary category at Sundance but lost the best documentary feature prize at the Oscars to "The Last Days."
Omori says shooting "Regret" and hearing the women's stories of survival influenced her own film, then in its early stages.
"It gave me an understanding about our camp experience," she says. "I got real interested in what was happening with the women."
Her own mother died of a bleeding ulcer a year out of the camps. The family tucked away her photos and the urn carrying her ashes.
"It occurred to me … that we never talked about the camps, and I had always felt that our mother's death was connected to the camps," says Omori. She had always felt her mother was too traditionally Japanese to survive such indignities.
Omori's mother was born in the United States but raised in Japan. Her father was Japanese-born. But Omori and her older sister, Chizuko, were Americans, 1 and 12 years old when the Omoris were interned in an Arizona camp in 1942 after the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor.
While there, sleeping on hay-filled sacks and sharing one room with two other families, internees were ordered to fill out a questionnaire designed to determine their loyalty. Would they serve in the U.S. Army? Would they give up allegiance to the Japanese emperor?
Some asked for repatriation to Japan; others proved their loyalty by enlisting. But there also was a little-known resistance by "no-no boys," those who rejected both questions. The questions "sliced through the camps like a knife," dividing families.
Japanese Americans left the camps a fractured community that has never completely recovered, she says. Simply looking at the night sky reminds Omori of the struggle she inherited: At first she'd see the man in the moon, then she'd see the rabbit of Japanese tradition.
"What the government asked of us was to stop seeing the rabbit," she says in the film.
Beautiful and well-crafted, the film won documentary cinematography honors at Sundance. Footage from home movies taken before the war and inside the camps provide a rare glimpse into Japanese-American life in the 1940s; government reels now betray the travesty of the incarceration.
At the same time, in Asia, the Japanese surrender meant freedom for 200,000 women in military brothels, most of them Korean. For four decades, the women listened silently as the Japanese denied forcing them into sexual servitude.
In 1991, the women began stepping forward. They speak in "Silence Broken: Korean Comfort Women" of being seized by soldiers, of girls as young as 12 forced to see up to 100 men a day. Many were beaten, drugged and made infertile.
One woman refuses to feel shame though she lost the chance to bear children and claim her place in Korean society. "I want to die as a daughter of Korea," she says proudly, clad in an elegant traditional gown.
In all three films, moments of serenity contrast with brutal images of torture and death. Water laps at a boat in Vietnamese waters, a voice soars in song. A waterfall roars in the Korean mountains. The snowcapped Sierra rises above the cacti of the Manzanar camp.
There is beauty even in a landscape of horror. Years after the barracks were torn down, a farmer dug up a rusty oil barrel that internees had filled with tiny, polished stones, each painted with a word.
She and other survivors are like those river rocks, Omori says.
"To bury them like a time capsule, people wanted us not to forget how we had all shattered and scattered and couldn't come back together in quite the same way. They've become messengers," she says. "When I would want to give up, they were a reminder that I owed it - to my history, to the community - to finish."
 Load-Date: April 1, 1999

 

End of Document
