

Trade Relations with China Worsen, So Does the Trade Deficit with the World
May 19, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 908 words
Byline: By JOYCE M. ROSENBERG, AP Business Writer
Body




Washington and Beijing bicker over trade. The Treasury and American Express try some new marketing schemes. And millions of Americans plan to hit the road and forget it all.
What happened in business this past week:
 
 MIXED SIGNALS?
On Wednesday, the Clinton administration warned it would hit China with tariffs on $ 2 billion in goods if the Chinese don't honor an agreement to stop making counterfeits of U.S. computer programs, music and movies.
The next day, Undersecretary of Commerce Stuart Eizenstat asked Congress to renew China's general trading privileges.
If this doesn't seem to make any sense, the Commerce Department's trade deficit report - which came out Friday - will help. The nation's overall deficit surged to a record $ 8.92 billion in March, and the second-largest individual deficit was a $ 1.81 billion shortfall with China.
The Clinton administration is walking a thin line - it wants to narrow that deficit, but it could hurt trade further by carrying out its threats.
As Eizenstat told a House committee, "It is in our interest" to do business with China. Certainly the hundreds of U.S. companies that sell to Chinese companies agree. Chinese purchases of U.S. farm products, aircraft and telecommunications equipment provide some 170,000 American jobs to the U.S. economy, Eizenstat said.
But unless the administration and the Chinese reach a new agreement by June 17, the Clinton administration says the tariffs will go into effect. And China says it will retaliate with sanctions against U.S. farm products, vehicles and applications to form joint ventures between U.S. and Chinese businesses.
It's a mess the administration, especially in an election year, hopes to avoid.
 
 MONEY MARKETING TO THE MASSES
The nation's lust for investment continues undiminished, even with the ups and downs of the stock and bond markets. So two big financial institutions, the U.S. Treasury and American Express Co. , are coming up with new places to put your money.
Uncle Sam is offering a new bond that protects investors from inflation. The security's yield will rise along with the inflation rate, meaning individual investors can save for retirement without worrying that their investments - unlike fixed-income bonds - will be eaten up as inflation rises.
American Express, meanwhile, has created a new family of low-cost mutual funds and other inexpensive financial products. The investments will be sold over the phone, through the mail and via the Internet.
Both the government and Amex realize that individual investors will continue to be a huge market, one that any savvy marketer will target. But to compete with no-load funds and discount brokers, you need an angle. The Treasury and Amex think they have one.
 
 WHEN THE GOING GETS TOUGH, THE TOUGH … TAKE A ROAD TRIP
After the big 1980s consumer shopping spree ended, analysts and economists said Americans would spend if they really wanted something, or if they thought they were getting a good deal.
So a lot of people are going on the road this summer even if the price of gasoline is rising. The American Automobile Association says more than 30 million Americans expect to travel at least 100 miles, an increase of 1 percent over last year. The Travel Industry Association of America says people will take 232 million trips, a record and up more than 2 percent from 1995.
One reason is that the bite from higher gas prices isn't that severe - if you're driving from Los Angeles to Washington, D.C., it will cost only about $ 12 more for gas this year than it in the summer of 1995.
Another reason may well be that many people feel they need a break. The news reports still have tales of layoffs - this past week the food processor
 
 ConAgra Inc.  said it was cutting 6,500 jobs. And even people with secure jobs feel like they're working harder than they used to. So the idea of breezing down the interstate with "See You In September" playing on the radio is too good to pass up.
 
 WINNERS, LOSERS, IN BETWEEN
WINNERS: Chrysler Corp.  shareholders, after the automaker said it would split its stock and raise its dividend 16 percent. Shareholders at Tiffany & Co.  and Xerox Corp.  also found out their stocks are being split.
LOSERS: The investment firm Josephthal, Lyon & Ross , ordered by securities regulators to pay about $ 575,000 for overcharging investors for stocks the company sold them. The is the first time in less than four years the firm has been cited for securities violations by the National Association of Securities Dealers.
SOMEWHERE IN BETWEEN: Mexico, which did better than expected during the first quarter as the country continues its recovery from the December 1994 economic crisis. But the Mexican gross domestic product still registered a decline during the January-March period.
 
 TICKER
Inflation at the consumer level continued at a moderate pace in April … Factory output surged last month as General Motors Corp.  plants were back at full strength following the United Auto Workers strike in March … Housing starts spurted up 5.9 percent in April to a two-year high of 1.52 million units … The Supreme Court, citing free-speech rights, struck down a state law forbidding ads that list or refer to liquor prices.
 
 COMING UP:
TUESDAY: The Treasury releases its April budget statement.
THURSDAY: The Labor Department releases weekly jobless claims figures.
FRIDAY: The Commerce Department releases April durable goods orders.
 
 End adv for weekend editions May 18-19
 Load-Date: May 19, 1996

 

End of Document
