

Two views of peace process by those who negotiated the accords
The Associated Press
September 6, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 821 words
Body




Former Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres, architect of the Oslo peace accord, and Palestinian chief negotiator Ahmed Qureia (Abu Alaa) met separately with The Associated Press to outline their views on the progress and meaning of the peace process:
 
 SHIMON PERES
Q: Looking back, what did Olso accomplish?
A: To us it looks like a very long period; historically it was fast, you know. But I think the Oslo agreement has changed the whole history and processes in the Middle East.
Let's face it, at the heart of the Mediterranean conflict it was always the Palestinian problem. But, when it came to the Palestinians, there was a Palestinian problem but not a Palestinian partner. In Oslo, it was legitimized, a Palestinian partner was established and whether the baby is a product of love or accident, it doesn't matter, he has a life of his own, he grows, he develops. …
We have today Palestinian autonomy. Most of the Palestinians are in the womb of their own leadership. We stopped being the dominators of the Palestinian life, the Palestinian people. They're developing their own land, their own independence, their own infrastructure. …
With the present processes and crises, we do not hear voices that call for war neither on the Arab side nor on the Israeli side. And while right now there is a setback or a stoppage or whatever you call it, it's temporary. If the government will not proceed with the peace process, I think the government will fall and not the peace process.
Q: Do you believe in the creation of an independent Palestinian state?
A: Well, I'm clearly and loudly for the creation of a Palestinian independent state. Hopefully it will be democratic, modern and prosperous.
We need it, because the alternative to it is the end of Israel as a Jewish state. We are today 4.7 million Jewish people west of the Jordan river, and there are 4 million Palestinian people. If we should come under the same statehood, it will be not a Jewish state, not a Palestinian state; it will be an ongoing clash between two people that refuse to coexist.
So I mean, honestly and courageously one must say the truth, that this is the best solution. Instead of having a divided state, let's have a partition of the land. Furthermore, I say that even if we shall give to the Palestinians most of the land they demand and much of the water they ask for, they, as us, will always be short of land and short of water because the land is a tiny little land and the Jordan River is richer in history than in water.
---
 
 AHMED QUREIA (ABU ALAA)
Q: Five years after Oslo, what are the accomplishments and disappointments?
A: A lot has been accomplished. There is a Palestinian Authority that was established on Palestinian land. There are institutions for this authority that are real and a foundation for the process of building towards the independent Palestinian state. …
Also, a kind of relationship with the Israelis has been established, as well. And there is now a kind of understanding on the part of the Israelis of the rights of the Palestinian people, and a lot of the misinformation and indoctrination that the Israelis relied on in dealing with the Palestinian has begun to be rejected and in its place there is the beginning - and I stress the beginning - of the possibility for two neighbors to exist on one land and to think of a future of cooperation and coordination on various levels.
Among the negative is that for the past two years this Israeli government has been conducting the process by itself far from implementation of the agreement in accordance with a set timetable, a timetable limited to five years.
And so we have lost two years of the five years in putting on a show of negotiations for the television cameras, a creation of this Israeli government of wasting time. The timetable is the most significant component of Oslo; it is the strongest component. The major disappointment is the nonimplementation of the agreements.
Q: What is the Palestinian definition of peace?
A: Real peace is the real attainment of the national rights of the Palestinian people, which include the right of return, self-determination and the establishment of the independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital. This is the real peace. And if this is achieved then every Palestinian has to go and give every Israeli citizen they see a kiss because this will mean real coexistence. Without this there will be no real peace.
Q: Is May 1999 the right time to declare the state?
A: I believe yes for one reason: That the agreement set May 4, 1999, as the end of the interim agreement and so with the end of the interim agreement the world must stand by us so that we can declare our state and establish its borders and tell the world there are certain areas of our land still under occupation, and it is you who are responsible, ethically, historically and legally to implement your decision regarding the refugees' right of return.
 Load-Date: September 6, 1998

 

End of Document
