

U.N. interpreters bridging the language barriers in Tower of Babel
June 1, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1090 words
Byline: By MATHIS CHAZANOV, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




When the plight of unwed mothers came up in U.N. debates, the Arabic interpreters were faced with a predicament. There really wasn't a word for it.
So the interpreters consulted the U.N. translation department and came up with a phrase that translates literally as "soon-to-be-wedded mother."
"Paternity leave" presented another challenge. Since the concept is new in Russia, it was agreed to use the phrase "time off for childbirth taken by the father," which is more explanation than translation.
But it works, and delegates from around the world were able to discuss these and other issues at the Beijing conference on women's issues. The United Nations produced a book with examples of the new terminology.
U.N. interpreters have been dealing with such challenges for 50 years now. This is the world stage of simultaneous interpretation, where the work of more than 100 linguists allows delegates from 185 countries to talk to each other as though they were all speaking the same language.
There are six official U.N. languages - Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Spanish and Russian - but speakers tend to talk fast no matter which one they use. And there is no time to look in a dictionary once the talking starts.
It's not just a matter of putting what's said into another language, but of putting it elegantly - and quickly.
"Sometimes the speakers are going so fast I doubt if people understand them in the original," says Evelyn Moggio-Ortiz, who has been interpreting from English and French into Spanish for 25 years.
"A person can't speak faster than they think," she says. "Sometimes you come out of a meeting and you feel your brain has been squeezed like an orange and all the neurons are gone.
"That's the downside. When you do a good job, you come out of there feeling on Cloud Nine."
Simultaneous interpreters made their first large-scale public appearance at the Nuremburg war crimes trials after World War II.
But the first session of the U.N. General Assembly, held in London, relied on a slower process - the speaker speaks, then waits for the interpreter - which was a relic of the prewar League of Nations.
One of its most memorable practitioners was Andre Kaminker, a Frenchman, who would sit with his head in his heads, listening glumly, then stand up and render the address from English to French without notes.
It was when the General Assembly met for its second session, at Flushing Meadow, New York, that simultaneous interpreters debuted at the United Nations.
First seen at meetings of the Financial and Budget Commission, they were mockingly called "telephonistes" - telephone operators - because of their headsets and microphones, and because many of them were young women.
But the newfangled interpreters sped up the proceedings enormously, and by the end of the session, everybody wanted them.
Now there are some 120 full-time interpreters at the international compound overlooking the East River, and as many as 150 may be on the job for big events.
The pay can range from $ 44,830 to nearly six figures for a few veterans. But Monique Corvington, their chief, says she has a hard time finding good help, since qualified interpreters can make more money free-lancing.
While some interpreters are American-born, most are not, coming from 22 nations at last count.
Many interpreters learned their languages as children, at the knees of multilingual parents or from growing up in more than one country, but others picked them up in school. A few studied at foreign language institutes in Russia or China, closely monitored institutions that schooled them in such forbidden fare as the Bible.
Some colleges and universities in the United States and elsewhere offer specialized training, but there are no prerequisites for this job beyond a profound command of languages and the intellectual muscle to wrestle with any subject in the world.
Most interpreters work into their native tongues from at least two others, but Arabic and Chinese specialists - because of their rarity - generally translate not only into their own language but also back into French or English.
It doesn't always work just right. Sometimes "bugs" in the computerized sound system get in the way, or rookie interpreters lose track of what's being said, or delegates are impatient at minor delays in a "relay" translation - Arabic to English to Spanish, for example.
It's not like in a courtroom, where the interpreter can ask the judge for time out to look something up. No one will play the tape back so the interpreter can catch up.
But generally the meetings go off without a hitch, with delegates understanding each other as if they all grew up on the same street.
The interpreters work in pairs, handing off every half-hour or so to keep the brain fresh.
When they are "on," their concentration is complete, earphones firmly in place, mouth to the microphone, hands free to gesture or scribble down tricky acronyms or hard-to-remember numbers.
When they are "off," they stretch, snack, skim newspapers, wander in the corridors or read up on specialized words that might pop up in the next debate.
Sometimes there is a problem with proverbs: "Cultural differences are more difficult to bridge than language differences," says Igor Korchilov, who works from French, Spanish and English into Russian.
The former Kremlin interpreter was at one international conference where an interpreter struggled with an earthy Russian saying about a cow that mooed, a cow that didn't and the farmer who was caught in the middle.
The hapless Englishman seized on a Shakespearean Golden Oldie - "Something is rotten in the state of Denmark," which prompted the Danish delegate to register a protest - and the Russian to deny that he said anything at all about Denmark.
Interpreters are careful about keeping the secrets they hear behind closed doors, not that many secrets - or much of anything else - can stick to a mind focused on words and grammar.
"It's very difficult for interpreters to remember," says Moggio-Ortiz. "They have a short-term memory, and then there's professional secrecy. It would be embarrassing … if we talked about the problems we have at work."
Korchilov treasures a story he heard from President Richard Nixon about Churchill and Stalin, who purportedly stayed up late drinking at a wartime summit conference.
"I hope I didn't say anything indiscreet," the British leader said in the morning. "Don't worry," Stalin replied. "I had the interpreter shot."
"To avoid such a fate, interpreters are very careful to maintain professional secrecy," Korchilov says.
 Load-Date: June 1, 1997

 

End of Document
