

U.N. summit brings promises, but the test comes in the field
The Associated Press
September 9, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 908 words
Byline: By TIM SULLIVAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast
Body




When the speeches are over at the Millennium Summit, when the world's leaders have gone home and the limousine-clogged streets around the United Nations are clear, it will be in places far from Manhattan's sleek East Side where their grandiose promises will be tested.
It will be in countries like Congo, where months of effort to get a U.N. force mobilized across the sprawling nation has yielded little more than a few dozen monitors in isolated pockets. And in Sierra Leone, where the world's largest peacekeeping force faces attacks by a rebel movement whose brutality strains belief. And in country after country ravaged by poverty, illiteracy and disease.
Still, the promises come.
"We will spare no effort to free our peoples from the scourge of war," U.N. members pledged Friday in one segment of the eight-page declaration that capped off the three-day summit of presidents, prime ministers and kings, with some 150 countries committing themselves to a slew of good intentions from poverty eradication to reversing the spread of AIDS.
Money, manpower, decades of experience. The United Nations has all that and more to wage war with the world's ills. But the challenges are often even greater.
Much of the talk at the summit was about Africa; its wars, its poverty, its battle with AIDS. It is in Africa where the world body's resolve will face the greatest test and an entire section of the concluding Millennium Declaration was devoted to "meeting the special needs of Africa."
"There is a dismal record of failure in Africa on the part of developed world that shocks and shames our civilization," British Prime Minister Tony Blair said in his U.N. address.
The problems of sub-Saharan Africa can seem intractable. Glossy U.N. reports open up to a depressing statistical litany of sub-Saharan life: more than one in six children die before age five, the per capita gross national product is less than $2 a day and just over half the adult population is literate.
Fighting those troubles is an army of U.N. employees, from paper-shuffling bureaucrats to medical staff who venture deep into the Sahara to machine-gun carrying soldiers who nervously watch over the road leading into Freetown, the capital of war-ravaged Sierra Leone.
On the ground, these U.N. missions face everything from official stonewalling to lack of funds to international squabbling over their role and their performance.
Sometimes, the challenges can be far worse. In the Indonesian territory of West Timor, a mob stormed a U.N. office earlier this week, slaughtering three foreign relief workers and three other people.
But even when the United Nations faces up to its challenges, it seldom gets much credit.
In Sierra Leone, the last four months have seen the United Nations go from an embarrassing debacle where nearly 500 of its peacekeepers were taken captive by the brutal Revolutionary United Front Rebels to a comparatively aggressive series of confrontations with the country's armed groups.
But few in Freetown are impressed.
"The U.N. peacekeepers, in the face of the escalating violence, now look like helpless spectators," sneered Umara Fofana, a 48-year-old businessman in Freetown, Sierra Leone's capital.
The United Nations can be easy to ridicule. It can be wasteful, its bureaucracy is slow-moving and its dramatic failures are replayed over and over by the world's media.
But the world body is simply a reflection of its members, an international agglomeration of wildly divergent views, demands and capabilities. Making any decision can be a serious challenge. Even the eight-page Millennium Declaration - essentially a compendium of calls for a better world - took weeks of negotiation.
It's a system that encourages rhetoric, and has become accustomed to seeing that rhetoric overwhelmed by reality.
In Congo, a plan to send a 5,500-strong observer mission has been stalled for months by repeated government stonewalling and a sometimes-virulent campaign in the Congolese press to discredit the United Nation's work. Instead, the two-year civil war continues to flare, and the country remains divided among various rebel factions and the government.
When unarmed observers did deploy to the rebel-held city of Kisangani, they quickly found themselves retreating under fire as soldiers from Rwanda and Uganda - which support competing rebel groups - waged a bloody battle.
"It has been frustrating so far," acknowledged Theophilus Biriyai, a 32-year-old Nigerian U.N. human rights officer based in Kinshasa, the Congolese capital. "I should be monitoring human rights violations in the entire country and I could not deploy."
But it's because of staff like Biriyai that the United Nations wins some of its battles - successful peacekeeping deployments in Mozambique and Namibia, for example, and a dramatic fight against polio - even if the New York rhetoric is largely ignored.
While many of the United Nation's bureaucratic and waste problems are replicated in the field, there are also thousands of U.N. employees who keep working despite constant roadblocks. Many, like Biriyai, forgo the normalcy of homes and families. In Kinshasa, much of the U.N. staff are relegated to lives of four-star drudgery, desperately hoping to be deployed but stuck in the city's garish hotels.
Biriyai doesn't tell her relatives back in Nigeria much about her life, she doesn't want to worry them. But she sees a reason to keep trying.
"I have the feeling I am doing something noble."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY190
 Load-Date: September 10, 2000

 

End of Document
