

U.S., Iraq Pleased by the Show of Force; Oil-Poor Kurds Lose Out
September 10, 1996, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 818 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




As strategic regions go, northern Iraq is no Kuwait. It's a good distance away from the oil fields that lie under Kuwait and other Persian Gulf countries, and when Iraqi President Saddam Hussein sent his troops into Kurd country last month, there was no international clamor for retaliation.
Nothing underscored the powerlessness of the Kurds more than the nature of the U.S. response. President Clinton decided that a military strike, albeit limited, was appropriate, lest Saddam believe he could act with the kind of impunity he had shown previously.
But Clinton struck hundreds of miles to the south of the Kurdish region. He ordered two U.S. cruise missile attacks on Iraq's air defense network south of Baghdad, and he extended the U.S.-imposed southern "no-fly" zone northward about 60 miles, almost to the outskirts of the Iraqi capital.
It's an old story for the Kurds. They get sympathy but little else from the international community.
Now, a week after the Iraqi incursion and the U.S. response, both countries have largely moved to the sidelines, seemingly pleased with the fruits of their actions.
Iraq apparently has broken up a CIA operation, based in northern Iraq, aimed at undermining Saddam's rule. It also has a foothold in the Kurdish territories for the first time in five years. The United States, meanwhile, has further reduced Iraq's military capability in the south, presumably making less vulnerable both the nearby oil fields and U.S. and allied pilots who patrol the extended no-fly zone.
Where all this leaves the Kurds is subject to conjecture. Saddam was able to benefit from the divisions that have plagued the Kurds for years. When one of the warring factions, the Kurdistan Democratic Party, invited Saddam's troops to come to their rescue, he accepted eagerly.
The rival Patriotic Union of Kurdistan has been on the run ever since. U.S. government analysts believe Saddam will over time be able to reassert control over the entirety of Kurdistan. There is no evidence the United States intends to stop him.
"We should not be involved in civil war in the north," Defense Secretary William Perry says. "We should focus our actions where our interests are."
The administration is far more interested in what Saddam does with the sites damaged in last week's missile attacks.
"We have warned Saddam Hussein that any attempt to repair those sites or reinforce them will be taken very seriously and he must understand the consequences of such an act," Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen. John Shalikashvili says.
That brought a rebuke from GOP presidential nominee Bob Dole.
"The Clinton administration should be careful about making claims of success that events on the ground may not substantiate, and about giving assurances that it is unable or unwilling to fulfill," Dole said. "The credibility of the United States is at stake."
The United States will do its best to help the two Kurdish antagonists to patch up their relations. But the Kurds can expect little more than that because the United States sees them more as a humanitarian than a strategic problem.
"Our ability to control internal events in Iraq is limited," Clinton told reporters Monday as U.S. officials said only Western government and relief officials were being evacuated from northern Iraq despite fears that Saddam was ordering severe reprisals - including death - against his opponents there.
Saddam's Kurdish allies on Monday overran the last stronghold of their rebel rivals, the city of Sulaymaniyah, where The Washington Post said about 200 Iraqi Arab dissidents were holed up.
The newspaper reported in today's editions that more than 100 Iraqi dissidents and military officers associated with a CIA-financed effort to topple Saddam were arrested and executed in June by security agents that penetrated the group, the Iraqi National Accord.
Five years ago, there was an outpouring of sympathy for Iraqi Kurds when, following an abortive anti-Saddam uprising in the wake of the Gulf War, they fled for the Turkish border ahead of Saddam's advancing army, their desperate plight shown on television screens around the world.
It is not clear what fate awaits the allied programs designed to feed and defend the Kurds that were established in the aftermath of that episode.
State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns predicted Monday that the KDP won't be secure with Saddam as an ally and that the rival PUK will rue the day it established links with neighboring Iran.
Burns said the short-term gains for KDP leader Massoud Barzani by aligning himself with Baghdad will only lead to long-term problems for him.
"Saddam Hussein has demonstrated time and again over the last five years, including last week, that he wishes to annihilate the Iraqi Kurds," Burns said, "And certainly to dominate them if he can't annihilate them."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - George Gedda has covered foreign affairs for The Associated Press since 1968.
 Load-Date: September 10, 1996

 

End of Document
