

Uncertainty in the market, and few answers in the economic reports
The Associated Press
September 6, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 481 words
Byline: By JOYCE M. ROSENBERG, AP Business Writer
Body




Wall Street's plunge raises questions about Americans and the economy, but the latest numbers provide few answers.
A look at what happened in business this past week:
 
 WHERE DOES IT END?
Any 4-year-old knows this one - toss a stone into a pond and the ripples will spread outward from the point of impact. That 4-year-old's parents and grandparents are wondering about the same phenomenon, only this time with the stock market.
The market's volatility over the past seven weeks - including this past Monday's 512-point plunge and a 288-point surge the next day - presents the American public with an uncertainty that many people have not experienced before.
With the Dow Jones industrial average down more than 18 percent since its July 17 high of 9337.97, individual investors who steadfastly weathered past declines have turned more cautious. August was the first month in eight years that investors took more money out of stock funds than they put in, according to Trimtabs.com, which tracks 3,400 mutual funds.
August retail sales figures indicated that consumer spending is slowing. Perhaps this is because Americans have heard so much about the fallout from Asia's financial problems on the U.S. economy and employment levels in this country. And perhaps its' because consumers, with the stock market decline eroding their net worth, feel like they don't have so much money to throw around.
The question as the week ended was when would the uncertainty fade? Would it be in time for the Christmas shopping season? Or would uncertain consumers slow the economy, giving nervous investors another reason to sell, and creating a whole new set of ripples?
 
 WHAT THE NUMBERS SAY
While investors and analysts try to figure out what the markets will do and what that will mean for people's finances, the newest set of figures indicate the economy has been growing, but at a slower pace. They don't provide any conclusive answers about the future.
The Index of Leading Economic Indicators rose in July, reversing two months of declines and easing some concerns about recession in the months ahead. But the National Association of Purchasing Management reported the manufacturing sector is slowing. The NAPM said the overall economy is expanding.
The government's employment report said job growth slowed last month as the effects of Asia's problems were felt in U.S. companies. On the other hand, the Commerce Department said construction spending rose 0.4 percent in July to a record high.
The stock market's performance Friday reflected the lack of answers. The Dow was up 78 points during morning trading, then fell sharply until it was down 186 in late afternoon. In the last half-hour of trading, the increasingly unpredictable market turned around, leaving the Dow down nearly 42 points at 7,640.25. The damage for the week: 411.43 points, or 5.1 percent.
 
 End adv for weekend editions Sept. 5-6
 Load-Date: September 6, 1998

 

End of Document
