

WASHINGTON TODAY: JFK - The myth endures the muckraking
The Associated Press
January 12, 1998, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 671 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Tell the American people that John F. Kennedy was an arrogant scoundrel. Tell them that his daddy's money may have bought his presidency. Tell them that there is something fishy about the Chicago vote count that assured him the election.
Tell about his liaisons with Marilyn Monroe and a gangster's moll. Or how he concealed the truth about his health from the public. Or that he was willing to sanction murder as an instrument of statecraft in Cuba, and maybe in South Vietnam, too.
Tell all that, and it does not seem to alter Kennedy's place in Americans' hearts and minds. After all the revelations, Kennedy remains for millions a handsome, romantic figure, a highly regarded president, a model for his successors from Richard Nixon to Bill Clinton, both of whom borrowed some of his gestures.
The latest assault on the Kennedy reputation - mounted by muckraking journalist Seymour Hersh in his popular book "The Dark Side of Camelot" - has not undermined Kennedy's stature. Hersh's findings had seeped out over the years and their repetition, even with fresh details, often brings a shrug.
"It's not like you're taking a saint and suddenly revealing him as a sinner," says Caryl Rivers, a journalism professor at Boston University who is writing a novel about those days. "You're taking someone who the public knew as a very imperfect person and yet, I think, was fascinated by his promise, his achievements, his charisma."
The central explanation lies in a word: assassination. John Kennedy was made a martyr by a bullet in Dallas nearly 35 years ago; that alone gives him an emotional hold on his generation and, it appears, many people born after his death.
"The fact is that people see him as having lost his life in the service of his country," says a historian, Robert Dallek, author of "Hail to the Chief: The Making and Unmaking of American Presidents."
John Trew, a senior at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., describes himself as a staunch Republican but still considers Kennedy an inspirational figure. "He stood up to the Soviet Union," says Trew. "I rank him right below Lincoln and Washington."
In a greatness poll last year of 719 "knowledgeable" people, mostly college teachers, Kennedy stood 15th among the nation's 41 presidents. Significantly, as a man of character he placed only 34th, but as a leader he was ranked eighth.
"What makes Kennedy impervious to some of the personal stuff was the Cuban missile crisis," says Tim Blessing, historian at Alvernia College in Reading, Pa. "No matter how much people complain and think he failed at so many things, you have that one shining moment. The idea that Kennedy saved us from nuclear war is fixed, and I don't think that will ever go away."
In addition to that shining moment, and in addition to the emotional tug arising from his murder, Kennedy's elan endeared him. He was young and handsome, and his wife floored even the French. Kennedy was the first president born in the 20th century, and so much different from his predecessors. He had fun and flash.
Moreover, just often enough to keep the Kennedy legend fresh, something happens to keep in mind the Kennedy triumphs and tragedies - most recently the skiing accident that killed Michael Kennedy, John Kennedy's nephew.
The debunking began long before Hersh. On the day that Kennedy was killed, the country's No. 1 best seller was Victor Lasky's acidic book, "JFK: The Man and the Myth."
In 1991, Wisconsin historian Thomas C. Reeves' book, "A Question of Character," portrayed Kennedy as a compulsive womanizer, a liar, a bully, a ruthless hypocrite.
"An awful lot of people don't want to know the truth," Reeves says. "They desperately want heroes, and since heroes are in short supply they cling to the myths of the past."
Adds historian Dallek, more gently: "We crave an aristocracy. We have none. His words still echo for people. All this transcends his womanizing and even his failures and shortcomings in the White House."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Mike Feinsilber has covered events in Washington since 1968.
 Load-Date: January 12, 1998

 

End of Document
