

WASHINGTON TODAY: Keeping busy in the eye of the storm
The Associated Press
February 25, 1998, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 710 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




From the State of the Union address to the flare-up over Iraq, President Clinton has been in a nearly constant state of motion for the past month, seizing one opportunity after another to shape attention.
So far, the calendar and luck have worked to his advantage.
With the Iraqi confrontation easing, some White House aides have even jokingly wondered what the president will do next to divert attention away from the Monica Lewinsky matter.
He gives no signs of slowing - or wallowing.
He was leaving for Florida today to inspect tornado damage first hand en route to a five-day visit to California and Utah. He's got a 10-day trip to Africa planned for next month.
And Clinton keeps drumming away at initiatives he rolled out in his State of the Union message and 1999 budget. In recent days, he's been to Philadelphia to talk about his tobacco-tax proposals, Baltimore to provide more details on clean-air legislation and Wheaton, Md., to spell out a health-care "Bill of Rights."
In the meantime, he's been hitting the fund-raising circuit hard, raising $ 1.5 million in one 24-hour blitz last week and headed for more fund-raisers in California.
"This has been a very busy week in Washington," Clinton told the National Council of Jewish Women on Tuesday - a day after he cautiously endorsed an agreement between the United Nations and Iraqi President Saddam Hussein on weapons inspections that averted a U.S.-led military strike.
Even the visit earlier this month by British Prime Minister Tony Blair provided Clinton an opportunity to show his level of engagement in the international arena.
"There has been a series of events that have helped the president look in charge, focused on governing," said Stuart Rothenberg, publisher of a political newsletter. "It's been a significant plus for him."
But Rothenberg said there are limits to how long Clinton can keep such a process going on, especially if new accusations surface - or if special prosecutor Kenneth Starr's Whitewater grand jury starts handing down indictments.
Furthermore, questions linger about the Iraqi agreement that could return to haunt Clinton should Saddam renege on some of the terms.
"This is still very much a dicey and unresolved issue, and we're going to have to give some serious thoughts to how we deal with the continuing problem," said Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss.
Still, Clinton has displayed resilience and inventiveness in shaping and controlling the national agenda, many analysts suggest.
"Skillful presidents can keep up this kind of thing forever," said Erwin Hargrove, a political scientist at Vanderbilt University. He said Clinton in many ways resembles President Reagan for his ability to stay on message.
But Clinton's high approval ratings could slump if there is "a deluge suddenly" from the Starr investigation, including a possible subpoena of the president or "if it's showed he lied," Hargrove said.
White House adviser Paul Begala, part of Clinton's damage-control team, credits neither luck nor the calendar for Clinton's recent performance. "Football coaches say you can't teach speed, you can't teach someone to run fast. You can't teach someone to be president. It's been his ability to dominate the agenda and the landscape."
Part of Clinton's luck in being able "to defy the laws of presidential gravity" is the continuing strong economy, suggested Thomas Cronin, a political scientist who has written books on the presidency and who is president of Whitman College in Walla Walla, Wash.
Good economic times give many Americans little reason to focus on goings on in Washington, he suggested.
Not only has the good economy made Clinton and his aides confident, it has made some of them sound downright cocky.
"My suggestion is that Republicans should not even think about defying the Social Security-first principle," Gene Sperling, chairman of Clinton's National Economic Council, told a White House briefing Tuesday. It was a reference to Clinton's challenge to Congress to forgo spending any budget surplus until Social Security is shored up.
"Or else what?" he was asked.
"I think they will be making a very unwise policy and political decision," Sperling said.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Tom Raum covers politics and national affairs for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: February 25, 1998

 

End of Document
