

Weary Gulf strike force 'owns the night'
The Associated Press
December 20, 1998, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: State and Regional
Length: 874 words
Byline: BRIAN MURPHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABOARD THE USS ENTERPRISE
Body




The admiral went to the ship's bridge. It was 53 minutes to midnight on Wednesday. About 8 miles away, a bright white glow lit the sea.
Rear Adm. J. Cutler Dawson Jr. watched the fiery trail of the first Tomahawk cruise missile carry 1,000 pounds of explosives toward Iraq. The firing from the submarine USS Miami opened the barrage. Less than a half hour later, warplanes began streaking from the deck of the USS Enterprise.
Dawson left the bridge and prepared for a long night.
He made no announcement to the nearly 5,000 airmen and sailors aboard. Everyone had known for hours that the attacks would begin. They had been readying for the possibility since the Enterprise raced to the Persian Gulf at 31 knots, near its maximum speed.
In the flight area, the air wing commander, Capt. Tom Hagen, gathered pilots to review their missions: suspected weapons sites and facilities for Saddam Hussein's prized Republican Guard.
More than half the airmen had experience in the 1991 Gulf War or monitoring the no-fly zone in southern Iraq. These were the men Hagen wanted in the air.
"Opening night is not the time for the new folks to go," said Hagen of Billings, Mont.
He told the pilots to make sure they had all their survival gear and that their flight suits were "sanitized" - free of all names and markings in case they were captured.
"I want you to visualize yourself up there, dropping the bombs and coming back safely," he urged. Hagen watched the pilots closely. He didn't want to see anyone too cocky or too calm.
"They should have their game face on," he said. "It's focused on what needs to be done."
The first night was an all-Navy barrage. F/A-18 Hornet and F-14 Tomcat warplanes, loaded with laser-guided rockets and free-fall bombs, flew runs off the carrier.
About 200 cruise missiles were launched from the Miami and other vessels in the battle group during the first assault - more than one every two minutes until sunrise. Fewer than 300 Tomahawks hit Iraq during the entire Gulf War.
The last plane arrived back at the carrier about 5:30 a.m.
Military planners decided to wage the attacks in the dark to take advantage of night-vision technology and the extra concealment it gives warplanes.
"We feel that we own the night," said Dawson.
The following evening, the Iraqis fought back with more firepower.
The flak from the anti-aircraft batteries was heavier. Pilots also began seeing more surface-to-air missiles. Still, there was no sign of Iraqi jets challenging the air armada.
In Kuwait - rescued from Iraqi occupation in the Gulf War - British Tornado fighters left their base to join the air assault. U.S. Air Force B-52 and B-1 bombers also took to the sky. Extra American ground troops arrived in Kuwait.
Cmdr. Kevin Miller, leader of an F/A-18 squadron, attributed the heavier second night anti-aircraft fire to Iraqi preparations.
"The first night we had the element of surprise," said Miller of Jacksonville, Fla. "They were ready for us the second night."
About 50 cruise missiles were fired from the Enterprise battle group. The cruiser USS Gettysburg, which arrived with about 100 Tomahawks, had nearly exhausted its supply.
On day three, the adrenaline rush was waning. Most of the crew had only a few hours' sleep. Deep in the hull, assembly teams raced to keep up with the orders for missiles.
A dozen men put together a missile in about 10 minutes - from bracing the tail fins to securing the guidance system in the nose.
Aviation Ordnance 3rd Class Randy Self of Cullman, Ala., was getting by on about 90 minutes of sleep a day.
"We were going flat out," he said. "We didn't even know if it was day or night."
The Muslim holy month of Ramadan had begun. Arabs around the Middle East intensified protests against the attacks. Syrian demonstrators ripped the flag from the U.S. Embassy in Damascus. Palestinians raged against the United States - just a week after President Clinton visited the Gaza Strip and boosted Palestinian efforts for self determination.
Military experts reviewed digital images from the raids. The video is downloaded into computers before being sent for more detailed analysis at Central Command in Tampa, Fla.
Though Saddam claimed hospitals and other civilian sites were hit by the air strikes, Dawson insisted none of the targets were near medical centers or other large civilian buildings.
A second U.S. carrier arrived in the Persian Gulf. The USS Carl Vinson led its six-vessel battle group into position.
Early Sunday, Dawson received a call from the military command for Southwest Asia. Desert Fox was over. The last warplane returned to the Vinson about 2 a.m.
In total, 650 U.S. and British attack missions were launched against Iraq - about half from the Enterprise battle group. More than 325 cruise missiles were fired from Navy ships, and more than 90 from B-52s.
No flights were planned for the rest of Sunday. Pilots and others caught up on their sleep. Unused bombs were dismantled.
At a Roman Catholic Mass in the ship's chapel, Rev. Bob Panec offered a prayer for the Iraqis "suffering from the rages of war."
The daily flight schedule always features a cartoon on the back. Sunday's drawing was a caricature of Saddam running from a shower of rockets. The caption read: "It was fun while it lasted."
 Load-Date: December 20, 1998

 

End of Document
