

What Happened to America's Big Names of the Vietnam Era? series that moved previously, marking the anniversary of the end of
The Associated Press
April 18, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 638 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Some prominent figures of the Vietnam era, and what happened to them:
MUHAMMAD ALI: Heavyweight boxing champion, convicted in 1967 of refusing induction into the Army ("I ain't got no quarrel with them Viet Cong"); retired, suffering from Parkinson's syndrome.
JOAN BAEZ: Folk singer and anti-war activist; climbed redwood last year to sing to anti-logging campaigner living there.
PHILIP AND DANIEL BERRIGAN: Radical priests involved in burning draft records; still active in anti-war causes; Philip, convicted in 1997 of vandalizing the destroyer USS The Sullivans, has left the priesthood.
WILLIAM CALLEY: Commanding officer at My Lai massacre in 1968; now a jeweler in Columbus, Ga.
WALTER CRONKITE: CBS newsman whose report on Vietnam in 1968 helped turn American opinion against war; retired as anchorman in 1981, still takes on special TV projects.
DANIEL ELLSBERG: Researcher who leaked the Pentagon Papers; activist against nuclear proliferation, living in Washington.
JANE FONDA: Actress and anti-war activist, branded "Hanoi Jane" by critics for visiting North Vietnam in 1972; separated from media magnate Ted Turner after eight-year marriage; last reported to be embracing evangelical Christianity.
DAVID HARRIS: Former husband of Baez, jailed in 1969 for refusing induction; writer in Mill Valley, Calif.
TOM HAYDEN: Co-founder, Students for a Democratic Society, one of the so-called Chicago Seven tried for trashing the 1968 Democratic Party convention; former husband of Jane Fonda; retiring this year as a California state senator.
ABBIE HOFFMAN: Chicago Seven member; went underground for nearly seven years to avoid drug charges, committed suicide in 1989 at age 52.
JULIUS HOFFMAN: Judge, Chicago Seven trial; died in 1983 at age 87.
EARTHA KITT: Singer, attacked Vietnam War in front of Lady Bird Johnson, wife of President Lyndon B. Johnson, at White House luncheon in 1968; now on Broadway in "The Wild Party."
EUGENE McCARTHY: Minnesota senator who ran for president on a peace platform in 1968; has written poetry; speaks out against campaign spending limits; lives in Washington.
COUNTRY JOE McDONALD: Singer-songwriter best known for the "I Feel Like I'm Fixin' to Die Rag" and FISH cheer at Woodstock; still singing, campaigning for veterans; a scholar on Florence Nightingale.
ROBERT McNAMARA: Secretary of defense in Kennedy administration; retired in 1981 as head of World Bank; serves on corporate boards; wrote 1995 book acknowledging that Vietnam War was a mistake.
GEORGE McGOVERN: anti-war senator from South Dakota, 1972 Democratic candidate for president; now U.S. ambassador to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization.
JERRY RUBIN: Chicago Seven member; later a business entrepreneur, fatally injured while jaywalking in Los Angeles in 1994.
BENJAMIN SPOCK: Famed pediatrician, convicted in 1968 of "conspiracy to aid, counsel, and abet" young men to violate the draft laws; conviction overturned on appeal; ran for president in 1972 and got more than 75,000 votes; died in 1998 at age 94.
MARK RUDD: Leader of the 1968 student uprising at Columbia University; now a teacher at Albuquerque Technical-Vocational Institute in New Mexico.
MAXWELL TAYLOR: General, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 1962-64, then ambassador to South Vietnam; died in 1987 at age 85.
MARY ANN VECCHIO: Teen-age runaway whose picture, kneeling over one of the victims at Kent State, was one of the era's most enduring images; works as a slot change attendant at a Las Vegas casino.
WILLIAM WESTMORELAND: Commander, American forces in Vietnam, 1964-68; retired, living in Charleston, S.C.
ELMO ZUMWALT: Commander of Navy forces, 1968 to 1970; later said he believed the defoliant Agent Orange, dropped on Vietnam at his orders, led to the fatal illness of his son who was serving there. He died Jan. 2 at age 79.
End Adv
 
 Load-Date: April 19, 2000

 

End of Document
