

Why did the chicken cross the border? Because Hong Kong ban lifted
The Associated Press
February 7, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 477 words
Byline: By DIDI KIRSTEN TATLOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HONG KONG
Body




Truckloads of clucking Chinese chickens in orange plastic crates crossed into Hong Kong on Saturday, ending a six-week ban imposed to contain a deadly bird flu epidemic among Hong Kong's people.
Health officials wearing white smocks and surgical masks were waiting to inspect the birds, which had been kept in a five-day quarantine in China to ensure they were free from the H5N1 virus, which killed six people before the outbreak subsided.
Health workers conducted random blood tests among the 35,000 chickens at the Mankam To border checkpoint before the fowl were transported to a wholesale poultry market. The chickens, to be sold Sunday, all tested negative for the bird flu virus.
Before the ban was imposed on Dec. 24, Hong Kong imported 80,000 birds daily, or 75 percent of the territory's daily consumption, from China.
While many in Hong Kong accepted the need for the ban, it deprived families of traditional chicken dishes during the Chinese New Year festivities late last month.
Some planned dinner parties Saturday night to celebrate the chickens' return.
The lifting of the ban comes after the Hong Kong government slaughtered all the territory's 1.4 million chickens late December in a drastic move to stamp out the virus outbreak that claimed its first human life last May.
The outbreak was a major test for the new government that took power when Hong Kong reverted to Chinese rule last July 1. Critics accused it of reacting too slowly and haphazardly to the crisis.
It also scared off tourists, and sparked a wider debate about cleanliness in Hong Kong, one of Asia's most modern and most crowded cities, with 6.4 million people packed close together.
While government officials are confident that the flu has been contained, some expect consumers to remain wary.
"Many people will adopt a wait-and-see attitude toward chickens and even eggs. And who can blame them?" the Hong Kong Standard said in an editorial.
Of the 18 people sickened by the bird flu, only two remained hospitalized, with one listed in poor condition.
No new flu cases have been reported since the chicken slaughter, but Lessie Wei, head of the government's agriculture and fisheries department, said the flu's legacy lived on in the stringent new tests that will cost Hong Kong $ 1.92 million a year.
"I can't say it's over. It's a long-term commitment," she said. "We now have a system in place and we need to ensure that the system continues to work.
A World Health Organization team last month found no sign of the bird flu in southern China, but said more surveillance was needed. The virus is carried by wild birds, which pass it to domestic fowl.
There is no vaccine for the virus, and medical experts don't know how it is transmitted to humans. Health officials have not entirely ruled out a resurgence of the virus, but say the chances are good for now that it has been beaten.
 Load-Date: February 7, 1998

 

End of Document
