

Will Fed raise interest rates? The answer may lie in the data
The Associated Press
May 6, 1998, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 792 words
Byline: By DAVE SKIDMORE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




First the stock market plummets from fear the Federal Reserve is about to raise interest rates. Then, convinced the Fed won't, the market soars to a new record. Then it gets nervous again.
So what will happen?
The answer may lie in the stream of economic data that will be released between now and the monetary policy-makers' next meeting on May 19. Friday's report on employment in April could be the most significant of all.
"The employment number is clearly important," said economist David Wyss of DRI-McGraw Hill in Lexington, Mass. "If that comes in strong, especially if it's accompanied by a big increase in (non-farm workers') hourly earnings, the Fed may move."
Employer payrolls declined in March - by 36,000 jobs - for the first time in more than two years. The unemployment rate ticked up to 4.7 percent from a 24-year low of 4.6 percent.
Wyss and other analysts said Friday's report on payrolls in April may indicate whether March was a weather-related pause or the start of a trend toward slower growth in employment.
Economists in the weather camp note that mild weather pumped up the job market in January and February by keeping construction companies from making their usual layoffs. Thus, the usual construction job rebound didn't materialize in March.
Looking at April, analysts on average are projecting that employers added a robust 275,000 jobs to their payrolls. A substantially bigger gain may indicate Asia's financial problems aren't reining in the U.S. economy as much as the Federal Reserve was expecting.
In February, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan told Congress, "The key question going forward is whether the restraint building from the turmoil in Asia will be sufficient to check inflationary tendencies that might otherwise result from the strength of domestic spending and tightening labor markets."
Economist David Jones of Aubrey G. Lanston & Co. in New York said it increasingly looks as if restraint from Asia won't be sufficient even though it produced the largest drop in U.S. exports in 4 years in the January-March quarter.
Despite that, the fastest growth in business spending on new equipment in nearly 15 years and the sharpest increase in consumer spending in more than six combined to push the economy ahead at a rapid 4.2 percent annual rate in the quarter.
In addition to the employment report, Fed policy-makers will scrutinize the April report on retail sales, representing a third of economic activity, on May 13 and housing construction figures on the morning of their meeting, Jones said.
"Something has to begin to moderate consumer spending," he said. "The trouble is, with stock prices going up and wealth rising, there doesn't seem to be anything to do it."
He said the stock market was probably a prime topic Tuesday when Greenspan met at the White House for nearly an hour with President Clinton and Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin. White House officials refused to disclose what was discussed.
Earlier in the day, Rubin told CNBC's "Market Watch" that Americans should evaluate stock prices with "great rigor."
"In good times, people tend not to be very rigorous," he said.
A published report that Fed policy-makers on March 31 had adopted a policy bias in favor of higher rates - while deciding to hold off on actually raising them - caused the Dow Jones industrial average to tumble 166 points, to 8,899, on April 27 and 28.
But, in the next four sessions, it rebounded 294 points to a record-high 9,193, largely because Labor Department data on wages and benefits showed little inflation pressure brewing. Renewed nervousness over the interest-rate implications of Friday's report contributed to a 45 point retreat on Tuesday.
Jones said the Federal Reserve may want to take some steam out of the stock market now, with a quarter-point increase in short-term interest rates, in the hope of avoiding a crash later of a speculative bubble.
Other analysts are convinced the Fed is still in a wait-and-see stance. It will take a while longer before the full extent of Asia's impact on the United States is known and a surging stock market alone would not justify Fed action, said economist Allen Sinai of Primark Decision Economics in New York.
"It's not the central bank's job to … decide when there is or isn't a speculative bubble, in a judge-like sense. That's too much interference in private markets," he said.
Plus it will be difficult for policy-makers to justify higher rates when inflation is so tame. Analysts are anticipating reports for April, scheduled May 13 and 14, will show only mild increases in both consumer prices and prices paid to goods producers.
If that's the case, policy-makers may well sit tight and read the economic numbers until it's time for their next meeting on June 30 and July 1.
 Load-Date: May 6, 1998

 

End of Document
