

With the Russians gone, Islam fills the void in Chechnya
January 24, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 700 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GROZNY, Russia
Body




Since Muslim separatists captured Chechnya's capital five months ago, they've banned alcohol, established Islamic courts, cracked down on prostitution and begun religious instruction in their schools.
And as Monday's presidential election nears, candidates take pains to stress their Islamic credentials during speeches in mountain villages and in posters plastered all over the war-ravaged capital.
"Islam, independence, order," read the banners of Aslan Maskhadov, one of the front-runners.
Chechnya has been a predominantly Muslim territory for centuries, but Soviet rule placed strict limits on all religions, and Moscow was particularly wary of the Islamic people to the south, both in the Caucasus Mountains and farther east in Central Asia.
Now that the Russians are gone, Chechens are looking to Islam for direction - in life and in politics. And when politicians tout Muslim values, the message is pro-independence for Chechnya, and anti-Russia.
"Islam is playing a larger and larger role in Chechnya, and people are happy with this," Mullah Shahid Yunus declared after delivering the midday sermon Friday at a packed mosque on a hillside overlooking Grozny.
Islamic practice here has traditionally been mainstream and moderate, and it appears unlikely that the independence sought by the Chechens would result in a fundamentalist state.
At present, religious figures do not hold any senior political or military positions in Chechnya, and the presidential and parliamentary elections are expected to be dominated by men who made their names in the guerrilla war with Russia.
"If Russia and other countries want stability in the Caucasus, they must understand that it's only possible through Islamic order," said Chechen Vice Premier Movladi Udugov, a presidential candidate. "We now have thousands of people with weapons and only Islam will be able to keep this problem under control."
Unlike the rest of Russia, Chechnya has for some time kept to the Muslim practice of setting aside Fridays for rest and religious services, while Saturdays and Sundays are working days.
After the Chechen rebels captured Grozny in August and signed a peace deal with Russia, Chechen leader Zelimkhan Yandarbiyev moved quickly to introduce many more Islamic practices.
Alcohol was officially banned, something unthinkable elsewhere in Russia, with its well-deserved reputation for heavy drinking.
Sharia, or Islamic law, was introduced in November in Chechnya and courts have been established in Grozny and other towns.
The Sharia courts have sentenced some convicts to 40 lashes, though the practice has been suspended temporarily during the election period. In one case, a Sharia court convicted a driver of killing a man in a traffic accident and ordered him to pay 63 camels as compensation to the victim's family.
Compensating crime victims with camels and other property has a long history in Islamic law, but when someone noted that there are no camels in Chechnya, the penalty was converted into a fine.
The Sharia court system appears to have widespread support among ordinary Chechens, though crime is still a serious problem in the republic as the former rebels battle to establish full government authority.
Under Soviet rule, it was not possible to teach Islam in the classroom, but religious instruction has been introduced in some schools and could soon become standard practice, according to Yunus, the mullah.
"We must now teach Islam in all schools, beginning at the early ages," said Yunus, a genial man who was warmly greeted by the men who filled his mosque.
Yunus also said that Chechnya will be looking to other Muslim countries as it seeks help to rebuild from the devastating war that killed thousands and left the capital in ruins.
But so far, Muslim nations have been restrained in their support of Chechnya for fear of angering Russia, which says Chechnya will not be allowed to secede. Nearby countries such as Turkey and Iran both have good relations and growing trade ties with Moscow, and would not want to jeopardize those links.
But Yunus said he was optimistic.
"We have lost contact with Muslim countries," he said. "For us, it is very important to build those relations, and I think we will."
 Load-Date: January 24, 1997

 

End of Document
