

With Syria talks at hand, Israel considers the cost
The Associated Press
December 9, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 863 words
Byline: By LAURA KING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak, a former general, once faced Syrians on the battlefield. Now he is set to engage them at the negotiating table - and it could prove the tougher fight.
With the dramatic announcement of a U.S.-brokered agreement to bring the two sides together, Barak - who will personally launch the talks in Washington next week with Syria's foreign minister - must weigh exactly what price he is willing to pay to come to terms with one of Israel's bitterest enemies.
The hard-line government of Syrian President Hafez Assad has long insisted that any agreement is impossible without the return of all of the Golan Heights, the strategic plateau that looms over northern Israel. Israel captured the volcanic plain from Syria in 1967, retained it in bloody fighting in 1973, and annexed it in 1981.
Barak wasted no time in trying to rally the country around the peace push, telling his Labor Party in a nationally televised speech today that "the conditions are ripe for the opening of talks with Syria."
"There exists before us … a real possibility in the coming months to bring a peace agreement," he said.
Since his election campaign earlier this year, the prime minister has said he was willing to consider the return of Golan territory - but with certain conditions, primarily security guarantees and control over water resources.
The heights are the main source of water to the Jordan River and border the Sea of Galilee, which provides Israel with one-third of its drinking water.
Also to be worked out is the status of Mount Hermon, a towering 9,300-foot peak at the heights' northern tip that serves as an important intelligence-gathering post.
Barak's government says it enters into the talks without having agreed in advance what it will give up, but that assertion was scoffed at by his political foes. Hawkish opposition leader Ariel Sharon called the startup of negotiations "a total surrender" to Syrian demands.
Some Barak associates, including Deputy Foreign Minister Nawaf Massalha, say the negotiations will focus on relatively minor points, primarily the small difference between an old international border and the pre-1967 cease-fire line. The latter would give Syria more territory, including a foothold on the shore of the Sea of Galilee.
Barak and President Clinton have already staked enormous personal prestige on the Syria peace effort. Clinton himself announced the sealing of a deal Wednesday to resume the talks, and Barak is taking matters in hand by leading the Israeli delegation to Washington rather than sending an emissary.
Assad, on the other hand, will be represented by his foreign minister, Farouk al-Sharaa. That might appear lopsided, since Israel is represented by its head of government - but Syria, which has no diplomatic ties with Israel, considers it an important concession to dispatch someone of al-Sharaa's rank to speak with an Israeli.
In Washington, Clinton described Assad, who is 69 and said to be ailing, as "very personally involved" in the process. Al-Sharaa's meeting with Barak, he said, was "as close to person-to-person talks as they could have without doing it."
Syria and Israel have officially been at war since 1948, and Syria's state-run media routinely portray Israel as a demon and an aggressor. Not surprisingly, reports in Damascus about the resumption of talks stressed the American role rather than the upcoming contacts with Israel.
State-run newspapers in Syria carried big front-page pictures today of Clinton and Assad - but none of Barak. A commentary in the official Tishrin daily said Syria would not give up "one iota" of the Golan.
If the peace pact calls for giving up the Golan, Barak has already committed himself to a public referendum on the handover. In an interview in Thursday's editions of the Yediot Ahronot newspaper, he expressed confidence that a "decisive and sweeping" majority of Israelis would back him up.
Still, a bitter public-relations battle could be in the offing. Uri Heitner, a spokesman for the Golan Settlers Council, said giving back the heights would be bowing to "the dictates of a Syrian tyrant."
"We intend on mobilizing the public, to call on every person who has a conscience in the state of Israel not to lend a hand to this act," he told Israel radio.
As the talks progress, an important part of the puzzle will be Lebanon, which is something of a proxy battlefield for the two sides. Syria is the main power broker in Lebanon, but Israel retains control of a so-called security zone in southern Lebanon, which it says it needs as a shield against attacks by Islamic guerrillas.
Barak has promised to bring Israeli troops home by midsummer, and an agreement with Syria would vastly simplify that process. Cabinet minister Haim Ramon expressed hopes for a cease-fire in Lebanon during the talks.
Although getting the Syria talks moving again was widely seen as the biggest peace breakthrough of Barak's 5-month-old administration, some rivals suggested the prime minister was overly confident.
"He really looks like a cat that licked the cream," said opposition figure Limor Livnat. "I only hope the bowl won't tip over on the head of the one who's licking it."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY127
 Load-Date: December 10, 1999

 

End of Document
