

Women from both sides of the war still seek equality in today's Vietnam
The Associated Press
April 29, 2000, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1145 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam
Body




As Saigon was about to fall, Kuong Thi Tam drove her American boss to the airport, dodging fires and fighting. Do Thi Huu Bich, a top female Viet Cong leader, emerged from her underground hideout and took charge of a key district in the city.
In the 25 years since the Vietnam War ended on April 30, 1975, Tam hasn't been able to get a job, citing her work for the U.S. Agency for International Development. And despite repeated attempts, she has been denied a visa to the United States for unknown reasons.
Bich, in contrast, was rewarded by the newly installed communists with a series of high-ranking jobs until she retired in 1985.
Behind the battlefields in Vietnam - and occasionally on the front lines - millions of women like Tam and Bich joined the war effort.
Some, like Bich, now 75, got their revolutionary credentials fighting against the French in the late 1940s and early '50s and became ardent followers of Communist Party founder Ho Chi Minh. Others, like Tam, now 63, supported the freewheeling capitalist lifestyle of the South Vietnamese and their American backers.
Now women from both sides in the war are trying to find equality in today's Vietnam, where men still dominate the highest positions of power. They also face the same problems as their male counterparts, including the legacy of the war's divisions: To many it seems that the winners and losers in 1975 remain the winners and losers today.
Female guerrillas from the north and south who backed the victorious communists have climbed the party hierarchy, though not yet to the top, while women associated with the defeated Americans and the South Vietnamese army have trouble finding jobs - with few exceptions.
Dao Thi Nhien, director of the Women's Museum in Hanoi and a member of the powerful Women's Union's leadership committee, said unemployment is a problem nationwide and dismissed reports that women who worked for the Americans are excluded from government jobs. "There is no discrimination," she said.
But Tam and others with American connections say that despite strenuous efforts over long periods, they always have been turned down for official positions - and so were their children.
"After 1975, I tried to apply for a job with the government, but they said there was no job for me because of my background," said Nguyen Thi Mui, 74, who worked as a cook for an American couple during the war. She became a street vendor and worked until she fell and broke a leg four years ago.
Truong Thi Thuan, one of thousands of bar girls who catered to American GIs during the war, hid her past at the "Lucky Seven" and other famous Saigon watering holes when the communists came to power.
Now 57, she shares two tiny, dark rooms with her son and his family, earns a living selling Vietnam's traditional pho soup on a street nearby - and dreams of going to America.
Only with the opening of the private sector in 1986 have some women linked to the Americans been able to find jobs that aren't menial.
While Vietnam's constitution guarantees gender equality, even the government's most stalwart supporters aren't satisfied because women have yet to ascend higher than second-rung jobs.
"For thousands and thousands of years, men looked down on women, so it's not easy to change," said Dr. Nguyen Kim Cuc, who spent nearly 10 years running a clinic for guerrilla fighters and sympathizers in the mountains between Chu Lai and Nuoc Nam in South Vietnam and is now vice president of the Vietnam Family Planning Association in Hanoi.
Especially in rural areas, she said, the old saying is still true that "one son means you have children, but 10 daughters is nothing" because a wife moves in with her husband's family.
Maybe in her granddaughter's lifetime, women will achieve real equality, Cuc said.
Le Thi Thoan joined the communists in 1941 and launched a women's guerrilla movement against the French in Hun Yun province in the north in 1950 which became the model for the campaign against the Americans in South Vietnam. She went on to head Women's Union branches, including in Hanoi - but she said she never got a top party post because of her sex.
"My own opinion is it is unfair," she said, "but it is still great progress from the past."
Now 75 and retired for 18 years, Thoan believes women need to learn to network and play politics like men to crack the glass ceiling but must "do it in a very honest way."
Women do have relatively high representation in the National Assembly - 26 percent - and "the government is still trying hard to promote women in the political sphere," said Dagmar Schumacher of Germany, the U.N. Development Program's deputy representative in Hanoi. "It's still a long way from equality."
The fight for equal rights is not the only legacy of what is called the "American war."
At least a million Vietnamese soldiers died and hundreds of thousands remain missing, a loss that still casts a shadow over the wives, mothers and children they left behind.
Women guerrillas in the south, nicknamed the "long-haired army," fed the fighters, gathered intelligence about U.S. and South Vietnamese forces, traveled behind enemy lines and sometimes went into combat.
The only official figures on female casualties show that of the 70,000 young women, mainly from the north, who volunteered to help oust the French and then the Americans, about half died, Nhien said.
Women also have suffered in other ways.
Tran Hong Nhat, a Viet Cong guerrilla leader who went on to head the Women's Union school in Tu Duc which trains party cadres, miscarried in 1976 - tests showed the fetus was allegedly deformed from her exposure to the toxic defoliant Agent Orange. She has never had children since.
Still, women in the north and south are united in hopes for a better future for their children.
Nguyen Thi Thep, 78, dropped out after third grade to help her parents farm in rural North Vietnam. She struggled through two wars trying to raise three sons and three daughters. She succeeded well: one daughter is a teacher, another is a travel agent and the third works for the government.
"The best thing now is … that women can look forward to managing and raising children without wondering whether they have a future at all," she said at the Chua Tay Ho Temple in Hanoi, where she goes every day to volunteer.
With 50 percent of the country's 76 million people under 25, Schumacher said, "the memories of the war are fading away."
But for those like Thoan, the guerrilla leader from the north who lost her 19-year-old son in combat in 1973, not a day passes without her eyes wandering to the photo of the handsome young man on an altar in her living room.
Wiping away tears, she described how her son asked if he could volunteer for the military at 17 - a year before he had to - because the war was nearing an end and he wanted to do something more than clean up the debris left by American soldiers.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY191-193
 Load-Date: April 30, 2000

 

End of Document
