

'El Loco' Gained Presidency by Reaching the Poor
July 10, 1996, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 393 words
Byline: By CARLOS CISTERNAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUITO, Ecuador
Body




Abdala Bucaram cast himself as "El Loco" in Ecuador's presidential campaign, but analysts say it was his shrewd stance as leader of the poor that won him the election.
The 44-year-old former mayor of coastal Guayaquil gained widespread attention with wild antics at campaign rallies, though his words - often delivered like a repent-or-be-damned preacher - resonated most with the have-nots.
"Bucaram made the poor people understand that he understood their problems," said political analyst Luis Proano.
He said Ecuador's extreme poverty and the people's anxiety explain his support. More than half of the country's 11 million inhabitants are seriously impoverished.
Bucaram defeated free-market proponent Jaimi Nebot in Sunday's runoff, winning the right to lead this Colorado-sized nation for the next four years.
Although official figures are not expected until the end of the week, exit polls gave Bucaram the election by about 54 percent to 46 percent over Nebot, who conceded defeat.
Bucaram's campaign specifically targeted the poor. He called himself the "leader of the poor" and the "scourge of the oligarchy."
To emphasize his message, Bucaram occasionally would take off his belt at campaign rallies and scream that he was going to use it to punish the oligarchy, which he said was "the government of a few to the detriment of many."
Experts say such comments carried great weight with the poor, whose condition has worsened under the economic policies of conservative President Sixto Duran-Ballen, who tried but was unable to carry out economic reforms.
Duran-Ballen steps down Aug. 10 after a four-year term marked by social protests and corruption scandals.
Conservatives worry that a Bucaram presidency could bring economic chaos, but after the election he began to tone down his rhetoric, saying the country needs good businessmen and foreign investment.
"Ecuador has found its leader of the moment," political analyst Juan Pablo Moncagatta said.
He said Bucaram is the only politician who has shown the ability to communicate directly to Ecuador's residents "and reach the heart of the people with his words."
Bucaram's campaign rallies featured him singing, dancing and screaming at the top of his lungs, backed up by a popular band providing rock and Latin rhythms.
"With a light-hearted style, he motivated the people to unite around him," Moncagatta said.
 Load-Date: July 10, 1996

 

End of Document
