

'The Torch' Comfortable in the Heat of Politics
November 6, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 326 words
Byline: By HENRY STERN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




Robert Torricelli takes stands that often bring criticism from both parties, but "The Torch" can take the heat.
On Tuesday, the 45-year-old Democratic congressman defeated fellow Rep. Dick Zimmer for the Senate seat vacated by retiring Democrat Bill Bradley.
"In every endeavor, a person sets a goal for themselves," Torricelli said. "For me it is quite simple: that if I serve with distinction, if I serve with character, strength and integrity, then one day they will say, 'He was a senator like Bill Bradley,' and that is a goal worthy of any person."
A member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Torricelli has rankled conservatives with his advocacy of human rights.
Yet Torricelli also backed former President Bush in the Gulf War and wrote legislation to toughen the U.S. embargo against Cuba.
"It's not worth being in public life if you're not prepared to take stands and take risks. That's not the story of my life," he said.
Torricelli was raised in Franklin Lakes, where friends recall a teen-ager's room filled atypically with American flags, New York Times editorials and busts of Presidents Lincoln and Kennedy.
From junior high school through college, Torricelli ran for student offices and never lost. He spent his 20s working for former Gov. Brendan Byrne and former Vice President Walter Mondale.
At 31, Torricelli ran a door-to-door campaign to defeat Republican Rep. Harold Hollenbeck. He was re-elected six times.
Within a month of his 1983 swearing-in, Torricelli flew to El Salvador to retrieve the body of a slain U.S. journalist who was from his district. On trips abroad with former girlfriend Bianca Jagger, Torricelli made comments that angered local officials.
During the campaign, Zimmer labeled Torricelli "foolishly liberal" and attacked his ethics. He cited everything from Torricelli's overdrafts at the House bank to the help he gave the teen-age daughter of a former client and campaign contributor who was a federal fugitive.
 Load-Date: November 6, 1996

 

End of Document
