

1999: The year Congress did little on the immigration front
The Associated Press
December 2, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 637 words
Byline: By MICHELLE MITTELSTADT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The notion that the Immigration and Naturalization Service is in need of a major overhaul is widely accepted, even by the agency's managers. So it seemed inevitable, when Congress convened in January, that policy-makers would agree to sweeping changes.
Eleven months later, with politicians gone for the remainder of the year, INS restructuring did not figure among lawmakers' accomplishments.
Lawmakers also failed to act on virtually every other major immigration issue before Congress this year, chief among them: providing more visas for high-tech workers; restoring welfare benefits to legal immigrants; and granting amnesty to Central Americans who fled strife in their homelands and are living illegally in the United States.
"This Congress has been an abysmal failure in regards to immigration policy," said Rep. Luis Gutierrez, D-Ill., chairman of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus' immigration task force.
"A very disappointing year," agreed Jeanne Butterfield, executive director of the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
The association and other immigrant advocacy groups blame Republicans, as does the White House. The administration pressed unsuccessfully to include the amnesty and benefits restoration in the year-end budget package approved Nov. 19 by Congress and signed Monday by President Clinton.
"The Republicans are not interested in issues affecting immigrants," said White House deputy chief of staff Maria Echaveste, the administration's point person on immigration policy. "That is the only conclusion I can draw."
The GOP, in turn, accuses the administration of blocking legitimate INS reform and questions the White House's drive to grant amnesty to hundreds of thousands of foreigners living illegally in the United States.
"The administration's immigration policy has been quite interesting," said John Feehery, spokesman for House Speaker Dennis Hastert. "Making illegal immigrants suddenly legal is not a smart international policy."
For some, inaction by Congress on immigration was not such a bad thing.
"I'd have to say the country dodged several bullets in this session of Congress because immigration policy didn't get any worse than it already is," said Mark Krikorian, head of the Center for Immigration Studies, which favors reduced immigration.
The year began with agreement by the administration, Republicans and special-interest groups to separate INS' sometimes competing enforcement and service missions. But legislation to do that stalled amid disagreement over the scope of the restructuring.
The authors of a bipartisan House INS bill - GOP Reps. Lamar Smith of Texas and Hal Rogers of Kentucky, and Texas Democratic Rep. Silvestre Reyes - say they will push for swift consideration of their legislation when Congress returns in 2000.
The administration also says it is eager to resolve the question.
"We're disappointed that we couldn't make it happen this year, but we still do hope to reach a consensus as soon as possible," INS spokeswoman Maria Cardona said.
The House bill would abolish the INS. In its place would be separate agencies, headed by different managers, to enforce the nation's immigration laws and handle benefits such as citizenship.
The administration contends total separation would create a new set of problems. It is pushing a more modest plan that would keep INS intact, with separate work forces and chains of command for enforcement and services. Smith has said this proposal would create a "super-INS."
While some predict any changes to the agency during an election year will be difficult, others are more optimistic as both parties court minority voters.
"A lot depends on how serious the Republican Party is about changing its image in immigrant communities," said Cecilia Munoz, vice president of the National Council of La Raza, a Latino advocacy group.
 Load-Date: December 3, 1999

 

End of Document
