

A Bush-Gore Oct. 11 debate exchange on U.S. troops in the Balkans
The Associated Press
October 21, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 667 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at an exchange on the use of U.S. troops in overseas peacekeeping missions, including the Balkans, during the second debate on Oct. 11 between Democrat Al Gore and Republican George W. Bush.
JIM LEHRER (debate moderator): You said in the Boston debate, Governor, on this issue of nation-building, that the United States military is overextended now. Where is it overextended? Where are there U.S. military that you would bring home if you become president?
BUSH: Well, first, let me just say one comment about what the vice president said. I think one of the lessons in between World War I and World War II is we let our military atrophy, and we can't do that. We've got to rebuild our military.
But one of the problems we have in the military is we're in a lot of places around the world. And I mentioned one, and that's the Balkans. I'd very much like to get our troops out of there. I recognize we can't do it now, nor do I advocate an immediate withdrawal. That would be an abrogation of our agreement with NATO; no one's suggesting that. But I think it ought to be one of our priorities, to work with our European friends to convince them to put troops on the ground. And there is an example. Haiti is another example.
Now, there are some places where, I think, you know, I supported the administration in Colombia; I think it's important for us to be training Colombians in that part of the world. Our hemisphere is in our interest, to have a peaceful Colombia.
But…
LEHRER: If you're just going to - you know, the use of the military, there's - some people are now suggesting that if you don't want to use the military to maintain the peace, to do the civil thing, is it time to consider a civil force of some kind that comes in after the military that builds nations or all of that? Is that on your radar screen?
BUSH: I don't think so. I think, I think what we need to do is convince people who live in the lands they live in to build the nations. Maybe I'm missing something here. I mean, we're going to have kind of a nation-building corps from America? Absolutely not.
Our military's meant to fight and win war. That's what it's meant to do. And when it gets over extended, morale drops.
And I'm not, I strongly believe we need to have a military presence in the Korea Peninsula, not only to keep the peace in peninsula, but to keep regional stability. And I strongly believe we need to keep a presence in NATO.
But I'm going to be judicious as to how to use the military. It needs to be in our vital interest, the mission needs to be clear, and the exit strategy obvious.
GORE: Well, I don't disagree with that. I certainly don't disagree that we ought to get our troops home from places like the Balkans as soon as we can, as soon as the mission is complete.
That's what we did in Haiti. There are, there are no more than a handful of American military personnel in Haiti now. And the Haitians have their problems, but we gave them a chance to restore democracy. And that's really about all we can do.
But if you have a situation like that right in our backyard with chaos about to break out and flotillas forming to come across the water and all kinds of violence there, right in one of our neighboring countries there, then I think that we did the right thing there.
And as for this idea of nation-building. The phrase sounds grandiose. And, you know, we can't be - we can't allow ourselves to get overextended. I certainly agree with that. And that's why I've supported building up our (military) capacity. I've devoted in the budget I've proposed, as I said last week, more than twice as much as the governor has proposed.
I think that it's in better shape now than he generally does. We've had some disagreements about that. He said that two divisions would have to report not ready for duty, and that's not what the Joint Chiefs say. But there's no doubt that we have to continue building up readiness and military strength, and we have to also be very cautious in the way we use our military.
 Load-Date: October 22, 2000

 

End of Document
