

Aberrations in the marketplace
The Associated Press
July 17, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 453 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Nothing to worry about, the analysts say, as they declare the stock market correction just about over. Just look at the big corporate earnings now being announced, they say.
Is it possible? Could the long-forecast stock market downturn have ended after just a month or so and less than a 10 percent drop in the Dow Jones industrial average? Could investors get off that easily?
Well, they could, perhaps, with luck and unforeseen good news, and a suspension of some of the old laws of how stocks should be valued.
But to believe there's nothing to worry about requires a suspension of belief in the power of economic facts, such as the monetary and economic distress of Asia, Russia, Africa and much of Latin America.
Closer to home, it means ignoring signs of increasing sloppiness and extravagance in the conduct of business affairs. It means ignoring the news.
How else do you explain the profusion of high-priced, frivolous, questionable-value products from kitchen aids to houses and cars now being hawked by promoters?
Or June's $ 30 billion net flow of cash into mutual funds, with about $ 24 billion going into stock funds, when most of those funds cannot even match the popular averages?
Or the growing numbers of near-instant multimillionaires as a result of nothing more than having been in at the start of a new stock issue for a company that has yet to make a profit, as in the case of the online bookseller Amazon.com?
Or that corporations are transferring billions of dollars of equity from investors to favored employees through morally and perhaps legally questionable stock options? And giving bonuses for failing to meet goals?
Or that one of the darlings of investors, Cendant Corp., headed by a financially savvy chairman, merged with a company that, it was later discovered, had nearly $ 300 million in bogus revenue?
And it wasn't just the executive staff that failed to spot the fictitious revenues of the former CUC International - the stock analysts who promoted the shares and the outside accounting firms were duped too.
Each by itself is remarkable, but when these items seem to merge into a pattern it causes some of the more cautious investors to see flashing red lights and talk about it being time for the market to rest.
The popular investing mood, however, seems to maximize what is good about the markets and minimize the negatives.
There is plenty of good news, of course, including a federal government flush with revenues, lots of jobs, low inflation and corporate coffers bulging with profits. The economy is strong.
And there's lots of starkly negative news, some that at other times might be viewed as shocking and interpreted as evidence that the market needs a rest to regain its bearings.
 Load-Date: July 17, 1998

 

End of Document
