

After 71 years, Panama Canal worker is witnessing the unfathomable
The Associated Press
December 30, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 600 words
Byline: By MICHELLE RAY ORTIZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PANAMA CITY, Panama
Body




When the Panamanian flag is raised for the first time - alone - outside Panama's Canal Commission offices at noon Friday, Cecil Haynes will witness a moment he never imagined possible when he first sought work at the canal - more than 70 years ago.
"I never thought when I began working for the canal that I would live to see the canal transferred to Panama," said Haynes, whose career began in 1928. "But I've come to see it."
The U.S. flag was lowered at the Canal Commission headquarters for the last time Thursday, marking the first time since 1914 when the Stars and Stripes has not flown over the waterway. Panama's flag was also symbolically lowered - in preparation for a triumphant re-raising ceremony Friday.
Haynes, 86, will be a special guest, a living voice of history, at the handover ceremonies.
From his start as an office boy sharpening pencils and filling ink wells to his present position as an inventory manager, Haynes stuck with the canal - largely to honor his father, a Barbados-born laborer who in 1904 joined thousands of others to carve out the mighty trench with picks and shovels.
"My father and all the others … instilled in me that I should respect their efforts and the labor they put into that canal - it was part of their lives and we lost a lot of people while building it - and in memory of those men that I should always try to stay with the canal and do what I could to keep it as one of the wonders of the world."
After 71 years and seven months of service - with never a sick day taken or a shift started late - Haynes is a wonder himself.
"As a matter of fact, I tell people it's my canal. I own it," he says, laughing.
With the world's attention on the canal in recent days, Haynes has been sought out to share his memories and thoughts on the engineering marvel.
"Some people say I'm famous. If I'm famous, good," he says, because that means he is passing on the memory of the people who built the canal but died without proper recognition.
They were proud, hardworking men - largely from the Caribbean islands - who labored with love, Haynes says. But in the U.S.-controlled canal zone, they were "aliens" whose meager salaries were paid in silver coins while American workers earned gold.
American engineers and money made the canal possible, but Haynes wants future generations to know the labor came from ordinary men like his father. He wants them to remember the nearly 22,000 people who died of disease and in landslides or ill-planned explosions.
"That's why there's so much sentiment to it - it was built with sweat, blood and tears," he says. "And whose blood and whatnot? The black man, because they were the ones that built the canal."
Haynes also gives respect to Americans who arrived to help protect the canal during World War II and protested the dual standard forced on non-American workers. It was their union-organizing efforts which equalized pay and helped end racist policies, he says.
The United States' presence gave Panama stability, he says. Though he is pleased to see the "big brother-little brother" relationship end, he worries that Panama is unsuited to defend the canal from possible attack because it has no army.
He believes, however, that Panama is ready to administer the canal properly.
"My desire is that we manage this in a very good form because this canal is for the service of the world. For a country as small as we are … I am waiting to see us do this successfully."
After decades of service to the United States, Haynes says he looks forward to working for Panama.
So don't dare ask about retirement, he says - "That's a dirty word."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY189
 Load-Date: December 31, 1999

 

End of Document
