

After scramble to get into Brazil, automakers ask, "Where are the customers?"
The Associated Press
October 24, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 710 words
Byline: By TONY SMITH, AP Business Writer
Dateline: SAO PAULO, Brazil
Body




After a multibillion-dollar scramble to set up factories here and tap a potentially huge market, the world's big automakers are asking: "So where are the customers?"
Brazilians, still recovering from the 1999 devaluation of the real, are buying only half the cars automakers expected. And neighboring Argentina, the closest and largest export market, is in an economic slump and is effectively trying to block Brazilian imports.
To take up the slack, manufacturers are selling more to Mexico and other Latin American markets.
General Motors, Ford and Volkswagen, in Brazil for decades, were joined in the 1970s by Fiat. They largely produced rough, tough, locally designed cars or copies of obsolete European and U.S. models.
Then, in 1994, Brazil launched the anti-inflationary Real Plan, which brought stability, easier credit and a consumer boom. It also started the race by other carmakers to get into South America's most populous nation. Big automakers - Daimler-Chrysler, Toyota, Nissan, Honda, BMW and others - made the most of generous government incentives and built a slew of new factories that have come on line in the past two years.
Investment between 1996 and 2001 rocketed to about $20 billion, roughly double that of the previous five-year period, according to the Brazilian auto manufacturers' association. Automakers were tempted by the prospect of selling 3 million cars a year, according to Lelio Ramos, commercial director at Fiat Brazil.
In 1997, Brazilians registered 3 million new cars, but sales slumped to 1.25 million following last year's currency crisis. With the economy recovering slowly, sales are expected to climb to 1.4 million this year and 1.5 million in 2001.
"Things are a bit bleak right now, but from 1995 onward, the trends did point to considerable growth for the Brazilian market," said Markus Stricker, auto industry analyst at A.T. Kearney in Sao Paulo. "And over the next 10 to 20 years, the potential for growth is there. South America is definitely a growth region."
Argentina has been Brazil's main auto export market, but relations between the neighboring countries have been strained since the real devaluation, which overnight made Brazilian products a third cheaper in Argentina, where the peso is pegged to the dollar. To protect its auto sector, Argentina unilaterally altered an auto trade deal in August. Brazilian carmakers cried foul and trade has slumped badly.
"There's no magic to be done," said Gianni Coda, president of Fiat Brazil. "Let's just say we're trying to reduce our losses as much as possible there."
Reacting quickly, Brazilian manufacturers have turned to Mexico, which is negotiating a broad free-trade agreement with the South American common market, known as Mercosur.
Brazil and Mexico already have a limited auto deal that automakers are proposing to expand. Terms would include a gradual annual reduction of tariffs on increasing quotas of vehicles, with an eye toward fully free trade by 2007.
"The Mexican agreement saved the day for the manufacturers here," said Stricker. "The manufacturers who are most flexible and react fastest will profit most."
Volkswagen has been the fastest off the mark. It has exported 60,000 cars - mainly Gols - to Mexico this year, and with an expected total of 110,000 exported cars, it is set to overtake Fiat as Brazil's top exporter.
Increased competition means Brazilian cars are better-made and more sophisticated. Just a decade ago, car-shopping Brazilians could choose from just 100 models on sale. Today there are some 500, most of them the same as those available in the United States and Europe.
At this month's Sao Paulo Auto Show, some of the world's latest prototypes - VW's AAC pickup and and Renault's Avantime sporty wagon - rubbed fenders with a new wave of high-tech, home-grown subcompacts such as Chevrolet's new Celta, Fiat's revamped Palio and VW's Gol with a fast but frugal 1.0-liter turbo engine.
"Brazil is the biggest, most sophisticated market in Latin America, even including Mexico," said Joseph H. Damour, sales and marketing chief at General Motors Corp. Brazil. "That's why we decided to make Brazil a regional center for production. With very competitive labor costs, it's a good export base."
End advance for release any time
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY352 of Oct. 24
 Load-Date: October 25, 2000

 

End of Document
