

After the peace, business of seeking aid and investment
The Associated Press
December 30, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 502 words
Byline: By JOHANNA TUCKMAN
Dateline: GUATEMALA CITY
Body




First came the peace. Now comes the business of seeking aid and investment to fund Guatemala's recovery.
Government officials and business leaders hope the end of Guatemala's 36-year civil war, sealed with a peace treaty Sunday, will attract billions of dollars in foreign aid and investment to this poor Central American nation.
"Peace is good business," said industrialist Carlos Vielman, who has joined in pitching the idea of a transformed Guatemala. "There is a new vision of the country at the international level and a new optimism at home."
Fresh income is key to fulfilling the accords and to financing development projects to surmount the destruction of years of war.
"The economy is not going to take off with peace," said financial analyst Pablo Rodas Martini.
Guatemala is poorly prepared to open its doors for business.
Bridges and power towers were blown up during the war, the nation's few paved roads are in disrepair and telephone service is unreliable. About 40 percent of the nation's 10.2 million people are illiterate. Many schools are poorly equipped, houses are primitive and health clinics, scarce.
President Alvaro Arzu, a member of Guatemala's economic elite, made swift peace an all-consuming objective.
"It was clear that we could not even begin to address the fundamental problems of Guatemala without ending the conflict" he said.
Rebel and government negotiators signed a series of accords over the last two years - many addressing the unequal land distribution and other economic issues at the root of the war.
But the promise of peace did not improve 1996's bottom line.
The economy grew 3 percent this year - down from 4.9 percent in 1995 - barely above the rate of population increase.
Even Arzu admits that peace is no cure-all.
"We are fully aware that signing of peace will not make manna fall from heaven the day after," he said.
The government estimates it will cost at least $ 2.3 billion over the next three years to fulfill the accords. They include expanding education and health services, overhauling agriculture and the economy, respecting the rights of the indigenous Maya majority, reforming the judicial system and demilitarizing the country.
The government hopes to raise about $ 1.5 billion from the international community.
Donor countries and financing agencies will meet to discuss the nation's needs in Brussels January 22.
But even with new funds expected to flow into Guatemala, it will take a long time to raise the income of the impoverished majority.
"The implementation of the accords will produce political and institutional changes before we see … an improved distribution of wealth," said rebel commander Pablo Monsanto.
Many economists believe that Guatemala's improved image will first benefit the important tourism industry.
Investors could also be lured by the sale of state-owned telecommunications and electricity companies, planned for 1997.
But the increase in violent crime - especially robberies and kidnappings for ransom - continues to discourage investors.
 Load-Date: December 30, 1996

 

End of Document
