

After Asian crisis, will poor countries listen to the IMF?
The Associated Press
February 9, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 601 words
Byline: By BART JONES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




The Asian economic crisis is raising questions among developing nations about whether the International Monetary Fund's medicine is worth swallowing.
Finance ministers and central bank presidents from some of the 24 poor countries meeting in Caracas are growing more reluctant to subscribe to the IMF's cure.
The IMF - the world's top multilateral lending agency along with its sister institution, the World Bank - still enjoys a high level of credibility among many poor countries.
But the seven-month Asian crisis has moved even those nations to become more vocal in demanding a greater voice in IMF decisions. The crisis has seen stock markets and currencies in Asia plummet, leading to scores of company bankruptcies, increased joblessness and, in the case of Indonesia, widespread fears of social unrest.
Meeting in Caracas for a three-day conference that ends Monday, representatives of the Group of 24 said the IMF's demands for government belt tightening and open markets may now be met with greater misgivings.
Colombia's finance minister, Antonio Jose Urdinola, said he felt vindicated by bucking IMF policy and imposing controls on how much money people are allowed to take out of the country. Capital flight has been a key feature of the Asian currency crisis.
"I think everybody is going to be taking (IMF calls for free movement of money) with a grain of salt," said John Ohiorhenuan, a Nigerian economist and United Nations Development Program official.
In Caracas, some officials complained of unfair burdens, saying the world's poor suffer the most from IMF-prescribed austerity while the rich reap the benefits of the fund's bailouts.
Some developing countries have begun to question IMF calls for open markets, fearing that greater openness could make their economies even more vulnerable to fluctuations in global capital flows.
For its part, the IMF says it's not free markets that are to blame for today's woes, but countries' failure to break up monopolies, curb corruption and correct market distortions such as overvalued exchange rates.
Still, the fund is coming under increasing pressure from officials and analysts who say it handled the Asian crisis badly.
The most radical proposal made in Caracas was to replace the 54-year-old IMF with a new international agency to monitor 24-hour global financial markets that now can move billions of dollars in a matter of minutes.
"You can see that people are worried that these issues now are much too important to leave entirely to the IMF alone," said Ohiorhenuan.
Colombia's Urdinola, however, noted the IMF "has an immense accumulated experience" that would be hard to replace.
"No one is capable of predicting events," he said.
The IMF may now be poised for some big adjustments. Ohiorhenuan believes the fund will listen more to organizations like the G-24, which in turn will implement IMF economic recipes with more caution.
Many countries "are not going to be totally free-market anymore," he said.
During a press conference Saturday in Caracas, IMF managing director Michel Camdessus hinted the fund may give developing nations a larger say in IMF matters.
The fund "has to permanently adapt to better reflect its membership, and if that leads to an increased representation of the developing world, so be it," he said.
However, changing IMF quotas may take years, said William Larralde, head of international relations at Venezuela's Central Bank.
Poor nations founded the G-24 in 1971 to promote development by lobbying for changes in the international monetary system. Its membership is divided equally among Asia, Africa and Latin America.
 

 
 Load-Date: February 9, 1998

 

End of Document
