

Airline abduction turning into a fiasco for the rebels
The Associated Press
May 8, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 562 words
Byline: JARED KOTLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




What began as a plea for respect is turning into a fiasco for Colombian rebels who hijacked an Avianca airliner last month and kidnapped everybody on board.
Despite releasing seven hostages on Friday, the National Liberation Army, or ELN, earned little good will. The group still holds 25 people captive, and has given no indication it will free them.
Nearly a month after the mass abduction, observers say the ELN has nothing to show for an action that has, if anything, undercut its claim to be taken seriously in peace talks to end a 35-year conflict.
"It's a huge political error which has damaged their image" in Colombia and internationally, said Francisco Santos, a newspaper editor and one of many prominent civilians who had been encouraging peace talks with the ELN.
"They've gained absolutely nothing," Santos said.
As if to illustrate the point, Colombian media coverage of Friday's hostage handoff hardly even paid attention to a rebel statement in which the ELN attempted to justify its actions.
"They want to be recognized and taken into account," said Ana Teresal Bernal, a Bogota-based peace activist. "Although their methods are deplorable, they are trying to let the government and President Andres Pastrana know that they, too, are a military force."
Formed in the 1960s as a blend of disgruntled peasants, leftist priests and radical students trained in Cuba, the ELN has a long and defiant tradition. Nearly wiped out in the 1970s, the group rebounded with the help of millions of dollars from kidnappings and blackmail of foreign oil companies.
In recent years, the ELN has weathered a fierce onslaught from rightist militias on its strongholds in the oil-rich northeast, and suffered the death by malaria in February 1998 of its longtime leader, Manuel Perez.
In comparison with Colombia's other major insurgent group - the surging Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC - the ELN appears weak. Pastrana has held peace talks with the 15,000-member FARC - twice meeting with its legendary leader, Manuel Marulanda, and clearing all troops from a large southern region the FARC now administers.
When the ELN asked for a demilitarized zone of its own in February, the president said no.
"He treated them too harshly and in a way instigated them to try to make their presence felt," said Daniel Garcia-Pena, a former government peace commissioner who has dealt extensively with the ELN.
The critique is shared by many here. But even the government critics agree that the ELN only worsened its lot when it hijacked the Fokker 50 turboprop and abducted its 41 passengers and crew.
"What it's done is to turn the very people who were defending the ELN against them," said Garcia Pena. "It's a total blunder."
The guerrillas' fall from grace has been swift. A year ago, peace with the ELN was a better bet than with the FARC.
Meeting last July in a German monastery, ELN delegates and Colombian civic leaders drafted plans to hold a sweeping national peace dialogue as a prelude to talks with the government. Now those plans are in shambles.
Pastrana has offered only to resume contacts with the ELN once it releases all of the hostages without conditions. Ironically, that may now be the rebels' only face-saving way out.
"With a generous act that shows a desire for peace," said peace activist Bernal, "they'll gain much more than if they dig in and refuse to cede."
 Load-Date: May 8, 1999

 

End of Document
