

Americans Who Became Heroes Take a Bow Before the Country
January 23, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 449 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton singled out a federal civil servant - a hero of the Oklahoma City bombing - to make the point that government workers are often unsung heroes.
Not only did Richard Dean, an employee of the Social Security office in Oklahoma City, save the lives of three women during the bombing, he also later worked through the recent government shutdown without pay to help Social Security recipients get their benefits, Clinton said.
The president cited Dean's service during his State of the Union address Tuesday night to make a broader point to Congress: It should "never, ever shut the federal government down again."
Dean, sitting in the balcony with Hillary Rodham Clinton and others that Clinton cited, accepted Congress' applause - and a handshake from Oklahoma City police Sgt. Jennifer Rodgers, who was one of the first police officers on the scene of the bombing that killed 169 people last spring.
Police Chief Sam Gonzalez has nominated Rodgers as one of 5,500 local heroes from across the nation who will run the Olympic torch from Los Angeles to Atlanta this summer.
Clinton called Rodgers a reminder of the response of the people in Oklahoma City who "lifted us all with their basic sense of values and community."
Others invited to share the spotlight with Mrs. Clinton and daughter Chelsea in the gallery of the House of Representatives:
-Rosana Monte, wife of Staff Sgt. Evelio Monte, who is serving in Sarajevo, Bosnia-Herzegovina, with U.S. peacekeeping forces, and their children, Annabell and Christian. The Montes will serve as representatives of the families of U.S. forces in the former Yugoslavia.
-Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, whom Clinton has chosen to run the Office of National Drug Control Policy because of his successes against narcotics traffickers attempting to bring cocaine into the country from Latin America.
-Educator Lucius Wright of Jackson, Miss., who founded organizations that encourage young people to combat drugs and set goals for themselves and to work with police on community projects.
-Elie Wiesel and his wife, Marion. He is the Holocaust survivor who has devoted his life to keeping alive the memory and lesson of the Holocaust.
-Mayors Norman Rice of Seattle and Richard M. Daley of Chicago, the top officers of the U.S. Conference of Mayors.
-Massachusetts factory owner Aaron Feuerstein, 70, who kept his 2,400 mill workers on the payroll after fire destroyed much of his textile factory two weeks before Christmas.
In 1982, President Reagan started the custom of inviting ordinary Americans who had become heroes. He honored Lenny Skutnik, a government worker who two weeks earlier had rescued from the icy Potomac a survivor of the Air Florida crash.
 Load-Date: January 24, 1996

 

End of Document
