

An APN Subscriber Package; Big dreams of the big leagues leave some kids in the lurch
The Associated Press
May 31, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 824 words
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




Inspired by names like Andres Galarraga, Sammy Sosa and Omar Vizquel, boys in Latin America often dream of making it to the majors, but the big money at stake for the best young baseball players has an ugly downside.
Local sports officials denounce an increasing tendency to recruit underage players and to crush their baseball dreams through exploitation and false promises.
In the worst cases, the officials say, scouts promise boys lucrative major league contracts then take them out of local play to hide them from other scouts.
Gerdvan Liendo, legal adviser to Criollitos de Venezuela, the country's little league, says the boys thus miss international competitions "that, after all, are the great sports shopping windows that could raise their value in the baseball market."
The kids often don't make it to the majors at any price, he said. Many leave school early to play baseball "and later there's no way to return them to the classroom."
The U.S. major leagues allow no one under age 16 to be signed, but teams and scouts often find ways to get around that ban. There are no statistics, but hundreds of underage boys are believed to be signed clandestinely in Latin America every year by scouts - with or without their teams' knowledge.
Last February, baseball Commissioner Bud Selig fined the Atlanta Braves $100,000 for signing 15-year-old Dominican shortstop Wilson Betemit. Selig banned the team from recruiting in the Dominican Republic for six months.
Selig imposed a similar punishment on the Los Angeles Dodgers for signing Dominican Adrian Beltre, a third-baseman, before he turned 16.
Raul Salmeron, president of the Venezuelan government's National Sports Institute, told The Associated Press that the two cases are "just the tip of the iceberg." It's a problem, he says, "that repeats itself with great frequency in Venezuela and other Latin American countries that are considered authentic sources of raw material for the big leagues."
Sandy Alderson, executive vice president of baseball operations in Selig's office says that "because birth records are maintained differently in different countries, these efforts have to be tailored specifically for the country involved."
"I think we have a very effective method in place in the Dominican Republic. We're making an effort to put a similar program in place in Venezuela," he said.
"I do believe the frequency of these underage signings is substantially less today than several years ago, when the Betemit and Beltre cases first arose."
Jose Maza, a scout for the Boston Red Sox, defended early recruiting, saying children and their parents can protect themselves by playing it smart and rejecting bad deals.
"The work of a scout is like courting a woman: you propose, but she's the one who decides," he said.
In baseball-crazy countries like the Dominican Republic, Venezuela, Mexico, Puerto Rico, Aruba, Curacao and Nicaragua, playing professionally is often a ticket out of poverty - and, for a lucky few, into a life of fame and glory.
But the people who run youth baseball programs in Latin America have a much different goal: to keep children out of trouble and in school.
In Venezuela, little league coaches review young players' school report cards, show up at their birthday parties with pinatas and organize raffles to pay for uniforms and gloves. Each child is guaranteed the right to play at least 40 percent of each game.
But Orlando Becerra, president of Venezuela's little league, said playing fields are becoming increasingly scarce. He said six training camps for the U.S. major leagues often sign with local governments for the rights to diamonds which "used to belong to the community."
He said the lack of fields is a major problem for the Criollitos, which has 80,000 Venezuelan children. In Caracas alone, he said, 6,000 youngsters must share 12 diamonds, with teams often waiting two or three weeks for an available field.
"Those of us who have worked to develop young people's baseball in Venezuela feel displaced," Becerra said.
He and other baseball volunteers interviewed made a plea for U.S. teams to donate balls, bats and other baseball equipment to Venezuela, which has provided the majors with nearly two dozen current players, including Galarraga, Wilson Alvarez, Bobby Abreu, Vizquel and Roger Cedeno.
Some of the boys who made good come home to help when they're needed.
After flooding and mudslides last December killed as many as 30,000 people in Venezuela, Vizquel of the Cleveland Indians helped raise about $600,000 for the relief effort, including a charity softball game in Caracas that brought in $200,000.
On a recent return to Venezeula for an exhibition game in Caracas, shortstop Ozzie Guillen of the Tampa Bay Devil Rays said it's time for parents to let their kids be kids.
"Childhood is the most beautiful time," he said, adding that we "should let our children choose what they want to do and stop pressuring them."
End adv for Sunday, June 4
 
 Graphic



 
APN SUNDAY ILLUSTRATIONS: Subscribers get 2 photos, NY379-380 of
 Load-Date: June 5, 2000

 

End of Document
