

An ocean away, the cry is for France
The Associated Press
July 12, 1998, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 576 words
Byline: By MARIA F. DURAND, Associated Press Writer
Body




French soccer fans flooded one of Manhattan's ritziest streets Sunday, dancing on cars amid chants of "Vive la France."
They crowded in front of televisions set up on Fifth Avenue as part of the city's Bastille Day celebration. But the tribute to food and wine did not stand a chance against France's 3-0 triumph over Brazil in the World Cup final.
"It seems like the French people are believing again," said Nicole Veyne, 67, a native of Avignon, France, who works for the United Nations and has lived in New York for 15 years.
An exuberant Frederique Browne thought the victory would improve race relations in France. Zinedine Zidane, who scored twice Sunday, is the son of an Algerian night watchman.
"It's going to change the opinion of French people toward North Africans," she said.
Actors performing a reenactment of the storming of the Bastille had to stop because of cheering fans.
But for Brazilian fans in New York, this was no time to samba. And the somber mood was the same in Los Angeles, Boston and Miami, which has one of the largest Brazilian expatriate communities in the United States.
Walter Scigliano, 52, from Sao Paolo, window shopping on New York's Fifth Avenue, said the hype in Brazil created unrealistic expectations.
"Brazil didn't have a great team," he said. "Nike and other advertisers were the ones that created the myth of the team."
Nike sponsored the Brazilian team with a $ 200 million contract and put players in their international advertising campaign.
Danielle Sirgant, 29, of Toulouse, France, and her boyfriend, Jose Garcia, a Brazil fan and native of Peru, watched the game on neutral ground in midtown.
"I'm very depressed," Garcia said. "It was the only team from South America."
In Florida, thousands of people - many of them Brazilian fans - spilled onto Ocean Drive in Miami Beach. They danced, waved flags and banged drums.
"It hurts," said Marcelo Araujo, a Brazilian visiting Miami. "But it's not that bad where we can't party anyway."
Police closed two blocks of Ocean Drive to traffic as fans poured out of bars and restaurants. But in a crowd estimated at 20,000, only one arrest was reported.
Crowds wearing Brazil's yellow and blue colors grew quiet when France scored.
"Win or lose, we still have four titles," said fan Paulo Santos, a New Yorker. "The soccer gods will come again."
The French in Boston took to Newbury Street to celebrate the landmark victory.
College students screamed from car sunroofs along the city's tony strip, joining an impromptu parade of hundreds.
The city's French Consulate was not prepared for the stunning victory, and its champagne supply was insufficient.
"For the first time ever, we've won we've won," Celine Kern of Strasbourg, France, screamed in between singing and whistle blowing. "It's fantastic! It's brilliant!"
The parties in Massachusetts stretched to Cape Cod, where about 200 Brazilians gathered at the Atrium Restaurant in West Yarmouth.
"It went very well," manager Jim McCourt said. "They seemed to enjoy it even though they lost."
In Los Angeles, some 400 Brazilian fans streamed into the street after the game, blocking traffic before police ordered them onto the sidewalks.
The fans had been watching on TVs from businesses along Venice Boulevard. Police reported no arrests, damages or injuries.
"They came out and some people had been drinking, and I guess they were getting a little boisterous and rowdy," Officer Mike Partain said. "It's kind of like our Super Bowl."
 Load-Date: July 13, 1998

 

End of Document
