

Analysts: Potential flash points in 1998 circle the globe
The Associated Press
January 2, 1998, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 679 words
Byline: Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Serbia's restive Kosovo province could be a flash point in 1998. Israel's northern border with Syria and Lebanon may heat up. There's a risk of another border conflict between Peru and Ecuador, and trouble in divided Cyprus.
Military analysts considering what the New Year may hold warn of potential hot spots throughout a troubled world.
Tensions in Rwanda and Burundi may blow up again, and the United States can expect more problems with Saddam Hussein. The analysts predict more difficulties for Israel with Hamas, further trouble for Egypt with Islamic extremists and no end to civil wars in Afghanistan and Sri Lanka.
"In terms of arms control, the priorities for 1998 must be to identify and control weapons of mass destruction, to continue nuclear disarmament, and prevent countries like Iran from becoming nuclear weapon powers," said Paul Beaver, spokesman for Jane's Information Group, which publishes Jane's Defense Weekly.
Kosovo, where more than 90 percent of the people are ethnic Albanians seeking independence, tops the list of potential hot spots.
In the last six months, many weapons stolen in Albania have reached nationalists in Kosovo, giving them arms capability equal to the Serbian police for the first time, Beaver said.
"I would expect there to be some problem in Kosovo in the next 12 months," he said.
Michael Clarke, executive director of the Center for Defense Studies, an independent think tank, called the Kosovo situation "very dangerous."
"Kosovo, if and when it blows up, will be a lot more dangerous than Bosnia ever was because it won't be so containable," he said.
Problems in Kosovo could lead to a wider conflict between Serbia and Albania.
Albania also was spotlighted by the National Defense Council Foundation as a country where law and order broke down in 1997. The Alexandria, Va.-based think tank listed Albania on its yearly index of world conflict areas.
Serbia faces problems on another front in 1998. Clarke and Beaver agreed that tensions between Orthodox Christian Serbs and Muslim Slavs in Bosnia could lead to renewed war.
President Clinton's decision to keep American troops in the NATO-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia won praise from the analysts.
Clarke said NATO needs a success in Bosnia because of Russia, which remains concerned about NATO's planned expansion into eastern Europe.
"The success of these forces will be critical to convincing the Russians that NATO has a useful role to perform which is not anti-Russian," he said.
Beaver said there is a real concern that Israeli policies could lead to conflict on its northern border, either with Lebanon or Syria.
The analysts said Iraq's latest face-off with Washington gave Saddam breathing space, possibly to redeploy his weapons of mass destruction and to increase the profile of Baghdad's protests against U.N. trade sanctions. It also forced the United States to spend millions of dollars to send two aircraft carriers and additional air power to the region.
"And he can do this whenever he wants," said Philip Gordon, a fellow at the International Institute for Strategic Studies. "If he wants to do it again tomorrow, the U.S. response will have to be the exact same one."
Greece and Turkey remain at odds over the ethnically divided island of Cyprus, where tensions have risen following the European Union's decision to leave Turkey off the list of potential members.
Gordon said the situation is compounded by the Greek Cypriot government's expected receipt of Russian surface-to-air missiles next year and Turkey's pledge to destroy them if they are deployed.
In Southeast Asia, the financial crisis could lead to instability if the economic readjustments prove to be symptoms of weakening government structures, Clarke said.
"The Chinese will have more problems with their northwest frontier," Beaver said, "and we continue to watch North Korea with great trepidation."
In South America, the major concerns are in Venezuela, Colombia, Peru and Ecuador "which have undefined borders," Beaver said. "This is leading to increased instability and the risk of border conflict."
 Load-Date: January 2, 1998

 

End of Document
