

Argentina's one-day market drop, yet another bump in the road in Latin American markets
The Associated Press
July 15, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 668 words
Byline: By KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




It's becoming a scene that is all too familiar in Latin America: the dazed look of frantic floor traders, the flash of televised updates on tumbling stock prices, the rush of politicians to assure skittish investors that their slumping market is no cause for long-term concern.
Argentina's leading Merval Index tumbled 8.7 percent Monday on worries about Argentina's election-year recession and comments by one presidential candidate that appeared to suggest the need for a debt-repayment moratorium. Concerns over protests by low-paid teachers and disgruntled truck drivers also gave investors more reason to be edgy about the final year of Carlos Menem's presidency.
The Argentine stock market recouped about half of its losses Tuesday and has since steadied. But the volatility at the week's outset underscored the fact that many Latin American markets are still wobbling six months after the Brazilian devaluation.
Election-year politics in some nations, widening budget gaps, and even sagging tax revenues are all part of the scene in one fashion or another.
"In the whole region there are a lot of unknowns," said Omar Borla, chief Latin American economist at Robert Fleming in New York. "But to some extent they are blown out of proportion, such as in the case of Argentina and who takes office in December."
Voters in Argentina later this year will elect a successor to Menem, who has governed this country for 10 years through two terms. Until election time, international investors are certain to remain on guard, analysts said.
Elsewhere, Latin American economies face their own internal pressures.
-The more apprehensive investors appear to be holding off in Venezuela until President Hugo Chavez forces through his first initiative: amending the country's constitution to give him more presidential powers.
The Venezuelan economy has contracted nearly 9 percent in the first half of 1999, unemployment has swelled to over 20 percent and hundreds of companies have gone bankrupt.
Slipping prices in oil, Venezuela's chief source of revenue, initiated the hardships last year. Brazil's devaluation deepened the economic woes and uncertainty over Chavez further compounded them.
-Ecuador is locked in its worst economic crisis in 50 years, with the economy expected to shrink by 5 percent this year and inflation to top 50 percent. Hoping to prune a bloated budget deficit, President Jamil Mahuad is battling powerful unions to enact tough reforms.
A Mahuad decree that hiked gasoline prices by 13 percent met with stiff resistance by taxi, bus and truck drivers who launched a strike paralyzing movement in Andean country for days. Mahuad eventually backed off, but unions haven't. They say their strike will end when the cancellation of the decree goes into effect. Mahuad is also jostling with Congress, where his plans to privatize state companies and raise taxes are making little headway.
-In June, Colombia devalued its currency, the second time since President Andres Pastrana took office in August. Critics have decried his budget-slashing plan and say it caused a gigantic interest-rate hike. An escalating war with leftist guerrillas hasn't helped.
-Brazil appears to be slightly rebounding from its January devaluation. Fears of a double-digit inflationary spiral are easing. But there are problems: Brazil still needs to pass a balanced-budget, reign in spending, and launch privatization programs.
-The Mexican economy last year managed to weather the economic tumult in Asia and Brazil, despite a drop in world oil prices, which makes up about a third of government revenues. This year the outlook has improved with oil prices rising, inflation in check and slow but steady growth of about 3 percent.
But Mexico still hasn't fully recovered from the 1994 peso crisis, which sent interest rates and inflation soaring. The banking system remains weak, about 40 percent of the country lives in poverty and there are fears the country could face more turmoil around the July 2000 presidential election.
 Load-Date: July 16, 1999

 

End of Document
