

Argentines finish off tough year with age-old rite: the tango
December 31, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 510 words
Byline: By BILL CORMIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




On the streets of Buenos Aires, hundreds of revelers shrugged off the economic slump of 2000 and got ready to usher in the new year Argentine-style - by dancing the tango.
Police blocked off downtown Corrientes Avenue, one of Argentina's busier boulevards, as "My Beloved Buenos Aires" soared above the twinkling Christmas lights on a cool summer's night to the strains of the accordion-like bandoneon.
"What worries? I am just here to dance! Tango is one of the great wonders of Argentina," Alberto Pajesz said as he tangoed with a partner on the asphalt in an age-old Argentine end-of-the-year rite.
Around him, scores of couples danced the seductive steps of the tango into the wee hours Sunday, some of the men in black fedoras and white cravats, the women in black miniskirts and high heels. Others danced the night away in T-shirts, sandals or shorts.
This year, they have reason to kick out the old with abandon: joblessness hovers around 15 percent, a long-stalled economy is expected to grow little in 2001 and there seems no end to one of the worst Latin American downturns since Mexico's Tequila Crisis of 1994.
But when they dance the tangos of Carlos Gardel and Alberto Piazzolla on the streets of Buenos Aires, the gray mood lifts - even if for a few hours. Gone are worries of tax hikes, austerity measures and government budget cuts meant to satisfy foreign lenders.
Musicians take to a makeshift stage and suddenly, the Buenos Aires where everyone complains that "Todo esta mal" - "everything is bad" - is suddenly transformed. Rich and poor, young and old, all join in for the party known as the "Milonga."
One father danced out a tango with two little girls in his arms, their feet flying above the ground. An elderly lady with a kerchief tied over her white hair looked on, nodding to the beat.
A century ago, when penniless immigrants from Europe landed here, they danced away a life of hard knocks to the tango. A century later, their descendants are still dancing tango through bad times and good - as much a part of Argentina as the beef and the gaucho cowboys of the Pampas.
"The tango is something we carry in our blood. It's a way of life and a longing for the nostalgia of the old Buenos Aires," said Gabriel Arango, 28.
There is even a National Day of Tango - Dec. 11, the birthday of Carlos Gardel, its most famous singer.
Monica Santillan, who came with her husband, said Argentines need the tango as an escape valve after struggling to make ends meet in "a very hard year."
"I feel like Argentines have accumulated so much pain for what the country is going through. Dancing helps dispel the disillusionment and despair," she said. "For a while, everyone is happy, until of course tomorrow comes."
Alberto Bernet, a 75-year-old retiree, said the tango has been one constant in a life marked by political upheaval and military dictatorships, devaluations and even war. He shrugged off 2000's economic slump as nothing new.
"We've lived through far worse," he said, watching the dancers tango by. Then he shouted out: "A Happy New Year to you!"
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BAI101-103
 Load-Date: January 1, 2001

 

End of Document
