

As troop pullout takes affect in Colombia, residents await the rebels
The Associated Press
November 7, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 547 words
Byline: By CESAR GARCIA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN VICENTE DEL CAGUAN, Colombia
Body




A government troop withdrawal from a large section of southern Colombia went into effect Saturday ahead of talks aimed at ending a 30-year rebel insurgency.
The bold decision by President Andres Pastrana to remove 2,000 soldiers and police from the 16,200-square-mile region of foothills and savannah came amid doubts about the rebel commitment to peace and criticism by some that Pastrana has already conceded too much.
"We've carried out the president's orders," army chief Gen. Jorge Mora said in a radio interview Saturday, confirming the evacuation. The troops were redeployed just outside the pullout zone.
The area is a stronghold of the 15,000-member Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, which has been fighting since the 1960s and now holds sway over a dispirited military.
With the troops gone, the rebels - who already rule the countryside - are expected to move freely in towns across the demilitarized zone.
A delegation led by presidential peace envoy Victor G. Ricardo arrived in San Vicente on Saturday. Ceremonies to inaugurate the peace talks - scheduled to begin in December - included tree-planting, poetry readings and the release of 500 white doves.
The process is moving forward despite growing doubts about the guerrillas' willingness to make peace.
"Pastrana is putting all his eggs in one basket, and it's a very fragile basket," former government peace negotiator Jesus Antonio Bejarano said this week.
Recent rebel attacks are deepening concern over the FARC's intentions. A week ago, the FARC overran a remote state capital in southeastern Colombia, raining homemade missiles on an outmanned police barracks and killing at least 50 people.
But in an apparent goodwill gesture Saturday, rebels released the mayor of Milan, a town 78 miles southwest of San Vicente, who had been held since April to protest elections.
At a Friday news conference, Ricardo said the pullout would not disrupt daily life. The national ranchers' association said, however, that rebels have already stolen 8,000 head of cattle in the area.
Courts were closed and shifted to nearby towns. Banks, schools, hospitals and transportation would function normally, Ricardo said. Civilians are to be deputized as temporary police, but they will not carry arms.
Ricardo said peace talks would begin once both sides agree security is adequate. A commission of Colombian and international observers will help monitor each side's actions.
Pastrana says he'll attend the negotiations, but it's unclear whether seated across the table will be Manuel Marulanda, the FARC commander, who says he fears for his safety.
The agenda for talks will likely focus on rebel demands to reform Colombia's corrupt political system and to correct its skewed distribution of wealth. The guerrillas also want to swap the nearly 300 police and soldiers they've captured in battle for 452 guerrillas held in government jails.
Also at issue will be Colombia's booming cocaine trade, which Pastrana says can only be stemmed if there is peace.
The rebels' top revenue source are taxes on peasant coca production and payoffs for providing security to drug traffickers. In a recent interview, Marulanda said the FARC would help the government convince farmers to switch to legal crops over a three to five-year period.
 
 Load-Date: November 7, 1998

 

End of Document
