

As the Americans pull out of Panama, two Chinas are moving in
September 26, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 718 words
Byline: By NIKO PRICE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DAVIS, Panama
Body




Under a heliport and the floodlights of a baseball field, a new street cuts through what until two years ago was the U.S. Army's Fort Davis.
It is called Teng-hui Boulevard, and the workers building factories along it speak two languages: Spanish and Chinese.
With the Cold War over, Latin American nations can no longer count on U.S. aid for choosing capitalism over communism. Now a new set of powers is throwing money at the developing world and asking it to pick sides.
The United States is pulling out of Panama - and two Chinas are moving in.
It will be up to Panama to choose which China - the one ruled from Beijing or the one from Taiwan - it welcomes.
Panama's reliance on the United States and its 94-year presence has been so strong that the country uses U.S. dollars as its own currency.
But one of the main symbols of that presence, the U.S. Army's Southern Command, lowered its flag at Quarry Heights on Thursday for a transfer to Miami Friday.
U.S. soldiers slowly are trickling out of Panama under a treaty that turns over the Panama Canal in 1999, and taking their dollars with them.
Enter the Asians.
Both China and Taiwan claim to be the legitimate rulers of both the Chinese mainland and the island of Taiwan. Beijing forbids countries to have relations with both. Both are wooing Panama.
China offers its economic might; it has millions of dollars invested in Panama, and is the third-largest user of the Panama Canal. Taiwan is offering government loans and private investments.
So far, Panama has sided with Taiwan. It is one of only 30 countries in the world - 13 of them in Central America and the Caribbean - that grants diplomatic recognition to the island.
In exchange for the support, Taiwan has rewarded Panama richly.
"The Panamanian people see us as intimate friends," said Lii Jong-han, a businessman who imports Panamanian maritime products to Taiwan. "That's the biggest reason we come here."
Taiwan loaned $ 120 million to Panama last year - $ 50 million to build hospitals and the rest for "discretional use" of the Panamanian government - the newspaper La Prensa reported in August, citing unidentified government sources.
Taiwanese companies invested $ 300 million in Panama last year, La Prensa said. That is roughly the same amount that the U.S. bases injected into the Panamanian economy each year before they began to close down in preparation for a U.S. military withdrawal in 1999.
"We maintain relations with all the Central American nations," Taiwanese government spokesman David Lee said in an interview. "We have suggested to our business people that Central America could be a good option for their global market strategy."
Along Teng-hui Boulevard in the "Davis Export Processing Zone," eight Taiwanese companies have followed their government's advice.
At the inauguration of the zone this month, Panamanian girls wore Chinese gowns and waved Taiwanese flags. Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui presided.
"Relations between the Republic of China and Panama have entered a totally new horizon," Lee said.
But while Taiwan's friendship has brought money, it has also brought trouble.
When Panama convened an international conference to announce its plans for the canal, one of the invitations went to Lee, who accepted and contributed $ 800,000 to the conference in gratitude.
China was furious, and said it would boycott the conference. Under Chinese pressure, the United Nations withdrew its support, and Western leaders pulled out as well, so as not to anger Beijing.
The Sept. 7-10 conference, billed as a major international event, was by most accounts a failure.
Other than the Taiwanese and Panamanian presidents, only two heads of state showed up - those of Nicaragua and Honduras, both of which have diplomatic relations with Taiwan.
Some Panamanians are uncomfortable with their government's Asian ally. Many fear that the Taiwanese won't pay as well as the Americans, who paid U.S. minimum wages.
"Taiwan is building maquiladoras," said Danilo Lopez, an unemployed electrician in Davis. "Those are factories that enslave our people with miserable salaries."
But others say adjusting to the Chinese arrivals will simply take time.
"We've lived all our lives with the Americans," said Francisco Gonzalez, a Panamanian from nearby Colon. "This is a change we have to pass through."
 Load-Date: September 26, 1997

 

End of Document
