

As usual, Castro steals the show at Panama's Ibero-American Summit
November 18, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 646 words
Byline: By JOHN RICE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PANAMA CITY, Panama
Body




The king of Spain and leaders from throughout Latin America were here, but the spotlight was on one man at the Ibero-American summit: Fidel Castro, who stole the show by alleging that his enemies had sent armed assassins to murder him.
The Cuban president said Friday that the assassination plot was led by a Cuban exile named Luis Posada Carriles, who has admitted to Cuban hotel bombings in the past. Hours later, police detained Posada Carriles and three other Cuban exiles at a Panama hotel for questioning.
The four had apparently arrived in the country Wednesday, and no guns were found in their possession, chief of police Carlos Bares told The Associated Press. He said they could be held for up to 24 hours and were still in custody late Friday.
Castro's allegations came during his first visit to Panama since he took power in 1959. Within hours of his arrival, he had announced the alleged murder plot, stalled an effort to condemn the Basque separatist group ETA and made the opening speech at the 10th Ibero-American Summit, which brings together leaders from 19 Latin American countries, along with Spain and Portugal. The summit ends Saturday.
Shortly after he arrived, Castro held a press conference and charged that the U.S.-based Cuban-American National Foundation had sent arms, explosives and assassins into Panama, "intent on my physical elimination." He said the latest plot was led by Carriles, a Cuban exile whom he described as "a cowardly man totally without scruples."
The Cuban-American National Foundation said it has no links to Posada. Ninoska Perez, a spokeswoman for the Miami-based foundation, said the group has no one in Panama and Castro "should get a new story."
"There is no reason why we should have to respond to unfounded accusations," she said. "He is the terrorist. They are accusations without proof. Where are the people he's talking about?"
Posada has been accused of organizing the 1976 bombing of a Cuban jetliner that killed 73 people. He was twice acquitted of that, but he spent nine years in a Venezuelan prison before escaping in 1985.
In July 1998, the New York Times quoted Posada as admitting he organized bombings of hotels in Cuba.
Panamanian Interior Minister Winston Spadafora said an advance security team for Castro had been in Panama for several months and that the Cuban leader had been "offered all security and all cooperation."
At his press conference, Castro joked that there have been "about 600" attempts on his life.
In December, a Puerto Rico federal jury acquitted five exiles - including a director of the Cuban-American National Foundation - of plotting to kill the 74-year-old leader.
The Coast Guard had stopped three of the men aboard a yacht near Puerto Rico in 1997. Sniper rifles, ammunition and night-vision goggles were found aboard, and one of the men told officers they were headed to the Ibero-American Summit in Venezuela to kill Castro.
Defense attorneys argued that the men merely planned to help Cuban officials defect and they needed the weapons for defense.
The Cuban leader's very presence in Panama on Friday was symbolic, coming less than a year after the United States handed over control of the Panama Canal to the Panamanian government after 97 years. Upon his arrival, Castro praised Panama for achieving "full sovereignty" with the December 1999 handover.
Castro, who hosted last year's Ibero-American Summit, opened this year's session by speaking about the meeting's main topic: the problems children face in Latin America. The U.N. Children's Fund estimates that about 500,000 children under the age of 5 die each year in the region.
Also Friday, Cuba blocked a resolution condemning terrorism by the Basque separatist organization ETA. Cuban Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque said Cuba considers the issue an internal matter for Spain and favors a more general condemnation of terrorism.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo PAN105
 Load-Date: November 19, 2000

 

End of Document
