

Astronauts begin bouncing radar beam off the planet surface
The Associated Press
February 12, 2000, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 416 words
Byline: By MARCIA DUNN, AP Aerospace Writer
Dateline: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla.
Body




Space shuttle Endeavour's astronauts fired up their radar and began bouncing its beams off Earth's surface Saturday to create the ultimate map of the planet's peaks and valleys.
Mapping got under way as Endeavour orbited high above the Maldives and then Sri Lanka. If all goes well, more than 70 percent of the Earth's terrain will be mapped, as far north as Alaska and as far south as the tip of South America.
"So far, everything has gone about as perfect as we could have imagined," said Endeavour's pilot, Dominic Gorie.
NASA half expected problems in deploying the 197-foot radar antenna mast from a can in the shuttle cargo bay. But Friday evening's extension of the mast went smoothly - so smoothly that the astronauts were able to start mapping a little early.
The mast - a series of 87 stacked cubes made of steel, titanium and plastic - is the longest rigid structure ever flown in space. Attached to the far end, like the cross on a T, is a 26-foot radar antenna.
For astronaut Janice Voss, who's in charge of the payload, the outstretched mast was a welcome sight. Because Endeavour's six astronauts are split into two teams working day and night, she was asleep when the mast went out.
"As much as I would have loved to have been here when this came out, it was also pretty fun to go zooming up out of my bunk up here and peer out the commander's window and see the mast shining in the sunlight … glittering all the way down like a really, really tall Christmas tree with icicles on it," Voss said.
Here's how the radar mapping works:
A 39-foot antenna in the cargo bay beams radar signals at the Earth. The signals bouncing back are received by both that antenna and the antenna 197 feet away at the tip of the mast.
By combining the two sets of images, scientists hope to compile 3-D snapshots of Earth's terrain with unprecedented accuracy and clarity.
As Endeavour orbits 145 miles high, the radar beam sweeps across the Earth in a swath 1040 miles wide.
All the radar information is stored on tape aboard Endeavour. The crew's main job, in fact, is to keep putting new tapes into the recorders and keep the machines running.
However, snippets of data were sent down for analysis, and NASA and its partner, the National Imagery and Mapping Agency, said they appeared to be of excellent quality.
After nine days of mapping, the astronauts hope to fill nearly 300 data tapes, or the equivalent of 13,500 compact discs. Scientists expect it will take one to two years to analyze all the information.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XHTN101, HTN104, AP Graphic NASA EARTH MAP
 Load-Date: February 13, 2000

 

End of Document
