

At 500, Brazil remains the country of the future
The Associated Press
April 21, 2000, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 671 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




When much of the Americas celebrated the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus' 1492 discovery voyage, Brazil, the hemisphere's only Portuguese-speaking nation, paid no attention.
Now, Brazil is holding its own 500-year fest honoring the arrival of navigator Pedro Alvares Cabral on April 22, 1500. But nationalist pride is mixed with frustration at the country's unfulfilled potential, and for many of Brazil's have-nots - including Indians and descendants of slaves - the anniversary will be a day of protest.
Only about 330,000 Indians survive in Brazil, down from as many as 5 million in 1500.
"It's 500 years that our land has been taken away, our people killed and turned into alcoholics and prostitutes," said Leonardo Macuxi, a Macuxi Indian from the northern Amazon.
He is among more than 3,000 Indians from 186 tribes gathered to protest what they call "the invasion" near Porto Seguro, the seaside town 500 miles northeast of Rio where Cabral landed. They want to forge a united front to pressure the government to protect their lands, now under siege by farmers, loggers and prospectors.
Landless farm workers also have seized the occasion, pledging to occupy 500 rural properties across the country this week to call attention to the need for land reform. In a country larger than the 48 continental United States, 90 percent of the land is in the hands of 20 percent of the people, while the poorest 40 percent own just 1 percent.
Black rights groups see no reason to celebrate, either. They say the myth of racial democracy disguises discrimination, and that Afro-Brazilians on the average earn and study less than whites and rarely hold top positions in business and government.
"This is not a celebration, it's a symbolic moment for the country," said Kebengele Munanga of the Center for African Studies at the University of Sao Paulo. "If anyone should commemorate it's the Portuguese. They discovered, colonized and plundered" Brazil.
In Rio on Wednesday, police battled students and labor groups who vandalized a "500 Years Clock" near Copacabana beach. Set up in 28 cities by the Globo TV network, the clocks have spent the last three years counting down the days to the 500th anniversary.
The protests seemed to surprise the government.
"The 500 years celebration should not be an invitation to a wake," presidential press spokesman Georges Lamaziere said.
On Saturday, President Fernando Henrique Cardoso is to inaugurate a Discovery Museum and tourist center at Porto Seguro and welcome a fleet of wooden ships that retraced Cabral's route. Pope John Paul II is expected to telephone with congratulations.
But in the wake of the recent unrest, Cardoso shortened his planned visit and called for tighter security.
The frustration springs from a sense that Brazil could have been much better off. Its potential was evident from the first.
"The land itself is … so generous that, wishing to exploit it, everything will it yield," Pero Vaz de Caminha, the scribe of the first expedition, wrote nine days after arrival.
Today, with the world's eighth-largest economy, Brazil still takes prides in its size and promise. It has the world's biggest rain forest, the biggest river, the biggest hydroelectric dam, the biggest soccer stadium, the most iron, the most coffee, the best carnival.
Yet the distribution of its riches is among the most unequal anywhere. With 165 million people, nearly half of officially employed Brazilians earn $170 a month or less. More than a fifth of greater Rio's 10 million people live in slums.
A popular joke has it that "Brazil is the land of the future - and always will be."
Still, it's hard to suppress a national pride that comes naturally to Brazilians.
"The moment is traumatic, but it will pass," said best-selling author Paulo Coelho. "I'm very proud to be Brazilian. It taught me to see the world without the barrier between the magic and the real, and that helped me to grow as a writer and a human being. And because it's always in crisis, it prepared me for the battles of life."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos sent April 20
 Load-Date: April 22, 2000

 

End of Document
