

At the movies: 'Starship Troopers'
November 5, 1997, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 789 words
Byline: By TED ANTHONY, AP National Writer
Body



AT THE MOVIES logo
Random observations from the kill-the-giant-insect sci-fi flick "Starship Troopers":
-It's rare to see such a well-orchestrated blend of hair gel, well-chiseled chins and mass human dismemberment.
-Lines like, "To fight the bug, we must understand the bug," are pretty funny - if they're intentionally so, which is unclear.
-Giant vermin are cool.
Beyond that, there's little to recommend "Starship Troopers," Paul Verhoeven's attempt to create a giant, malevolent Bazooka Joe cartoon in outer space. The characters are cardboard and juvenile, the plot twists indecipherable and the epic battle against gargantuan extraterrestrial insects morally questionable at best.
Here's the strange thing, though: Despite this battalion of weaknesses, you'll probably walk away entertained from this "90210" meets "Star Wars" meets "Sands of Iwo Jima." It's marginally goodhearted, despite its violence, and it sports enough camp to carry it through to the end.
The story goes something like this: In the future, giant bugs from another star system - based on a planet called Klendathu - are launching salvos at Earth, so Earth decides to fight back by invading the bug world. The foot soldiers are a model-agency-smooth bunch of high-school students from Buenos Aires, Argentina, who sign up for federal service, which allows them to become "citizens."
Among them are the improbably named Johnny Rico (Casper Van Dien), the impossibly fresh-faced Carmen Ibanez (Denise Richards) and come-hither tough-girl Dizzy Flores (Dina Meyer), who has long lusted after Rico. Ibanez chooses pilot school, Rico and Dizzy the infantry. In quick succession, we see them join, train, graduate and go off to battle.
Their quarry is a race of giant bugs who live in the Arachnid Quarantine Zone, though only a few of them seem spider-like. They impale chests with their claws and bite off heads with their jaws, allowing Verhoeven ("Total Recall," "Basic Instinct") to perpetrate all sorts of unspeakable gore upon the human body.
Because of all this carnage, "Starship Troopers" is one of the most violent American movies since "Platoon." And even though the bloodshed has a cartoonish, 1950s sci-fi quality about it, it's shocking and excessive nonetheless. Verhoeven could have reduced the gore factor by half and still gotten his point across.
Throw in the occasional erotic encounter and a plethora of get-up-and-go military charges led by Rico's former teacher and military mentor, Rasczak (Michael Ironside), and you have a disjointed piece of pulp fiction.
What's strange about "Starship Troopers" is how little empathy the characters generate. They might as well have been computer-generated: Attractive, buff and outwardly moralistic, they nonetheless come across as mere pawns, fighting a war for questionable reasons and doing little to better the human race in the process.
Some cameos are intriguing. Rue McLanahan ("Golden Girls") is unsettling as a scarred, blind biology teacher. Clancy Brown ("The Shawshank Redemption") makes a good tough-guy drill sergeant. But Neil Patrick Harris ("Doogie Howser, MD"), who can be a decent actor, is merely annoying as a friend of Rico and Ibanez whose psychic powers land him in the futuristic equivalent of the CIA. His best line: "We're going back to (Planet) P - to CAPTURE that brain!"
Where "Starship Troopers" shines, if anywhere, is in its occasional "federal newsreel" segments, modeled on the "duck-and-cover" segments produced in the Cold War 1950s. They feature a Nazi-like bird of prey logo, warn against "The Foe" and depict kids "doing their part" by squashing household roaches en masse.
"Starship Troopers" is deficient in many ways. It's too long. It glorifies war. Its music, makeup and hairstyles suggest a future horrifyingly replete with mid-1980s aesthetics. Much of its terminology and space architecture is poached from "Star Trek." Ammunition seems unlimited until the plot requires an ammo shortage. Coffins shot into space resemble suburban tract houses.
Yet this big-screen, sci-fi Capture the Flag is cloyingly engrossing in an embarrassing manner. If you want to see it, fine. But if you like it, best not to tell anyone.
"Starship Troopers," directed by Verhoeven, is produced by John Davison and Alan Marshall from an Ed Neumeier screenplay. It is rated R.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: November 5, 1997

 

End of Document
