

At U.N. summit, good news among the bad: There are fewer of us than thought
June 25, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 520 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




On land, sea and in the air, people are making a mess of the planet. But one bright spot flickers amid the gloom at this week's Earth Summit: There are fewer people around doing it than once feared.
In fact, revised U.N. population estimates say there may be a half-billion fewer people worldwide by 2050 than previously projected. Population control, in short, is making progress.
"Fertility rates are going down all over the world," said Nafis Sadik, executive director of the U.N. Population Fund.
She was interviewed Tuesday on the second day of the weeklong U.N. conference, convened to review progress on development and environmental protection since the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro.
On closer look, the bright spot does dim in one way: Population growth in parts of sub-Saharan Africa is being held down by high mortality rates from AIDS.
But declines elsewhere are attributed in large part to the fact that more couples want to limit family size, and more have access to the means to do it.
"Many countries had restrictions on family planning," Sadik said. "Most of those kinds of restraints have been removed, mostly since 1985."
As a result, according to U.S. Census Bureau figures, the total fertility rate - the average number of children born to a woman in her lifetime - has declined 26 percent in India since 1985, 30 percent in Brazil and 35 percent in Bangladesh.
Catching up with the news from Asia and elsewhere, demographers have scaled back previous estimates and now say the annual addition to world population peaked at 87 million in 1990 and had dropped to 80 million by 1996.
The 1996 global population is now estimated at 5.77 billion - 41 million fewer than previously thought. And Sadik said the latest low-end projections would have it stabilizing at 7.5 billion in the middle of the next century, down from a best-case scenario of 8 billion projected in the mid-1990s.
A million fewer here and there can mean a lot for the global environment, noted Robert Engelman of Population Action International.
His Washington-based advocacy group estimates, for example, that as pressure on water resources slows, the number of people short of fresh water in the next century could end up as low as 2 billion, rather than the 3.5 billion it once projected.
"The international community, broadly defined, deserves much of the credit," he said. "There's been more will and unanimity and money for family planning."
Some of that money has come from Washington, via the U.S. Agency for International Development's programs for financing contraceptives and family-planning education in developing countries worldwide.
Under President Clinton, such spending leaped from $ 325 million in 1992 to $ 582 million by 1995. But the Republican-dominated Congress has since slashed it by about one-third.
Sadik, a Pakistani physician, said she fears "donor fatigue" could set in and set back the progress on population.
"I keep urging the international donor community and developing countries to keep up this momentum," she said. "These are programs with important effects on the environment and all sectors of development."
 Load-Date: June 25, 1997

 

End of Document
