

Battle of the Buds goes to highest Swiss court after U.S. defeat
December 11, 1997, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 407 words
Dateline: BERN, Switzerland
Body




The world's biggest brewer said Thursday it is taking the 86-year-old international battle over the Budweiser and Bud trade names to Switzerland's top court.
Anheuser-Busch Cos., based in St. Louis, said it would appeal a Swiss trade tribunal's decision to ban U.S.-brewed "Bud" beer from the country.
The tribunal's chief, Juerg Naegeli, said Wednesday that beer should not be sold as "Bud" in Switzerland because of a risk of confusion with the name "Budweiser," claimed by the state-owned Czech brewer Budejovicky Budvar.
It was the first time a court has barred use of the "Bud" name even though the dispute has been aired in up to 20 European nations, according to Anheuser-Busch lawyer Georg Krneta.
The two brewers have been claiming rights to the Budweiser name since 1911.
Last month, the Czech government refused to allow Anheuser-Busch to use the "Bud" trademark in disputed markets in exchange for an agreement to buy Czech hops for the next 10 years.
Budvar opposed the deal on the basis that giving any ground to the U.S. brewer over the trademark would start an irreversible process.
The Czech brewery exports to 37 countries, mainly in Europe. Anheuser-Busch has sales in over 70 countries, holding a market-leading global share of over 8 percent.
The German immigrants who founded Anheuser-Busch in 1876 used the Budweiser name for their beer because it was well-known in their homeland.
Budweis is the German name for the original brewery's hometown, Ceske Budejovice, now in the Czech Republic. The Czechs say "Budweiser" describes the beer and the area, in the same way Burgundy and Champagne describe wines and wine-making regions in France.
Krneta accused the trade tribunal of making "major mistakes" and said he was convinced Anheuser-Busch would do better before the Federal Tribunal, Switzerland's supreme court.
The trade tribunal said its verdict was based on Anheuser-Busch's 1983 removal of the name "Budweiser" from the Swiss register of brand names, following a Czech protest.
At the time, the American brewer pledged in writing that it would stop importing beer carrying the name "Budweiser" to Switzerland from the United States, but no mention was made of "Bud."
Extending the ban to "Bud" now is "impossible," said Krneta.
Anheuser-Busch still holds unchallenged rights to the Budweiser name in most of the world, including North and South America and virtually all of Asia. Some European countries have ruled in its favor.
 Load-Date: December 11, 1997

 

End of Document
