

Battle of Boutros-Ghali: U.S. vs. Africa in the New World Order
November 20, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 564 words
Byline: AP Photo NY190, By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Boutros Boutros-Ghali's refusal to bow out after the United States vetoed his re-election as U.N. secretary-general comes as no surprise to those who know him.
On Tuesday, the United States cast the lone vote against Boutros-Ghali in the 15-member Security Council. But the 74-year-old Egyptian diplomat said he would remain a candidate, as U.N. rules permit.
African diplomats met Wednesday on whether to continue supporting him. Council President Nugroho Wisnumurti said he would schedule another vote after the Africans decide.
Boutros-Ghali has a reputation as a fighter, a proud, hard-headed aristocrat willing to take unpopular stands when he believes principles are at stake.
In 1977, he accepted the post of acting foreign minister of Egypt after the incumbent resigned and the deputy minister refused the job to protest the late President Anwar Sadat's plan to visit Jerusalem.
At a time when militant Arab states denounced Sadat as a traitor, Boutros-Ghali stuck by his commitment to peace and played a key role in the negotiations that produced the Camp David accords in 1978 and the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty a year later.
But Boutros-Ghali was no pushover. The Israelis considered him a hawk and an obstructionist. Egyptian diplomats and commentators believed he prevented the mercurial Sadat from making concessions too quickly.
Boutros-Ghali prefers to work in the background, negotiating behind closed doors rather than in the media. He rarely attends after-hours social functions, preferring to retire to his U.N.-owned apartment on Manhattan's East Side to read reports and briefing papers.
Those who have known Boutros-Ghali for years believe his character was shaped by his origins. His family was one of the wealthiest in Egypt.
But the family was Coptic Christian in a largely Muslim society, and his wife, Lea, is of Jewish origins. As a result, he was never appointed foreign minister of Egypt, where key positions are reserved for Muslims.
In an earlier time when Christians had more power, his grandfather, Boutros Ghali Pasha, served as prime minister of Egypt from 1908 until he was assassinated in 1910 for supporting extended European control of the Suez Canal. The assassin was a Muslim and the killing soured relations between Christians and Muslims for years.
Boutros-Ghali graduated from Cairo University in 1946. After earning his Ph.D. at the University of Paris, he returned to Cairo and taught international law until joining the government in 1977.
He was elected secretary-general in December 1990 after the council bowed to African demands that an African head the organization. Previous U.N. chiefs had come from Europe, Asia and Latin America.
Since then, the independent-minded Boutros-Ghali often has butted heads with the United States and other Western countries, which dominate the United Nations.
Boutros-Ghali felt that the United Nations ignored crises in Africa in favor of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, which he once branded a "rich man's war."
His plans for expanding the United Nations in the post-Cold War era clashed with Washington's interest in pursuing its own policy goals.
He initially resisted U.S. demands for U.N. reforms, such as a "zero-growth" budget and staff reductions, although he ultimately accepted them. That led to U.S. allegations that new leadership was needed to carry the United Nations into the 21st century.
 Load-Date: November 20, 1996

 

End of Document
