

Big Movers in the Stock Market
August 13, 1996, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 866 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Some of the stocks that are moving substantially or trading heavily today on the New York Stock Exchange, Nasdaq Stock Market, and American Stock Exchange.
 
 NYSE
Wal-Mart, up at 26
Home Depot, down at 54
J.C. Penney, down 1/2 at 52
Dillard Department Stores, down at 33 1/2
Wal-Mart and Home Depot reported stronger earnings in the May-July quarter, lifted by double-digit percentage sales gains. Profits at J.C. Penney dropped nearly 20 percent on a surge in bad customer debt. Dillard Department Stores, meanwhile reported a 2.3 percent profit gain.
Deere & Co., up 2 at 38
The farm equipment maker reported its third-quarter earnings rose 13 percent as high grain prices boosted worldwide demand for agricultural equipment. Net income for the three months ended June 30 rose to $ 204.4 million, or 79 cents a share, exceeding many forecasts. Sales rose 9 percent to $ 2.91 billion from $ 2.67 billion a year earlier.
 
 Buenos Aires Embotelladora, down at 4 1/2
The Argentine franchise bottler for PepsiCo won't be able to pay any interest or principal on its bank debt through Oct. 15. Embotelladora also said it failed to pay about $ 34 million of debt that was due Monday. The company said it will explore ways to restructure its debt. Last week, it reported a loss of $ 251.5 million for the quarter ended June 30, and announced plans to close plants and lay off more than 1,500 workers.
 
 Blount International class A, up 2 at 33
Blount International class B, up 1 1/2 at 32
A group associated with the Bass family of Texas reported a 5.3 percent investment stake in Blount in an SEC filing. The group, which includes Trinity Capital Management, also said it plans to seek permission from the Federal Trade Commission to purchase up to 15 percent percent of Blount, a maker of industrial, construction, and recreational machinery.
 
 NASDAQ
Chantal Pharmaceutical, down 13/16 at 2 11/16
Coopers & Lybrand resigned as independent accountant for Chantal and won't complete an audit of the wrinkle cream maker's fourth-quarter statements. Chantal said Monday the accounting firm, as a matter of policy, did not state its reason for resigning. In March, Chantal was warned it could be delisted for not filing its financial statements with regulators on time.
 
 Genzyme, up 3 1/8 to 26
Genzyme warrants, up 5 to 17
The FDA approved the biotech company's Seprafilm, a chemical membrane to be used by surgeons to prevent internal scar tissue from forming after abdominal or pelvic surgery. The approval is broader than expected. An FDA advisory committee recommended in March the product be used only in operations to remove the large intestines or benign uterine tumors.
 
 Argyle Television, up 5 1/8 at 28 1/8
The TV station owner is considering a possible sale of the company. In a statement late Monday, Argyle cited consolidation in the industry for its need to become part of a larger group, saying it would be difficult to grow quickly enough through the traditional acquisition process.
 
 Cambridge SoundWorks, up 1 at 4 1/8
The audio-speaker maker reported a smaller-than-expected loss in its fourth quarter. Cambridge lost $ 13,515, or less than a penny a share, in the period ended June 30. The company, which sells products through its own stores and through a mail-order catalog, credited its turnaround to an expansion plan that saw 23 stores open, up from 17 a year earlier.
 
 Dynamex, up at 8 from initial offering at 8
The stock started trading after the delivery-service company sold 2.6 million shares for $ 20.8 million, or $ 8 each, in a smaller-than-expected initial public offering. Dynamex, with operations in the United States and Canada, originally planned to sell 3.1 million shares for between $ 10 to $ 12 each. It did not disclose the reason for the smaller issuance.
 
 Escalade, up 2 at 8
The maker of sporting goods and office products plans to buy back 1 million shares of its stock. In the Dutch auction tender, Escalade stockholders can offer to sell their shares at a specific price between $ 6 and $ 10 a share. The offer expires Sept. 13.
 
 Maxim Integrated Products, down 2 at 28
The computer-chip maker said high customer inventory of its products could hurt revenue in the coming months. Maxim gave the warning late Monday as it reported earnings of $ 34.7 million, or 49 cents a share, for its fourth-quarter ended June 30. The results met Wall Street's expectations.
 
 AMEX
Gencor Industries, up 4 1/2 at 15
The heavy equipment maker agreed to buy Ingersoll-Rand's process equipment division for about $ 72 million. The unit, which makes equipment for oil production, sugar production and minerals extraction, has annual revenues of about $ 100 million and operating profits of about $ 10 million.
 
 Cycomm, up 7/16 at 4 5/16
Lucent Technologies has begun shipping pre-production units of Cycomm's Slice cellular phone security devices. The devices, which incorporate Lucent voice-encryption technology, are attachments for Motorola's MicroTAC series of handheld cellular telephones and prevent monitoring by third parties.
 
 Comforce, down 1 at 16
The stock sank for a second day after Barron's Magazine column suggested the staffing and consulting firm's stock is trading at too high a price.
 Load-Date: August 13, 1996

 

End of Document
