

Big Movers in the Stock Market
August 21, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 481 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Some of the stocks that moved substantially or traded heavily Wednesday on the New York Stock Exchange, Nasdaq Stock Market, and American Stock Exchange.
 
 NYSE
PepsiCo, up at 30
The stock rebounded slightly from worries about Pepsi's South American operations. Today, the front page of the New York Times business section featured an article on Pepsi's problems in Venezuela, where the company's leading bottler switched over to Coca-Cola last week.
 
 Philip Morris, down 3 at 87
RJR Nabisco, down 1 at 25 1/8
B.A.T Industries (Amex), down at 13 1/2
The Clinton Administration announced that a decision on whether to allow the FDA to regulate tobacco as a drug could come by Friday. The news came as a widely watched tobacco liability trial in Indianapolis was drawing to a close and three more states filed suits demanding the tobacco industry pay billions of dollars for the cost of treating smoking-related illnesses.
Newbridge Networks, up 9 at 59
The Canadian company's fiscal first-quarter earnings jumped 64 percent, beating most analyst estimates. Sales rose 46 percent to $ 208.23 million for the three months ended July 28, the maker of communications networking said after trading Tuesday.
 
 Jenny Craig, down 5 at 11
The diet-center operator reported a drop in participation in its programs, blaming new weight-loss drugs. Public interest in obesity drugs such as Redux - approved in April by the FDA - have cut program sales and the number of active clients this summer, the company said late Tuesday as it reported better-than-expected earnings for the quarter ended June 30.
 
 NASDAQ
Oracle, down 1 at 37
Goldman Sachs removed the database maker from its U.S. priority list, citing a sharp increase in stock price and some weakness in European operations, the Dow Jones News Service reported. Oracle remains on Goldman's recommended list.
 
 CompuServe, down 1 at 11
H&R Block (NYSE), down 1/2 at 27
CompuServe posted a fiscal first-quarter loss and warned investors it also expects a loss in the second quarter. CompuServe, based in Columbus, Ohio, said late Tuesday its online subscriber base slipped from the fourth quarter to the first quarter. Kansas City-based H&R Block, which still owns an 80 percent stake in CompuServe, cited the online service's performance in reporting its own loss for the period.
 
 Premier Laser Systems, up 1/8 at 8 1/8
The FDA approved the company's teeth-whitening laser. Premier, based in Irvine, Calif., has an agreement with Stardent International Labs of Salt Lake City to market the Multi-Operatory Dentalaser argon laser.
 
 Merchants New York Bancorp, up 1 at 29 1/2
The bank raised its quarterly dividend 16.7 percent and plans to buy back up to 5 percent of its common stock. Merchants said a new dividend of 35 cents, up from 30 cents, will be paid Sept. 15 to shareholders of record on Sept. 12. Merchants has about 5 million common shares outstanding.
 Load-Date: August 21, 1996

 

End of Document
