

Big Movers in the Stock Market
The Associated Press
December 17, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 738 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Some of the stocks that moved substantially or traded heavily Tuesday on the New York Stock Exchange, Nasdaq Stock Market, and American Stock Exchange.
 
 NYSE
Frontier Corp. fell 5 to 20 .
The the nation's fifth largest long-distance phone company, based in Rochester, N.Y., said it expects its fourth-quarter earnings to be below expectations, owing to lower revenues and higher costs as it diversifies into new telephone services such as prepaid calling cards. The company has also lost customers to aggressive marketing by competitors.
Micron Technology Inc. fell 2 to 32 1/8.  The Boise, Idaho-based maker of memory chips for computers reported a 95 percent plunge in quarterly profits to 10 cents per share, from $ 1.51 per share last year, due largely to collapsing prices. The performance was above analyst expectations. Merrill Lynch & Co. lowered its fiscal 1997 estimate for the memory chip maker to $ 1.50 a share from $ 1.95. But Robertson Stephens & Co. raised its estimate to $ 1.00 a share from 95 cents.
 
 Telecom Brasil's American depositary receipts rose 3 23-64 to 75 .
Brazil stocks closed higher in heavy trading after an excellent sale price was gained for a 35 percent stake in the Rio Grande do Sul state telecommunications company, CRT.
 
 Toy Biz Inc. rose 1 to 18 .
The Andrews Group, owner of the Marvel Entertainment Group, the comic book publisher, raised its offer to buy the New York-based toy maker to $ 22.50 from $ 19. Toy Biz produces toys based on Marvel Comics characters.
 
 British Sky Broadcasting rose 3 to 51 1/8.
The British satellite television company, controlled by Rupert Murdoch, rose after traders perceived it would benefit from new regulations regarding development of the digital television market in Britain.
 
 Home Depot Inc. rose 1 to 49 .
Prudential Securities Inc. upgraded the stock to buy from hold, a source at the firm said.
 
 Archer-Daniels-Midland Co. rose 1 to 22.
The company liquidated its stake in Rayonier Inc., according to a filing made with the Securities and Exchange Commission. ADM said it sold about 2.2 million common shares between Nov. 27 and Dec. 6 at prices ranging from $ 38 to $ 39.25 a share. Prior to the sale ADM held a 7.22 percent stake in the Stamford, Conn., forest products company.
 
 NASDAQ
Intel Corp. rose 2 1/2 to 130.
The computer chip company and the Energy Department's Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, N.M., said they had developed a computer that does more than 1 trillion calculations in a second, as many as the entire U.S. population could do on hand calculators for 125 years.
 
 Microsoft Corp. rose 3 to 79 .
The software company said it signed a 3-year deal to supply MCI Communications Corp. with Windows operating systems, Internet browsers and other software.
 
 Global Village Communication fell 1 13-16 to 3 15-16.
The Sunnyvale, Calif. maker of software for Macintosh computers announced a restructuring plan late Monday including work force cuts. The aim is to return to profitability. The company will take a charge against earnings of $ 25 million to $ 30 million to finance the move, which will result in an operating loss for the fiscal third quarter.
 
 Storm Technology Inc. fell 4 1/8 to 5 1/8.
The company said it will exceed analyst expectations for losses in the fourth quarter and fiscal year 1996. Although revenues will grow at nearly 180 percent in the quarter, that's down from 300 percent that was projected. Storm, based in Sunnyvale, Calif., makes products to store and organize photos on personal computers.
 
 Ascend Communications Inc. rose 4 to 66.
Dillon Read & Co. initiated coverage of the maker of wide-area computer network access products with a buy rating, according to a contact at the firm.
 
 PriceCostco Inc. rose 1 to 24 .
The Issaquah, Wash. holding company for cash-and-carry membership warehouses posted a first-quarter net income of 34 cents a share before special charges, up from 25 cents a year ago. The results were 4 cents above analysts' average expectations.
 
 AMEX
TWA fell to 7 .
The airline named three directors as interim managers to succeed chief executive Jeffrey Erickson, who resigned. A two-month search for a new leader has thus far been frustrated. Outside director Gerald Gitner was appointed acting CEO and another outside director, David M. Kennedy, was named acting chief operating officer. William Compton, a TWA pilot, was appointed acting executive vice president of operations.
 Load-Date: December 17, 1996

 

End of Document
