

Blair, the loyal U.S. ally, makes a stunning hawk
The Associated Press
June 17, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 629 words
Byline: By MAUREEN JOHNSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Labor Party Prime Minister Tony Blair looks good in domestic policies borrowed from his Conservative predecessor, Margaret Thatcher. But when he draped himself in her warrior mantle during the Kosovo crisis, the effect was simply stunning.
Blair arrives at the annual G-8 summit in Germany this week as Bill Clinton's most loyal foreign ally. It is a familiar British role when the leaders of industrialized nations gather, whether the U.S. president's problem is Monica Lewinsky or mayhem in Kosovo.
This time, however, the Blair took a risk: Had the United States backed down before Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic caved, the British leader would have been left looking isolated and foolish.
The prime minister had pledged that NATO would do "whatever it takes" to return ethnic Albanians to Kosovo, a Serb province; he challenged American policy by refusing to rule out an invasion by ground troops; and he declared that Yugoslavia would be bombed until President Slobodan Milosevic conceded.
"Blair was very astute," said Brendan O'Leary, a political science professor at the London School of Economics.
"He basically stiffened Clinton's back by taking a position that was very difficult for Clinton to repudiate publicly, although it was clear there were briefings being given in Washington to imply that Blair was a hawk and out of touch, and Clinton was the realist," O'Leary said.
Thatcher took a similar approach in the 1991-92 Gulf War crisis, standing alongside President Bush and promising Iraqi President Saddam Hussein a fight from the allies - with overwhelmingly American air power.
Well before 11 weeks of bombing forced Milosevic to begin withdrawing of his forces and agree to NATO peacekeepers, Blair's Kosovo stance boosted his popularity ratings to new records.
A Gallup poll during the campaign showed a huge 67 percent of voters said they were satisfied with Blair's performance. That outstripped Thatcher's best rating - 52 percent in 1982 when Britain defeated Argentina in a war over the Falkland Islands.
As when he won a May 1997 landslide election victory on centrist policies that owed a lot to 18 years of Conservative rule, Blair seemed slightly surprised that things had turned out so well.
"I never set out to be the hawk in this. … I just believe when you start the thing you have to finish it, and the cause is just," Blair said after the Serbs signed on to a peace deal.
He praised Clinton and the American public for "knowing that though this evil of ethnic cleansing was happening far from their shores, they had a duty to help defeat it."
U.S. religious broadcaster Pat Robertson accused Blair of conscripting "the power and wealth of the United States" behind a "new moral foreign policy."
But, at least on the ground, charges of hypocrisy don't stick this time: Britain will be providing the single largest number of peacekeepers - 19,000 - when the entire force of nearly 50,000 is in place.
Yet again, the timing seemed just right for the 46-year-old British leader.
At home, Blair's Conservative opponents remain divided, unpopular and frustrated as the prime minister builds on the recovering economy Labor inherited. Unemployment is now at an 18-year low.
Even taking over the Conservatives' refusal to adopt the European single currency, the euro, looks like a smart Labor move. The euro has had a rocky start since its launch in January.
With another G-8 leader, German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, Blair unblushingly outlined before the summit the pair's recommended political route for Europe's social democrats. It contained stiff language on curbing state spending and lowering taxes.
State spending, the joint document said, "has more or less reached the limits of acceptability."
Like the hawkishness, there was a familiar Tory ring.
 Load-Date: June 17, 1999

 

End of Document
