

Brazil reawakens worries about the global economy
The Associated Press
January 17, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 663 words
Byline: By JOYCE M. ROSENBERG, AP Business Writer
Body




Wall Street is forced once again to deal with the realities of a troubled global economy. Apple Computer continues to flourish. And inflation was a nonevent in 1998.
A look at what happened in business this past week:
 
 THE LATEST CHAPTER IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMIC SAGA
A currency is devalued, central bank officials resign and stock markets around the world tumble. It's a familiar story as the global financial crisis continues, and the latest comes from Brazil.
Latin's America's largest economy has been in trouble for some time, but its problems worsened this past week as Brazil, struggling as it awaits most of the money from a $ 41 billion International Monetary Fund bailout package, had to devalue its currency. Stock prices plunged around the world, including the United States, as two top Brazilian monetary officials quit. One official rescinded his resignation Friday, a day after announcing he intended to step down.
Many U.S. investors worried that the problems would spread to other Latin American countries, and that U.S. firms with Latin American interests would see their profits, already lowered by Asia's crisis, take a further hit.
But by the end of the week, nerves calmed as Brazil adopted a strategy of allowing its currency, the real, to find its own level on foreign exchange markets. The move meant Brazil would not sap its reserves of dollars trying to support the real. It was seen as inviting foreign investment as now-cheaper Brazilian assets are suddenly more attractive to overseas buyers, and Brazil's major stock index soared 33.3 percent on Friday.
The angst meant the Dow Jones industrial average, had a loss of 302.77 for the week, although Wall Street did rebound sharply on Friday. Just a week earlier, the Dow reached a new closing high, 9,643.32.
 
 EARNINGS UPS AND DOWNS
The first big fourth-quarter earnings reports assuaged some Wall Street fears, and exacerbated some others.
Chipmaker Intel said its profits rose 18 percent, well ahead of the forecasts, as demand increased for its pricier microprocessors used in powerful business computers. But it did warn that revenue may fall from the fourth-quarter's high levels.
Apple Computer also beat Wall Street expectations as it continued to enjoy very strong sales from its new iMAC computer. It was the fifth straight profitable quarter for Apple, which had lost money for two years.
But Kodak, hurt by lower film prices and a drop in copier sales, reported earnings that were weaker-than-expected. The company's stock dropped more than 10 percent on the news.
 
 THE LAST WORD ON INFLATION
Consumer prices rose just 0.1 percent in December, capping the lowest two-year stretch of inflation since the 1960s. The Labor Department said consumer prices rose 1.6 percent over the year, and stable inflation meant consumers felt free enough to spend buy plenty of cars and other retail goods. Retail sales were up 5.1 percent during 1998.
 
 TICKER
The government finished its antitrust case against Microsoft, revealing court-sealed documents in which computer maker Gateway contends that Microsoft charged it more for Windows operating software than it charged other PC companies.
Lucent Technologies Inc. is buying Ascend Communications Inc. for $ 18.7 billion in a deal that reflects the growing influence of the Internet on telecommunications. Lucent is the world's No. 1 phone equipment maker, while Ascend is a major supplier of computer networking gear.
Goldman Sachs & Co.'s Jon Corzine stepped down as co-chief executive but will remain a co-chairman. He gave up his management role after the privately held investment bank reported a poor year-end performance.
British American Tobacco, which makes Lucky Strike, Kent and other cigarettes, is buying rival Rothmans International BV for $ 7.48 billion acquisition of rival Rothmans International. The combined company would have 16 percent of the global cigarette market, second to Philip Morris' 17 percent.
 
 End adv for weekend editions Jan. 16-17
 
 Load-Date: January 17, 1999

 

End of Document
