

Brazil's Catholic church to apologize for errors committed over the past 500 years
The Associated Press
April 25, 2000, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 388 words
Byline: By STAN LEHMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PORTO SEGURO, Brazil
Body




Five hundred years after the first Mass was celebrated in Brazil, the Roman Catholic Church will formally apologize for the "sins and errors" committed by its clergy against Indians and blacks.
The apology will be read Thursday at a special mass near the spot where Friar Henrique de Coimbra celebrated the first Mass on April 26, 1500, four days after the Portuguese expedition made landfall.
Church officials expect some 50,000 people, including more than 300 bishops, to attend the open-air mass in Coroa Vermelha, just outside this seaside resort 500 miles northeast of Rio de Janeiro.
"The mass will be a moment of penitence," said the Most Rev. Raymundo Damasceno Assis, secretary general of the National Brazilian Bishops' Conference. "We will ask God to forgive the sins and errors committed by the Roman Catholic clergy against the human rights and dignity of the Indians, the first inhabitants of this land, and the blacks who were brought here as slaves."
The Church will "admit that some of the acts committed by its clergy over the past 500 years did not correspond to what is written in the Gospel," he said.
The mass will be held near the same spot where last Saturday police used clubs, tear gas and rubber bullets to break up a crowd of about 2,000 Indians, who had gathered from all over Brazil to protest what they called Portugal's "invasion" of this country.
Thursday's service also will kick off the Conference's 38th General Assembly, which ends May 3.
During the week-long meeting, Brazilian bishops will discuss internal issues as well as "some of the major challenges facing this country," Assis said.
Among those challenges is economic globalization, he said. The bishops will discuss its negative impact on society, widening the gap between the haves and the have-nots.
Another topic for discussion is land distribution. Much of the clergy sides openly with the Landless Rural Workers Movement, which encourages the invasion of idle farm land to pressure the government to accelerate agrarian reform.
"The government's agrarian reform program is not moving fast enough to meet the needs of some 4 million landless farmers who need land to live and work on," Assis said.
---
On the Net: National Brazilian Bishops' Conference at http://www.cnbb.org.br/ 
The Landless Rural Workers Movement at http://www.mstbrazil.org/ 
 Load-Date: April 26, 2000

 

End of Document
