

Brazil's Carnival starts up, Rio still promising the best
February 8, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 356 words
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




Millions of people took to Brazil's streets Saturday for the start of Carnival, shedding their inhibitions - and often their clothes - to dance to the hypnotic beat of samba drums.
The four-day pre-Lenten bash promises non-stop dancing, drinking, partying and colorful and seemingly endless parades.
Though sex is always a big part of Carnival, the government this year is trying to crack down: Warnings have been issued against having sex with children and officials plan to hand out over 2.5 million condoms across the country.
The party sweeps the entire country, from the plains in the south to the steamy Amazon and the concrete jungle of industrial Sao Paulo. But as usual, Rio will host the most lavish, unrestrained and colorful festivities.
What has been dubbed as the "world's greatest party" got off to an early start Friday when Rio Mayor Luis Paulo Conde handed over the keys of the city to Alex de Oliveira Silva, this year's King Momo - Carnival's symbolic leader.
The highlight of Rio's Carnival is the samba parade on Sunday and Monday. Sixteen groups - known here as samba schools - feature original music, luxurious floats, 300-piece percussion bands and a mix of flashy costumes with near-total nudity.
Each group is made up of close to 5,000 musicians and dancers, mostly from the city's shantytowns, who march and dance before the judges along the "Sambadrome," a half-mile parade ground.
Each "samba school" is judged for the richness of its costumes, the originality of their themes, rhythm and dancing.
The winner will be announced Wednesday, and the champion earns bragging rights and the privilege of parading again the following Saturday.
But Carnival is more than just the big "samba school" extravaganza.
Music bands and informal groups of revelers move through the streets of residential areas, drinking and dancing and singing for hours.
The wealthy also party in private clubs that throw wild and glittering balls in which feathers or strings of beads pass as costumes.
Brazil comes to a near-standstill during the the four-day holiday. Banks, stores and government offices close, only to open at noon on Ash Wednesday.
 Load-Date: February 8, 1997

 

End of Document
