

Brazil puts the brakes on dash to economic chaos
The Associated Press
September 24, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 606 words
Byline: By STAN LEHMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAO PAULO, Brazil
Body




Brazil's pledge to adopt fiscal austerity measures in an effort to break its headlong dash to economic chaos has received high marks overseas, but greeted with skepticism at home.
On Wednesday, President Fernando Henrique Cardoso said his government planned to tackle the economy's main Achilles heel - a budget deficit equal to 7.3 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) - and hinted that taxes would be increased.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin praised Cardoso's speech, saying it "highlighted fiscal adjustment and reform as Brazil's national economic priority."
Enrique Iglesias, president of the Interamerican Development Bank said the speech was "an excellent message to the international financial community".
But many businessmen fear that any increase in taxes would only make matters worse.
"The country already has the highest tax burden in the world, responding for 32 percent of GDP," said Antonio Ermirio de Moraes, owner of the Votorantim Group, Brazil's largest business conglomerate. "A tax increase would only help the underground economy grow."
Synesio Batista da Costa, president of the Brazilian Toy Manufacturers' Association is convinced taxes will be increased, leading to a sharp drop in consumer sales, "especially during the Christmas season."
The president's remarks, widely seen not only as an effort to reassure international investors, but also to prepare Brazilians for belt-tightening economic measures, also heightened fears of recession and unemployment.
"In the first quarter of 1999, there will either be recession or economic stagnation," said economist Paulo Nogueira Batista of the Getulio Vargas Foundation, Brazil's leading business administration school. "And as a result, unemployment will grow."
Brazil's unemployment rate is around 8 percent, its highest level since Cardoso took office four years ago.
And next year, "the joblessness rate could hit double digit figures - the worst in all of Brazil's history," said Sergio Mendonca of DIEESE, a labor union-funded socioeconomic research center.
Like other emerging markets, Brazil has been buffeted by the turmoil in world financial markets with a loss of investor confidence and a strong outflow of capital. The country's foreign reserves have fallen below $ 50 billion from the $ 70 billion posted at the end of July.
To prevent a collapse of Brazil's currency, the real, and stem capital flight, the government on Sept. 10 raised interest rates from 29.75 percent to 49.75 percent.
Although slowed down, the outflow continues.
On Wednesday $ 531 million left the country, bringing the total for the month to $ 16.79 billion.
Protecting the real with high interest rates is a double-edged sword, economists point out.
On one hand they curtail capital flight, but on the other they aggravate the deficit. According to press reports, government securities account for nearly 85 percent of Brazil's public debt of $ 296 billion.
Although the austerity measures announced by Cardoso are potentially unpopular, they are not expected to hurt his bid for a second term in office.
A survey published earlier this week showed that Cardoso would easily win the Oct. 4 elections with 47 percent of the vote. His nearest challenger, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, of the leftist Workers Party, has 24 percent of the vote.
Cardoso's remarks coupled with signals that the United States may lower its interest rates buoyed the Sao Paulo Stock Market, Latin America's largest, which closed almost 11 percent on Wednesday.
On Thursday the stock market's Bovespa index closed down 6 percent, mainly because of profit taking and the poor performance of the Dow Jones Index.
 Load-Date: September 25, 1998

 

End of Document
