

Brazil's civil servants take economic reforms on the chin
The Associated Press
November 7, 1998, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 522 words
Byline: By MICHAEL ASTOR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRASILIA, Brazil
Body




To generations of Brazilians, a government job was synonymous with the good life.
For millions, it was a ticket out of poverty and into middle-class security. Civil servants often retired in their 40s at full salary, and some even returned later to their old jobs, collecting both pension and salary.
The constitution, meanwhile, made it almost impossible for the government to fire employees with five years or more experience.
Not anymore.
Last week, the government unveiled a package of austerity measures aimed at fixing Brazil's battered economy and reducing a $ 65 billion budget deficit. The plan calls for higher taxes and decreased spending.
Brazil has pledged to enact the reforms as part of an agreement with the International Monetary Fund to receive a loan package reportedly worth more than $ 30 billion. Brazil needs the money to restore investor confidence and shore up its currency, the real, against attacks by speculators.
If Congress approves the package, many workers would receive smaller salaries, pay more in social security tax, and lose their guarantees against being fired.
"Civil servants are being used as scapegoats," said Ivanilde Castro, 45, an Environment Ministry accountant who also collects a pension from the Justice Ministry.
Under the government's austerity plan, Castro stands to lose some $ 1,090 a month. She should still take home $ 4,200 - a whopping salary in a country where the monthly minimum wage is $ 100. Castro's double paycheck contributes to a growing deficit in the government pension system that this will total $ 28.9 billion in this year alone.
But few of Brazil's 5.5 million civil servants qualify as true fat cats.
Manoela Costa, a secretary with the Justice Ministry, earns about $ 550 a month. A 14.5 percent raise in July was her first in four years, and inflation during that period effectively halved her salary.
"It's hard enough working for so little money," Costa said. "Now I don't even know if I'll have this job next year."
The austerity plan will force the government to lay off workers when its payroll exceeds 60 percent of the federal budget. Today, 56 percent of the budget goes to pay workers.
But many states are spending far above the limit. The poor northeastern state of Alagoas, for example, spends more than 90 percent of its budget on its payroll. Under the new plan, the federal government could force states into compliance.
Antonio Borges de Sousa, coordinator of the Brasilia Civil Servants Union, said the government is blaming civil servants for its deficit despite spending billions of dollars to bolster Brazil's troubled banking sector.
Sousa, who also works at the Agriculture Ministry, said government workers are already struggling to make ends meet.
"Right now, civil servants are buying their own supplies to work with," he said. "The only reason nobody is quitting is that there are no jobs elsewhere."
But Jose Marcio Camargo, an economist at the Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro, agreed that the new austerity rules are probably necessary for the country's long-term economic health.
"There's a lot of excess that can still be cut," Camargo said.
 Load-Date: November 7, 1998

 

End of Document
