

Brazilians go to the polls in nationwide municipal elections
The Associated Press
October 1, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 500 words
Byline: By STAN LEHMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAO PAULO, Brazil
Body




A left-wing politician took a commanding lead Sunday in the mayoral election in Brazil's biggest city, according to exit polls.
Marta Suplicy of the Workers Party won 40 percent of the vote in the Sao Paulo race, the respected polling firm Ibope said. Her two nearest rivals were tied with 16 percent each. Ibope said its survey was based on responses from 7,000 voters and had a margin of error of 1.2 percentage points.
Although Suplicy probably won't reach the 50 percent limit needed for a first-round victory, analysts said the former psychologist will handily beat any rival in an Oct. 29 runoff.
Nationwide, nearly 110 million voters went to the polls in 5,559 cities and towns to elect mayors and 60,332 city councilors.
"I think Marta and the PT (the Portuguese initials for the Workers Party) are honest and the most committed to finding solutions to the city's problems," said Pedro Alves Santoni, a 42-year-old attorney, as he left a polling station in Sao Paulo's posh neighborhood of Jardim Paulistano. "All the candidates say they will improve the city's health, transportation and education systems and end corruption. But the only one I believe in is Marta."
A Stanford-educated psychologist, Suplicy first won national attention years ago with frank talk about sex as a TV personality. As a congresswoman, she raised conservative eyebrows for her outspoken defense of abortion and gay rights.
A Suplicy victory in Sao Paulo - the country's economic and financial nerve center - could give the Workers Party an important showcase for the 2002 presidential elections.
But even Suplicy's supporters and fellow party members acknowledge that this depends on how well her administration performs during the first year in office.
"The city is bankrupt and her first year will have to be one of austerity" Workers Party congressman, Aloisio Mercadante told reporters. "We have a tough job ahead of us, and if we fail, her victory could backfire."
Whoever wins will be faced with a huge debt of $9 billion, left behind by former Mayor Paulo Maluf and incumbent Celso Pitta, who has been convicted twice for corruption and narrowly escaped impeachment.
Pitta is among the handful of mayors not seeking re-election. Some 70 percent of incumbents are running, and polls predicted about 80 percent of them would win.
"The results of the election will define the chances some parties will have in the presidential elections of 2002," said Antonio Carvalho Teixeira, a political scientist of Sao Paulo's Roman Catholic University.
According to polls, the Workers Party and the right-of-center Liberal Front Party stand to gain the most in these elections.
The Workers Party is expected to retain its hold in the important state capitals of Belem and Porto Alegre and could pick up three others.
The Liberal Front Party is expected to hold on to Rio de Janeiro, where Mayor Luiz Paulo Conde has a wide lead and is expected to win in a runoff. Pollsters also predict the party will win in three other state capitals.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos SAO101-106, RIO101-102
 Load-Date: October 2, 2000

 

End of Document
