

Brazil seeks to save the Amazon by leasing tract of rain forest
July 21, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 387 words
Byline: By ANY CABRERA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRASILIA, Brazil
Body




In an effort to curb illegal and indiscriminate logging that is ravaging Brazil's rain forest, the government will allow a private company to lease a tract of land and harvest wood under strict guidelines.
The experiment, which the government claims will both generate revenue and lead to more effective protection of the environment, is the first of its kind in Brazil. Environmentalists say the plan is irresponsible because it lacks a reliable method of enforcement.
The area to be leased is part of the Tapajos Forest in the northern state of Para, an area rich in valuable woods. The government plans to lease 12,355 acres of jungle, and the company that wins the bidding will be allowed to harvest timber there for five years.
Loggers will only be allowed to cut trees at least 22 inches in diameter, said Cleuber Lisboa, who is with Brazil's environmental agency, Ibama, and is a member of the Tapajos project. Ibama will monitor the logging and if the forest is not regenerating normally, the agency will reforest the area with native species.
"We have no experience in forest management," Lisboa said. "Through monitoring, we can learn about forms of extraction in a pilot project to see how to reduce the environmental impact."
Brazil hopes the plan to reduce pervasive logging that already has claimed 12 percent of the 2-million-square-mile Amazon. Eighty percent of logging is illegal, according to a government study.
The government says the project will yield about $ 270,000 a year in revenues.
But environmentalists, while acknowledging the good intentions of the plan, are skeptical.
"The government is going too fast," said Rep. Fernando Gabeira of the Green Party. "If we're not prepared or we don't discuss it sufficiently, concessions like this could lead to the destruction of the Amazon."
Roberto Smeraldi, of the group Friends of the Earth, said trees in the region take 30 to 35 years to grow and the plan doesn't allow enough time for regeneration. Ibama's Lisboa, however, said regeneration takes only 18 years.
The International Tropical Timber Organization will provide $ 1.5 million for research and implantation, Ibama spokesman Jose Roberto Lima said. The program will be extended to other parts of the jungle if successful. He said similar programs in the United States had reduced illegal logging.
 Load-Date: July 22, 1997

 

End of Document
