

Cali Cartel Leaders Face A Ruthless Rival - The Overalls Man
October 18, 1996, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 566 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER TORCHIA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




His identity is a mystery to authorities, but a ruthless underworld figure has emerged as a challenger to the old guard of Colombia's Cali cocaine cartel.
Among cartel leaders, he is described as even more fearsome than Pablo Escobar - the Medellin drug lord who planted bombs in shopping centers and sent assassins after police, judges and presidential candidates.
The shadowy new crime boss appears willing to take on the richest drug traffickers in the world, perhaps signaling that their dominance in the criminal world is over, at least for now.
He is suspected in a May 24 attack on a son of jailed Cali kingpin Miguel Rodriguez, possibly to retaliate for a deal gone sour. The attack may indicate how the once-hierarchical Cali cartel, source of most of the world's cocaine, has splintered since its chiefs were jailed last year in a police crackdown pushed for by the United States.
Colombian prosecutors know little about the new claimant to power - not even his name. In a fearful conversation the day after the attack on Rodriguez's son, Rodriguez and another cartel leader identify him only as "Overalls."
"These people are worse than Pablo Escobar," Rodriguez told Helmer Herrera in one of three taped telephone conversations. Colombia's most widely read newspaper, El Tiempo, published transcripts of the conversations Sunday, saying it had obtained them from police agents.
In the hit that brought "Overalls" to Colombians' attention, Rodriguez's son, William, was shot six times at a restaurant in the southwest city of Cali, where cartel families once enjoyed impunity.
William Rodriguez survived, but the gunmen killed five bodyguards and Miguel Rodriguez's brother-in-law.
The vicious attack "might bring to light a number of embryos, little groups that are deciding who's going to be in charge of whom," said Luis Fernando Velez, the top investigator in the Cali prosecutor's office.
Unlike his jailed rivals, "Overalls" is likely a free man who can more easily marshal his criminal resources, Velez said.
Mystified prosecutors say they may call Rodriguez and Herrera to testify about the identity of "Overalls." Authorities have offered no explanation for the nickname.
Rodriguez, mindful that telephone conversations are often recorded, also refers to the man as "the guy from the garage."
The exchanges between the two Cali bosses indicate how much influence the pioneers of large-scale drug trafficking, who are now in their 40s and 50s, have lost to up-and-coming gangs.
"We've got to make peace and tell these people not to take more lives," Herrera tells Rodriguez in one exchange.
"Why don't you do me a big favor," responds Rodriguez, who is now being held at a maximum-security Bogota jail, La Picota.
"Why don't you try to talk with 'Overalls'… Man, why don't we talk through 'The Bloodsucker.' But let's be straightforward, my God! If the tiniest detail in this deal has to be explained, let it be explained ten times," Rodriguez says.
Drug traffickers are known to refer to their lawyers as "bloodsuckers" because they charge large sums for their services.
Herrera also tells Rodriguez that he has talked to "Overalls," urging him to keep innocent family members out of the dispute because it would encourage underworld mayhem.
U.S. officials have long complained that drug traffickers remain powerful in Colombia's lax jail system, doing business with their lieutenants on the outside.
 Load-Date: October 18, 1996

 

End of Document
