

Candidates turn to stand-ins to spread the word
The Associated Press
January 3, 2000, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 984 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




With some 1,300 miles separating Des Moines, Iowa and Manchester, N.H., presidential candidates are hard-pressed to put in the requisite face time in the nation's first caucus and primary states.
That's to say nothing of the endless driving within the states, where voters in every tiny corner expect personal attention. Candidates can find themselves stretched like guitar strings.
That's why most use stand-ins - or campaign surrogates. Here is a look at two.
----
 
By FREDERIC J. FROMMER
Associated Press Writer
HANOVER, N.H. (AP) - Before announcing the formation of an exploratory committee for president a year ago, Bill Bradley made a courtesy call to someone already in the race, Sen. Paul Wellstone of Minnesota.
"Well, thanks for calling," Wellstone told Bradley. "I'm glad you're running, because I think you'd be a very good president. But there is just one thing. Starting in Iowa, I'm going to kick your butt in."
That's not going to happen. Wellstone dropped out, leaving only Bradley to challenge Vice President Al Gore for the Democratic presidential nomination.
He's on the campaign trail now as stand-in, helping the former New Jersey senator seek votes in New Hampshire's leadoff primary.
"He plays a terrific set of roles in the campaign," said Gina Glantz, Bradley's campaign manager. "He is a key surrogate, he is an adviser, he is someone many of us turn to in the course of campaign planning."
Wellstone has been Bradley's most active surrogate and plans to spend 18 days on the road this month.
In New Hampshire, Wellstone tells audiences that Bradley's integrity transcends their differences on some issues. He said he's particularly attracted to the candidate's goals of racial healing and campaign finance reform.
"Why am I supporting Bill Bradley, heart and soul?" he said at Dartmouth College. "Because he can renew our nation's commitment to equal opportunity."
Wellstone makes a point of telling audiences he doesn't always agree with Bradley, and often does it with humor.
In Keene, N.H., a woman told Wellstone she doesn't think Bradley's health care plan goes far enough. "I wanted more," she said.
Wellstone clutched his chest with both hands. "You want me to argue with that?" he responded in pretend shock.
"When Bill announced his plan, I said to him, 'I think you've struck a compromise between vision and political feasibility.' Bill's plan isn't perfect, but it pushes the envelope."
One of their biggest disagreements is over the Senate vote Bradley cast in 1986 to provide the Nicaraguan Contras with $100 million in aid.
"I've told Bill, 'What was that?' " Wellstone said in an incredulous voice. "I don't think it's a vote that fits in with other votes on it, nor do I think it's a vote that he thinks was his best vote."
Despite departing from Bradley on several key points, Wellstone has been sought out by the candidate for advice. He participates in the campaign's strategy sessions and reviews drafts of speeches in addition to serving as surrogate speaker.
Wellstone and Bradley could not have more different styles. Short and hyper, Wellstone actually has a lot of candidate Clinton in him, asking people for their first names during question-and-answer sessions and putting a hand on a person during one-on-one chats.
Bradley is dry, but at a campaign event in Iowa, he joked about adopting Wellstone's style.
"Bill is introduced, and he looks out at everybody, and he says, 'I know how I can get your support,' and he starts waving his hands,' " Wellstone recalled, flailing his arms as he mocks Bradley's mocking of him. " 'I can start speaking like Paul Wellstone!' "
---
 
By KATHERINE RIZZO
Associated Press Writer
WASHINGTON (AP) - Rep. Rob Portman, R-Ohio, knows all about January in New Hampshire, having shivered through it as a Dartmouth College undergraduate.
Nonetheless, he's happily back in his boots, working old contacts to help a new cause: Texas Gov. George W. Bush's presidential campaign.
"I'm probably doing more than they asked me to do in terms of surrogate work," he said, laying out a still-in-progress schedule of New Hampshire coffee klatches, radio interviews and college organizing.
This is after Portman threw a $1 million fund-raiser in Cincinnati for the Bush campaign.
A friend of the Bush family, Portman is the only alumnus of President Bush's White House staff currently serving in Congress.
That connection led the Bush campaign to tap Portman as a bridge to House Republicans and as a policy adviser. Working out the basics of his federal tax proposals, the candidate turned to Portman. One of the people he consulted about Medicare was Portman. Social Security reform? Portman. Drug-fighting strategy? Again, Portman.
"He has been a real asset to the campaign and a trusted friend of Governor Bush," said campaign spokeswoman Mindy Tucker.
Portman is considered to be so tight with the Bush family, in fact, that guessing what job he might be offered in the event of a Bush presidency has become a sort of parlor game among Ohio Republicans. (Most frequent guesses: White House chief of staff or commerce secretary.)
Portman exhales a half-laugh, half-sigh and for the umpteenth time tries to discourage such speculation.
"I think George Bush, if he's elected president, will have plenty of people to fill positions," he said.
"To do a job and do it right at the White House, I found that's 20 hours a day," he said. "I can remember days when I would not see my newborn son for two or three days at a time - I would see him, but he would be asleep. That's no way to live."
Giving up precious family time to help the Bush campaign is, in part, a way to repay the governor's parents for helping him in his first bid for public office - a special election in 1993 - and earlier, for selecting him as White House director of legislative affairs.
"It's probably the best job that I ever had, working for his father," said Portman. "There's a loyalty there."
 Load-Date: January 4, 2000

 

End of Document
