

Carlos the Jackal sentenced to life for triple murder
December 24, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 522 words
Byline: By DEBORAH SEWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Ever defiant, the aging revolutionary known as "Carlos the Jackal" smiled and raised his left fist after a French court sentenced him to life in prison early today for the 1975 murders of two French investigators and a Lebanese national.
Defense lawyers for Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, linked to some of the Cold War's most sensational terror attacks, said they would appeal the verdict.
After Ramirez' rambling, four-hour monologue - and four hours of deliberation - jurors convicted the man who has claimed responsibility for 83 killings. Among other attacks, he has been tied to the 1975 seizure of OPEC oil ministers in Vienna and the 1976 hijacking of an Air France jet to Uganda.
"Viva la revolucion," Ramirez, who was born in Venezuela, said in Spanish after hearing the verdict. He was escorted out by police guards; the Venezuelan government said it will not seek extradition.
Ramirez was convicted of shooting counterintelligence investigators Raymond Dous and Jean Donatini as well as Michel Moukharbal, a Lebanese colleague Ramirez suspected of being an informer. He also was convicted of the attempted murder of French investigator Jean Herranz.
The investigators, unarmed when they were killed, had been probing attacks on Israel's El Al airlines at Paris' Orly Airport earlier that year.
"It's a comfort after 22 years. I feel good. He's in prison for life and he'll never get out," said John Donatini's son, Guillaume. "But I'll never get my father back."
Gilles Dous, who also lost his father, said the verdict was a relief but added: "I still haven't turned the page."
In his final appeal to jurors, Ramirez called the eight days of proceedings a political show trial. "There is no law for me," said the dapper and graying revolutionary.
Before Judge Yves Corneloup cut off Ramirez and sent the jury to deliberate, Ramirez said he was unafraid of spending the rest of his life behind bars.
"They want to sentence me to life in prison. I'm 48 years old, so it could be another 40 or 50 years. That doesn't horrify me," Ramirez said.
Ramirez' leading lawyer, Isabelle Coutant-Peyre said the defense would appeal the verdict.
"It was not a just trial. He was convicted on political grounds," she told reporters. "I consider that the decision comes from outside interests, especially America and Israel."
In Spanish-accented French, Ramirez hammered on the theme he has maintained throughout the trial: He is a political combatant with a "love of revolution and love of justice."
Captured by French agents in Sudan three years ago, Ramirez long has been inactive, his support drying up with the Cold War's end.
Two years before his Aug. 14, 1994, capture in Khartoum, Sudan, Ramirez he was convicted in absentia of the three shooting deaths. French law required a retrial once he was in custody.
Defense attorneys contended the evidence at the trial was fabricated and the testimony was not credible. Prosecutors' evidence included fingerprints on a whiskey bottle and glasses at the Left Bank apartment where the killings occurred, more fingerprints on a postcard addressed to a Venezuelan friend and the words of former friends and lovers.
 Load-Date: December 24, 1997

 

End of Document
