

Castro accuses El Salvador of tolerating 'worst terrorist in the hemisphere'
November 25, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 494 words
Byline: By VIVIAN SEQUERA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HAVANA
Body




Fidel Castro accused the Salvadoran government on Saturday of tolerating "the worst terrorist in the hemisphere," a political nemesis who the Cuban leader says was plotting to kill him.
Castro told a gathering of about 30,000 people in eastern Cuba that Salvadoran President Francisco Flores did not act on information sent to him on Oct. 5 about Luis Posada Carriles, who lives in El Salvador.
Posada Carriles has been detained since Nov. 17, the day Castro arrived in Panama for a regional summit and announced that his enemy was in the country and planning to assassinate him. Panamanian authorities picked up Posada Carriles and three other Cuban exiles at a Panama City hotel several hours later.
Castro told the gathering in the rural town of Guisa, about 450 miles east of Havana, that he was not accusing the Salvadoran president of involvement in the "macabre plan" to kill him.
But he did accuse the Flores administration of "knowing about, tolerating and hiding" Posada Carriles in the Central American country he currently calls home. Cuba has long blamed Posada Carriles for the bombing of a Cuban airliner that killed 73 people as well as other violent attacks against the island.
Flores "did absolutely nothing" after receiving the information from Cuba, Castro said. "Perhaps he could not because he did not have the authority and the courage."
Calls for comment from Salvadoran authorities were not immediately returned.
Cuba and El Salvador have not had diplomatic relations since the 1960s. Castro and Flores clashed during the Ibero-American Summit in Panama over a proposal by Spain and Mexico to condemn terrorism. Castro opposed the measure because while it mentioned the Basque separatist group ETA, it did not mention acts of terrorism against the communist island.
During the summit, Castro accused Flores of tolerating Posada Carriles' presence in his country, and Flores accused Castro of fomenting leftist rebellion in El Salvador during the 1980s.
Cuba is seeking the extradition of Posada Carriles, 72, an admitted former CIA operative who has made a lifelong career out of fighting against socialist Cuban and other communist governments and movements. Panama is holding the men pending completion of Cuba's extradition request. They could also face trial in Panama if they broke any laws in that country.
Posada Carriles is "the worst terrorist known in the hemisphere," responsible for "uncountable crimes," Castro said.
Posada Carriles has admitted to involvement in a string of bombings that shook Havana in 1997, including one that killed an Italian tourist. Havana wants to try Posada Carriles for those attacks, as well as the 1976 bombing of the Cubana airliner off the coast of Barbados. Members of Cuba's fencing team were among the 73 people who perished.
Posada Carriles has long denied involvement in the airliner bombing and was twice acquitted in the case. He was awaiting a retrial when he escaped from a Venezuelan jail in 1985.
 Load-Date: November 26, 2000

 

End of Document
