

Catholics get out the flock for pope's Cuba visit
The Associated Press
January 20, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1071 words
Byline: By DAVID BRIGGS, AP Religion Writer
Dateline: HAVANA
Body




The faithful sang and prayed Tuesday in the streets of Havana, and Cubans of every persuasion - Catholic, communist and curious - awaited a papal visit that many said could be a turning point for their nation.
In a concession to the pope that had some churchgoers in tears, a bishop expelled from Cuba at the lowest point of church-state relations was allowed to return and celebrate Mass Tuesday in his old parish.
On the eve of John Paul II's first visit ever to Cuba, the communist government was still laboring to patch and tidy up sections of the crumbling capital, which has been ravaged by a collapsed economy.
Crews poured and steamrolled fresh asphalt over the cracked and potholed roads, traveled by rusted and creaking old cars and trucks. Workers sprayed yellow paint on one school's faded facade.
While most Cubans agree the pope's five-day visit will leave their country changed, expectations on what will change depends on their political and religious perspective.
Foes of Fidel Castro hope it will weaken his communist regime, which took power in 1959. Castro hopes to gain stature for his revolution and support for an end to the more than three-decade-old U.S. economic embargo. The Cuban church hopes the visit will help it expand its influence.
Bishop Eduardo Boza Masvidal, expelled in 1961 and returning to the island for only the second time since then, made a triumphant return to the Virgin of Charity Church in Havana to lead a Mass.
Amid scattered shouts of "Miracle!" Boza entered the packed church in a procession of more than 20 priests and altar boys.
The slight, stoop-shouldered Boza, whose face bears a resemblance to the pontiff, smiled and waved as parishioners applauded enthusiastically. Many churchgoers wept openly, and some left their places to approach him, bend over and kiss his ring.
"It's a miracle," said 62-year-old Cupertina Gutierrez, wiping away tears. "We didn't hope top have this. We didn't expect this."
Boza, who lives in exile in Venezuela, was allowed back into Cuba for a visit in 1988, when he also said Mass.
An outspoken anti-Communist clergyman, Boza held a September 1961 church celebration that turned into an anti-government demonstration and a street clash that left one teen-age passerby dead. Later that month, he and another 129 priests were expelled and religious processions were outlawed.
Churches held Masses and prayer vigils throughout the country Tuesday evening. At Our Lady of the Ascension Church in the Guanabacoa neighborhood of eastern Havana, the Rev. Jose Maria Martinez celebrated Mass for 30 parishioners.
"We should pray tonight for the pope, because in spite of his health problems, he is coming tomorrow to bless our country and our people," the priest said.
At Medalla Milagrosa Church, in the Havana neighborhood of Santos Suarez, 10-year-old Claudia, dressed in a pink Snoopy sweatshirt, dreamed of shaking hands with the pope as she and others finished work on the last of 80,000 simple Cuban and papal flags made at the church.
"The pope is like God, a beautiful picture," imagines Claudia.
While Castro sought to burnish his government's image and the pope hoped for a spiritual awakening in Cuba, it was unclear which of the two men has tougher task of evangelization.
"Missions are more difficult here than in Africa or India. We have to start from scratch. We have to explain everything," said the Rev. Jesus Luzaretta, a Spanish priest who spends two months each year at Medalla Milagrosa Church. "You can't easily wipe out 40 years of restrictions."
In Washington on Tuesday, President Clinton was asked what the United States was gaining by pressing the embargo against Cuba.
"We want Cuba to move toward freedom and openness, and if they do, we'll respond," he said. "That's always been our position, and I believe that in the end it will prevail."
Castro is scheduled to greet John Paul after the pope arrives at 4 p.m. EST Wednesday in Havana, than meet privately with the Cuban leader the following day.
Castro has encouraged Cubans to come out for papal services in Santa Clara, Camaguey and Santiago, and the revolutionary leader says he will attend the final Mass at the secular government's most sacred meeting ground, the Plaza of the Revolution in central Havana. State-run television is scheduled to broadcast the Havana Mass live and provide extensive coverage of the rest of the trip.
The trip is at least a minor boon to the Cuban economy - with estimates the thousands of journalists and visitors will pour some $ 20 million into the foreign currency-starved nation - and the government hopes the pontiff's opposition to the U.S. economic blockade will further weaken U.S. efforts to isolate Cuba.
However, if the anti-communist pope is taking a risk his visit will strengthen the Cuban government, Castro, an altar boy turned revolutionary leader, is gambling that the papal visit will not bolster opposition voices in Cuban society, as the pope's presence did in his native Poland in 1983.
"I believe the visit will have an impact in our country, a great impact," said Elizardo Sanchez, a prominent Cuban human rights monitor who spent 11 years in prison. "Although regretfully, I'm not expecting a miracle, nor do I believe that the Holy Father thinks that there will be a miracle."
Even with recent concessions such as allowing a few outdoor Masses and door-to-door distribution of religious literature, Cuban Catholics say the church faces a daunting task in explaining the rudiments of their faith. About 40 percent of the 11 million population are baptized Catholics, and few practice their faith on a regular basis.
The sanctuary of Medalla Milagrosa Church was two-thirds full Monday evening for a showing of a movie about John Paul. The balding Luzaretta, wearing a cross over his light blue shirt, said churches have to explain to their own members who John Paul is and why he is coming.
Among many of the faithful, there is hope the papal visit will change their lives.
As she talked on the balcony outside Our Lady of Carmen Church, 25-year-old Madeleine Alonzo, could barely contain her excitement.
"The pope means to us hope, joy and faith. He's coming not for the church, not for the government, not to Fidel. He's coming for the people," said Alonzo, clasping and unclasping her hands and waving her arms as she spoke.
"We Cubans, we have so many problems. … He's trying to be near the people who are suffering," she said.
 
 Load-Date: January 21, 1998

 

End of Document
