

Chicago Tribune, The Dallas Morning News to open offices in Cuba
The Associated Press
September 8, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 506 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The Chicago Tribune and The Dallas Morning News learned Thursday that they will be allowed to open offices in Havana, Cuba, joining The Associated Press and CNN as the only U.S.-based news organizations with bureaus in the communist country.
Cuban Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque gave permission in separate meetings Thursday with Tribune Co. CEO John Madigan and Morning News publisher Burl Osborne. The discussions took place in New York City, where Perez Roque was attending the U.N. Millennium Summit along with Cuban President Fidel Castro and Ricardo Alarcon, president of Cuba's National Assembly.
"They are the two media that have shown interest for some time" in opening bureaus in Havana, Alarcon told the AP in an interview Thursday.
Cuba has slowly opened up to American news media in recent years, especially following Pope John Paul II's visit to the island nation in January 1997. Amid moves in Congress to ease long-standing U.S. trade sanctions against Cuba, authorities in Havana want average Americans to learn more about their country and ultimately weigh in against the embargo.
CNN opened a Havana bureau in 1997, and the AP returned the following year - almost three decades after the communist government expelled the news gathering cooperative's last permanent correspondent there.
"The Cuba story is one that needs to be told properly," Madigan told the AP. "Being there allows you to do that. We have had a lot of interest in events in Cuba, and this is another way to bring our readers in-depth coverage of subjects important to them."
Osborne said the announcement was an honor to The News, which already has four international bureaus.
"This is an important recognition of the role The Dallas Morning News has played in bringing insight and understanding of Latin America to Texas and throughout the United States," Osborne said. "This will enable us to do an even better job in the future as the distance between countries and peoples continues to shrink."
Gilbert Bailon, The News' executive editor, said a bureau chief would be appointed soon for the Cuba office, which officials hope to open later this year.
James O'Shea, the deputy managing editor for news at the Tribune, said the Havana office would be a "Tribune company bureau," meaning it would be operated in conjunction with the company's other news outlets, including the Sun-Sentinel in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and The Orlando Sentinel, also in Florida.
The Tribune earlier this year acquired Times Mirror Co., owner of the Los Angeles Times, the (Baltimore) Sun, Newsday on New York's Long Island, other newspapers and numerous specialty magazines.
O'Shea said it remained unclear what kind of access those papers would have to the Havana bureau, but Madigan said the Cuban government seemed interested in the company's reach.
"(Cuban officials) definitely felt that our group of newspapers would provide them significant coverage of the Cuban story," Madigan said.
He didn't know when the bureau would officially open or how many employees it will have.
 Load-Date: September 9, 2000

 

End of Document
