

Chile, Peru fight over the fiery liquor Pisco
The Associated Press
November 16, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 621 words
Byline: CARLA SALAZAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




Latin American pride has sent nations to war over disputed borders and even a soccer game. But Chile and Peru are at each other's throats in an ego clash over a fiery liquor called Pisco.
The Andean neighbors both claim the colorless brandy distilled from mashed grapes as their national drink, and have even taken their case to an international group to determine who can use the name.
Only the brave dare say Pisco is Chilean in Peru or Peruvian in Chile. Both consider Pisco their own, drinking it straight or in a tart lime cocktail called a "Pisco sour."
Afraid Chile was winning the Pisco war through aggressive lobbying and increased production, Peru began an international marketing campaign in September to convince the world that Pisco is as Peruvian as llamas and Machu Picchu.
Its goal is to boost Peru's exports and have the International Wine Association in France declare that Pisco originated in Peru, giving it bragging rights.
"Chile entered the international market ahead of us, but now we're starting to compete with them," said Agnes Franco, Peru's vice minister of industry.
That may be, but export figures show the fight for now is fueled mainly by pride.
Chile leads in international sales of Pisco, but ships only about $ 900,000 worth a year. Peru's foreign sales run about $ 125,000 a year. Chile has almost doubled production since 1992, while Peru's output hasn't changes since 1984.
Feeding the rivalry is a grudge between the South American nations from a war they fought in the late 19th century in which Chile grabbed a part of southern Peru that Peruvians still claim.
Peruvians see Chilean imperialism everywhere, including in the Pisco war. They charge that in the 1930s Chile even tried to create a town called Pisco to back its claim to the liquor, a charge denied by Chile.
Showing more business savvy than Peru, Chile trademarked the Pisco name in 1931. The move enraged Peruvians.
"Peru has a city, a port and a valley called Pisco. Pisco is Peruvian. Chile is trying to take what is ours again," said Isabel Alvarez, a restaurant owner in Lima.
Pisco was first produced in Peru's southern Pisco valley as far back as the 16th century, made from grapes brought by the Spanish conquerors, Peruvians argue.
The word "pisco" means "bird" in the Quechua language of Peru's Inca Indians.
Chile contends the name Pisco was given to the liquor by early Chilean producers who exported it through the Peruvian port of Pisco.
Most Chileans see Peru's claim to Pisco as absurd, arguing that Chile has done much more to develop and market the liquor.
"Are we going to have to start offering 'booze sour' instead of Pisco sour at cocktail parties now?" said Julio Larenas, a caterer in Santiago, Chile's capital.
In 1995, Chile petitioned the International Wine Association to declare Pisco a Chilean liquor, but a Peruvian delegation narrowly managed to block the motion, Peruvians producers say.
The wine association has yet to pronounce on which country originated Pisco.
Another bone of contention between the countries is who invented the Pisco sour, which is made by mixing Pisco with lime juice, sugar, ice and egg white.
Chilean historians say the Pisco Sour was devised in the early 1900s by American and European steamship passengers traveling around the continent's southern tip and stopped for layovers in the Chilean port of Coquimbo.
The ships stopped in Chile "to fill up with Pisco and flamenco dancers," said George Gilder, an expert on cocktails. "Gringos couldn't drink it, so they had to mix it as a cocktail."
Peruvian historians contend the Pisco sour was invented in the early 1900s by an English barman at the luxury Maury hotel in downtown Lima when he didn't have whiskey to prepare a whiskey sour.
 Load-Date: November 16, 1998

 

End of Document
