

China foils Taiwan's U.N. bid for the eight straight year
The Associated Press
September 8, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 421 words
Dateline: TAIPEI, Taiwan
Body




China has blocked Taiwan's bid to join the United Nations for the eighth straight year, prompting Taiwanese officials on Friday to accuse Beijing of "sinister behavior."
Taiwan's latest attempt to enter the United Nations had been expected to fail because of opposition from China, which insists the island is a breakaway province that should not be treated like an independent nation. The two split amid civil war in 1949.
Most nations recognize Beijing as being the legitimate ruler of China, and Chinese leaders demand that diplomatic allies cut formal ties with Taiwan.
A U.N. steering committee decided Thursday night not to put the issue on the U.N. General Assembly's agenda, Taiwan's Foreign Ministry said.
The committee's chairman, former Finish Premier Harri Holkeri, made the ruling after representatives from 47 nations opposed the proposal. Only 19 nations - most of them small, developing African and Latin American allies of Taiwan - supported the measure.
China, the United States, Britain, France and Russia, all permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, opposed the measure.
Taiwan's Foreign Ministry complained that China used its influence to block the application "despite our government's repeated displays of goodwill and appeals for the Chinese communists to cooperate with us and play a more positive role for peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait and the Asian Pacific region."
"We are angered by the Chinese communists' sinister behavior," the ministry said in a statement.
It was Taiwan's first attempt to join the United Nations since new President Chen Shui-bian took office in May.
China's state-run Xinhua News Agency said Taiwan's U.N. defeat was a "heavy blow" for Chen's government. "It became clear that the new regime disregards past defeats and still wishes to regain access into the U.N," the agency said.
The report quoted Chinese U.N. representative Wang Yingfan as saying Beijing "rightfully represents all Chinese, including our compatriots in Taiwan, in the United Nations and all organizations related to it."
When it was based in China, Taiwan's former Nationalist government was one of the founding members of the United Nations in 1945.
The Nationalists, representing the Republic of China, kept the U.N. seat after the Communist Party captured the mainland in 1949 and forced the Nationalists to retreat to Taiwan.
The Taiwan-based government gave up its U.N. seat in 1971 after the United Nations accepted the communist government in Beijing as the sole legitimate ruler of China.
 Load-Date: September 9, 2000

 

End of Document
