

Civilians suffering the brunt of Colombia's war
The Associated Press
October 9, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 574 words
Byline: By ANDREW SELSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




A waitress who kissed a government soldier is suspected of being a government collaborator and is shot. Rebels, angry that people of one village wouldn't join their ranks, return and butcher residents. Paramilitaries storm a southern town and execute rebel sympathizers.
More than ever, non-combatants are being caught up in Colombia's decades-long civil war. With tales of atrocities becoming more frequent - and civilians doing most of the dying - the situation is looking more and more like "La Violencia," a frenzy of bloodletting that convulsed this South American nation in the 1940s and '50s, leaving hundreds of thousands dead.
Residents of one community, the western village of Ortega, took the unusual step of resistance - and paid dearly for it this weekend.
Their tragic story began Sept. 12, when leftist rebels of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, entered Ortega to recruit young people. Angry villagers wielding shotguns and machetes chased them off, according to El Liberal, a local newspaper.
On Saturday, the rebels returned to Ortega and took revenge: They killed as many as 13 villagers, strewing decapitated bodies along the roadside.
It recalled an incident that occurred a half-century earlier and just 40 miles to the north. In the town of Puerto Tejada, supporters of the opposition Liberal Party massacred backers of the Conservative Party, decapitated them and played soccer with their heads.
That incident came during La Violencia, or "The Violence" - a time of unprecedented upheaval in Colombia.
The current war has not reached the level of La Violencia. That orgy of killings, in which up to 200,000 people died, was carried out by uneducated peasants who believed followers of the rival political party "were somehow in league with the devil," according to David Bushnell's book, "The Making of Modern Colombia."
But today's war - being waged by two leftist rebel groups against government security forces and their right-wing paramilitary allies - has gotten so bad that a young woman can die merely for kissing the wrong man.
Such was the fate that befell a waitress at a cafe in the southern village of La Dorada. She said goodbye to a government soldier by giving him a peck on the cheek. Suspected of being a government collaborator, she was shot and killed last month.
Even priests are not immune: In the southern town of Puerto Caicedo, the Rev. Alcides Jimenez was slain in 1998 by two suspected FARC gunmen as he delivered a sermon.
Nearby, in Puerto Asis, the paramilitary United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia accused the Rev. Luis Alfonso Gomez of being a rebel sympathizer. To save his life, Gomez had to convince the group that he does not take sides.
This year alone, 50 of Gomez's 3,400 parishioners have been killed, the Roman Catholic priest said.
The right-wing United Self-Defense Forces commonly executes rebels or suspected rebel collaborators. Sometimes they get the wrong person, as when they recently shot and killed a young man in La Dorada whom they mistook for a rebel commander, according to a report Sunday in El Tiempo, a Bogota daily.
There is a striking difference between La Violencia and the current war, notes historian and author Arturo Alape.
"During La Violencia, the civilian population participated directly in the killings," Alape said. "Today, they are being attacked by three sides - by the rebels, the paramilitaries and the military - and they are defenseless."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BOG5-7
 Load-Date: October 10, 2000

 

End of Document
