

Clinton and Pastrana speak to the press in Cartagena
The Associated Press
August 30, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 911 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Statements and a question and answer session with President Clinton, Colombian President Andres Pastrana, and House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., Sen. Joe Biden, D-Del., in Cartagena, Colombia, as transcribed by the eMediaMillWorks Inc.
PASTRANA (THROUGH TRANSLATOR): Good afternoon. On behalf of all Colombians, it is my great privilege to welcome to Cartagena de Ingles President Clinton, who has been Colombia's steadfast friend and honors us enormously with his visit today.
I'd also like to welcome the distinguished members of his delegation, starting with the Republican Party, the speaker of the House of Representatives, a very good friend of Colombia, Dennis Hastert; and the Democratic Party, another great friend of ours, Senator Joseph Biden. You, Speaker Hastert, are not (inaudible) to Columbia, given that you have decided to defended all democracy for many years now and have guided the assistance package through the House. Colombia is truly fortunate to have you as a friend, sir.
Senator Biden, we're also very pleased to have you once again here in Cartagena de Ingles. Your understanding of the very complex issues related with Colombia, from human rights to alternative development, have been crucial.
Senator Bob Graham and Mike DeWine are also with us today; two individuals who have led the way in the U.S.-Colombian relations, providing leadership in both trade and counternarcotics. They are with their colleague, Senator Lincoln Chafee, who is visiting Colombia for the first time. Gentlemen, we are very honored with your presence.
However, there is a notable absence that hurts our hearts of another friend of Colombia, Paul Coverdell. His passing last month was a deeply felt loss and I cannot imagine how we would have gotten this far without him. We need him, but what he did so bravely will allow us to pursue.
I would also like to welcome our good friends from the House of Representatives, Congressmen Douglas Bereuter, William Delahunt, Sam Farr, Porter Goss, Ruben Hinojosa and James Moran. Each, in your own way, have worked for positive changes for our country.
I'd also like to welcome the members of the president's Cabinet, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Attorney General Janet Reno. They are leaders of the highest order who have visited us here before. You have taken the cause of burden sharing in the war on illegal drugs across the globe. The same is true for General McCaffrey, who has worked tirelessly through very many complicated details of our bilateral strategy. And we're also proud to have with us, Sandy Berger, the national security advisor and John Podesta, the White House chief of staff.
Two years ago, I traveled to Washington with the high hopes of forming a new partnership with the United States. Today, it is clear we have accomplished this objective and much more than any of us (OFF-MIKE) at any time in our history.
The United States government and Congress have offered significant decisions in Plan Colombia, which is my government's strategy for national recovery. This package covers - has been developed by Colombians, has been planned by Colombians, has been presented to the rest of the world by Colombians and is being implemented - or will be implemented by Colombians. These very important resources support many of the central elements of the plan, including support of political negotiation, alternative developments for subsistence farmers, the battle against drugs, the strengthening of justice, humanitarian assistance and the protection of human rights.
The U.S. assistance is a recognition that the menace of illegal drugs is truly international and therefore requires a concerted global response. We in Colombia must address the many challenges our nation faces at this moment in history. We know that the solutions must be our own. Equally important is the understanding that Colombia's armed conflict must be solved by political means.
We have asked the United States and the international community to provide us with new tools and additional resources to build the Colombia of the 21st century. We're grateful for the help you have provided - for the assistance you have provided.
Many times over the past decades, Colombians have felt alone in bearing the burden of the international drug war. And out of the - this is an international presence, and your presence here today, Mr. President, and - as representative of the American people, is a commitment that leads us to know that we're no longer isolated in this struggle.
I'm also pleased we have had the opportunity today to discuss our bilateral economic agenda. Peace in Colombia is tied to prosperity, to economic growth and new opportunities for all our people, and this includes expanding bilateral trade.
I believe the time has come to move toward an agreement that allows better access for Colombian products into the U.S. market. I'm convinced that, at the end of the day, trade and investment will do more for Colombia and will be more decisive instruments in the battle against drugs, given that they will have a sustainable impact for future generations and will contribute to a more prosperous Colombia.
Today is indeed a historic occasion. It marks a decisive in time when - in a time when two nations joined forces to realize - to obtain common objectives. I have no doubt, ladies and gentlemen, that we have the right policy and that we will be implementing them in the right way and with the right partners.
 Load-Date: August 31, 2000

 

End of Document
