

Clinton spokesman no longer the 'substitute teacher'
The Associated Press
May 17, 1999, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 701 words
Byline: SONYA ROSS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Joe Lockhart looked like a whipless ringmaster among the circus lions, sitting at his desk feigning naivete for the swarm of reporters buzzing about efforts in Moscow to oust Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
"Why are you asking me about impeachment?" Lockhart teased. "Do I have some special knowledge or experience on this?"
What Lockhart did have was the ability to speak for a president who himself has been impeached. But no words were forthcoming. The reporters got only more teasing.
It's not personal, it's just Lockhart's way. After seven months on the job, President Clinton's press secretary has proved a blend of pugnacity and insouciance, very much the "Cool Joe, Mean Joe (Killer Joe)" in composer Quincy Jones' jazzy ode to a smooth operator.
When he's Cool Joe, Lockhart chums up reporters on airport tarmacs or backstage at Clinton speeches, benign and friendly. When he's Mean Joe, he calls those same reporters and fights via telephone - even climbing the ranks to their editors - if he thinks they have wronged his boss.
"I don't think people should ever be in any doubt over where I stand," Lockhart said in an interview. "When the argument over any issue is done, the people who know me wipe the slate, and we start again."
Take the time Lockhart learned that news organizations were following up on rumors the president and first lady were considering a trial separation after a spat during their February ski trip. It posed a problem for Clinton because the first lady did not accompany him on his Central American tour.
Standing somewhere in Guatemala, Lockhart grabbed a cellphone and called an Associated Press reporter in Washington. "Oh, so now we're going to have a story based on some guy's fantasy? That's ridiculous," he complained.
Then there was the day in early March when Lockhart swore he did not watch Monica Lewinsky's TV interview on ABC the night before, and asked innocently, "Is it worth watching?"
"Not really," deadpanned Sam Donaldson, ABC's White House correspondent. "She's rather pathetic."
"You heard it here, folks, and not from me!" Lockhart declared with a gleam in his eye.
Thus Lockhart dodged the more pressing question: Whether Clinton watched the interview as he lingered for 34 minutes aboard a parked Air Force One, meeting, Lockhart explained, with some congressmen.
Those who pushed Cool Joe got Mean Joe, who tersely replied, "I said he did NOT watch."
These days, Lockhart is mostly Cool Joe. The president is in the throes of the NATO mission in Yugoslavia, and this means Lockhart repeats vague explanations about the military operation, sprinkling in touches of mock pique when questions move beyond where he wants them.
Lockhart spent many earlier days as Mean Joe, slugging it out with a press corps irritated by Clinton's silence on impeachment. At one point, a reporter complained of "non-existent" access to the president and Lockhart accused the reporter of trying to embarrass him.
Lockhart returned the next day as Contrite Joe, and said White House chief of staff John Podesta suggested he give a name to the evil twin who had popped out before the cameras.
He solicited names from reporters before coming up with his own - "Lester" - but none of them call Lockhart that. They just call him Joe with a mood qualifier: Nice. Mean. Happy. Easy.
"One on one, he's charming and funny and has a great sense of humor," said Ann Scales, White House correspondent for The Boston Globe. "It's obvious he has a command of the subjects and does his homework. But he also has a bully-like quality, where you know, 'Hey, he's not having a good day.' "
Lockhart said he fought for respect in those early months, looking to conquer the "substitute teacher" syndrome he was seeing from reporters who he felt viewed him as a kid brother-like deputy to his suave predecessor, Mike McCurry.
"When I was the deputy and I'd get up to brief occasionally, I had to stand there and take spitballs," Lockhart said.
In his briefings, not even average citizens escape Lockhart's humor.
"To my C-SPAN viewers: Those of you who don't like me, please stop writing. I am very thin-skinned, and it really gets to me," Lockhart said last week.
"Guarantees about 300 next week," he grinned.
 Load-Date: May 17, 1999

 

End of Document
