

Clinton sees chance to 'close the gap' in Mideast peace negotiations
The Associated Press
April 27, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 530 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton held out hope Monday that Israel and the Palestinians can "close the gap" in the next couple of years on stalled peace negotiations.
At a White House ceremony marking Israel's half-century as a nation, Clinton pleaded for reconciliation in the Middle East and cautioned against yielding to extremist groups.
"We cannot let the extremists prevail," Clinton said. "Israel can fulfill its full promise by drawing on the courage and vision of its founders to achieve peace with security. Never has the opportunity been more real, and it must not be lost."
Clinton recalled the words of Israeli elder statesman Abba Eban, who said when President Kennedy was assassinated that "tragedy is the difference between what is and what might have been." He urged Middle East leaders to turn that formula on its head.
"If we all pray for the wisdom to do God's will, chances are we will find a way to close the gap in the next couple of years between what might be and what is," the president said.
Clinton accepted an honorary doctorate of philosophy from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem to commemorate Israel's 50th birthday. He was the first American president to receive that honor since Harry Truman.
On May 14, 1948, 11 minutes after Israel's self-declaration as a state, Truman signed a document that made the United States the first country to formally recognize the Jewish state. That act by Truman, against the advice of his advisers, was "one of our proudest moments," Clinton said.
"Fifty years later, old Harry Truman looks pretty smart," Clinton told guests in a cavernous tent on the South Lawn.
Pointing to steps toward reconciliation around the world - in Guatemala, Mozambique, Bosnia and Northern Ireland - Clinton said it is time Israel and the Arabs join the trend.
"It must be a time to deepen freedom and raise up life in the Middle East," Clinton said.
Vice President Al Gore, who also spoke at the ceremony, mentioned that he and his wife, Tipper, were heading to Israel this week to participate in 50th anniversary celebrations.
"We will carry with us the yearnings of millions of Americans for peace, for a new season of joy and a new jubilee of hope," Gore said.
While he is in Israel for the anniversary events, Gore is to have three meetings with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and also see Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat separately.
The Clinton administration is pushing for Israel and the Palestinians to reopen their peace talks after a 14-month lapse. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright will fly to London from Asia next weekend for separate meetings with Netanyahu and Arafat on May 4.
Making peace in the Middle East is a high priority for his administration, but Clinton has been frustrated by a lack of progress. White House press secretary Mike McCurry said Clinton was neither encouraged nor discouraged by the long impasse. "He is realistic," McCurry said.
Asked when Clinton would step in personally to push for a breakthrough, McCurry replied: "When there is a reason to believe that we can achieve a significant outcome. There is no reason at this moment to believe that, but that is one of the reasons why we are pressing the parties hard."
 Load-Date: April 27, 1998

 

End of Document
