

Clintons tango the night away in honor of Argentine president
The Associated Press
January 12, 1999, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 558 words
Byline: By KALPANA SRINIVASAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Inspired as he watched Robert Duvall effortlessly glide across the floor of the White House's East Room, President Clinton gave up his sideline seat and showed the Argentine delegation that he can tango with the best of them.
The president and first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton capped off a state dinner tribute to Argentine President Carlos Menem Monday night by indulging in a few rounds of the sensual dance form.
Menem escorted the U.S. first lady to the dance floor, while the president perfected his tango technique with Amanda de Fernandez, the wife of Argentina's minister of the economy.
Duvall, who became smitten with the dance after seeing it performed 12 years ago and has honed his abilities in more than 15 visits to Buenos Aires, dazzled the 170 guests who watched him glide across the makeshift dance floor.
"I'll never look at you the same way again, Robert!" exclaimed the president, after watching Duvall with his partner, Luciana Pedraza. The chamber ensemble QuinTango provided the music as the pair and another couple, Pablo Veron and Victoria Vieyra, performed.
Menem, in his official toast, pointed to Duvall's chairmanship of the U.S. Tango Academy as an example of the strong ties that connect the people of the two nations.
"Of course the bonds of friendship between the presidents are very deep," Menem said through a translator. "But as deep are the bonds of friendship that bring together the people of Argentina and the people of America."
In his salute, Clinton described some of the values held by both countries.
"We share aspirations old and new, to deepen democracy, to strengthen justice … to give other people the chance to live as peacefully and as positively as possible at the dawn of this new century," Clinton said.
Of course, the president warned, some disputes will never be resolved, "like which country has the better beef … or whose cooks have better mastered the ancient art of barbecue."
Indeed, noticeably missing from the menu was beef, which the Argentines consider one of their best agricultural products.
But tango proved to be common ground, with celebrities and politicians alike taking a whirl as the night went on. Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., was among the revelers taken with tango fever as was actress Salma Hayek, who gave the president kudos for his technique.
"I was very impressed," Hayek said. "He did wonderfully."
The festive mood, and the focus on U.S.-Argentina relations, even managed to divert attention from the impeachment trial before the Senate. The guest list included seven of the 100 senators standing in judgment of the president, but several said they could put the question aside for the evening.
"This is a very important thing our country is doing, our relationship with Argentina, and we're grateful to be a part of that," said Sen. Richard Lugar, R-Ind. "We are serving the country tonight and so is our president."
Guests dined on lemon herb roasted chicken, grilled vegetable risotto, tomato basil broth, seared striped bass, a cassoulet of crab, corn and fava beans, sauteed morels and sweet potato, with a salad of kale, endive and spinach.
For dessert, it was back to Argentina: Frozen dulce de leche, a confection of caramel and baked pineapple ringed with fresh coconut and red currant, and topped with a couple made of chocolate, dancing the tango beneath a palm tree.
 Load-Date: January 12, 1999

 

End of Document
