

Congressional negotiators restore School of the Americas funding
The Associated Press
September 23, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 374 words
Byline: By DAVID PACE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




House and Senate negotiators have restored funding for the School of the Americas, the controversial Army school in Georgia that the House moved last summer to shut down.
Rep. Jack Kingston, R-Ga., said House conferees on the fiscal 2000 foreign operations spending bill agreed Wednesday to accept the Senate's position that provided $ 2 million in the State Department budget to pay the expenses of Latin American soldiers who attend the school at Fort Benning.
The vote won't become final until the conference on the entire bill is concluded, but Kingston, one of the House conferees, said the section covering funding for the school has been closed and cannot be reopened.
"The School of the Americas is in there," he said. "It's survived another year."
The House voted 230-197 last summer to eliminate the $ 2 million in training funds. It marked the first time in five House votes since 1993 that the lawmakers have gone on record in opposition to the school.
The school has been the target of a decade-long campaign by religious activists upset that some of its graduates were linked to the 1989 murders of six Jesuit priests and two women in El Salvador.
Father Roy Bourgeois, the Maryknoll priest who has spearheaded the campaign against the school, said the conference committee action Wednesday won't slow the campaign.
"We are not going away," he said. "We're going to keep coming back to Washington and to the main gate of Fort Benning in greater and greater numbers every year until that school is shut down."
The House conferees voted 8-7 to recede to the Senate position.
Kingston said the House agreed to restore the funding because members of the foreign operations spending panel did not want to lose jurisdiction over the school, which also receives money from the Defense Department budget.
Kingston said House conferees felt that the Pentagon would find a way to continue operating the school, even if the $ 2 million in training funds had been eliminated.
The $ 2 million represents about half the school's annual budget. The rest comes out of the Pentagon budget, which also pays the salaries of the military officers who serve as instructors. Congressional opponents of the school estimate it costs the taxpayers $ 20 million a year.
 Load-Date: September 23, 1999

 

End of Document
