

Congressional negotiators restore funding for School of the Americas
The Associated Press
September 22, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: State and Regional
Length: 390 words
Byline: By DAVID PACE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Congressional negotiators agreed Wednesday to provide full funding next year for the School of the Americas, rejecting last summer's House vote to slash the budget of the controversial Army school in Georgia.
Rep. Jack Kingston, R-Ga., said the House conferees on the fiscal 2000 foreign operations spending bill voted to accept the Senate's position that provided $ 2 million in the State Department budget to pay the expenses of Latin American soldiers who attend the school at Fort Benning.
While the action will not become final until the conference on the entire bill is concluded, Kingston said the section covering funding for the school has been closed and cannot be reopened.
"The School of the Americas is in there," he said. "It's survived another year."
The House voted 230-197 last summer to eliminate the $ 2 million in training funds after opponents of the school argued that many of its graduates had been linked to human rights atrocities in Latin America. The school had survived four previous House votes since 1993.
The school has been the target of a decade-long campaign by religious activists upset that graduates of the school were linked to the 1989 murders of six Jesuit priests and two women in El Salvador.
Father Roy Bourgeois, a Maryknoll priest who has spearheaded the campaign against the school, said the conference committee action Wednesday won't slow the campaign.
"We are not going away," he said. "We're going to keep coming back to Washington and to the main gate of Fort Benning in greater and greater numbers every year until that school is shut down."
The House conferees voted 8-7 to recede to the Senate position.
Kingston said the House agreed to go along with continued funding for the school because members of the foreign operations spending panel did not want to lose jurisdiction over the school, which also receives funding from the Defense Department budget.
Kingston said House conferees felt that the Pentagon would find a way to continue operating the school, even if the $ 2 million in training funds were eliminated.
The $ 2 million represents about half the school's annual budget. The rest comes out of the Pentagon budget, which also pays the salaries of the military officers who serve as instructors. Congressional opponents of the school estimate it costs the taxpayers $ 20 million a year.
 Load-Date: September 22, 1999

 

End of Document
