

Contains items from Mexico, Peru, Cuba and the Dominican Republic
The Associated Press
March 13, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 675 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: MEXICO CITY
Body




Mexico announced Friday it has deported another foreigner after accusing him of meddling in domestic politics in the southern state of Chiapas.
The man, Ahmed Bakoura, is the second French citizen expelled from Chiapas and deported from Mexico in the last two weeks. Michel Henri Jean Chanteau, who served as a parish priest in Chiapas for over 30 years, was deported Feb. 27.
Authorities accused Bakoura of having acted as an observer at two events in Chiapas sponsored by leftist Zapatista rebels.
Mexican law prohibits foreigners from becoming involved in, or stating opinions about, Mexican politics.
The Fray Bartolome de las Casas Human Rights Center, a human rights group in Chiapas, claimed that three foreign women - a Swiss, a German and a U.S. citizen - had been detained Friday and taken to Mexico City for deportation.
However, Angelica Rendon, a spokeswoman for Mexico's immigration department, denied that the three women were being held by immigration police. Rendon said she did not know of the women's whereabouts.
---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - Police believe a body found buried in a garage Friday is that of a Jesuit priest kidnapped last June.
Wilfredo Guinea, 74, has not been seen since he was seized June 17 in Mexico City. He was director of a Jesuit publishing house, Obra Nacional de la Buena Prensa.
Police said a suspect arrested on a drug charges admitted that he had been involved in kidnappings, including Guinea's.
He accompanied police to a vacant house in the poor Iztapalapa neighborhood where a decomposed body was found buried 5 feet under the garage floor.
Guinea's order said it paid a ransom after confirming that Guinea was alive. They received a call that the priest had been released, but he never turned up.
---
LIMA, Peru (AP) - Floods and high river levels caused by El Nino-driven rains have destroyed or damaged 70 bridges and disrupted major highways across Peru, the transportation minister said on Friday.
Minister Antonio Paucar told reporters the government has installed 20 portable metal bridges and will buy 33 more portable bridges from England and Colombia.
The torrential rains have also generated mudslides and floods that have blocked key stretches of highway, especially in northern Peru.
Prime Minister Alberto Pandolfi has said that Peru will need to spend $ 265 million just to repair its roads.
---
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) - Authorities began investigating two police officers Friday, a day after a 17-year-old youth was shot in the back and killed during street protests.
Police spokesman Col. Simon Diaz said the victim was taking part in a public protest over lack of repairs to the streets in the capital.
On Wednesday and Thursday, police and soldiers clashed with protesters who tossed homemade bombs and set up flaming tire barricades in Licey al Medio, a small town outside the northern city of Santiago.
At least 12 people were injured and more than 200 arrested.
Protests and demonstrations over poor public services - including frequent power outages - have erupted around this Caribbean country several times in the past year.
---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - A delegation of top-level former U.S. officials and legislators met with Cuban government leaders Friday to discuss a partial lifting of the U.S. embargo of the island.
The delegation, which includes former Sen. Claiborne Pell, and retired Gen. John Sheenan, former commander of NATO, met with Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina and the speaker of Cuban parliament, Ricardo Alarcon, the Cuban official news agency Prensa Latina reported.
Baltimore Mayor Kurt Schmoke also is on the delegation, which began its visit Thursday in support of allowing free movement of food and medicine toward the island nation.
Such trade is currently allowed only under a special license arrangement under the terms of the 36-year-old U.S. economic embargo of the island.
On Thursday the delegation met with Health Minister Carlos Dotres, who described the effects of the blockade on the health of Cuba's population.
The group will remain in Cuba through Sunday.
 
 Load-Date: March 14, 1998

 

End of Document
