

Cuba's diplomatic isolation a thing of the past
The Associated Press
July 29, 1998, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 665 words
Byline: By JOHN RICE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEXICO CITY
Body




From Guatemala to Switzerland, from Spain to the Dominican Republic, Cuba is making diplomatic breakthroughs against decades of U.S. efforts to isolate it.
Many countries remain critical of Cuba's domestic politics, but the United States is almost alone in trying to force changes by freezing Cuba out of the international community.
"We do not feel that Cuba should be penalized for its failure to approach democracy at the dictate of any particular government," Kenny Anthony, prime minister of St. Lucia and chairman of the Caribbean Community trade bloc, said in early July.
American officials long denounced nearly any contact with Cuba. Prodded by Washington, every country in the Western Hemisphere except for Canada and Mexico cut ties with Cuba.
Now, all but El Salvador and Costa Rica have some sort of diplomatic links with Fidel Castro's government. The visit by Pope John Paul II to Cuba in January showed that anti-communism is no bar to contacts with the communist island.
Many countries that once saw Cuba as a threat no longer do. Cuba has stopped backing guerrilla forces in the Americas. And the collapse of the Soviet bloc made Cuba itself seem less menacing.
The Soviet fall "showed many that we were not a satellite of anybody, that we had our own policies," said Abelardo Moreno of Cuba's Foreign Ministry.
While U.S. officials say the wave of democracy across the Americas has made Cuba an isolated oddity, it also has eliminated all of the anti-communist military dictatorships that shunned Cuba.
In fact, free-market businessmen, Latin American nationalists and leftists who rarely agree on other issues are united on Cuba, resenting U.S. efforts to tell foreign businesses where they can invest.
Almost all of America's allies have denounced U.S. laws extending parts of the embargo to their own companies.
The European Union threatened to sue the United States at the World Trade Organization. The Clinton administration has tried to head that off by promising to avoid action against European companies if Europe tries to voluntarily restrict some investments in Cuba.
That alarmed Castro, who warned it could hurt the island.
But even that setback for Castro may be killed in Congress. Castro's foes insist the embargo law should be enforced. European officials say their trade complaint will be revived if Congress shoots down the deal.
U.S. opposition is the primary stumbling block to Cuba's readmission to the Organization of American States, from which it was suspended in 1962.
But despite Washington's antipathy, few leaders seem reluctant to visit the communist state. Canada's prime minister went in April and Colombia's president was there in June. Once-hostile Guatemala and the Dominican Republic reestablished full diplomatic relations this year.
The U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva voted down a U.S.-backed measure to condemn Cuba.
"There are many countries, including allies of the United States, who are fed up" with the U.S. stand, Moreno said.
Cuba's Communist Party newspapers almost daily boast of meetings that once would have enraged U.S. officials: The foreign ministers of Mexico, Guatemala, Jamaica and two NATO countries - Italy and Portugal - have all been to Cuba recently.
Visits by other European, African, Asian and Arab officials are commonplace.
Cuban officials often have had to listen politely as foreign visitors urge greater political freedoms or liberation of political prisoners - both prominent themes of Pope John Paul and of Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien during their visits in Cuba.
Still, while the European Union has repeatedly criticized Cuba's human rights record, it is moving toward closer economic ties.
Even a nasty spat with Spain's conservative government, which caused the European country to keep its ambassador's post in Havana vacant for 16 months, ended in April.
Spain's King Juan Carlos plans to visit Cuba next year along with heads of state from throughout Latin America at an Ibero-American summit in Havana.
 Load-Date: July 29, 1998

 

End of Document
