

Death toll from Venezuelan flooding in the thousands
The Associated Press
December 20, 1999, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 709 words
Byline: By BART JONES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LA GUAIRA, Venezuela
Body




Thousands of hungry residents defied the National Guard and looted food from containers at the port in La Guaira, while health officials painted a worsening picture in the aftermath of massive floods and mudslides.
Foreign Minister Jose Vicente Rangel said the death toll could be anywhere between 5,000 and 20,000, but said the true magnitude of the catastrophe may never be fully known.
"There are many people covered by mud and rocks. There are cadavers in the sea," Rangel told reporters.
The National Guard fired shots, mostly into the air, and struck people with swords to quell looting today in La Guaira. Thousands of hungry residents raided containers left on the port, some stealing fish and fruit and others making off with goods including toys to cellular phones.
Helicopters swirled overhead, and one looter was shot in the foot.
Military helicopters filled the skies at La Guaira airport today, dropping off refugees from the disasters and quickly taking off in search of more.
National civil defense chief Angel Vargas said 40,000 people had been evacuated from devastated areas hit by torrential rains last week, and predicted 15,000 more would be transported to safety in the next 48 hours.
Dr. Arturo Contreras, coordinating first aid at the airport's makeshift field hospital, said more fluids were needed to treat children suffering from diarrhea caused by dehydration, hunger and drinking contaminated water.
Speaking to reporters at the airport, Defense Minister Gen. Raul Salazar said troops were searching "meter by meter, house by house" for people who might still be alive under mudslides and rubble.
Meanwhile, Gen. Charles Wilhelm, the chief U.S. military commander in Latin America, was flying to Venezuela today for a one-day visit to assess the country's humanitarian needs.
In addition to the dead, another 150,000 Venezuelans are homeless, and at least 6,000 have been reported missing - many of whom are presumed dead. The number of bodies recovered by Monday was 1,500, Rangel said.
Workers at Caracas' cemetery dug 1,500 graves for people buried by a mudslide along the Caribbean coast. Pictures of the dead, with disfigured faces, were posted at the cemetery's entrance. Hundreds of anxious relatives gathered at the gates praying that none of the photographs belonged to a loved one - and crying when they did.
Early Sunday, Gen. Isaias Baduel, the head of an elite paratroopers' unit leading the rescue effort, said between 500 and 600 bodies had been found in the northern state of Vargas alone. He said the bodies recovered "allow us to make projections that surpass 1,000 dead" in Vargas.
The official coordinating the rescue operation, Vice Justice Minister Vassili Kotoski Flores, said hundreds of bodies were found floating along the coast off Vargas.
The magnitude of the calamity overwhelmed Venezuela's capacity to respond. Dozens of nations from around the world rushed aid to the South American country. The United States, which gets much of its petroleum from Venezuela, offered two planes and nine helicopters.
The disaster started Wednesday, when torrential rains triggered landslides that crashed down from Mount Avila, a mountain separating Caracas from the Caribbean coast, sweeping away large swaths of Venezuela's northern coast.
Many of the dead and wounded were poor people living in shacks made of tin, wood and cinderblock at the foot of Mount Avila. Millions had built homes on the mountainside because they couldn't afford to live anywhere else. For decades, government officials did little to stop them.
President Clinton sent a letter to Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez expressing his "profound condolences to those who suffered losses," according to a Spanish version of the letter issued by the Venezuelan Foreign Ministry.
One flood victim, Marta Iriarte de Salvatierra, 46, said her family's shack was swept away by an avalanche of water, mud and boulders. She said they grabbed what belongings they could and fled to the nearest structure still standing - a luxury apartment building near the beach.
The family spent two nights in one apartment, amazed by its luxuriousness, and ate the food in the refrigerator. They were rescued Sunday and were waiting to be bused out of the airport to an inland city.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos CAR101,102
 Load-Date: December 21, 1999

 

End of Document
