

Despite threats, Colombia extradites drug suspect to the United States
The Associated Press
August 18, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 456 words
Byline: By WILL WEISSERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




The alleged leader of one of Colombia's most powerful drug cartels was sent Friday to the United States to stand trial, days after drug dealers threatened violence if authorities carried out the extradition.
A small army of security forces escorted Alberto Orlandez Gamboa onto the tarmac at Bogota's international airport, where he left on a U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration plane bound for Miami, said President Andres Pastrana, speaking from the Western highlands city of Medellin.
From there Gamboa will head to U.S. District Court in Manhattan to face charges he conspired to import and distribute thousands of pounds of cocaine from Colombia to New York and other U.S. destinations.
Gamboa, who U.S. authorities say is the head of an international drug trafficking and money laundering organization headquartered in Barranquilla on Colombia's Caribbean coast, is also accused of smuggling cocaine to Europe since 1991 and conspiring to launder millions of dollars in drug profits.
After a 10-year moratorium on U.S. extradition, Gamboa becomes the third Colombian whom Pastrana has spirited to the United States to face drug charges in the past nine months. Pastrana favors extraditing accused drug traffickers to the United States, where stiffer penalties often await them.
Gamboa's extradition comes three days after a newspaper ad paid for by a band of drug dealers known as the Our Country Movement threatened to assassinate supreme court judges and government officials unless authorities here reversed their decision.
"We won't allow the immoral American drug addicts to try us," said the ad, published Tuesday in a newspaper in the sprawling city of Cali, located 185 miles from the capital, Bogota, in drug-producing southern Colombia.
The group behind the threats claimed to be an offshoot of the notorious 1980s drug-financed terrorist faction "The Un-extraditables."
"We are not looking for a war like that of Pablo Escobar, but we will fight to stop all Colombian extraditions," their ad said.
Escobar, shot and killed by state forces in 1993, was the longtime head of the ruthless Medellin Cartel, named for the western Colombia city from which it operated.
Also a former Colombian senator, Escobar gained worldwide notoriety as the tough ruler of the Medellin faction.
The faction controlled the world's cocaine trade until months before Escobar's death. It also used car bombs and machine guns to wage a prolonged and bloody terrorist-style war against state forces and pressure the government into barring extraditions of drug traffickers to the United States.
The 44-year-old Gamboa, nicknamed "Caracol" - Spanish for "The Snail" - was arrested in June 1998 in Bogota on charges of murder, kidnapping and illicit enrichment.
 Load-Date: August 19, 2000

 

End of Document
