

Disaster could further president's plans for military, the poor
The Associated Press
December 21, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 629 words
Byline: By STEVEN GUTKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHARALLAVE, Venezuela
Body




President Hugo Chavez gazed from a helicopter at a vast expanse of green pasture on Tuesday and said, "We can put a thousand houses there."
Chavez is personally directing much of the relief effort after flooding that left about 150,000 homeless. And he may use the disaster to further his populist platform of giving the military a greater role in society and helping poor people colonize the far reaches of the country's interior.
The president, dressed in combat fatigues and a red beret, got a hero's welcome Tuesday from 790 mudslide victims holed up at a military base in this town of rolling hills southeast of the capital of Caracas.
Survivors mobbed Chavez, kissing and hugging him and shouting, "Chavez! Chavez!"
"He is keeping his word and helping his people," said Edward Gomez, a 37-year-old survivor.
Chavez has ordered seven such military bases to be turned into shelters while the government, with the help of private donations, begins building thousands of homes for Venezuelans left homeless by the worst natural catastrophe to hit the country this century.
On Tuesday in Charallave, the president surveyed a lot where private businessmen are building 200 houses for survivors.
"We're going to turn that building into a school," Chavez said, pointing to a brick structure.
The disaster likely will enable the government to speed up its plans to relocate hundreds of thousands of poor people to undeveloped regions in the country's southern Great Plains and eastern Amazon jungle as a way of reducing urban overpopulation.
"This tragedy is already turning into an opportunity," said Planning Minister Jorge Giordani, who accompanied Chavez on his visit to Charallave.
Chavez, a former paratrooper who was jailed for two years for staging a failed military coup, is a hero to millions of poor Venezuelans. Volunteers on Tuesday played guitars and sang Chavez a song they wrote with the lyrics, "They threw him in jail for trying to erase injustice."
One of the cornerstones of his ruling agenda is to put the country's military at work for the poor. His showcase Bolivar 2000 program uses some 80,000 soldiers to build schools and roads and tend to the sick.
Now the army is taking on an even bigger role, with Chavez personally commanding an elite paratroopers' unit whose members descended by rope from helicopters to rescue survivors.
Chavez's wife, Marisabel, is taking in children orphaned by the disaster and allowing them to live temporarily in the presidential residence.
But some have also criticized Chavez for what they said was a preoccupation with electoral politics at the expense of the people's safety.
Last Wednesday, even as torrential rains soaked the country and began to loosen torrents of mud and boulders, Chavez was exhorting citizens to come out and vote for a popular referendum on a new constitution - the centerpiece of his political agenda.
"Instead of worrying about the voting, he should have been worried about what was going to happen to us," said Roslyn Reyes, a survivor from Caraballeda.
Graffiti written on walls of the devastated town of Caraballeda read: "Thanks to Chavez the world has ended."
It's unlikely that anyone could have known that the heavy rain would end up doing so much damage, smothering much of the South American nation's northern coast.
Still, The Associated Press has obtained a copy of an internal document by the National Civil Defense issued just hours before the landslides that spoke of the need to "declare a state of emergency for reasons of nature."
"The situation is of such magnitude that an Executive Emergency Command Center must be created to coordinate" efforts to deal with the heavy rains.
The document did not call for an evacuation of the coastal area north of Caracas, the country's hardest hit region.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos CAR114,115
 Load-Date: December 22, 1999

 

End of Document
