

Drug war to heat up when U.S.-trained battalion hits the jungles
The Associated Press
July 29, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 644 words
Byline: JARED KOTLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TRES ESQUINAS MILITARY BASE, Colombia
Body




In dense Amazonian jungles and on the muddy rivers that swirl past this outpost in the war on drugs, the action is about to heat up.
Before year's end, a new U.S.-trained Colombian army battalion will be deployed into a wilderness teeming with exotic birds and leftist rebels. Its mission: to sever the lucrative ties between the guerrillas and the cocaine trade.
Colombian and U.S. officials say an aggressive push into this stronghold belonging to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, is needed to counter a doubling in the coca acreage since 1996 in the world's No. 1 cocaine-producing nation.
But critics warn that the United States is getting involved in a civil war reminiscent of the wars that ravaged Central America, only this time in the name of drug interdiction.
Underscoring those dangers, five U.S. soldiers and two Colombian air force officers were apparently killed when a U.S. army spy plane crashed into a mountainside Friday while on a counter-narcotics mission over rebel territory. Search teams working in bad weather and rough terrain recovered four bodies on Wednesday, and were looking for the other three.
Although the crash was by all appearances an accident, some saw it as an ominous sign.
"It's a clear marker along the way to the growing involvement of the United States in a very dirty war," said Carlos Salinas, a Latin America specialist with Amnesty International. More than 30,000 Colombians have been killed in 35-years of fighting, most of them civilians in massacres by rebels, rival right-wing paramilitary forces, or the army.
The 1,000-man counter-narcotics battalion, currently being trained by U.S. Special Forces troops at the Tolemaida army base, is an example of U.S. efforts to destroy illegal drugs at their source.
Gen. Barry McCaffrey, the Clinton Administration's top anti-narcotics official, visited the base Tuesday while on a tour to discuss and promote a $ 1 billion increase in anti-narcotics aid for the Andes.
Even counting the new anti-drug battalion, the U.S. military's role in Colombia remains modest. There are no troops in combat and only about 200 U.S. military personnel in the country at a time. The bulk of Washington's $ 300 million aid program this year is going to the police.
McCaffrey watched Colombian soldiers with war-painted faces rappel down walls, take target practice and act out dramas designed to teach soldiers to respect human rights. In one of the play-acting exercises, soldiers kick and threaten to shoot surrendering rebels, only to be stopped by fellow troops.
It might look like a "political charade", said McCaffrey, but he said soldiers learned valuable lessons about what they would likely observe in the heat of combat.
Set to be deployed in December, the new battalion will add heavily-armed ground forces to police raids on drug laboratories and airstrips, and fumigation runs over illegal drug plantations.
Those operations are hampered by heavily armed FARC units, who fire on aircraft, ambush patrol boats, and guard fields, laboratories and airstrips in return for multimillion dollar payments from drug traffickers.
Although the battalion's purpose is ostensibly to fight drugs, Colombia's besieged military sees it as a tool for regaining the upper hand against the surging rebels.
The rebels "are investing in arms, in explosives, in sophisticated communications equipment, in intelligence," said Armed Forces chief Gen. Fernando Tapias. The only way to stop the FARC "is to cut off their source of funding."
The battalion will work largely out of the Tres Esquinas military base, an installation the army says is surrounded by eight FARC units with nearly 2,000 fighters.
Perched above the Orteguaza River, the base borders Caqueta and Putumayo, the two southern states which have seen the greatest increase in the production of coca, the plant used to make cocaine.
 Load-Date: July 29, 1999

 

End of Document
