

Drug smugglers try to stay ahead of the law with submarine
The Associated Press
September 8, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 600 words
Byline: By ANDREW SELSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




By land, by air, by sea - and perhaps now under the sea - drug smugglers are becoming ever more innovative in their efforts to outwit authorities and get their cargo across the sea.
Drug agents were astounded to discover a sophisticated submarine under construction in a cow pasture outside the capital - 7,500 feet high in the Andes mountains and 210 miles from any port. It apparently was being built for the sole purpose of transporting cocaine.
"In the 30-some-odd years I have been in law enforcement I have never seen anything like this," Leo Arreguin, the chief of the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration in Colombia, said Thursday.
The 100-foot submarine, discovered in a warehouse near the suburb of Facatativa on Wednesday, could have crossed an ocean, surfaced off Miami or other coastal cities and surreptitiously unloaded tons of cargo.
Police were tipped off by suspicious residents who said Americans were in the area. Blueprints at the warehouse indicated Russians might have been involved as well, authorities said. No arrests have been made.
Colombia produces more than 520 tons of cocaine per year. Smugglers go to great lengths to outwit authorities and get the cargo out of the country.
Pilots have flown by starlight using night-vision goggles. Entering U.S. airspace, they have dropped their altitude and speed to appear on radar as helicopters coming in from offshore oil rigs in the Gulf of Mexico.
The drugs are either unloaded at clandestine airstrips or dropped in sacks in isolated areas, to be picked up later.
In the late 1970s, traffickers used light twin-engine planes to smuggle drugs. During the 1980s, they switched to larger aircraft, like the Lockheed Lodestar. By the 1990s, they had refitted Boeing 727s, their lights and radar transponders turned off to avoid detection as they flew loads of cocaine north.
Small quantities are smuggled by "mules," people who hide drugs in false-bottom suitcases or the soles of their shoes, or swallow condoms full of cocaine or have it surgically inserted under their skin.
Police say 60 percent of Colombia's cocaine leaves by sea, from miles of coastline on the Caribbean Sea and the Pacific Ocean.
Drugs are hidden on freighters amid legitimate merchandise, or on boats supposedly out on fishing expeditions. Speedboats ferry drugs to larger ships offshore. They all face interception by Colombian navy and U.S. Coast Guard officials.
Although smugglers have built tiny fiberglass "submersibles" to ferry drugs in the past, they were nothing compared to the submarine, which was more than 11 feet in diameter.
"This is very high-tech," said Colombian Navy Capt. Ismael Idrobo, gazing up at the sub, which stood in three sections on lengths of railroad track. "Look at the rudders and the pressurized double hull. This could easily travel … under the surface of the ocean."
Navy Capt. Fidel Azula, a former submarine captain, said even the Colombian navy lacked the knowledge to build such a vessel. "This is unmistakably of superb naval construction," he said.
Seized documents contained Russian and American-sounding names, Arreguin said. There were indications Russian engineers were involved, including "a very professional engineer who has constructed submarines before," Arreguin said.
The Russian mafia has become increasingly involved in cocaine trafficking to Europe, Arreguin noted.
The well-stocked warehouse was empty when police arrived. Surveillance cameras had been mounted on the roof. Welding tools, propane tanks, hard hats, tool boxes and knee pads were scattered about, along with a tool catalogue from the United States.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo BOG101
 Load-Date: September 9, 2000

 

End of Document
