

Ecuador's switch to the U.S. dollar in full swing
The Associated Press
April 26, 2000, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 630 words
Byline: By CARLOS CISTERNAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUITO, Ecuador
Body




A bank teller is asked to cash a check and says, "Will that be dollars or sucres?" A passenger asks a taxi driver if he can pay in U.S. dollars. Stores and restaurants in Ecuador list prices in both currencies.
The scenes have become common in Ecuador since the beginning of April, when the country started its gradual changeover to an all-dollar economy. Increasingly, U.S. currency is used in everyday commerce, with the exception of small transactions.
Adopting the dollar comes after the near collapse of Ecuador's corruption-ridden banking system that drove down the value of its currency, the sucre. Between January 1999 and the beginning of this year, the sucre fell from 7,000 to the dollar to nearly 30,000. Now, the exchange rate is set at 25,000 sucres to $1.
"The sooner we accept that there's no turning back, the sooner everyone will start to get used to dollars," said Guillermo Buendia, a 54-year-old taxi driver.
The government of President Gustavo Noboa approved a far-reaching reform package in March. Noboa took over from President Jamil Mahuad Mahuad, who was forced from office in a military-backed Indian uprising. Protesters were outraged over Mahuad's failure to stem corruption and end economic chaos.
Officials say the changes - namely adopting the dollar - can help end inflation running at more than 80 percent a year, stabilize the economy and promote investment.
But the switchover hasn't come without problems.
For many people in Ecuador, the conversion of 25,000 sucres to the dollar is proving to be a formidable task in an economy where most people get their milk, bread, vegetable and meat in street markets from poorly educated vendors.
Only 2 percent of sidewalk merchants "know how to use dollars," said Elias Guaranda, a leader of a group of vendors who attended a seminar to learn about the dollar switch. It was offered by the Chamber of Commerce in the city of Guayaquil, 165 miles southwest of Quito.
"I understand absolutely nothing, and until this mess is cleared up, I am not going to accept dollars," said Jose Vera, a 60-year-old grocer in Quito, the capital.
Government authorities have started an information campaign through newspapers, radio and television, in both Spanish and Quichua, the mother tongue of Ecuador's highland Indians, to explain the currency switch.
They hope to head off public anxiety about everything from how to handle the unfamiliar foreign money to widespread fears of counterfeiting.
Last month, police caught two Ecuadoreans at a border crossing trying to enter the country from Colombia with $40,000 in fake $100 bills. The impact was immediate. Many stores throughout the country put up signs: "No $100 bills accepted."
The recent ads explain how to tell a real dollar from a fake one.
Under the government's timetable, sucres and dollars will continue circulating simultaneously until Sept. 13, when Ecuadorean bills, such as the dark-orange 50,000 sucre note which bears the national seal, will be pulled forever. Starting June 13, Ecuador's banking operations are scheduled to be carried out entirely in dollars.
On Monday, Noboa met with members of a delegation from the International Monetary Fund to discuss the switch.
International lenders, including the IMF, have backed the plan, announcing a three-year $2 billion aid package to help finance the rebuilding of Ecuador's economy.
After meeting with Noboa, Claudio Loser, the IMF's director for the Western Hemisphere, said the currency changeover will give Ecuador an opportunity to "put public finances in order and defend the poorest sectors of the population."
Among the loan conditions set by the IMF are as-yet unspecified increases in the price of government-subsidized gasoline and home cooking fuel, as well as increases in electric and telephone rates.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo QTO103 April 25
 Load-Date: April 27, 2000

 

End of Document
