

Ecuadorean Candidate Says He is 'The Crazy One' Who Fights for the Poor
June 28, 1996, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 602 words
Byline: By CARLOS CISTERNAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUITO, Ecuador
Body




He calls himself "El Loco" or "El Payaso" - the crazy man or the clown - and his stubby mustache does sometimes make him look like Charlie Chaplin.
What his enemies, including much of Ecuador's establishment, call him is much worse. And they think he more closely resembles Adolf Hitler.
Nonetheless, Abdala Bucaram is in a good position to win election July 7 as president of this small Andean country.
A 44-year-old populist who heads his own party, Bucaram faces rightist Jaime Nebot, 49, in the presidential runoff. Nebot finished first and Bucaram second among nine candidates in the first round on May 19.
The latest independent poll taken June 10 showed Bucaram with a slight lead over Nebot, 40 percent to 36 percent, with a 2 percentage point margin of error. Bucaram would seem to be helped by a large group of undecided voters - 24 percent - and by his history of pulling a hidden vote.
Bucaram appeals to Ecuador's poorest and most desperate people, whose numbers have grown under the incumbent government of conservative President Sixto Duran-Ballen, public opinion analyst Luis Eladio Proano said.
"He is a very able type who knows how to reach the people. I believe Bucaram's strength, his capacity, is underestimated," Proano said.
That strength is obvious to those who attend his campaign rallies - backed up with the music of a popular Uruguayan band hired just for the elections.
Bucaram sings and dances, screams and lets his emotions out as sweat pours off him in streams. The words rattle from his mouth like machine-gun fire, in the style of a repent-or-be-damned preacher - except Bucaram's sermons are peppered with curses and off-color comments.
"I am the Crazy One who is going to win the presidency," he screams to the virtually mesmerized crowds that turn out to cheer him on.
The possibility that Bucaram could really become president has provoked a backlash among Ecuadorean newspapers, which have joined in a campaign to stop him.
The Quito daily El Comercio attacked what it saw as the lavish living habits of a man who also calls himself the "scourge of the oligarchy" and the "force of the poor."
"The leader of the poor lives in a huge house with a soccer field, a swimming pool and a jacuzzi. The … door is of carved wood. The floor is made of marble and the furniture is covered with plastic," the newspaper observed.
The grandson of Lebanese immigrants, Bucaram burst onto the Ecuadorean political scene 12 years ago when he was elected mayor of Guayaquil, the country's largest city. This is his third bid for the presidency. He came in second in 1988 and third in 1992.
He has twice fled the country after running afoul of the military and the law. In 1985 he went into exile in Panama to escape slander charges by the armed forces for saying the military was only good for marching in parades.
He returned in 1988 after receiving a congressional amnesty and launched a bid for the presidency. After that election he again fled to Panama to avoid prison on allegations of embezzlement while mayor. Another amnesty brought him home again in 1990.
Nebot, candidate of the Social Christian party, also has a reputation for erratic behavior. He has tried hard to paint himself as the respectable choice, although many people still recall a drunken appearance a few years ago in Congress, where he threatened to urinate on a rival lawmaker.
Nebot's campaign has focused on presenting Bucaram as a wild man unfit to be president.
Polibio Cordoba, director of the independent polling firm Cedatos, said that for many voters the election has turned into a choice "between the lesser of two evils."
 Load-Date: June 28, 1996

 

End of Document
