

Ecuadoreans unload sucres as dollar becomes the national currency
The Associated Press
September 8, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 594 words
Byline: By CARLOS CISTERNAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUITO, Ecuador
Body




Like a hot stone in their hands, Ecuadoreans are casting off their last wads of sucres, their national currency. As of midnight Saturday, the sucre will be worthless for normal street transactions - replaced by the American greenback.
This small Andean nation, wracked by political and economic disorder for years, is completing a six-month transition to making the U.S. dollar its official currency. Ecuador joins Panama and nine other countries in which the U.S. dollar is legal tender.
Adoption of the dollar comes after the near collapse of Ecuador's corruption-ridden banking system, which contributed to driving down the sucre's value from 7,000 to the dollar in January 1999 to nearly 30,000 to the dollar at the beginning of this year.
Officials hope the switchover will end record inflation running at 104 percent a year, Latin America's highest. The step is designed to prevent the government from printing excessive money to meet its budgetary needs. Economists blame Ecuador's economic woes on decades of deficit spending.
So far, signs indicate that the plan is working. Monthly inflation has plunged from 14.3 percent in January to 1.4 percent in August.
Public opinion polls show that many Ecuadoreans are unhappy with the loss of their national currency because of its value as a symbol of sovereignty.
In a symbolic "funeral" for the sucre on Saturday, a group of actors, painters, writers and musicians plan to carry a small coffin filled with sucre bills in a procession from the Central Bank to Quito's main cemetery.
"We are going to gather to say a final goodbye to our beloved currency," said Ana Fernandez, coordinator of the event. She said groups also will convene in Guayaquil, Ecuador's largest city, for "a historic commemoration" to say farewell to the sucre, Ecuador's currency since 1884.
At the same time, though, many people recognize that the change appears to be stabilizing a chaotic economy, and they are relieved that the six-month transition, in which both currencies circulated simultaneously, is ending.
"We're ready for the sucre to disappear. We were all confused by getting change in different currencies," said Ricardo Tipan, 37, who makes a precarious living hauling vegetables from farms to the city in a dilapidated pickup truck.
Figuring out the math of transactions during the transition period - $1 equals 25,000 sucres - has been exasperating to many businesses and consumers.
More than two-thirds of Ecuadoreans earn less than $30 a month, making the dollar appear disproportionate to the meager means of the average Ecuadorean and unwieldy for most small purchases. A $20 bill is worth 500,000 sucres.
The introduction of U.S. currency spawned a boom market for cardboard conversion charts, sold by street vendors for 1,000 sucres, or 4 cents.
Even with that tool as a crutch, figuring out a simple 70-cent purchase turned into a time-consuming mental workout for people carrying both sucres and cents: two quarters, a dime, two 1,000-sucre coins, and two pennies.
A blizzard of radio, newspaper, and television ads by the Central Bank this week have been reminding Ecuadoreans to change their sucres before their buying power vanishes Saturday at midnight. Central Bank officials said Friday that some $420 million in sucres have been removed from circulation but $41 million are still out there.
Many businesses have refused to accept sucres for the last several weeks, fearing they would get stuck with worthless currency. But the Central Bank ads say leftover sucres may still be switched at special locations until March 9.
 Load-Date: September 9, 2000

 

End of Document
