

Elian Gonzalez's father coming to the United States on Thursday
The Associated Press
April 5, 2000, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 803 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Elian Gonzalez's father will fly to the United States on Thursday to seek custody of his son, the 6-year-old Cuban boy who has been the object of an international tug-of-war for the past four months, his lawyer said.
"It is time for this reunion to go forward," said attorney Gregory Craig, who met earlier Wednesday in Havana with the elder Gonzalez and Cuban officials.
Craig said Gonzalez "is prepared to stay here until he has achieved that objective."
Juan Miguel Gonzalez, the father, had said he would not travel to the United States until he received assurances that custody of Elian would be transferred from the boy's great-uncle, Lazaro Gonzalez, who has cared for him since he survived a boat sinking last Thanksgiving in which his mother died.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service issued a statement Monday that said, "Once Mr. Gonzalez arrives in the United States, the INS will begin transferring care from Lazaro Gonzalez to the boy's father."
Craig said Wednesday night, "We take this statement from the INS to mean and be an assurance that when Juan Miguel comes to the United States tomorrow, the process for transferring to him, the care and custody of his son Elian will immediately begin."
In Havana, President Fidel Castro declared Wednesday night that it is just matter of days before Elian would be reunited with his father.
"I am talking about three days" more or less, Castro told hundreds of university students from across Latin American and the Caribbean in town for a regional congress. "It is inevitable."
White House spokesman Jake Siewert said only, "We believe that the father's travel to the United States could contribute to a successful resolution of this matter."
Outside the home of Elian's Miami relatives, word of Juan Miguel Gonzalez's imminent trip to Washington filtered through a crowd of more than 150 people clustered behind police barricades.
"Tomorrow is a crucial day. We must prepare," demonstrator Gerardo Barrios shouted into a bullhorn.
Afterward, another man read a prayer to supporters gathered in a circle under the white glow of TV lights. "Protect this boy, Lord," they sang in Spanish. But Elian was not inside; he had departed earlier to visit his cousin.
Anti-Castro activists also protested outside Attorney General Janet Reno's Florida home, carrying signs depicting her as the devil.
Elian's Miami relatives are fighting for permanent custody, opposing any move to return the boy to Cuba. They have appealed a ruling that says he should be returned to his father, and Cuban-American protesters have threatened to form a human chain around the Miami home where Elian is staying to prevent him from being sent back to Cuba.
They have challenged Elian's father to come to their home to discuss Elian's future.
But rather than flying to Miami, Juan Miguel Gonzalez, his wife and their infant son will travel Thursday to Washington. U.S. visas for the three, along with a male cousin, a pediatrician and a kindergarten teacher, were issued Tuesday.
Cuban officials had also requested visas for 22 others, including 12 children who were classmates of Elian in Cuba. The State Department is still reviewing those requests.
Negotiations to determine how best to transfer temporary custody to Elian's father were scheduled to resume Thursday morning.
"Even as Elian lost the love and companionship of his mother when she died last November, Juan Miguel has lost the love and companionship of his 6-year-old son for four long months," Craig told reporters gathered at his downtown law office. "The first tragedy cannot be reversed. The second tragedy can and will be ended. We look to the attorney general and to the commissioner of INS to take immediate action aimed at reuniting Elian with his father."
If Juan Miguel Gonzalez had come to the United States, the Immigration and Naturalization Service was prepared to transfer temporary custody of the boy from the great-uncle to the father. But details of the transfer could not be worked out during two days of negotiations in Miami between lawyers for the government and for Elian's Miami relatives.
Castro has said that for Elian to achieve "recovery" after four months away from home, visas were being sought for the 22 others, including psychologists, a doctor and a senior Cuban official, in addition to Elian's classmates.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said Wednesday the six were approved because "they were the immediate group. She said it "seemed like a group that would serve a purpose for Elian."
The six were to have stayed at the home of Cuba's chief diplomat in Washington, Fernando Remirez. Classes were to be held for Elian and his 12 classmates at the Remirez home until his fate was decided.
His case is before a federal appeals court in Miami, which will begin hearing arguments on the case next month.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos FLWB107-111
 Load-Date: April 6, 2000

 

End of Document
