

Elian Gonzalez's father to fly to the United States to reclaim his son
The Associated Press
April 6, 2000, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 718 words
Byline: By ANITA SNOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HAVANA
Body




Declaring victory in the battle over 6-year-old Elian Gonzalez, President Fidel Castro predicted it would only be a matter of days before the boy is embraced by his father.
Juan Miguel Gonzalez planned to fly today to the United States to reclaim his son.
"The battle of Elian has been won - in judicial terms, in legal terms, in political terms," Castro told hundreds of students from across Latin America and the Caribbean who were attending a regional congress.
After being seen off personally by Castro, Elian's father, stepmother and 6-month-old half brother were to leave Havana in a private plane early today and arrive in Washington accompanied by Fernando Remirez, chief of the Cuban Interests Section in Washington, who offered the family his home during their U.S. stay.
Castro said Gonzalez would be reunited with his son, who is staying with relatives in Miami, in about three days. Gonzalez has demanded his boy's return to Cuba since the child was rescued off Florida's coast in late November.
The Cuban leader has made the fight for Elian a national campaign, with marches, rallies and televised roundtables held almost daily to call for the boy's return.
The Gonzalez family was to live in the Washington area for a month or two while awaiting the results of an appeal filed by Miami relatives who have fought to keep the boy in United States. A federal appeals court in Atlanta is to begin hearing arguments on the case next month.
Three others - a school-aged male cousin, a pediatrician and a kindergarten teacher - were granted visas to travel to the United States with the Gonzalez family. But they were not among those leaving today, and it was unclear why.
Cuban officials had requested visas for 22 others, including 12 children who were classmates of Elian in Cuba. Castro had said all were "indispensable" for Elian's "recovery" after four months away from home.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said Wednesday that six were approved because "it seemed like a group that would serve a purpose for Elian."
Gregory Craig, attorney for Gonzalez, announced today's trip Wednesday night after returning from a quick trip to Havana.
"It is time for this reunion to go forward," Craig said. The attorney said Gonzalez "is prepared to stay here until he has achieved that objective."
The Immigration and Naturalization Service said earlier this week that once Gonzalez arrives in the United States, it will begin the process to transfer Elian to his custody.
Gonzalez had earlier said he would not travel to the United States until he received assurances that custody of Elian would be transferred from Lazaro Gonzalez, who has cared for Elian since the boy's mother and 10 others died when their boat sank during an illegal crossing from Cuba to the United States.
INS spokeswoman Maria Cardona welcomed the news that Elian's father was headed to the United States but said it did not mean that father and son would be reunited immediately.
"We are still working out the most appropriate manner in which to proceed with the actual transfer," Cardona said. "This is an issue that we will be addressing with the family."
Negotiations to determine how best to transfer temporary custody to Elian's father were to resume early today. Two previous days of talks between lawyers for the government and for Elian's Miami relatives have failed to work out details.
The Miami relatives oppose returning the boy to Cuba and have appealed a federal court ruling that says he should be reunited with his father. Cuban-American protesters have threatened to form a human chain around the Miami home where Elian is staying to prevent him from leaving.
Outside the house in Miami's Little Havana neighborhood, news of Gonzalez's imminent trip filtered through a crowd of more than 150 people clustered behind police barricades.
"We must prepare," demonstrator Gerardo Barrios shouted into a bullhorn.
Another man read a prayer to supporters gathered under the white glow of TV lights. "Protect this boy, Lord," they sang in Spanish.
A spokesman for the relatives, Armando Gutierrez, said they would ask Elian's father to come to Miami to "meet in the house and try to work it out as a family."
Anti-Castro activists also protested outside Attorney General Janet Reno's Florida home, carrying signs depicting her as the devil.
 Graphic



 
AP photos staffing
 Load-Date: April 7, 2000

 

End of Document
