

Employees' drug-smuggling arrests are the latest dent in American Airlines' image
The Associated Press
August 25, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 751 words
Byline: By DAVID KOENIG, AP Business Writer
Dateline: FORT WORTH, Texas
Body




The arrests Wednesday of dozens of American Airlines employees are just the latest in a series of events that have buffeted the Fort Worth-based carrier.
In the past several months, the airline has suffered a fatal crash in Arkansas that raised safety questions, been sued for predatory pricing and been hit with labor unrest that inconvenienced thousands of passengers.
American officials admit to feeling besieged by bad news, but they defend the airline's performance.
"It would be totally unfair to draw any conclusions by linking any of these events," said spokesman John Hotard. "This is an industry and an airline that lends itself to always being in the public eye, and many times, not in a favorable light."
Dozens of American Airlines employees and contract workers were arrested in Miami as part of a federal investigation into a drug ring that authorities said used the airline's planes to smuggle drugs into the United States.
Industry analysts said American is not to blame for drug smuggling, but they faulted the airline on a number of other fronts, especially its troubled record in labor relations, which they said contributed to low employee morale.
James M. Higgins, an analyst for Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, said if drugs were smuggled on American's planes it was because the airline flies between Miami and drug-producing and transit countries in the Caribbean and Latin America.
"But I do think that employee morale internally at American is not great," Higgins said. "Whether that contributed to a culture where they're more prone to accidents is an open question."
Fatigue is suspected of being a factor in the June 1 crash of an American jetliner in Little Rock that killed 11 people. The co-pilot had been on duty more than 13 hours the day of the crash, although that is within the 14-hour duty period in American's pilot contract.
The National Transportation Safety Board and a contractor hired by American are looking into the crash.
In July, an anonymous pilot wrote in a union grievance report that he and the co-pilot fell asleep for a half-hour while flying over Mexico en route to Central America. The union charged that American doesn't strictly enforce crew rest rules.
American's tart reply: The charge came from the same union that claimed 2,500 pilots suddenly became ill in February.
Hundreds of thousands of passengers were affected when about one-fourth of the airline's pilots called in sick for several days during the Feburary job action, causing the cancelation of 6,700 flights. The pilots were protesting the lack of an agreement over the airline's absorption of lower-paid pilots from Reno Air, which American bought in December.
Next month, flight attendants will vote on a contract proposal and even airline officials are bracing for union rejection.
American is hardly the only airline with labor problems, however. Recently, Delta Air Lines delayed use of its new Boeing 777 planes because pilots want more money to fly them. And in the American pilots' sickout, a federal judge sided with the airline and fined the union $ 45.5 million for ignoring his order to get the pilots back to work promptly.
Aside from labor problems, American is also being sued by the Justice Department, which accuses American of predatory pricing to drive competitors out of routes in the Midwest. Since April, eight class-action lawsuits have been filed against American charging monopoly practices.
American's labor problems go back to the leadership of former chairman Robert Crandall, whose blunt comments alienated pilots and other employees and have carried over under chairman Donald Carty, who took the helm in May 1998. Airline officials blame an adversarial pilots' union.
"Don has tried to get out to employees and turn around the morale issue," said Hotard. "We think he's making some progress, but it's going to take a long time because the well has been poisoned so long."
The stock price of American's parent company, AMR Corp., has fluctuated sharply in the past year, tracking very closely the experience of other airlines. AMR's share price is roughly where it was a year ago, in the $ 60 to $ 65 per share range. In trading Wednesday, AMR's stock rose $ 2.75, or more than 4 percent, to $ 64.75.
Higgins said, though, that the airline is underpriced compared to competitors, which he attributed to investor concern about its labor relations.
"If you take apart the pieces of AMR, the implied value of the airline is lower than what investors pay other airlines," he said.
 Load-Date: August 25, 1999

 

End of Document
