

Employees' drug-smuggling arrests are the latest dent in American Airlines' image
The Associated Press
August 26, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 657 words
Byline: By DAVID KOENIG, AP Business Writer
Dateline: FORT WORTH, Texas
Body




American Airlines has seen its share of adverse publicity in the last several months, ranging from a fatal jetliner crash to antitrust charges.
Then came Wednesday's arrests of airline employees on drug-smuggling charges.
American officials admit to feeling besieged by bad news, but they defend the airline's performance.
"It would be totally unfair to draw any conclusions by linking any of these events," said spokesman John Hotard. "This is an industry and an airline that lends itself to always being in the public eye, and many times, not in a favorable light."
More than 50 people, including 30 American Airlines baggage handlers and ramp workers based in Miami, were arrested after a two-year federal investigation into a drug ring that authorities said used the airline's planes to smuggle drugs into the United States.
Industry analysts said American is not to blame for drug smuggling, but they faulted the airline on a number of other fronts, especially its troubled record in labor relations, which they said has contributed to low employee morale.
James M. Higgins, an analyst for Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, said if drugs were smuggled on American's planes it was because the airline flies between Miami and drug-producing and transit countries in the Caribbean and Latin America.
"But I do think that employee morale internally at American is not great," Higgins said. "Whether that contributed to a culture where they're more prone to accidents is an open question."
Neil Bernstein, a labor law professor at Washington University in St. Louis, said American's labor relations are among the worst in the airline industry. He said the result could be disgruntled workers who perform the least work possible.
"I don't think it would have anything to do with safety, but it's hard for someone who is unhappy about their job to be as efficient or enthusiastic," he said.
American's relations with its pilots reached a low point in February, when about one-fourth of its 9,500 pilots called in sick for several days to protest the lack of an agreement over the airline's absorption of lower-paid pilots from Reno Air, which American bought in December. The job action caused the cancelation of 6,700 flights, and a federal judge fined the union $ 45.5 million for ignoring a back-to-work order.
Next month, flight attendants will vote on a contract proposal and even airline officials are bracing for union rejection.
On June 1, an American jetliner crashed while landing during a storm in Little Rock, killing 11 people. Fatigue is suspected of being a factor. The co-pilot had been on duty more than 13 hours the day of the crash, although that is within the 14-hour duty period in American's pilot contract.
The National Transportation Safety Board and a contractor hired by American are looking into the crash.
In July, an anonymous pilot wrote in a union grievance report that he and the co-pilot fell asleep for a half-hour while flying over Mexico en route to Central America. The union charged that American doesn't strictly enforce crew rest rules.
American's tart reply: The charge came from the same union that claimed 2,500 pilots suddenly became ill in February.
American is also being sued by the Justice Department, which accuses American of predatory pricing to drive competitors out of routes in the Midwest. Since April, eight class-action lawsuits have been filed against American charging monopoly practices.
David Margulies, a public relations consultant in Dallas, gave American good marks for its response to all the unfavorable incidents. He praised chairman Donald Carty for cutting short a trip to Japan after hearing of the Little Rock crash.
Still, Margulies said, American has conveyed a cold image. He recalled an official boasting about removing olives from in-flight salads to save money - it might have pleased shareholders but not passengers.
"They don't create a warm, fuzzy feeling about American Airlines," he said.
 Load-Date: August 26, 1999

 

End of Document
