

Ex-guerrillas win majority in Salvadoran congress for the first time
The Associated Press
March 19, 2000, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 293 words
Byline: By DIEGO MENDEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador
Body




Former leftist rebels-turned politicians have for the first time won a greater number of seats in congress than the ruling party, according to final results from recent elections.
The Supreme Electoral Tribunal announced Saturday that the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front won 31 of the 84 contested seats in March 12 elections for the country's single-house National Assembly.
The ruling Nationalist Republican Alliance won 29 seats.
The results represent an increase of four seats for the Liberation Front, or FMLN, and no change for the Republican Alliance, or ARENA.
The March 12 election marks the first time the ex-guerrillas have achieved a higher number of seats than the ruling party. The leftists have now participated in four elections since signing a 1992 peace accord, ending a 12-year civil war that left 76,000 people dead.
The party's victory does not imply a majority in congress, however: The conservative National Conciliation Party, which works closely with the government, won 14 seats - enough to keep rightists in control of the Assembly.
The center-left Democratic Center Union won three seats, the Christian Democratic Party, five, and the recently founded National Action Party, made up of ex-Army fighters, two.
The results signify a dramatic rebound for the FMLN, which was trounced in last year's presidential voting by Francisco Flores of ARENA, which has governed the country for more than a decade.
The leftist party's greatest triumph was in the capital, San Salvador, where FMLN Mayor Hector Silva, a Boston-born gynecologist, easily won re-election.
Altogether, the FMLN won 77 of 262 mayoral races, 60 percent more than the 48 mayoral seats it won in 1997. ARENA won 127 mayoral seats, 34 less than the 161 it took in 1997.
 Load-Date: March 20, 2000

 

End of Document
