

EXPLORING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY; After bananas, coffee and tourism, Costa Rica looks to high-tech
The Associated Press
September 11, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 841 words
Byline: By TRACI CARL, AP Business Writer
Dateline: SAN JOSE, Costa Rica
Body




In a gleaming white factory on a former coffee field, some 2,000 workers put the final touches on one-third of all Intel microprocessors used in computers around the world.
The chips are destined for export, but Costa Rica treasures most what Intel Corp. brings in: generous pay and stock options for workers, and standards of efficiency and safety that are emulated by local businesses.
This lush, mountainous Central American nation may be better known for bananas, coffee and tourism. But it's having some striking success luring a different sort of export business - companies that boost people and communities instead of exploit them.
Along with the Intel plant, which opened in 1998, Costa Rica has drawn more and more software companies, making computer products 37 percent of its exports last year - far above bananas at 10 percent and coffee at 5 percent.
California's Silicon Valley is hardly imperiled. But Costa Rica is determined to sell technology companies on its strengths: an educated, tech-savvy work force that costs less to hire than workers in more developed nations.
"We need the jobs. We want to be competitive," said Tomas Duenas, the country's economic minister.
Costa Rica's grab for a high-tech rung on the global economic ladder isn't without splinters.
Lured by lax regulations, Internet gambling companies have flocked here to the dismay of U.S. authorities. Today, Costa Rica ranks as the world's top online betting haven. While government hasn't actively wooed the industry, it's created an attractive environment, said Las Vegas lawyer Anthony Cabot, an expert on the topic.
Costa Rica has a history of promoting its economy. For the last two decades, while most of its neighbors were in the midst of bloody civil wars or trying to recover from them, Costa Rica touted itself to tourists and businesses as a safe, stable "Switzerland" of Central America.
It campaigned aggressively to lure 1 million visitors a year - equivalent to a fourth of its 4 million population - to climb its volcanoes, explore its rain forests and lounge on its Caribbean and Pacific beaches.
Officials decided agriculture and tourism were not enough. They began recruiting industry - mostly clothing factories - selling businesses on the country's cheap labor supply and political stability. Wages, however, began to rise with the growing economy, and the country could no longer compete with cheaper labor in other developing countries.
The nation's education level improved with the opening of many San Jose universities and technical institutes over the past decade. Government officials touted the educated work force to technology companies.
In 1996, Intel was looking for a factory site in Latin America, considering plants in Mexico, Chile and Brazil.
Costa Rican officials offered Intel 400,000 square feet of space in a tax-free industrial zone in San Jose, the cooperation of area schools to train workers and a promise of minimal government bureaucracy.
Intel agreed. The company broke ground in spring 1997, and started operations a year later. Today, the Costa Rican factory is Intel's second-largest for final assembly and testing of computer microprocessor chips, behind a plant in Malaysia.
Other major U.S. companies followed, including consumer products maker Procter & Gamble, medical devices manufacturer Abbott Laboratories and money transmitter Western Union.
The Costa Rican Investment Board, financed by private and government funds, works to recruit U.S. companies through its offices in New York and Santa Clara, Calif., where Intel is based.
Today, Costa Rica's wages are relatively high, with a general manager of a company commanding $8,371 a month. The country lacks the widespread poverty of other Central America countries. While Intel doesn't disclose pay, it says compensation is similar to other foreign-owned companies.
Intel has set efficiency and other business standards.
Intel safety manager Diego Araya says many Costa Rican companies, including contractors to Intel, have voluntarily adopted the company's stringent safety standards - the same as those used in the United States.
"What we did was raise the bar," says Ericka Henriquez, an industrial engineer who went to work for Intel after college.
Costa Rica is having trouble keeping up with its own success.
With unemployment at less than 5 percent - down from 6 percent in 1999 - software companies have begun to complain of a shortage of qualified workers, said Ignacio Trejos, dean of studies for Cenfotec, a new technical institute created by the software industry to meet demand for educated workers.
But the shortage hasn't hit Intel, which continues to boost Costa Rica's image in high-tech, said Danilo Arias, Intel spokesman and former manager of the Costa Rican Investment Board.
"If you asked a businessman in Santa Clara two years ago about Costa Rica, he would have probably told you it would be a nice place to visit," Arias said.
"If you asked the same question today, the answer would be very different."
---
On the Net:
Intel Corp.: http://www.intel.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY195-198, Graphic GLOBAL LOGO
 Load-Date: September 12, 2000

 

End of Document
