

Eyeing Suriname's presidency, former dictator takes on the Dutch
December 19, 1997, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 709 words
Byline: By BERT WILKINSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARAMARIBO, Suriname
Body




He's overthrown two governments and faces trial on drug charges in the Netherlands.
That isn't stopping former dictator Desi Bouterse from wanting to be Suriname's democratically elected president.
In recent months, thousands of Surinamese have massed at political rallies to cheer Bouterse's attacks on the Netherlands. The dictator-turned-politician says Suriname's biggest aid donor is trying to dictate how its former South American colony should be run.
"I might just run for the presidency in 2001 just to make them (the Dutch) feel bad," Bouterse, 52, said in an interview. "They know I am aiming straight for an electoral majority and there is no stopping me."
Bouterse - pronounced BOW-ter-say - has feuded with the Netherlands since February 1980, when he and a group of fellow army sergeants demanding higher wages overthrew an elected pro-Dutch government.
He imposed martial law and censorship, and he was accused of ordering the killings of 15 top intellectuals, political leaders and journalists in 1982. He conceded his regime, which ruled until 1987, was responsible for the killings, but hasn't acknowledged any personal responsibility.
The Netherlands, Suriname's colonial ruler until 1975, reacted to the slayings by suspending a vital $ 1.5 billion aid package. Aid was resumed when Bouterse permitted elections in 1987, but was suspended again when he led a bloodless coup in 1990 and installed an interim president.
Bouterse allowed new elections the following year, retired from the military and started building his army-based National Democratic Party.
In 1996 elections, the party campaigned on a strongly nationalistic platform and won the most seats in Parliament. It assembled a coalition government that named a close Bouterse associate, Jules Wijdenbosch, president.
Wijdenbosch, in turn, named Bouterse a special adviser - a move that could give Bouterse diplomatic immunity when traveling abroad and possibly help him avoid drug smuggling charges filed this year by Dutch prosecutors.
The Dutch allege Bouterse, now a timber executive, exported tons of drugs to Europe and had links to Colombian cocaine cartels. Bouterse denies it.
"They can't now say that I am a communist, or a dictator, because I am the leader of the biggest political party in Suriname. The party has successfully contested free elections, and if now they talk about drugs, that is only the latest accusation they are making against me," he said.
A charismatic speaker, Bouterse has tried to take advantage of the failure of internationally supported economic austerity measures to improve living standards for Suriname's 420,000 people.
Suriname once enjoyed one of the most prosperous economies in South America but entered a rapid decline after independence. Today, it has the second-lowest standard of living in the Western Hemisphere after Haiti.
Many Surinamese remember better times under military rule, when Bouterse instituted a land reform program for the country's poor.
Others, however, fear a return of repression. In recent months, Bouterse has stepped up his criticism of journalists he considers antagonistic to his nationalist views.
On Dec. 8, the 15th anniversary of the executions, thugs beat the husband of Nita Ramcharan, editor in chief of the newspaper De Ware Tijd. "This is a present for December 8 for all of you," the men told Edward Toon before throwing him out of a car.
One of the 1982 victims was a young De Ware Tijd journalist, Lesly Rahman.
At the urging of human rights groups, the government has agreed to create a commission to look into abuses committed during the 1980s. But it hired a lawyer who represents Bouterse to organize the commission, drawing protests from rights advocates.
Bouterse dismissed the idea of a commission. "The population is more concerned with survival," he said.
Bouterse says he wants Suriname to be less dependent on Dutch aid, still considerable at $ 65 million this year. Suriname is seeking loans from a Saudi Arabia-based bank and wants to open the country's vast mineral resources to foreign investors.
"Development of Suriname is closely linked traditionally to (Dutch) development aid," he said. "They determine what is correct and what's not. In these modern days we cannot continue like this."
 Load-Date: December 19, 1997

 

End of Document
