

Fans a part of the scene at Bondi beach volleyball
The Associated Press
September 21, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 696 words
Byline: By TOM COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SYDNEY, Australia
Body




"Ladies and gentlemen," the announcer begins, "please put your hands together for the world's biggest beach volleyball fan."
All eyes turn to Roberto Santana, known as "Seven Ball," who lifts up his 480-pound body and starts a rhythmic clapping that quickly spreads through the Bondi Beach stadium.
His companion on trombone joins in, and so does everyone else. Kids in baggy pants dance in the aisles, while face-painted, wig-wearing adults clap and holler. Flags of all sizes and colors wave.
The mix of music, cheers, shouts and stomps never rises out of the open 10,000-seat arena into the blue sky above, instead staying put to overwhelm the ears and resound in the head.
No other Olympic event has the flavor and color of the beach spectacle that attracts sellout crowds daily, including emotional partisans, anxious parents and even one guy dressed as an endangered animal.
The players love it, unanimously calling the Olympic venue the best ever because of its setting on a gorgeous natural beach and the electric atmosphere created by the ever-present crowds.
When an Australian team plays in the men's or women's competition, the home side gets most of the cheers. Other matches usually end up unofficial noise competitions between rival contingents, with underdogs always attracting the non-aligned support.
Organizers make every effort to stoke the festive environment, blaring uptempo rock music between rallies and having announcers goad the crowd into cheering and doing various versions of the wave.
"There is something that only beach volleyball is bringing to the Olympic spirit - the joy for life," Ruben Acosta, president of the international volleyball federation known by the acronym FIVB, said in an interview Thursday. "We strongly believe … singing and cheering for the players and communicating with the players, this brings everybody inside the games."
Then there is Santana, a virtual wall of a man who stands out in any crowd. He and his four companions came from Rio de Janeiro as professional fans, sponsored by Speedo to get the dancing and partying going, Brazilian-style. Offering a mix of samba and other popular Brazilian music, they never fail to inspire dancing and clapping, with people constantly approaching to take photos.
"I'm very happy to be here, making a big party with the Australian people," Santana said through an interpreter. "It's a different language, I don't understand all that much, but people have made us feel welcome."
The unrelenting Australian sun makes some kind of hat almost mandatory, giving fans another way to express their spirit. Some wear team caps in national colors or the Akubra, a wide-brimmed local brand. U.S. first daughter Chelsea Clinton received a white Akubra on her first visit.
Others adorn headgear with balloons, streamers, tinsel and other decorations. Until Australia's Sarah Straton was eliminated in consolation play, her college friend from Perth - Paul Richardson - showed up each day in a bilby costume as part of his campaign to raise awareness of the disappearing rabbit-sized marsupial that resembles a tiny kangaroo.
Wearing the gray fur bilby head, its upright ears pink on the inside, Richardson told how he rode his bicycle the 2,500 miles or so from Perth to cheer for Sarah.
"It's such an amazing accomplishment," he said of Straton and teammate Annette Huygens Tholen qualifying for the Olympics. "I thought I can sacrifice seven weeks if they can sacrifice seven years."
Not everyone comes to party. In one corner Thursday, 1960 Olympic decathlon champion Rafer Johnson stood up to try to show his daughter where he was.
Jenny Johnson Jordan, out on the court with Annett Davis for the third-seeded U.S. team, didn't seem to notice, but that was fine with Johnson. He had his moment of Olympic glory - a silver medal in Melbourne in 1956, the gold in Rome four years later, and lighting the Olympic flame in Los Angeles in 1984 - and now it was her turn.
He called the Bondi Beach stadium the biggest, noisiest beach volleyball venue he'd ever seen, and the excitement seemed to touch him a little. When the wave came around, he raised his hands - but he still stopped short of standing up.
 Load-Date: September 22, 2000

 

End of Document
