

Fear, anticipation grip Caribbean in final total eclipse of the century
The Associated Press
February 26, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 703 words
Byline: By JAMES ANDERSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WILLEMSTAD, Curacao
Body




Confused roosters crowed and mothers thrust children under their beds during a solar eclipse of the sun that plunged much of Venezuela, Colombia and the Caribbean in deep twilight Thursday, inspiring awe and not a little fear.
Thousands of cruise ship tourists, Carnival revelers and astronomers gathered to behold the Western Hemisphere's last total solar eclipse of the century.
At Venezuela's Plaza Bolivar in downtown Caracas, New Age devotees formed a circle, closed their eyes and opened their palms in worship.
Families enjoying the spectacle on the Dutch island of Curacao spread picnic fare on a windswept plain dotted by 15-foot cacti and slow-running iguanas.
But in some places, the phenomenon caused panic. In Haiti, parents thrust children under their beds and youngsters raced to get home for fear of being struck blind - an exaggeration of the damage that can be done to unprotected eyes.
Confused roosters crowed as if it were dawn in Valledupar, a state capital in Colombia surrounded by ranchland. Nocturnal animals awoke while birds retreated to their nests, thinking it was bedtime.
"It's a mystery. Who knows what will happen? Who knows whether the sun will return?" Osman Jordan said as he arranged rows of apples, bananas and onions on a wooden stand at the pier of Willemstad, capital of Curacao.
Jordan, 42, had brought lanterns to light his stand.
Radio hosts spent the day trying to alleviate fears of a phenomenon this island won't experience for another 600 years. Around the Caribbean, government officials spent weeks educating the public. Some distributed special glasses for safe viewing.
One campaign in Haiti caused a panic that forced schools and shops to close. A mayor warned people's eyes would burst if they looked at the sun.
A new rumor ran threw Port-au-Prince Thursday morning: Under the cover of darkness, right-wing activists would return ousted dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier.
"There's a lot of people who fear this eclipse," said Zaira Busby, 24, of the Curacao government's Solar Eclipse Committee. "But to me this is great. It's a once in a lifetime experience."
Dozens of families, scientists and amateur astronomers converged on the island's Westpunt, where the darkness lasted more than three minutes.
In a total solar eclipse, the moon blocks all but the sun's corona, its flaring outer envelope, casting the earth into deep twilight through which the stars and planets shine.
Many areas experienced a partial eclipse, from Ecuador to Puerto Rico to parts of the southeastern United States.
People set up picnic tables, vendors sold souvenir T-shirts, and astronomers fidgeted with dozens of sophisticated and not-so-sophisticated cameras and telescopes as the sky began to darken and take the edge off the tropical heat.
"If I get one picture - just the corona and the stars and the planets - that's all I want," said a hopeful Stefan Dieters, 39, an astronomer at the University of Alabama-Huntsville. He stared at a sky dotted with puffy white clouds.
"All I need is the clouds to part, just once," said Francis Murphy, 35, of Honeybrook, Pa., who made his first-ever plane flight to see the eclipse.
He and others took solace when they spotted a cruise ship several hundred yards off shore, figuring its crew knew where the clearest skies would be.
Some star-chasing cruise liners offered running commentary on the event. Scientists Alan Hale and Tom Bopp of Hale-Bopp comet fame were on the Star Clipper, a four-masted sailing ship based in Antigua.
Steve Micciche and Ann Donegan of Denver labored in the heat to build a sophisticated telescope from 800 pounds of equipment carted in freight boxes. They hoped to sell eclipse pictures to universities.
One group of scientists was hoping to use the moon's creeping edge to get a better measurement of the sun's diameter.
After a career spent studying and photographing eclipses, Roy Bishop, 58, of Avonport, Nova Scotia, prepared to simply enjoy one. An editor and past president of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada, his sole equipment Thursday was a handmade viewing lens.
"This time I just want to see it," Bishop said. "This is just an emotional experience today. On the scale of one to 10 of celestial events, this is a 10."
 
 Load-Date: February 26, 1998

 

End of Document
