

First lady draws inspiration from women around the world
The Associated Press
October 2, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 508 words
Byline: By CAROLYN SKORNECK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MONTEVIDEO, Uruguay
Body




Hillary Rodham Clinton, cheered by women in Latin America as a source of inspiration, says the women she meets on her world travels are the ones who inspire her.
"I am very grateful for the opportunity that I have to meet with women and to listen to them, their dreams, their aspirations, their hopes, their concerns," Mrs. Clinton told the Vital Voices of the Americas Conference, a U.S. foreign policy project aimed at helping women advance politically and economically.
"And I'm always amazed, impressed and humbled by the extraordinary human spirit and hopefulness that I find.
"Whether I'm in a very poor village in Bangladesh or Uganda, or in a very small business in Nicaragua or Santiago, I'm always with women who inspire me."
The voices of women throughout the hemisphere must be heard, she said, "in city halls and boardrooms and trade union offices, in political parties, in academia, in families."
Mrs. Clinton, on the final day of her four-day trip to Puerto Rico and South America, struck many of the themes she has emphasized before - in Santiago, Chile, where she addressed her fellow first ladies of the Americas; on Thursday, when speaking to the multiparty Uruguayan Women's Political Network; in the six years she has lived in the White House and even long before then.
She emphasized anew the need for women's full participation in the political and economic lives of their countries as well as the need for judicial systems to treat women fairly. So-called women's issues, she said, are really society's issues - domestic violence, for example, is not a women's problem but a crime.
Hattie Babbitt, the deputy administrator for the Agency for International Development, said Friday in an interview that she's been hearing her friend argue these cases for more than two decades. After Mrs. Clinton delivered her stirring speech Thursday to the Uruguayan Women's Political Network, Babbitt told her: "You know, you gave that speech in 1974."
Women at the conference said they were moved that Mrs. Clinton had come to Montevideo.
Gladys Aida Caballero, the vice president of Honduras, said in an interview that she has high hopes for Mrs. Clinton's future.
"I'd like her to be the first woman president of the United States," said Ms. Caballero, who like Mrs. Clinton is a lawyer. "I think it's the time for a lady like her to be president. She has all the qualifications you need."
Eugenia Charles, the former prime minister of Dominica, said in an interview, "She's interested in the right things, not just in being a first lady. She wants to improve things. She's not satisfied by the status quo."
Mrs. Clinton announced new U.S. government programs Friday directed largely at women. The initiatives include $ 50 million from the U.S. Agency for International Development to strengthen human rights, justice and democracy. AID will also increase its loans to small enterprises in the hemisphere to $ 120 million over the next three years, more than two-thirds of the loans going to women.
Mrs. Clinton was flying back to Washington Friday.
 Load-Date: October 2, 1998

 

End of Document
