

Focus turns to recovering dead, relocating the uprooted
The Associated Press
December 21, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 747 words
Byline: By JARED KOTLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




Nearly a week after seeing half his family vanish under an avalanche of mud and boulders, 24-year-old Luciano Holguin watched grimly as soldiers and firemen with pickaxes dug tirelessly for his older brother's remains.
"I've already felt all the pain that I had," said Holguin, who also lost his younger sister and grandfather in the mudslide that rumbled through Blandin, a mountainside slum in the capital hit by Venezuela's worst natural disaster this century. "Now I just want the body."
At this point, it is impossible to give a precise death toll, government officials said Tuesday. Their rough estimates range between 5,000 and 30,000. Most bodies are thought to have been buried deep under avalanches or carried out to sea, and only 1,500 have been recovered, officials said.
The number of dead "could be 20,000 or it could be 30,000," civil defense chief Angel Rangel told The Associated Press, acknowledging that estimates are being made partly from census data. "What's for sure is there are thousands and thousands."
The disaster started last Wednesday, when torrential rains triggered massive mudslides and flooding, wiping out entire neighborhoods.
With tens of thousands of survivors already evacuated from the hardest-hit areas, the relief effort began shifting its focus Tuesday to recovering bodies, avoiding epidemics and finding new or temporary homes for 150,000 people.
"We are entering a second phase" of the emergency, President Hugo Chavez said.
As Chavez later visited several hundred refugees being lodged temporarily at a military base outside Caracas and gazed out at land where the government plans to construct housing for them, he received a call from President Clinton on his cellular telephone.
"He asked me to tell the Venezuelan people that he was praying for us … for our recovery, and that they are going to help out. I thanked him, of course, in the name of all the Venezuelan people for all the help he has sent us," Chavez said.
Earlier, the refugees had mobbed Chavez, kissing and hugging him and shouting, "Chavez! Chavez!"
During a meeting Monday in Caracas with Gen. Charles Wilhelm, the chief U.S. military commander in Latin America, Venezuelan officials requested the assistance of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in constructing houses for flood victims, Gen. Lucas Rincon, head of the Venezuelan army, told The Associated Press.
A nationalist preoccupied with issues of sovereignty, Chavez previously denied a U.S. request to use Venezuelan air space for anti-drug flights.
Teams of soldiers, forensic specialists and search dogs descended on devastated Vargas state, on Venezuela's Caribbean coast, in a stepped-up effort to find the dead.
An estimated 2,000 survivors remained stranded in remote coastal towns and villages in Vargas, said Defense Minister Gen. Raul Salazar. Since Wednesday, more than 68,000 people have been airlifted or bused from the disaster zone to Caracas and other cities.
The devastation was apparent in the coastal town of La Guaira, where residents in the Sorocaima section gathered Tuesday on top of mud in the streets that put them at eye level with the second-story windows of their homes.
Still, most said they had no plans to abandon their homes.
"We're not leaving," said housewife Leticia de Pelucarte, 52.
She and others said they doubted another disaster would strike, even though experts say much of the region should not be inhabited because mudslides are common.
Army helicopters dropped leaflets advising residents to stay in their homes after 7 p.m. and travel in groups for safety because of reports of robberies.
Health Minister Gilberto Ochoa warned that cases of diarrhea, dehydration and other health problems could spread because of unsanitary conditions.
Chavez urged residents to abandon the disaster area, and said officials would block new construction in it.
Meanwhile, sporadic looting broke out Tuesday, and army commander Gen. Lucas Rincon said the military was investigating reports that national guard soldiers participated in some of the previous days' sacking of stores and shipping containers.
In the mountainside slum of Blandin where workers were searching for bodies, construction worker Holguin described his brother's final moments.
The two were standing only feet apart outside a neighbor's house when Holguin looked up and saw an avalanche bearing down on them from the forested hillside above.
"I said, 'Run brother, run,' but he didn't make it," Holguin recalled. "I never saw him again."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos CAR101-110
 Load-Date: December 22, 1999

 

End of Document
