

For Web surfers in a jam: Yahoo! Here comes the Internet taxi
The Associated Press
October 26, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 532 words
Byline: By TONY SMITH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAO PAULO, Brazil
Body




It can take two or three hours to get across Sao Paulo at the height of traffic. An eternity for an executive stuck without a Palm Pilot - but no problem if you're aboard one of Yahoo!'s Internet taxis.
The first five taxis equipped with Internet-accessing laptops and swathed in Yahoo!'s purple and yellow colors have joined other cabs cruising the swankiest neighborhoods of South America's largest city.
From the relative luxury of a back seat, passengers could check their e-mail, send instant messages, catch up with the news online, and all for no extra charge over the regular taxi fare.
The Internet taxis are similar to ones introduced last year in San Francisco and last month in New York City. Now Santa Clara, Calif.-based Yahoo! Inc. is introducing them to the business nerve center of Brazil, Latin America's biggest economy.
It's the first foray outside the United States with the Internet cabs - a reflection of the company's interest in building up its brand in the Latin American market, Yahoo! says.
If the idea catches on, Yahoo! plans to install computers in 20 liveried cabs that work around Sao Paulo's bustling Faria Lima business district. Even more could be installed - but city authorities strictly limit the number of cabs that can be covered in multicolored advertisements. Cabs are traditionally white.
Yahoo!'s marketing scheme could be a boon for the busy and the bored who waste a large part of each day in traffic in this city of 10 million inhabitants. A cross-town drive can take hours when the streets are at their most jammed. Public transport is crowded, unreliable and can be dangerous.
"What a brilliant idea," Moraima Rangel said as she got into one of the first Internet cabs on her way to a meeting. "Whenever I come to Sao Paulo, I have to use taxis and I waste so much time just stuck in traffic."
Rangel, a Philip Morris executive from Curitiba, 240 miles southwest of Sao Paulo, said later by telephone that she had managed to surf, but with difficulty: The connection had been patchy and bad roads made typing difficult. But she said she was sold on the idea.
Passengers operate laptops fixed on a small table behind the driver's seat and permanently connected to the Net through a mobile phone. Given Sao Paulo's high crime rate, the computers are fastened down with metal cords.
All Net services, not just Yahoo!'s, are available.
"Yahoo! believes that Internauts want to enjoy maximum freedom when they're surfing," said Gustavo Siemsen, Yahoo! Brazil's marketing director. "That's what the Net's all about. It wouldn't make sense for us to limit access."
Siemsen declined to say how much the project would cost Yahoo!, which, according to ratings agency Media Metrix, is Brazil's fourth most popular site with 562,000 visits per month.
Cab drivers earn an extra $500 dollars a month for wrapping their car in an advertisement. But some don't think the extra cash is worth it because, when Sao Paulo residents want to hail a cab, they automatically look for a white car.
Still, the distinctive taxis are grabbing attention. When they first appeared outside the swanky Iguatemi shopping mall, youngsters on the street yelled "Yahooooo!" as the cabs passed.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos SAO102-103
 Load-Date: October 27, 2000

 

End of Document
