

For Argentine president, a political crisis marks the end of a honeymoon
The Associated Press
October 11, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 773 words
Byline: By KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




The honeymoon is over for President Fernando De la Rua.
Less than a year into his presidency, a man elected for his simple, honest style and his vow to clean up Argentine politics is facing a crisis. His standings in the polls has plummeted, the country's economy continues to sputter and worst of all, his vice president has resigned, saying he is indignant over De la Rua's handling of an influence-peddling scandal.
Carlos Alvarez, the vice president and a key ally in the ruling Alliance coalition, announced last Friday that he would step down.
His decision came a day after De la Rua had hoped to reinvigorate his government with a Cabinet shake-up. But Alvarez decried the changes, which left in place two ministers implicated in an alleged vote-buying scheme involving some 11 senators and labor legislation.
Analysts say the scandal has left De la Rua struggling to hold his now fragile coalition together, and has put him on the defensive on an issue that helped usher him into office last October - his honesty. That vote ended 10 years of rule by Carlos Menem's Peronist party.
"Alvarez's departure removes what had distinguished the Alliance from the Peronists and was one of the keys to its electoral victory last year," said Rosendo Fraga, a political analyst. "Those who voted for the Alliance did so because they wanted more political transparency."
The head of the Radical party, De la Rua joined forces with Alvarez's center-left FREPASO to form the Alliance coalition, only established three years ago. Both men were known for their squeaky clean politics.
"This is a crisis of De la Rua's strategy of fighting corruption and focusing on the way you do things rather than the things you do," said Argentine political consultant Felipe Noguera. "The main thing is that De la Rua needs a strategy that will affect people's lives, not just the way things are done."
Winning office on pledges to clean up Argentine politics and re-ignite the economy, De la Rua opened his term taking pains to distinguish his administration as more subdued and less glamorous than that of Menem.
De la Rua eschewed traveling in the luxurious presidential jet, Tango 1; made efforts to make all government expenditures more public, and established a first-ever anti-corruption office to investigate cases of official misconduct.
But those efforts have yielded few of the bombshell indictments of former Menem administration officials many Argentines seemed to expect. Charges of illegal enrichment and mismanagement of state funds swirled around high-ranking Menem officials as his term drew to a close last year.
Once the case in the Senate emerged in July, De la Rua assumed a more circumspect, wait-and-see approach, claiming there was no proof. Alvarez, in turn, chose a more strident tone.
Compounding the problems for the president has been the anemic economy. In a sign De la Rua's austerity measures of increased taxes and reduced spending has not jump-started the economy as expected, the government has scaled back growth estimates from 4 percent to 2 percent.
Taken together, the economy's sluggishness and the political turmoil have plunged De la Rua's approval ratings. Opinion polls taken by the Argentine daily, Clarin, over the weekend showed the president's popularity down to 23 percent.
On a popular Argentine television program Tuesday night, De la Rua said the Senate "has to purify itself" and return to being a trusted institution. Seated alongside his wife, daughter, and grandchildren, he sought to shake off any airs of a crisis, insisting: "I am in firm control."
But what the Argentine press have deemed a "crisis" poses some potentially damaging ramifications. Interior Minister Federico Storani has already said a fractured Alliance will make "it would impossible to pass a bill."
In a country heavily reliant on foreign investment, inability to pass key legislation - including the budget for the upcoming year, an economic emergency bill to streamline government, and an anti-tax evasion law - could turn repel investors.
Inability to pass the budget would make more difficult the government's task of meeting fiscal deficit targets agreed to with the International Monetary Fund. Argentina must slash its $7.1 billion deficit by $2.5 billion this year.
Inability to decrease the deficit would increase the nation's reliance on foreign investors and its debt-servicing expenses.
Meanwhile, Argentines appear to be bracing for what they expect to be tougher times ahead.
"The government kept talking about an economic recovery that apparently was on the way," said 48-year-old Ricardo Godoy, a business owner. "Then this happened."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY108
 Load-Date: October 12, 2000

 

End of Document
