

Former coup leader, popular in presidential polls, scares the rich
The Associated Press
April 22, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 779 words
Byline: By BART JONES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




A ban on visiting the United States and the scorn of his country's wealthy elite hasn't kept former coup leader Hugo Chavez from becoming a hero to millions of Venezuelans or rising to the top of the polls in this year's presidential race.
His popularity is provoking predictions of doom from investors and the Venezuelan establishment, which contends that Chavez is a dictator-in-waiting who will bring back failed socialist policies.
The State Department, citing the 1992 coup attempt, said last week that Chavez had been barred from entering the United States, where he had wanted to address businessmen, academics and Wall Street investors.
Many investors fear Chavez, 43, will reverse Venezuela's free market reforms if elected in December by turning back the clock on recent privatizations and imposing new trade barriers.
As an army lieutenant colonel, Chavez led a Feb. 4, 1992, coup attempt against then-President Carlos Andres Perez. He was pardoned after spending two years in jail and formed a political movement based on the teachings of South American liberation hero Simon Bolivar.
Since entering the presidential race, Chavez has been drawing support from the poor and middle classes for his tough anti-corruption rhetoric.
"The political class that governed this country for 40 years destroyed public morality," Chavez said in a recent interview with The Associated Press. "Our proposal is for true democracy. It doesn't have anything to do with dictatorship."
That kind of talk won over Norma Torrellas, 46, who says she and her children sometimes eat just once a day. "He's the only one who can save the country," she said.
Venezuela is the No. 1 foreign supplier of oil to the United States and has more proven oil reserves than any country outside the Middle East. Yet more than half the population lives in poverty.
Chavez is capitalizing on widespread discontent with Venezuelan democracy, which once was a model for Latin America and gave its citizens the region's highest per capita income during oil booms in the 1970s and early 1980s. Many blame political corruption and mismanagement for squandering the country's wealth.
Merrill Lynch investment company recently said Chavez's growing popularity "is making business leaders very nervous." Last week, the Caracas stock market took a tumble, partly because of Chavez's strong showing in the polls.
Newspapers have published a barrage of editorials attacking the former paratrooper commander, and Venezuela's traditional political parties reportedly may bury their differences and nominate a common candidate to defeat him.
Chavez's platform is drastic: he wants to dissolve Congress and the courts, convene a constituent assembly to rewrite the constitution and hold new elections for congressmen and judges.
"The Republic has fractured. There is no state. We have to change the immoral, rotten floor we're standing on," said Chavez.
But many fear he will try to stack Congress and the courts with his own people and essentially eliminate all checks on his power.
"What he's preaching is fascism. He's right out of Mussolini's book," said Michael Rowan, a political consultant in Caracas.
Chavez is fighting back, darting from meeting to meeting with officials of Citibank, J.P. Morgan, Morgan Stanley and other investment companies to calm their fears.
He's also trying to soften his image. Gone are the military fatigues and red beret he once favored. These days, it's suits and ties or pullover sweaters. Advisors are telling him to smile more and talk about his family.
He's hitting the TV talk show circuit and granting interviews as fast as he can. On Tuesday night, he appeared on a nationwide TV comedy show to poke fun at himself and the president he tried to overthrow. Pulling out a Visa card, he said the U.S. rejection didn't bother him because he already had a visa.
For months, Chavez had been given little chance of winning the presidency. Most eyes were on independent candidate Irene Saez, a former Miss Universe who won praise for running an efficient and honest government in Caracas's affluent Chacao municipality. President Rafael Caldera is barred from running for a second consecutive five-year term.
But Saez's sugary slogans, vague platform and flirtation with mainstream parties are eating away at her support. Since March, polls have shown her and Chavez neck-and-neck.
The latest, released April 14 by the Venezuelan Marketing Investigation Company, put Chavez at 19.2 percent and Saez at 13.5 percent. Nearly 31 percent opted for "no one," and the remainder was divided among several candidates.
The poll was of 1,582 people in five major cities. The margin of error was 2.5 percentage points.
 Load-Date: April 22, 1998

 

End of Document
