

Free of the specter of war, Guatemalans choose a new president
The Associated Press
November 7, 1999, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 573 words
Byline: By ELOY O. AGUILAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GUATEMALA CITY
Body




Guatemalans held their first peacetime presidential election in more than 30 years on Sunday. Among the leading candidates is Alfonso Portillo, a populist who admitted to killing two people at a party 17 years ago.
Portillo, 48, backed by the right-wing Guatemalan Revolutionary Front, and Oscar Berger, 53, of the ruling National Advancement Party led the field of 11 candidates. If no candidate won a majority of the votes, the top two would go into a runoff next month.
Voters also were electing a new congress and 330 mayors.
The political party made up of former guerrilla groups of the National Revolutionary Guatemalan Union had its own candidate but surveys indicated he would win less than 7 percent of the vote.
Voters showed up in small numbers early in the morning as polls opened, but lines grew by midmorning. The National Electoral Tribunal expected almost half of the 4.5 million voters to cast ballots.
There were few signs of the military presence that marked voting during the 36-year civil war between the government and leftist guerrillas. The war left an estimated 200,000 dead, mostly innocent Indian civilians. The two sides signed a peace agreement in 1996.
"There is no military presence," said Jorge Ismael Soto, formerly known as guerrilla commander Pablo Monsanto, who voted early Sunday. "There is no pressure, all is calm. We can say that for the first time there is total freedom to express our will."
Nobel Peace Prize winner Rigoberta Menchu noted it was the second time she had voted. "All is calm," she said. "There is great joy."
In San Juan Sacatepequez, a small, mostly Indian town 20 miles northwest of the capital, hundreds of residents milled in the main plaza.
Men lined up first to vote while women tended the market stalls. "There are more people here to vote than to buy," said a concerned Argentina Rompiche.
Portillo is feared in some sectors of Guatemalan society that are wary of the man behind him - Gen. Efrain Rios Montt, founder of the Revolutionary Front and a former military dictator who ruled with an iron hand for 17 months in 1982 and 1983.
Rios Montt heads the list of congressional candidates and is expected to be an influential figure should Portillo win. Portillo has stated the general's influence is "a myth."
Portillo admitted in September that he killed two men in self-defense outside a party in Mexico in 1982 and then fled from prosecutors. His outlaw image, however, has helped his popularity in the eyes of many Guatemalans, who have spent most of their lives amid a violent civil war and a corrupt legal system.
Portillo says he will strengthen the "process of reconciliation" and eliminate the "war of intolerance" and the "class confrontation" that followed the shooting war. He accused the government of corruption and failure to end common crime. Like Rios Montt, he supports the death penalty.
"I am very impressed with the voter turnout and I am confident that the winner will be the people of Guatemala," Portillo said after voting. "People are tired of the authoritarianism and violence."
Berger is a businessman who sees economic development and education as the solution to violence. He said he was "confident of victory in the first round" and rejected claims that the ruling party was going to cheat.
Official economic indicators are unreliable, but unemployment is estimated at about 20 percent and prices have risen as the national currency weakened before the dollar.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos planned
 Load-Date: November 8, 1999

 

End of Document
