

From the past, a glimpse of the next inauguration
January 21, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 488 words
Byline: By LAWRENCE L. KNUTSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




At the other side of the bridge to the 21st century, all 118 states will participate in the inauguration of President George McKinley Barrington in 2001.
Never mind that the number of states will have to more than double in four years, or that the president-to-be's name doesn't ring a bell.
It's going to happen.
The folks who helped inaugurate William McKinley as the first president of the 20th century had the start of the 21st century all figured out. They spelled out their vision in two pages of the official souvenir program for McKinley's inauguration on March 4, 1901.
According to McKinley's fearless forecasters, President Barrington is from Ontario and the United States encompasses the entire land mass of North and South America.
Reporting as though President Barrington's inauguration had already taken place, the guidebook called the ceremonies "the most elaborate in the history of this country."
Reaching for the most outlandishly large figure, the guidebook authors said that "not less than $ 10 million was expended on the celebration." That would mark quite a cutback. Organizers estimate Bill Clinton's inauguration bill this week was $ 42.6 million.
Special exhibits at the Barrington affair featured the automobile and the electric street car - state of the art in 1901 - as long-obsolete antiques.
The inaugural parade was 36 miles long, with floats and bands and marchers borne aloft by "aeroplanes" and "aerial autos." It passed by the Department of Transportation. Not a Cabinet department in McKinley's era, it didn't open its doors until 1967.
The new president reviewed this aerial parade from his "aerialtrans," 300 feet above the pavement. He was accompanied by the outgoing president, whose name was Brown, not Clinton.
Aerial floats included those from the all-American cities of Montreal, Mexico City, Rio de Janeiro and Santiago de Chile, as well as Chicago and New York.
"As the president passed over each of the state arches, he was saluted by a volley of electrical bombs," the guidebook said.
Wealthy Europeans flocked in aboard "air yachts," not a bad description of today's private and corporate jets.
A half-million people crowded into a glass pavilion at the East Front of the new Capitol, entertained by four "automatic bands," each operated with the press of a button.
The president walked off his airship at the top of the Capitol dome, took the oath of office and delivered his inaugural address, which the guidebook said was "remarkable for its brevity and yet for the numerous recommendations made."
Among these, President Barrington proposed that work begin at once on changing the direction of the arctic current off Labrador "to allow the gulf stream to change the climate."
"The ceremony passed off without a single mishap," the guidebook reported.
So did McKinley's. But within six months, he fell victim to an assassin's bullet.
The future changed in ways the predictors couldn't predict.
 Load-Date: January 21, 1997

 

End of Document
