

Fujimori exudes confidence in runoff in interview with the AP
The Associated Press
April 14, 2000, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 736 words
Byline: By MONTE HAYES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




Sitting under a portrait of a 19th century Peruvian navy admiral who died rather than surrender his ship, President Alberto Fujimori shows the same determination to see the course through to victory.
In his first interview since Sunday's election, which sent him into a second-round showdown against Alejandro Toledo, Fujimori exuded confidence, saying he had no doubt he would defeat his upstart rival.
At ease and self-assured, Fujimori seemed not to hear the unflattering chants of protesters who were demonstrating Thursday night outside the National Palace in the Plaza de Armas.
"You will always find me calm and tranquil," he said. "I have not gone out and made triumphant declarations."
He said he was pleased with the results of the first round.
"I'm satisfied with the final tally, which gave me 49.9 percent after 10 years governing a country with complicated problems," he said.
The president fell just shy of the majority he needed to avoid a runoff. But a three-day delay by election officials in producing the final returns raised suspicions of vote fraud and set off massive street protests by Toledo supporters.
Fujimori said the government had no intention of sabotaging Toledo's campaign during the runoff, despite concerns by international monitors about smear attacks and dirty tricks against Fujimori's election opponents during the first round.
The bespectacled, 61-year-old Fujimori joked about being blamed when anything goes wrong, and said it has become a habit for opponents to point to him or his military intelligence allies for "every problem that Peru has."
But he turned serious when he discussed his opponent. He called Toledo, a U.S.-trained economist, an irresponsible populist for his promises to cut taxes and raise wages and a demagogue who has frightened Peruvians with his fiery rhetoric.
He said Toledo's spending promises would cause a deficit equivalent to 10 percent of the gross domestic product and hurl Peru back into the economic chaos of the late 1980s.
"It would be unmanageable," Fujimori said.
When Fujimori took office in 1990, inflation reached 7,750 percent. He quickly imposed harsh austerity measures that doused the inflationary fires. Last year inflation was 3.7 percent.
But only half the Peruvians in the labor force have steady work, and Toledo has cut into Fujimori's support among the poor with promises to create hundreds of thousands of jobs by reducing taxes to boost business investment. He also has pledged large pay increases for police, teachers and other government workers.
Fujimori also criticized Toledo, 54, for firing up large crowds of protesters, calling them "mobs" that he could barely control.
For three days after Sunday's election, Toledo's supporters demonstrated by the tens of thousands in Peru's major cities. Toledo, a former World Bank official who grew up in poverty, warned that the mostly peaceful marches and rallies could turn violent if Fujimori claimed victory in the first round.
"His management of masses is worrisome," Fujimori said. "He has created a climate of uncertainty, of anxiety, of fear, in the last few days."
Fujimori also rejected any comparisons between Toledo's campaign to unseat him and his own upset win over famed novelist Mario Vargas Llosa in 1990, when Fujimori was a little-known university rector.
"The situation is very different," he said. "In this case the candidate is the president, who can show results, while the writer Mario Vargas Llosa had only proposals to show."
Since Sunday's election, Fujimori has said little while allowing Toledo to take to the streets to lead huge rallies against him.
Their approaches reflect very different leadership styles. Toledo appears to be impetuous and passionate, quick to fire up large rallies. Fujimori, known for his patience and cunning, bides his time until he finds the right moment to strike.
Fujimori showed the same patient style in his handling of his last big crisis, when leftist rebels seized hundreds of hostages at the Japanese ambassador's house in December 1996. After a four-month siege his commandoes rescued all the hostages but one, who died, and killed all 14 rebels.
Peru's steel-fisted leader said he was confident of winning the runoff, but true to his reputation for secrecy, refused to reveal his strategy.
Asked how he could be certain of defeating Toledo, he grinned and said: "That is like asking me if I am going to get the hostages out."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos LIM101-103
 Load-Date: April 15, 2000

 

End of Document
