

Fujimori's planned exit: setting the stage for a comeback?
The Associated Press
September 22, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 734 words
Byline: By BILL CORMIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




A skeptical opposition is demanding that President Alberto Fujimori guarantee a free and fair election of his successor, expressing doubts about his stated plans to lead his own transition from power.
Critics charged Thursday that Fujimori, accused of using dictatorial powers to rule this poor Andean nation for a decade, appeared bent on setting the stage for an eventual comeback.
His government beset by a fast-exploding corruption scandal, Fujimori stunned Peru on Saturday by saying he would call a special election but not be a candidate. He later said he would remain firmly in charge until a July 28 change of power amid opposition calls for the immediate creation of a transitional government.
Moving the quell speculation they were preparing a coup, the commanders of Peru's army, air force, navy and police on Thursday issued a communique saying they supported Fujimori's decision to call new elections and deactivate the National Intelligence Service, Peru's feared spy agency.
As the crisis dragged on, hundreds of anti-government demonstrators gathered outside the presidential palace late Thursday, shouting slogans against Fujimori in a second straight night of drum-banging protests.
One group briefly scuffled with a rival band sympathetic to Fujimori when they tried to unfurl a banner. A boy also was taken away bleeding from an army after witnesses said he apparently was hit by a bottle rocket. No other incidents were reported.
Earlier Thursday, edgy riot police pushed and shoved some 50 anti-government demonstrators away from the palace after the women used spray cans to douse police with foam and liquids.
"We want to fumigate the palace. We are spraying them to get the rats out of the palace," said Elsie Guerrero, a leader of a group that routinely uses tubs to wash the national flag in the plaza in a symbolic cleansing of Peru's "dirty laundry."
Alejandro Toledo, who emerged from obscurity this year to mount the only serious challenge to Fujimori's unprecedented third election, insisted Fujimori must step down immediately.
"How do we, as Peruvians, return Peru to democracy and the rule of law?" said Toledo, a U.S.-trained economist. He said a transition government led by an impartial figure "will conduct elections with utmost transparency."
Fujimori's announcement came days after the release of a videotape purportedly showing security chief Vladimiro Montesinos bribing an opposition congressman to defect to Fujimori's ranks. Fujimori and his supporters have long denied they used bribes and strong-arm tactics to regain control of the 120-seat Congress when he lost his majority there in an election earlier this year.
Political commentator Fernando Tuesta said Fujimori was intent on tightly controlling the transition and shouldn't be counted out for a comeback.
"I don't think Fujimori is the kind of person who will just go off and write his memoirs or give international conferences," said Tuesta, noting Fujimori's own suggestions he intends to remain highly active in politics.
"Fujimori wants to assure he is controlling the transition," said Tuesta, a sociologist. "He wants a transition conducted through official channels: through his cabinet, his congress, his institutions."
Fujimori has even hinted he would seek another five-year term in 2006. Asked about his future at a news conference Tuesday, he laughed and said, "I've got a little surprise for you about what I'm going to do."
One newspaper, La Republica, had a headline declaring "I'm going, but I'm staying."
Another Peruvian commentator, Mirko Lauer, said Fujimori is a master at political strategy and could already be working to consolidate his power base. The government has said it will seek a March election.
"I believe what Fujimori is trying to do right now is lay the groundwork where the government can win with a second-rate candidate who isn't as good as Fujimori but strong enough to take on Toledo," said Lauer, a columnist for La Republica.
He didn't name names, but added: "The strategy seems rather clear: divide the opposition."
That may not be hard, given the historical division within the opposition.
Fujimori also may seek a constitutional reform to bar immediate re-election of the president. Such a change is sought by the opposition, but observers note it would guarantee Fujimori could return and run for office without having to face a sitting and potentially popular incumbent.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo LIM109
 Load-Date: September 23, 2000

 

End of Document
