

Fujimori to travel to the Dominican Republic for 'very important' meeting
March 1, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 442 words
Byline: By ANITA SNOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




President Alberto Fujimori will travel to the Dominican Republic on Sunday for a meeting with that country's president, who has indicated he would grant asylum to the rebels holding 72 hostages in Lima.
Fujimori will leave early in the morning for the Caribbean country, said presidential spokesman Israel Mertz, who described the meeting as "very important."
When questioned by reporters later Saturday, Fujimori declined to say if the crisis was the primary purpose of the meeting. "By all means, that will be discussed," he said.
A high-level source in the Dominican government, speaking on condition of anonymity, also confirmed that the asylum question would be on the table.
Fujimori had made an unexpected stopover in the Dominican Republic on his way to Canada in early February to discuss the Peruvian hostage standoff with Japanese officials. At that time, he and Dominican President Leonel Fernandez discussed possible safe haven for the Tupac Amaru rebels, Dominican government aides said.
Fujimori said in comments published Saturday that government and rebel representatives were moving closer in the talks. "The differences each time are less," he said.
But there was no formal agenda for ongoing negotiations, he said Friday in comments published by the daily newspaper El Comercio.
The rebels are demanding that hundreds of their jailed comrades be freed before they will release the hostages. That issue has been a major sticking point in the talks, which resumed Feb. 11, because Fujimori has refused to discuss such a move.
The rebels seized the Japanese ambassador's residence on Dec. 17. They have freed hundreds of captives, but still hold 72 men, including several high-ranking Peruvian officials such as Foreign Minister Francisco Tudela.
Talks are to resume Monday, after a three-day break designed to give the sides time to analyze mediators' suggestions, which have not been made public.
The Dominican Republic has in the past served as a place of asylum for exiled rebels and ousted leaders. In 1993, then-President Joaquin Balaguer granted asylum to two members of the Nicaraguan rebel group Yolaina Commando who had seized Nicaragua's embassy in Costa Rica and held several diplomats hostage for 12 days.
Also, five members of Basque separatist group ETA were granted asylum in 1989 at the request of the Spanish government.
Politicians and others fleeing neighboring Haiti have frequently found refuge in the Dominican Republic, which shares the island of Hispaniola with Haiti. The exiles include aides to dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier, ousted in 1986, and members of the military junta chased from Haiti by the U.S. invasion in 1994.
 Load-Date: March 2, 1997

 

End of Document
