

Fujimori: the man who brought Peru back from the brink
The Associated Press
April 7, 2000, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 459 words
Byline: By MONTE HAYES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




When Alberto Fujimori swept to a surprise victory in Peru's presidential elections a decade ago, he took control of a country many people thought was ungovernable.
Maoist guerrillas had driven the police and army units from wide swaths of the countryside. Car bombs rocked the capital almost daily. Annual inflation was running at more than 3,000 percent. There were widespread shortages of basic foodstuffs like rice and cooking oil.
Few people gave Fujimori, a university rector, much chance of lasting more than six months in power.
Today the guerrillas have been reduced to a mere band of marauders. Inflation last year was 3.7 percent.
Fujimori, now 61 and dubbed "The Emperor" for his bulldozer style of governing, has turned Peru into the most stable country in the Andean region. He has installed a healthy free-market economy and has cracked down on cocaine trafficking.
But he has done it all at a price - with authoritarian measures that have stifled opposition and raised serious doubts about the fairness of Sunday's elections.
Now he is taking a message to the voters that he is indispensable, that without him Peru will fall into chaos again.
"Power fascinates me," he has said on more than one occasion over the years.
It is one of the few revealing statements he has made about himself.
A workaholic loner, this son of poor Japanese immigrants said once that the only institution he trusted was the National Intelligence Service, the spy agency that helps him control Peru.
Former associates describe him as self-assured, calculating, pragmatic, unsentimental, a man who lives for his work - and whose work is making Peru run smoothly.
"In Latin America, I am a special case," he said once in a late-night interview with The Associated Press after everyone else had gone to sleep in the neoclassic Government Palace. "I have had a special formation within an Oriental environment of discipline and perseverance."
A former mathematics professor, Fujimori said he views political rivals as pieces on a giant chessboard to be outmaneuvered with cool detachment and knocked off the table.
But he also relies on a "sixth sense" to warn him of danger and sometimes consults fortune tellers. He said one soothsayer told him years ago that one day he would be president of Peru.
"He is an incredibly cold, astute man," said Felipe Ortiz de Zevallos, who served as an economic adviser to him in the early years of his government.
Fujimori is divorced and his four children are grown.
"When I look at him, I see a man wrapped in a Shakespearean tragedy," Ortiz de Zevallos said. "I think he is a very solitary man, who most likely spends his Saturdays and Sundays with a pair of military aides wandering through the halls of a building called the Government Palace."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY192
 Load-Date: April 8, 2000

 

End of Document
