

Giants of the Cold War compete for hearts and minds of Cubans
The Associated Press
January 24, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 660 words
Byline: By VICTOR L. SIMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANTIAGO, Cuba
Body




Over the past four days, Cuba has witnessed a delicate duel between two figures from the Cold War still on stage. Each man, in his own way, is trying to evangelize Cubans.
Fidel Castro is ever the gracious host, so solicitous toward his distinguished guest that he claims to preach similar ideas.
Pope John Paul II is equally polite, making his points but softening his rhetoric so as not to offend.
At stake are two visions of Cuban society: John Paul envisions a more open and freer land where the Roman Catholic Church can play a major role in the life of Cubans; Castro, at the least, wants to sustain an aging revolution.
There was Castro at the airport, welcoming the staunch anti-communist from Poland and assuring him that "we feel the same way you do about many important issues of today's world."
At a private meeting at the Palace of the Revolution, Castro gently asked John Paul about his health and enlisted him for a picture-taking session with the Maximum Leader's two brothers and two sisters - the women described by the Vatican as practicing Catholics.
And then Castro made a surprise appearance at the University of Havana, his alma mater, when the pope came to speak of democracy and freedom to Cuban intellectuals. The Vatican said the presence of Castro, who joined in the applause, was "appreciated."
John Paul was not without his own eloquent gestures. Twice - at the airport when he arrived from Rome and at the university - he put his arm around the shoulder of Cuban Cardinal Jaime Ortega. It was the pope's way of showing that the archbishop was his man in Havana.
While the revolutionary government never broke relations with the Vatican, it has had few contacts until recently with the Cuban church.
The week's duel actually began in Rome on Nov. 19, 1996, when Castro called on John Paul at the Vatican and extended an invitation that before had been impossible.
There had been talk of an earlier invitation, for a quick stop in Havana en route home from a Latin American pilgrimage in the 1980s. But the idea was rejected by the Vatican because at the time Cuba was closely aligned with the Soviet Union.
The invitation carried a cost: more priests, more access in the media for the church, even making Christmas a holiday.
For the pope, that was only the start. And if Castro had any doubts about John Paul's intentions, they were clearly dispelled by John Paul's Christmas message to Cubans.
"I hope that after my visit," John Paul wrote, "the church may continue to have ever more liberty that is needed for its mission."
The visit has certainly given Castro some of the recognition he had been seeking, allowing him to bask in John Paul's presence.
John Paul's criticism of the U.S. economic embargo, in line with the Vatican's general opposition to such measures, was also unquestionably welcomed.
But as the days went on, John Paul's intentions became clearer, summed up in his homily Saturday before thousands in Santiago de Cuba.
True freedom, John Paul said, includes "recognition of human rights and social justice" and that change must come "through peaceful and gradual means."
He stressed that Catholics, locked out of power in the revolution, must regain a voice on the island.
They "have the duty and the right to participate in public debate on the basis of equality and in an attitude of dialogue and reconciliation."
And at a center for leprosy patients outside Havana on Saturday evening, John Paul called for the release of Cuban political prisoners and offered solidarity with prisoners of conscience.
"To all you who are detained, to your families who suffer the pain of separation and long for your return, I send my heartfelt greeting, urging you not to succumb to pessimism or discouragement," he declared.
Castro had at least two more appearances with John Paul. He has announced his planned attendance at Sunday's Mass in Havana's Revolutionary Square and will get in his last public word during John Paul's departure ceremony.
 Load-Date: January 25, 1998

 

End of Document
