

Has the investing picture really changed?
The Associated Press
November 1, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 660 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It was as if an artist had repainted a mural, brightening the colors and otherwise attempting to make it more pleasant to the eye. And it seems to have worked, at least for the moment.
The artist was the Federal Reserve and the more attractive canvas was an investment landscape that had been soiled by economic turmoil in Asia, South America and Russia, and fears it could spread to the United States.
The Fed did it in two interest rate cuts - one on Sept. 29, when the Dow Jones industrial average was about 1,370 points below its 1998 high, and another on Oct. 15. By late October, the Dow had regained hundreds of points.
Perhaps of more importance is the change in mood of those who viewed the new scene. Before the changes, forecasters were growing more gloomy about the investing future; now, they are expressing hopes again.
It leaves a big question with big consequences: In a world economy more dependent each year on trade, can two small interest rate cuts keep the economic storms of Asia from invading the Western Hemisphere?
Well in advance of the rate cuts, Alan Greenspan, the Fed chairman, had cautioned that the United States could hardly expect to remain an island in a sea of troubles, and many market forecasters had agreed.
Asia's troubles, for example, weren't Asia's alone. U.S. banks had lent billions of dollars to developing nations and stood to suffer big losses. And Asia's desperate efforts to sell its products at cutthroat prices was cutting into U.S. production and limiting U.S. exports.
Moreover, as Greenspan viewed the developing situation, fear had filtered into the U.S. economy, most notably demonstrated by lenders rationing credit. A credit crunch, he knew, could feed on itself.
Could all these problems be so easily corrected? Had the Fed so easily pumped liquidity and confidence back into international trade? Unlikely though that was, it was sufficient to raise investor hopes again?
Standard & Poor's investor newsletter, The Outlook, commented that "all the problems contributing to the market decline have not been corrected and some retracement of the rally is possible in the near term."
But, it continued, "we feel that downside risk has been reduced and a gradual upward trend is likely later this year and into 1999." It raised its target for the S&P 500 index to 1,070 from 1,050 by the end of 1998.
Wright Investors' Service, the money management firm, concluded that high volatility may persist for several months, but said it believes "high-quality stocks and bonds will provide investors with positive real returns over the long term."
Wright believes "the uptick in confidence triggered by the Fed's rate cuts so far seems to be holding," and the firm expressed confidence that "policy makers are putting a great deal of effort into keeping the goblins at bay."
Both Standard & Poor's and Wright are conservative commentators. Celebrity forecasters and some brokerage houses are much more positive in their comments, all but declaring the financial crises behind us.
Understandably, doubts remain. Edward Yardeni, an economist at Deutsche Bank, says: "I applaud the marshaling of monetary policy forces against deflation … but I doubt the central bankers will defeat the forces of deflation."
He believes that deflation, in which declining prices lead to price wars, eventually grinding down the economic gears and stalling production and trade, remains a serious threat to economic stability.
Meanwhile, Robert Morrow of Bradenton, Fla., an adviser to mutual funds and other institutions, continues to believe the worst of the decline is yet to come.
Earlier this year - in fact, even last year - Morrow's analyses showed a sharp decline to under 7,000 points in the Dow Jones industrial average to occur by October.
In spite of what appears to be renewed investor confidence, Morrow sticks to his forecast, explaining that the bottom may occur in November, the delay perhaps resulting from the Fed's interest rate cuts.
 Load-Date: November 1, 1998

 

End of Document
