

Heat, Traffic, Security - And Finally, The Games
July 19, 1996, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 583 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATLANTA
Body




The soaring temperatures, heavy traffic and tight security were unabated Friday. The change in Atlanta's Olympic mix was a shift from preparation to celebration as the south prepared to welcome the world to the Centennial Olympics.
A Southern-style party, complete with a visit from Arkansas native Bill Clinton, was set for the new Olympic Stadium. Fireworks and drums, dancers and cheerleaders and an assortment of American music greeted the president and the rest of the revelers.
The ceremonies come after six years of planning, $ 1.7 billion in spending, a week's worth of blistering mid-July temperatures and heightened security caused by the as-yet-unexplained deaths of 230 people aboard TWA Flight 800 off Long Island.
Nearly 30,000 security personnel were on duty in the Georgia capital as Gladys Knight, Celine Dion and Jessye Norman prepared to perform in the new 83,100-seat stadium.
Expected were the president, his wife Hillary Rodham Clinton, their 16-year-old daughter Chelsea, White House chief of staff Leon Panetta and a handful of Cabinet officers.
The president and Chelsea helped women's basketball star Teresa Edwards, playing in her fourth Olympics, celebrate her 32nd birthday Friday during a visit at the athletes' village. Edwards was scheduled to take the participation oath on behalf of all the games' athletes.
Wrestler Bruce Baumgartner, a two-time Olympic gold-medalist in freestyle wrestling, will carry the flag at the head of the U.S. team.
But the traditional "Parade of Nations," with more than 10,000 athletes from 197 nations entering the stadium, might be making its farewell appearance. The procession will last about two hours - half the time of the ceremony - and could be scrapped for the Sydney Games in 2000.
The commercialism that increasingly defines the Olympics was curbed at the opening ceremony, where General Motors was blocked from splashing its logo across 30 trucks used in a production number. GM, which initially trumpeted its marketing coup, was apologetic Friday.
"We never intended to put (organizers) in any sort of compromising and embarrassing position," said GM spokesman Dean Rotondo.
Neither did International Olympic Committee president Juan Antonio Samaranch, but he was only lukewarm Friday in his assessment of Atlanta's preparations for the games.
"We are extremely satisfied with the organization of the games - for the time being," he said. "The IOC will express itself at the end of the games."
The pomp gives way to competition on Saturday, when the U.S. baseball team takes on Nicaragua in the morning and the Dream Team plays Argentina at night. Other U.S. teams in action include soccer, water polo, women's volleyball and men's and women's field hockey.
The soccer team was incensed that NBC was relegating its games to periodic highlights rather than live coverage. Only the gold medal soccer game is scheduled on American television.
"It's another opportunity to have soccer in the news in this country," said U.S. soccer coach Bruce Arena. "Unfortunately, we're not going to get much coverage because of the NBC politics."
The Americans will vie for medals Saturday in the Games' first four swimming events.
The anticipation of the locals for the games' start was obvious early Friday, when huge crowds turned out for the final leg of the 84-day, 15,000-mile Olympic torch relay.
The streets were so thick with revelers that the torch, designed by Georgia Tech alum Kevin Barry, was 2 hours late arriving Friday afternoon at City Hall.
 Load-Date: July 19, 1996

 

End of Document
