

HOBBIES 1-17; Stamps In The News: New U.N. stamp features 'Year of Thanksgiving'
The Associated Press
January 17, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 328 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH, For AP Special Features
Body




The year 2000 has been proclaimed as the "International Year of Thanksgiving" by the United Nations.
Hailing this event, the U.N. Postal Administration has issued a new 33-cent stamp as its first of the new millennium. The design features the Glory Window in the Chapel of Thanksgiving at Thanksgiving Square in Dallas. The designer of the window was Gabrielle Loire of France. The designer of the stamp was Rorie Katz of New York City.
The importance of the International Year of Thanksgiving was expressed by Kofi A. Annan of Ghana, secretary-general of the United Nations. "The activities to be carried out for the International Year of Thanksgiving will be an inspiration for peace, healing and understanding," he said.
First-day covers and stamps of the new offering can be ordered by writing to United Nations Postal Administration, P.O. Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York N.Y. 10163-9992. Or you may call (800) 234-UNPA. You may also request an order form for future U.N. stamp releases.
---
 
Guyana has special offering
 
Guyana, a former British colony on the northern tip of South America, has released a special stamp to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the Inter-American Development Bank.
The Bank was founded in 1959 by the Organization of American States to finance economic aid and social development in the less wealthy regions of North, Central and South America.
The stamp is available at your local dealer.
---
 
A president's hobby
 
A new book, "Franklin D. Roosevelt: The Stamp Collecting President," by Brian C. Baur has just been published and provides interesting reading about the late president who found time to enjoy his favorite hobby.
Baur's first book on the subject was "Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Stamps of the United States 1933-1945."
The hard-cover edition of the new book can be obtained by writing to Linn's Stamp News, Box 29, Sidney, Ohio 45365. The hard- cover edition sells for $33 and the soft cover for $17.95, both postage paid.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY601
 Load-Date: January 18, 2000

 

End of Document
