

Hope and fear in the wake of Brazil's financial turmoil
The Associated Press
March 7, 1999, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 721 words
Byline: HAROLD OLMOS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BELO HORIZONTE, Brazil
Body




The collapse of Brazil's currency was a bonanza for Luis Santos, a shoe manufacturer looking to expand his production selling abroad. The wholesale price for his shoes fell to a competitive $ 12 a pair, and he now dreams of placing his products alongside trendy brands in U.S. and European shops.
But for Joao Porto, a public school teacher of history and philosophy, the devaluation of the currency, called the real, brought on a family crisis. Porto had planned to pay for a bed and a clothing closet for his two children with his Christmas bonus - but the bonus never came.
A decision by the new governor of Minas Gerais state on Jan. 6 to declare a 90-day moratorium on debt payments triggered a chain reaction that affected the Christmas bonuses of thousands of state employees like Porto.
The moratorium alarmed investors, already worried about Brazil's $ 65 billion budget deficit, and intensified the outflow of dollars to the tune of at least $ 1 billion a day, despite annual interest rates of about 29 percent.
Ever since the international financial crisis reached Brazil last August, more than $ 40 billion has left the country.
In January, the government stopped spending billions of dollars in currency reserves to prop up the faltering real, in effect allowing a devaluation.
Since then, the real has fallen about 40 percent against the dollar.
The world that has emerged as a result of the devaluation has brought misfortune to some Brazilians while providing others with lucrative opportunities.
Murilo Araujo, another exporter, is taking advantage of the weak real to revive a project he shelved almost five years ago.
Araujo's company, which makes meters that measure home energy consumption, nearly cracked the American market in 1994, after samples priced $ 20 each were successfully tested in South Carolina, Texas and Florida.
But then the government launched an anti-inflation program called the Real Plan that ended four-digit inflation, stabilized prices and kept the currency strong.
The strong real made Araujo's goods were more expensive to sell overseas. As a result, Araujo lost a significant amount of money in order to maintain prices to foreign customers.
Now, Araujo feels that his company, with 1998 sales of $ 30 million, will be competitive in U.S. and European markets besides Latin America, where it has a firm presence.
"The strong real strapped us, but now we got a powerful boost," Araujo said. "The outlook is great."
Still, Araujo worries that the debt moratorium will scare investors away from Minas Gerais, Brazil's third-richest state.
"The moratorium has hurt the state's appeal," Araujo said. "It will take a long time to recover it."
Until recently, Minas Gerais - a southeastern state the size of France - was an economic success story. From a mainly rural economy, it developed over the past 30 years a solid and often sophisticated manufacturing industries like Araujo's.
The state's economy last year was $ 70 billion, bigger than many Latin American countries and third in Brazil after Sao Paulo, the nation's industrial mecca, and Rio de Janeiro.
At the end of last year, Minas Gerais owed 18.5 billion reals to the federal government, multilateral organizations and Eurobond holders. At the time it was compiled, the amount represented $ 15.4 billion - it has not been recalculated since then.
Like most businessmen, Araujo sees the Minas Gerais crisis as a personal fight between Franco, who was president from 1992 to 1994, and President Fernando Henrique Cardoso.
Cardoso helped shoot down Franco's presidential bid in 1998. And when Franco demanded new terms to repay Minas Gerais' federal debt, Cardoso responded by blocking federal funds to the state.
"Franco has become, by coincidence or strategy, the voice of the opposition," said Marcos Coimbra, president of the Vox Populi polling institute.
With Cardoso's popularity plummeting, Franco has offered himself as the spokesman for a new economic order. While many Brazilians don't take him seriously, polls show Franco has strong support among the poor and middle class,
Fabio Fernandes, a shoe factory worker, says the government should be more concerned about health care, housing and education than paying creditors. He admires Franco's defiance.
"Few governors would have the courage he had to declare a moratorium," Fernandes said.
 Load-Date: March 7, 1999

 

End of Document
