

House deals first setback to Army School of the Americas
The Associated Press
July 30, 1999, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 468 words
Byline: By DAVID PACE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The House moved early today to cut funding for the Army school that has been criticized for human rights abuses committed in Latin American by some of its graduates.
The 230-197 vote during debate on the fiscal 2000 foreign operations spending bill marked the first congressional setback for the school since religious activists launched a campaign to close it a decade ago.
The school, located at Fort Benning near Columbus, Ga., had survived four previous House votes since 1993.
The House action, which will be an issue for a conference with the Senate on the foreign operations bill, would eliminate only about 10 percent of the $ 20 million in federal funds earmarked next year for the school. The rest of its funding comes from the Pentagon budget.
But the vote is a major victory for opponents who have argued for years that the school should be closed because its graduates include some of the worst murderers and human rights abusers in Latin American history.
"All these years of going to prison, fasting and protesting, it's been a long, hard struggle," said Father Roy Bourgeois, the Maryknoll priest who launched the campaign after graduates of the school were linked to the 1989 murders of six Jesuit priests and two women in El Salvador.
Rep. Joe Moakley, D-Mass., who led the congressional investigation into those 1989 murders, sponsored the amendment Thursday night that led to the House vote.
"If we don't stand for human rights in Georgia, how can we possibly promote them elsewhere in the world?" Moakley asked.
Rep. Sanford Bishop, D-Ga., a longtime proponent of the school, argued that 12 investigations by Congress and the Pentagon over the past decade have disproved allegations that the school teaches torture and murder to its Latin American military students.
"Those who persist in accusing the school of criminal and evil conduct are turning their backs on the facts," said Bishop.
Rep. Sonny Callahan, R-Ala., chairman of the foreign operations appropriations subcommittee, said he has sent investigators from his panel to Georgia four times to ensure that the school is not teaching terrorism tactics or promoting human rights abuses.
"The school has cleaned up its act," said Callahan. "The only thing we hear year after year are the atrocities committed by graduates of the school decades ago."
But congressional opponents argued that human rights abuses by the school's graduates are continuing even today, and that the institution is no longer needed now that the Cold War is over and most Latin American dictatorships have been replaced by democracies.
"This school is a blemish on the image of the United States among the people of Latin America," said Rep. Jim McGovern, D-Mass., who as an aide to Moakley a decade ago helped investigate the slayings of the Jesuit priests in El Salvador.
 Load-Date: July 30, 1999

 

End of Document
