

House votes to reform, not close, School of the Americas
The Associated Press
May 19, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 405 words
Byline: By JEFFREY McMURRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Lawmakers are giving a new life to a controversial Army school that trains Latin Americans in combat techniques, giving the facility a new name rather than closing its doors.
On a 214-204 vote during consideration of a defense bill, the House rejected a measure to shut down the School of the Americas at Fort Benning, Ga., for at least 10 months while alleged human rights violations are investigated.
Instead, the training facility will stay open. But the Defense Department instead of the Army will oversee it if the Senate takes the same route. In addition, a board of academics and members of Congress would monitor the conduct of the 54-year-old school, which would be renamed the Defense Institute for Hemispheric Security Cooperation.
Democratic Rep. Joe Moakley of Massachusetts, the primary sponsor of the measure rejected Thursday by the House, said the reforms "amount to little more than a new coat of paint."
Moakley contends some of the school's graduates, which include former Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega and El Salvador assassin Roberto D'Abuisson, developed terrorist techniques during training at Fort Benning.
Supporters of the school said it shouldn't be judged by its bad apples.
"The Unabomber went to Harvard, and we're not talking about closing down Harvard because he committed those atrocities," said Rep. Sonny Callahan, R-Ala.
In recent years, a protest group called SOA Watch has found new reasons to rally against the facility. Four years ago, the Pentagon acknowledged that training manuals used at the school recommended bribery, blackmail, threats and torture against insurgents. The manuals were destroyed in 1991 after an internal investigation.
"While we take joy in this partial victory, we will continue to move ahead in the struggle to close down this new-named school," said Roy Bourgeois, a founder and co-director of the protest group.
Bourgeois' group almost got its wish last year when the House narrowly approved a bill to cut off the school's funding. But that measure lost out in a conference committee with senators, and the funds stayed intact.
The school graduates about 1,000 students each year - about one-tenth of the Latin American soldiers trained in the United States.
In an effort to improve its image, the School of the Americas now offers courses in civil rights. Similar courses would be mandated under the proposed congressional reforms, which have President Clinton's support.
 Load-Date: May 20, 2000

 

End of Document
