

How could economic problems in Asia affect the Dow here?
October 27, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 616 words
Byline: By PETER ALAN HARPER, AP Business Writer
Body




The dramatic drop in the Dow Jones industrial average started with problems elsewhere. But how did problems in Asia on Monday wind up on Wall Street - and could they also wind up on Main Street USA?
Some questions and answers about what happened:
Q: What happened Monday?
A: The Dow Jones industrial average, the blue-chip barometer of the New York Stock Exchange, dropped more than 550 points Monday, its biggest point loss ever. Trading was halted at 3:30 p.m. because of the sharp drop, 30 minutes before the 4 p.m. closing bell.
Q: Was the Dow acting alone?
A: No, the Dow merely was the United States' reflection of a world-wide selloff that started in Hong Kong, where the blue-chip Hang Seng Index dropped 6 percent. Markets in Tokyo, Frankfurt, London and Paris followed suit as the trading day wrapped around the globe. Also during the North and South American trading session, stock markets fell in Mexico City and Sao Paulo, Brazil, where the key Bovespa Index plunged nearly 15 percent.
Q: How did all of this get started?
A: The long answer is that during the summer, the currencies of Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia came under speculative attack and the stock markets in those countries fell. Thailand wound up with a $ 17 billion rescue package from the International Monetary Fund and now Indonesia is working on getting one also following its subsequent crisis.
Q: And the short answer?
A: The short answer is that Hong Kong caught the same bug last week, with its stock market falling 10 percent on Thursday before slipping again on Monday. Both instances triggered a worldwide selloff in financial markets.
Q: What does this mean for Wall Street?
A: As the Dow fell, investors shifted some of their money out of the stocks of U.S. companies with Asian ties. At the same time, they or other investors put money into U.S. Treasury bonds as a safe haven.
Q: What effect does moving funds into bonds have?
A: For one thing, bond prices rose Monday with the increased demand for them. When prices rise, their interest rates fall. That should reduce fears of inflationary pressures. And it should also calm fears that the U.S. Federal Reserve will raise interest rates soon as part of its ongoing program to tame the economy and keep the inflation rate from rising.
Q: Who else was selling stocks and why?
A: Some fund managers were selling. Why? As of early trading Monday, the Dow average was still up 20 percent on the year, though down from its highs of around 25 percent. Fund managers looking for year-end bonuses and reputations took the opportunity Monday to lock-in profits by selling stocks while they could still hold onto the fast-bucking bull.
Q: What happens when investors sell off stocks in companies with ties to Asia?
A: Most Fortune 500 manufacturing companies have plants in Asia. Their revenues could suffer twice, once because of U.S. stock price losses and again because the dollar, stronger in Asia, will translate into losses on the balance sheet. That's because any assets the companies own in that region denominated in those currencies will be worth less and companies then will be loath to expand.
Q: How does that affect Main Street?
A: Very simply, if Fortune 500s or other companies see their revenues and profits diminish, they either won't be hiring or they may well be laying off workers.
Q: Is there any good news in the Asia crisis?
A: Well, yes, U.S. companies that make computer chips, for example, in Asia will find their costs lower because of the weaker currencies. That could mean prices for their products also will be lower, making those goods more attractive to buyers.
Also, American consumers may find Asian goods imported to the United States less costly.
 Load-Date: October 27, 1997

 

End of Document
