

If Colombia gets thumbs-down as drug ally, Samper's the reason why
The Associated Press
February 25, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 727 words
Byline: By FRANK BAJAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




Just hours after narcotics police snared a major drug trafficker, awakening a hung-over Nelson Urrego in bed with two teen-age girls, President Ernesto Samper called a news conference to proclaim Colombia's latest victory in the drug war.
"If justice still exists, we'll be waiting for full certification by mail this afternoon," Samper declared after the Feb. 19 arrest.
Certification as a U.S. drug-fighting ally is the blessing Washington bestows on those drug-production and transit countries deemed cooperative in combating the drug trade - and Colombia has been denied it for two straight years. At stake are U.S. aid and U.S. support for loan requests to international financial institutions.
If Washington insists on denying certification again - President Clinton's decision is to be announced Thursday - the consensus in this Andean country is that Samper again will be the main reason why.
Never mind that Colombia last year destroyed more coca crops than any other country in history - although overall coca production rose - or that 31 of its narcotics police have been killed and 68 wounded in the line of duty since 1994.
"As long as President Samper remains in power, the country will never receive full certification," a leading political scientist, Juan Gabriel Tokatlian, wrote in El Tiempo newspaper.
After Colombia's highly partisan, corruption-riddled Congress cleared Samper in 1996 of charges he solicited $ 6.1 million in campaign contributions from the Cali cartel, Washington stripped the Colombian leader of his U.S. tourist visa. U.S. officials say Samper won't get the visa back when his four-year term ends Aug. 7.
Washington is happy that Samper is constitutionally barred from seeking a second consecutive term, and U.S. policymakers hope the new president Colombians elect this summer is corruption-free.
During Samper's tenure, Washington has pursued a deliberate two-track Colombia policy: Even as they snubbed the chief executive, U.S. officials vigorously supported the Colombian police and prosecutors who daily risk their lives trying to jail drug lords and the dozens of politicians they've corrupted.
In turn, Colombian police captured and jailed the entire leadership of the Cali cartel - Urrego was the last capo still at large, national police chief Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano says. The Colombian Congress passed laws stiffening jail terms for drug lords and making it easier to seize their assets - though little was confiscated.
And the United States helped, boosting the police helicopter fleet to 62 aircraft with donated UH-1Hs and spare parts. The U.S. Congress even appropriated $ 50 million last year for three Blackhawk choppers and other equipment for narcotics operations in remote areas where coca and poppies, from which heroin is made, are grown.
"The police and parts of the military continue to be very strong, forceful actors in the fight against drug trafficking in a way that is truly exemplary," Randy Beers, acting assistant secretary of state for narcotics affairs, said in a telephone interview from Washington.
He said eradication of opium poppy through aerial spraying had kept the crop at 1996 levels while coca destruction was "outstanding - even though the overall crop grew."
By U.S. calculation, the Colombians destroyed 160 square miles of coca and 27 square miles of opium poppy in the 12 months ending Oct. 31, though the country's coca crop rose 18 percent to 307 square miles, superseding Peru as the world's No. 1 grower.
And that comes down to domestic politics. Samper opted not to destroy coca crops in the southern states of Caqueta and Putumayo where tens of thousands of peasants depend on them for their livelihood, where crop substitution programs have failed and where leftist rebels levy taxes on the drug trade.
Politics were also behind Congress' enactment in November of an extradition law that applies only to criminals who have not been convicted of crimes, thereby protecting four leading Cali cartel kingpins already in Colombian jails, whose extradition the United States has requested.
Samper has called certification "a perverse mechanism" that smacks of big-stick diplomacy.
Even one top Clinton administration official has called it counterproductive. U.S. drug czar Barry McCaffrey said earlier this month that he hopes Washington can "bury the certification process" in five years.
 Load-Date: February 25, 1998

 

End of Document
