

IMF finds world economy on the mend
The Associated Press
September 22, 1999, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 499 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The global economy, staggered for nearly two years by a spreading financial crisis, appears to be "on the mend," with growth this year and next likely to exceed earlier expectations, the International Monetary Fund said today.
In issuing its latest economic outlook, the IMF revised upward its forecasts for global growth, based on better-than-expected performances in many nations.
"Global economic and financial conditions have improved markedly, after the turbulence in emerging markets in 1997-98," the IMF said. "The world economy appears on the mend."
The upbeat assessment in its "World Economic Outlook" predicted that global output would increase by 3 percent this year and an even-better 3.5 percent in 2000. This represented upward revisions from growth rates of 2.3 percent and 3.3 percent the IMF made in its last forecast, released in May.
For the United States, the IMF predicted the gross domestic product would rise by 3.7 percent this year before slowing to 2.6 percent in 2000. In May, the IMF had forecast U.S. growth rates of 3 percent in 1999 and 2.2 percent next year.
The revisions were even more dramatic for Japan, the world's second-largest economy, which has been mired in its steepest recession in a half century. In May, the IMF was pessimistically forecasting output would shrink by another 1.1 percent this year after having fallen 2.8 percent in 1998.
But now, IMF economists predict Japan will grow by 1 percent in 1999 and by 1.5 percent next year. The Clinton administration has been pressing the Japanese for more than two years to more aggressively attack its economic troubles, including massive bad debts being carried by its banking system, arguing that until Japan staged a significant rebound its troubled Asian neighbors would have no hope of escaping from their own recessions.
But the IMF outlook saw hopeful signs around the globe that the currency crisis was finally abating after leveling a number of Asian countries in 1997, hitting Russia in 1998 and then forcing a currency devaluation in Brazil at the beginning of this year.
"For all the Asian crisis economies, growth projections in 1999 have been revised up significantly and the economic downturns in Brazil and Russia have been shallower than expected earlier," the IMF said.
The agency acknowledged there are threats that could make the more optimistic outlook fail to materialize.
One of the key concerns revolved around the possibility that the expected slowdown in U.S. growth could be sharper than expected if the high-flying U.S. stock market suddenly comes crashing back to earth or if the value of the dollar, which has been falling in recent weeks, turns sharply lower.
But the IMF said it believed there was a good chance the worst-case scenarios would not come about and the world would be able to emerge from its troubles, which dragged global growth down to 2.5 percent in 1998, the worst performance since 1990-91, when much of the world was affected by a recession in the United States.
 Load-Date: September 22, 1999

 

End of Document
