

In a flash, the party was over
The Associated Press
December 18, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 622 words
Byline: By MONTE HAYES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




The bomb went off, the shooting started and the guerrillas grimly, deliberately came marching across the ambassador's lawn in their olive-green uniforms and red-and-black bandanas.
The party was over. The terror was just starting.
For the hundreds of well-dressed guests at the Japanese ambassador's residence, drinking champagne in the night air to celebrate his emperor's birthday, the transition from party guest to political hostage was nightmarishly abrupt.
Within an hour they had been divided and herded into separate rooms, each group guarded by two rebels who held grenades in their hands at all times.
The leftist rebels were for the most part young and polite. They didn't rough up the government officials, diplomats, businessmen and wives they seized as hostages.
But they said they were prepared to kill the party guests one by one if their demands weren't met. They even named the first victim: Peru's young and widely admired foreign minister, Francisco Tudela.
The secret police say the first group of the rebels gained entry to the ambassador's residence by dressing as waiters, carrying champagne and baskets of flowers in which they hid their weapons.
When they set off a bomb at the rear of the compound, hundreds of guests were eating and drinking under a large red-and-white lawn tent.
The blast distracted guards, and allowed uniformed rebels to storm in. They ordered the guests to stay down or risk being shot.
"The order was that no one was to move or raise his head," said Clementina de Lida, a 77-year-old woman who threw herself on the grass along with the others.
Guests were just as frightened of the hundreds of policemen who quickly surrounded the residence, according to Sally Bowen, a BBC reporter at the party who was among 170 hostages released Wednesday.
Perched on nearby buildings, police fired guns and tear gas into the garden. But the rebels came prepared with gas masks, so the only people affected were the hostages.
"That was burning our eyes and our throats and we couldn't breathe," said Lucie Vincent, wife of Canadian Ambassador Anthony Vincent.
Mrs. Vincent was among those freed Wednesday, most of them women. They emerged from the house throughout the day, walking across the yard in their evening clothes, many crying. Like Vincent, many left husbands behind as hostages.
Among those released were two wounded hostages, both men. The nature of their injuries was not known, but they were able to walk out the compound unaided.
One guerrilla was wounded in the attack, receiving a bullet wound in the leg. The Red Cross was permitted to carry in medical supplies to treat him.
Realizing they were exposed to police sharpshooters in the yard, the rebels pulled into the residence. Throughout the day, hostages could be seen moving behind the windows.
President Alberto Fujimori's aging mother - a Japanese native who migrated with her husband to Peru in the 1930s - was among those seized and held overnight.
Dozens of Japanese Peruvians at the celebration feared she would be in danger if the rebels discovered her identity. They whispered to her in Japanese, warning her to keep quiet.
"I don't think they realized who she was," said Ana Tamashiro, 68. Mrs. Fujimori, who is in her 80s, was freed Wednesday along with her daughter, the president's sister.
Mieko Torii, a released hostage, said the young rebels tried to be reassuring.
"One of the guerrillas told us that they had no intention to hurt us," she said.
But they showed another face to the outside world.
A rebel who called a Lima radio station early Wednesday said he and his comrades were ready to die to gain freedom for imprisoned guerrillas.
"We are clear: The liberation of all our comrades, or we die with all the hostages," he vowed.
 Load-Date: December 18, 1996

 

End of Document
