

In Colombia's anti-corruption campaign, hunters become the hunted
The Associated Press
February 6, 1998, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 623 words
Byline: By PAUL HAVEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




After years of pursuing high-profile, high-risk corruption probes against Colombia's top politicians, five prosecutors accused of misrepresenting evidence have been suspended, stripped of their bodyguards and publicly exposed.
Within hours of their dismissal, the death threats began.
Between obscenities, a caller told prosecutor Oscar Toro that he would "take care of" his young son. Other threatening calls were made to the men's homes and cellular phones.
The attorney general's office has accused the prosecutors, who led dozens of drug corruption cases, of splitting one witness's testimony into anonymous and attributed parts in a case against a jailed ally of President Ernesto Samper - making it appear as if it came from different people.
"I am repelled by the thought that one should be allowed to use any irregular form of evidence gathering just because" the case is important, Attorney General Jaime Bernal said.
But Alfonso Valdivieso, who spearheaded the corruption probe before stepping down in May to run for president, said that even if the prosecutors are guilty, the 90-day suspensions announced Monday have crippled the investigation.
"These people have been fighting very tough battles and have risked their lives. There are a lot of people who want to see them harmed," Valdivieso said, adding that "other prosecutors are going to be afraid to step in."
The men, anonymous before their dismissal for security reasons, say they were targeted because they worked against the president's allies.
"We did nothing wrong," Toro told The Associated Press by telephone. He refused to discuss the case further or reveal his location for fear of retribution.
Others agree, adding that "Case No. 8,000," as the once wide-sweeping corruption investigation is called, has lost momentum.
"They were removed for political reasons," said former Deputy Federal Prosecutor Adolfo Salamanca, who helped initiate the probe. "The charge is an invention to give the attorney general an excuse to get rid of them."
He said that even before the suspensions, Federal Prosecutor Alfonso Gomez hurt the probe by splitting up many of the investigative teams that had put more than a dozen congressmen, the former attorney general and the comptroller behind bars for taking money from Cali cartel traffickers.
Before Samper appointed him to his current post last year, Gomez was a defense lawyer whose clients included former Foreign Minister Rodrigo Pardo, a corruption probe target who was eventually absolved of charges he helped solicit drug money for Samper's campaign.
Gomez denies he sabotaged any cases to protect Samper and his allies and says he has actually stepped up the probe, arresting several congressmen and the mayor of Cali, and pursuing lower-profile cases against businessmen. He says Salamanca and others are inventing the scandal.
The plight of the five prosecutors is not the only sign of changing political winds after the probe's main target, Samper himself, was absolved of drug corruption charges by Congress in June 1996.
The men who accused Samper of taking the drug money were both convicted of illegal enrichment. Samper, meanwhile, will complete his four-year term in August.
His former interior minister and hand-picked successor, Horacio Serpa, is the front-runner to win May 31 presidential elections.
Serpa was cleared of charges he allegedly covered up the illegal Samper campaign contributions, clearing the way for his presidential bid. Bernal had been Serpa's defense lawyer during much of the investigation.
Even Salamanca, who is running a threadbare bid for the Senate, admits Samper and his political friends have the last laugh.
"Despite everything, their power remains intact," he said. "At least for now, they've won."
 Load-Date: February 6, 1998

 

End of Document
