

In seamiest San Juan, speedballs for the down and out
The Associated Press
June 8, 1998, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 446 words
Byline: By DAN PERRY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico
Body




It is 9:30 in the morning, and the addicts have gathered at the shooting gallery to prepare for their first fix of the day.
For most of the two dozen people in the unmarked green building, it means a needle in the arm or leg to quench a raging drug habit. But Maria, whose limbs are covered with sores and cuts, goes for the jugular.
As she cranes upward, eyes glassy and left leg twitching, a friend delicately, purposefully presses the syringe into her neck until the speedball - a heroin-cocaine mix - enters her bloodstream.
Maria relaxes. An unfocused smile spreads across her ragged, pockmarked features - the human face of a wave of drugs that has swept the Caribbean in recent years.
"I will do anything for this. Anything," she tells a reporter allowed into the normally out-of-bounds drug den, run by local kingpins of the notorious La Perla neighborhood.
"The Pearl," abutting the renovated pastel mansions and elegant tourist traps of Old San Juan, is anything but. The several hundred dilapidated buildings form one of the poorest neighborhoods in Puerto Rico.
Drug dealers armed with guns, cellular phones and a healthy paranoia toward outsiders control the entrance.
Their business has prospered, thanks to Puerto Rico's location - about halfway between South American cocaine producers and their consumers on the U.S. mainland. And it is a U.S. territory, which means no customs or border controls once drugs are smuggled onto the island and shipped onward.
But some of the drugs that come through stay, creating an increasing dependency, especially among the poor.
The U.S. drug czar, Barry McCaffrey, says there are 68,000 users on the island - one of the highest per capita rates in the world - and that 70 percent of prisoners have drug problems.
According to police, $ 910 million worth of narcotics are sold on the island each year, which is equal to about 3 percent of the economy. The drug business employs 15,000 people.
Five years ago, Gov. Pedro Rossello began sending police and National Guard troops into the projects, home to about 250,000 people. The government has since taken over dozens of projects.
In one of them, Berwin in south San Juan, police recently demolished a building that served as a crack house.
Now addicts shoot up in the streets.
One of them, 29-year-old Marguerita, has lost her two children. Authorities took them away after discovering she had sniffed cocaine through her second pregnancy, giving birth to an addicted baby.
She weeps over the loss as she injects herself with a speedball, indifferent to the needle that broke off in her jugular several days ago.
Doesn't it hurt?
"Nothing hurts anymore," she says, and resumes her weeping.
 Load-Date: June 8, 1998

 

End of Document
