

In the shadow of the Andes: Solar energy ends long nights
The Associated Press
November 10, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 637 words
Byline: BILL CORMIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MENDOZA, Argentina
Body




Wrinkled beyond her years by the sun, Leonizia Felipa Gimenez still uses a metal box full of burning coals to iron her clothes. But the 60-year-old widow of an Andes goat herder has put away her smoky candles for good.
And she doesn't really need the antique iron any longer, thanks to a solar panel mounted on her home through a local government program.
"I now have really bright light in my home at night. I don't have a television but I can play with my grandchild and stay up later," exclaimed Gimenez, a mother of 11.
The government mounted a 5-foot solar panel on the roof of her home, and that of scores of others in the foothills of the Andes, providing a cheap, clean electrical source.
Experts contend solar, wind and other alternative energy sources will help reduce reliance on fossil fuels, which release heat-trapping gases blamed by scientists for a gradual warming of the planet.
The popularity of these alternatives is increasing as countries look to trim their pollutant output in accordance with a 1997 landmark treaty signed in Kyoto, Japan.
Gimenez says her life is better because of solar energy, one of the clean energies talked about by representatives of 160 nations attending a global warming meeting in the Argentine capital.
Instead of heading to bed at sundown, lulled to sleep by bleating goats on this rough grazing land, she now can stay up with friends and family in her house in Cacheuta Sur, 35 miles outside Mendoza, in western Argentina.
And if she could afford a radio, Gimenez could listen to tango, drawing power from a car battery charged by the solar panel set atop the humble, whitewashed wooden building she calls home.
In these remote and rocky hills far removed from power company lines, solar energy may be the only option other than candles or kerosene lamps.
Both in the developing and developed world, solar power is being used in ways unheard of since it first gained attention in the 1970s during the U.S. energy crisis.
In Buenos Aires, Charles W. Linderman of the Washington-based Edison Electric Institute says that more than half of U.S. electrical generation still derives from burning gas, coal or oil.
He notes that only about 1 percent of all electricity generated in the United States is solar.
But nations are increasingly looking to alternatives as they press to implement the 1997 Kyoto treaty, which calls for a curtailing of greenhouse gas emissions by 2010.
"In some cases it becomes the way to electrify a village that doesn't have electricity," Linderman said.
Solar panels are finding such uses in the industrialized world in public schools and buildings.
A solar newsletter, The UPVG Record, even reports that solar power is used to dry coffee beans, zap bugs, purify water and run two-passenger ferries on Lake Geneva, Switzerland.
Acceptance of renewable energy sources such as wind power and fuel from biomass - trees and plants that don't release greenhouse gases - also is rising, environmentalists say.
"Worldwide, these account for 8-9 percent of the world's energy supplies. We believe it would be easy to quadruple that in the next 50 years," said Wim Kersten of Friends of the Earth International, a 50-nation environmental coalition based in London.
Carlos Gallardo, a government official who installs the solar panels in Cacheuta Sur, said it costs an eligible family about $ 200 to get solar power installed. That's a relatively inexpensive option for the region's goat herders and cattle shepherds, most of whom make about $ 1000 a year.
The fact solar energy reduces global warming is nice, but the improved lives of people who live in Gimenez's community is what counts most, Gallardo said.
Gimenez agrees. "Before when we didn't have light, it was much more sad," she said. "We had candles but they never lasted. We would have go to bed soon after the sun."
 Load-Date: November 10, 1998

 

End of Document
