

In the Caribbean, a 30-year war on drugs slogs on
December 16, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1148 words
Byline: By MATTHEW J. ROSENBERG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico
Body




Is the U.S. government winning its 30-year-old war on drugs?
Consider the recently ended Operation Libertador, which showcased cooperation between dozens of countries and yielded the capture of an alleged major drug kingpin as well as the seizure of tons of marijuana and cocaine amid a flurry of public relations releases.
It was "a major takedown," said Michael Vigil, head of the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency's Caribbean operation.
Now consider these sobering words from former Jamaican police Col. Trevor McMillan, who's watched the drug war breed such corruption in his country that every Cabinet minister was forced into a public denial this fall that they are in any way involved.
"What the drug war has done is to drive the price of drugs up, so the more the price of drugs go up, the more money there is to corrupt people," says McMillan, who was fired in 1996 after he started a cleanup of the police force. "Until we remove the profit out of trafficking, nothing will change."
This war may slog on for another half century or more, according to the veterans who have fought it in the trenches - like Vigil, who has spent 27 years in the DEA, including a couple of years in Colombia at the height of the fight to bring down the Cali cartel.
He tells a reporter in his 20s: "We will be able to win this scourge - (but) it may not be in your lifetime or mine."
Still, he touts the regional cooperation strategy that he helped develop. It is a fight largely financed and led by the United States through multinational operations like Libertador, which involved 36 Latin American and Caribbean countries and territories.
Police reported arresting 2,876 people and seizing 20 tons of cocaine, 29 tons of marijuana and 82,170 ecstasy tablets during the Oct. 27-Nov. 19 operation. They said they also dismantled 94 drug factories and seized 100 tons of chemicals for drug-making.
Among those arrested was Martires Paulino Castro, whose apprehension in the Dominican Republic ended a two-year investigation in four countries. Agents say Paulino's 10-year-old network stretched from Dutch St. Maarten to New York and was capable of moving 4,400 pounds of Colombian cocaine a month to the United States.
Paulino was arrested by American and Dominican authorities and will be tried in his native Dominican Republic on drug trafficking charges.
Drug kingpins like Paulino can be caught, and drug trafficking disrupted, only "by these (Caribbean) countries working with one another," Vigil said.
Still, there is growing skepticism in the region about the drug war, which rankles local nationalists by seeming to cede some sovereignty to U.S. authorities while not appearing to seriously dent the drug trade.
Three decades after the war began, smuggling is at an all-time high, along with a rising tide of violent crime and corruption. Many critics say that's because of the war's heavy emphasis on interdiction and eradication rather than on efforts to reduce drug use.
Those on the war's front lines contend the situation would be immeasurably worse if nothing was done.
"We now have guns, ammunition, gang warfare that we didn't have before," says Rear Adm. Richard Kelshall, one of Trinidad's top drug fighters.
"See, if we were to stop at all, then this (violence) would just escalate ...," he says. "We don't know what the top limit would be. So we have to be out there, we have to be vigilant, we have to stop the drugs coming in,even if we're not actually stopping the full load."
In 1999, more than two-thirds of the estimated 506 tons of cocaine produced in South America was shipped through the Caribbean - the first time Caribbean smuggling outstripped the amount of drugs crossing the porous Mexican border, the United Nations' Barbados-based drug monitoring program says.
Of that, 62,709 pounds of cocaine were seized in the Caribbean, about 6 percent of the estimated amount passing through the area, the U.N. office says.
Critics - both in the United States and Caribbean - argue that criminal organizations flourish because of the drug war, not in spite of it. The war's focus on enforcement only jacks up prices, which in turn foster vast smuggling networks that are well-financed, armed and organized.
"Corruption around drugs has increased significantly," McMillan, the fired Jamaican police official, said just weeks after the specter of corruption became a stark public topic in his country.
Rumors that government ministers were caught on tape discussing cocaine smuggling have swirled around Jamaica since Prime Minister P.J. Patterson in October ordered an investigation into allegations that his telephone was illegally bugged along with those of Cabinet ministers and drug gang leaders with political ties.
Within days of Patterson's disclosure, the police commissioner said high-ranking police officers were being investigated for aiding Colombian smugglers.
Jamaica has one of the worst murder rates in the world - 849 people in 1999 out of population of 2.6 million - a reality many blame on drug gangs. Drug gangs are also blamed for the high murder rate in Puerto Rico.
With shifts in world trade costing the region tens of thousands of jobs and shrinking export profits, these small island states have become more vulnerable than ever to drug lords whose fortunes dwarf those of its governments and poorly paid law enforcers.
Drug scandals brought down the government of St. Kitts and Nevis in 1994.
Britain dissolved the government of its Turks and Caicos Islands in 1986 after then-Chief Minister Norman Saunders was convicted and jailed in Miami on drug-trafficking charges. Saunders was re-elected in 1995. The same year relations with Britain deteriorated after the British governor charged his territory was rife with drug corruption.
A U.N. report on drug trends in the Caribbean, released in late November, blames the surge in trafficking in part on "weak states, economic structures dependent on sectors such as tourism or financial services that are vulnerable to money laundering, and economic and human networks connecting the region to drug-consuming countries."
The solution, McMillan and others say, is decriminalizing or legalizing drugs, then using the money now spent on the drug war to pay for education and addiction recovery programs that would reduce demand for drugs.
Vigil does not disagree. "We have to look at a balanced approached between enforcement and demand reduction," he says.
But drug policy is mostly dictated by the United States, where politicians favor tough anti-drug laws and initiatives.
Solid figures on U.S. anti-narcotics efforts are nearly impossible to nail down. But the Center for International Policy, a Washington-based think tank, estimates that in 1999 the United States provided almost $500 million in aid to countries involved in this year's Operation Libertador. Of that, only $5 million-$6 million was earmarked to help reduce demand.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY324-329 of Dec. 11 by Tomas van Houtryve
 Load-Date: December 17, 2000

 

End of Document
