

It's New Year's again: Just like the last one, only more so
The Associated Press
December 31, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 525 words
Byline: By MATHIS CHAZANOV, Associated Press Writer
Body




As the world spun into 1997, people around the globe hailed the passage of time with rites old and new, from the solemnity of Mass at Mother Teresa's nunnery in India to overnight revelry on the beach at Rio.
This new year also was a rehearsal of sorts for the millennium, with Pope John Paul II himself talking about throwing a big party three years from now - even though the next 1,000-year cycle doesn't start technically until Jan. 1, 2001.
Police around the world banned the celebratory shooting of firearms, but many people went ahead and started the new year off with a bang - setting off firecrackers and firing guns.
In the Philippines, officials threatened to arrest anyone who set off firecrackers with more than a third of a teaspoon of explosives per stick. Homemade fireworks can pack an unpleasant surprise - the wounded often contract tetanus from cow dung used to control the speed of burning.
In public spaces such as Madrid's Puerta del Sol, hordes gathered to count down the year's final seconds. Like the celebration in New York's Times Square, the scene in Madrid is broadcast nationwide into Spanish homes. Most families start the new year by eating 12 grapes - one for each chime of the clock.
In Sweden, last-minute buyers mobbed the state liquor store at the ski town of Salen, 200 miles northwest of Stockholm.
"Nine hundred people ahead of me! It's outrageous," the newspaper Expressen quoted one customer as saying.
For many of the world's workers, the arrival of Jan. 1 on a Wednesday was just right - in the middle of the week.
With nine days off, about 1 million Japanese were traveling abroad to celebrate the passing of the Year of the Rat and the arrival of the Year of the Ox, the second in the 12-year cycle of the Asian zodiac.
Others prayed at temples and shrines or stayed home to eat traditional food such as dried herring in coarse seaweed and sticky rice cakes.
Aside from Hawaii, the most popular overseas destination for Japanese was Hong Kong - which celebrated its last New Year's holiday as a British colony.
In a holiday address, Chinese President Jiang Zemin promised to maintain Hong Kong's prosperity and freedoms when the territory returns to Chinese rule on July 1.
As party-goers shivered in the Northern Hemisphere, people in Rio de Janeiro donned white outfits to go to the beach with flowers and other offerings for Iemanja, an Afro-Brazilian water goddess.
In Rome, the pope called on the city to get ready for 2000, when the capital is expected to host millions of people for Holy Year and millennium celebrations.
"I hope with all my heart that you will never lack the commitment to give to the city a face more in line with the values of faith, culture and civilization … also in view of the Great Jubilee of 2000," the pontiff said.
In Calcutta, India, Mother Teresa attended a New Year's Mass that was held four hours before midnight Tuesday to make it easier on the 86-year-old nun, who is recovering from heart surgery.
At the United Nations in New York, Secretary-General Boutros-Boutros Ghali arrived Tuesday for his last day on the job: "Good luck to the United Nations and Happy New Year," he said.
 Load-Date: December 31, 1996

 

End of Document
