

Latin American economies eye the dollar in times of trouble
The Associated Press
January 17, 2000, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 710 words
Byline: By KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




When Latin American economies tumbled last year on the heels of a Brazilian currency devaluation, Argentina's then-President Carlos Menem floated a plan to ward off future turmoil: why not abandon the peso and replace it with the dollar?
Soon Mexico, too, was considering so-called dollarization. Prominent Mexican businessman, tired of the chronic inflation and currency volatility that plagued most of Latin America through the 90s, publicly lofted the idea.
But the idea never caught on in either country. While Menem went so far as to enter informal talks with the U.S. Treasury, his hopes of an Argentine economy supported by the dollar died out with the end of his decade in power in December.
In the end, it was tiny Ecuador that dared to take the bold step, becoming the first South American country seeking to dump its own currency in favor of the greenback.
Last week, President Jamil Mahuad said the nation planned to buy back the sucre and replace it with the dollar, joining Panama and nine other countries in the world where the U.S. dollar is legal tender.
Some analysts criticized Mahuad's plan as unfeasible: a desperate, last-ditch attempt to rescue his embattled presidency and an approval rating sinking as fast as Ecuador's economy.
Last year, the nation's economy shrank 7 percent and inflation topped 60 percent, the highest rate in Latin America. Ecuador also had the dubious distinction of becoming the first nation to default on Brady bonds when it missed a $44.5 million interest payment in September.
Without some sort of government intervention, many economists predicted that speculation against the sucre would send Ecuador into hyperinflation.
Those who oppose dollarizing Latin American countries say they simply need to address the fundamentals: reducing deficits, cutting back on bloated state bureaucracies, tackling corruption and boosting competitiveness.
In the cases of both Mexico and Argentina, talk of adopting the dollar faded as the speculative attacks on their currencies waned. But for Ecuador's crumbling economy, there seem to be few choices left. The value sucre has dropped 20 percent over the past week and nearly 67 percent over the past year.
"They've made a good choice," said Omar Borla, an economist with Robert Fleming in New York. "But Ecuador has got their work cut out for them."
By adopting the dollar, Ecuador can curb inflation and borrow money at lower, U.S. interest rates. That should help shore up its battered image with foreign investors.
However, this means the country must give up control of its monetary policy to the Fed, which acts only in the best interests of the United States.
Critics say Mahaud's decision to establish the conversion rate at 25,000 sucres to the dollar will have devastating repercussions for the thousands of Ecuadoreans whose savings are in sucres. A year ago, the sucre was valued at 7,000 to the dollar.
As in Mexico and Argentina, there has been opposition to the plan in Ecuador. Authorities began preparing Saturday for nationwide protests by indigenous groups in defense of the sucre, charging Mahuad's plan will exacerbate poverty in the country.
A recent poll indicates the majority of Ecuadoreans are welcoming Mahuad's decision.
"With the value of the sucre rising and falling, nobody could do anything. Business was bad and there were no customers," said Pedro Torres, 37, a Quito merchant. "I am just happy I will finally be able to work."
Guillermo Ruiz, a 27-year-old music student, said dollarization would achieve the fondest wish of many of his compatriots: a stable currency.
"Ideally, we're going to have money whose value is constant, one that doesn't go up and down like the sucre has done the past year," he said.
Congressional critics were upset with the way the president has acted single-handedly.
"This decision was adopted in a way the country didn't want," said Congress President Juan Jose Pons. "Congress has part of the responsibility of enacting the legislative changes to make dollarization work in this country."
Esteban Mafla, a 28-year-old waiter, was circumspect.
"No one really understands this. Will we be paid in dollars?" he asked. "If so, then that's good because my salary will be consistent. But I would like to have some more information."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY190 sent Jan. 16
 Load-Date: January 18, 2000

 

End of Document
