

Latin America struggling to ensure fair elections to the region
The Associated Press
May 17, 2000, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 793 words
Byline: By SANDRA HERNANDEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




In Haiti, a local opposition candidate is kidnapped at gunpoint a month before the election. In Peru, international observers are denied access to the computer system on election day amid allegations of fraud.
And in Mexico, election officials say they can't get media barons to air anti-fraud public service announcements because of broadcasters' links to the ruling party.
With Venezuela, Peru, Mexico, Haiti, Suriname and the Dominican Republic currently in electoral campaigns, the fragility of the region's electoral processes is becoming increasingly apparent, raising questions about how far Latin America has moved away from the dictatorships that dominated its past.
"In most cases we aren't talking about crude fraud," said Jennifer McCoy, who heads the Carter Center's Latin American program. Instead, she said the region is having trouble preventing more subtle forms of electoral abuse that range from unequal access to air waves to the absence of autonomous election agencies.
Many of today's electoral difficulties in countries such as the Dominican Republic, which held presidential elections on Tuesday, may stem from years of strongman rule when opposition parties were banned.
With every Latin American nation now nominally a democracy except for Cuba, many of these countries are reluctantly holding open elections but not creating rules of fair play to ensure clean balloting, officials say.
"I think you are seeing a lot of the elections questioned because you are seeing the collapse of the old parties and that means the end of the old rules," said University of Delaware political scientist Julio Carrion.
In Mexico, federal election officials say that while the July 2 presidential vote is likely to be the cleanest in the country's history, the campaign leading up to the balloting is still fraught with accusations of unfair advantages for incumbents.
"We are only about halfway toward having transparency and fairness in Mexico," Jaime Cardenas, a member of the country's Federal Election Institute, told The Associated Press.
Cardenas said that while electoral reforms should prevent a repeat of 1988, when Mexico was rocked by allegations that the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party stole the presidential elections from challenger Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, opposition candidates must still fight for media coverage.
The election institute, which is independent from the government, is currently locked in a battle with television and radio stations that refuse to air free public service ads encouraging voter participation and instructing people not to sell their votes. Critics have called the refusal an attempt at electoral manipulation by media barons with ties to the ruling party.
In Peru and Venezuela, each of which will hold presidential elections on May 28, international monitors are investigating opposition claims that transparent elections are unlikely because governments control the voting process.
Francisco Arias Cardenas, the main challenger to Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, was joined by church and retired military leaders in denouncing the country's election council, which was hand-picked by Chavez's ruling coalition in an exercise widely criticized as undemocratic.
On Tuesday, Arias said the balloting may be tainted, but added that domestic and international opinion are Venezuela's best hope for fairness on May 28.
"That's all we have left when state power falls into the hands of one man," he told foreign reporters.
In Peru, which held first-round presidential balloting on April 9, monitors from the Carter Center investigated accusations that President Alberto Fujimori's government pressured news outlets into ignoring the campaign of rival Alejandro Toledo.
Critics charge Fujimori threatened to pull government ads from media that covered Toledo's campaign. The government is the largest advertiser in Peru, according to the Carter Center.
The government's decision to set the second-round of voting for May 28 is sparking doubts there will be enough time to test new software that is supposed to fix the election authority's chronically faulty computer system, which led to allegations of fraud in the April balloting.
In the Dominican Republic, Hipolito Mejia of the center-left Dominican Revolutionary Party complained that government officials had reassigned 603,000 voters to different polling stations and failed to inform most of them. He insisted it was an effort to derail his campaign one day before voters cast their ballots.
"What this means is we are seeing a pretty turbulent democratic process in virtually every country that is returning to democracy," said Boston University political scientist David Scott Palmer, a member of the Organization of American States observation team in Peru.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY108-109
 Load-Date: May 18, 2000

 

End of Document
