

Lawyer says case against "Carlos" was the work of secret agents
December 23, 1997, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 426 words
Byline: By DEBORAH SEWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




An attorney defending the man known as "Carlos the Jackal" asked a French jury today to acquit his client of murder charges, saying the evidence was fabricated and testimony was not credible.
In an impassioned plea for the man once considered the world's most wanted terrorist, lawyer Olivier Maudret also assured the jury that Ilich Ramirez Sanchez would not go free even if acquitted.
That's because Ramirez, 48, is also under investigation in France for four terrorist attacks.
"What I propose is acquittal," Maudret said. "The solution to acquit should not shock you: Carlos will not leave jail.
"I don't ask it for Carlos, but for us, for our country, what it does best, in the name of law and truth."
The three judges and nine civilian jury members were expected to issue a verdict this evening.
Earlier, Francois Honnorat, another of Ramirez's troika of attorneys, said the prosecution had based its case on evidence fabricated by intelligence agents working for the French government.
Honnorat accused prosecutors and judges of "marching" the defendant through the proceedings while presenting only "the appearance of proof."
Ramirez is accused of killing two French investigators and a Lebanese citizen in a 1975 summer shootout.
Prosecutor Gino Necchi said he will seek a life sentence if Ramirez is convicted of killing agents Raymond Dous and Jean Donatini, and Michel Moukharbal, a Lebanese colleague of Ramirez.
The Venezuelan-born Ramirez was captured in Khartoum, Sudan, on Aug. 14, 1994, and taken to Paris by French agents.
He is widely accused of carrying out the 1975 seizure of OPEC oil ministers and was involved in the 1976 Palestinian hijacking of a French jetliner to Entebbe, Uganda, which ended with an Israeli commando raid.
Since the start of the trial, the defense has sought the presence of three witnesses to the shootings, which took place in a Latin Quarter apartment rented by a friend of Ramirez.
The prosecution claims they were unable to find the people in question, all Latin American students studying in Paris. Instead, the court heard 22-year-old depositions given by witnesses shortly after the shootings.
Honnorat criticized the depositions, saying none of the witnesses had a clear view of the person who fired the gun or of the weapon itself.
The trial has been repeatedly interrupted by a merry-go-round of defense lawyers who have come and gone and repeated demands for new information by the defense.
Ramirez was convicted in absentia for the killings in 1992, but French law required the retrial now that he is in custody.
 Load-Date: December 23, 1997

 

End of Document
