

Legacy of Guatemala's civil war: bones beneath the church
May 23, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 603 words
Byline: By JOHANNA TUCKMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN ANDRES SAJCABAJA, Guatemala
Body




Marcela Mejia is sure her husband's skeleton lies beneath the earthen floor of a 16th-century church, buried in some hasty, unsanctified grave.
"This is where the army was. This is where our husbands were brought. This is where they were tortured and killed," she said, walking among the ruins of the church of San Andres Sjcabaja, 120 miles northwest of Guatemala City.
After a peace treaty ended Guatemala's 34-year war in December, forensic scientists started helping anguished relatives search for victims of the fighting, which killed at least 140,000 people.
Some 40,000 others - like Mejia's husband, Domingo - are missing, and they are the focus of an escalating hunt for clandestine graves of victims of the war. Three forensic teams have started exhumations this year.
Mrs. Mejia vividly recalls the day that her farmworker husband walked down from their hillside hamlet of rolling pine forests to run errands in town. He never came back.
"A neighbor told me that the soldiers had taken him into the church. I went to look but they told me he wasn't there … and not to come back," said Mrs. Mejia, now 57.
Mrs. Mejia took her fear home and lived with it for another 15 years, raising her six children alone beside a small corn patch.
This week, Quiche Indian war widows walked down from nearby hamlets to watch as experts from the independent Guatemalan Forensic Anthropology Foundation began digging at the church site.
The church was left roofless and cracked by a powerful 1976 earthquake. In the early 1980s, the army occupied the church as an outpost. The priests and nuns had already fled.
The opposition says the army and its supporters went on to destroy many villages suspected of supporting their leftist guerrilla foe.
"People didn't really talk about what was going on. We were very frightened," said Rosa Lopez, 24, whose father also disappeared.
On Tuesday, anthropologist Freddy Peccerelli brushed dirt from a man's skeleton, found 3 feet below the packed dirt floor of the church, which has long since been stripped of pews and icons.
Rib by rib, vertebra by vertebra, he examined each bone before packing it for lab study and identification.
"The idea is that what we are able to establish scientifically will contribute to legal cases," said Peccerelli, hopeful the foundation can amass evidence that could be used someday to prosecute atrocities.
Since its founding five years ago, the organization has discovered more than 1,000 skeletons nationwide - and three so far at the church.
In more ways than one, the excavation is digging up the past.
By the late 1980s, the war had lost intensity, the soldiers had moved out of the church and the priests and nuns had returned. The army left the town completely in 1991.
But civilian paramilitary patrols who had acted as the eyes and ears of the soldiers still live in this town.
"It hurts to see these people walking calmly with their children," said one war widow, Polica Perez, whose face is wrinkled by age, hard work and the duress of living for years in fear.
By 1995, the local priest was impatient to rebuild the colonial church. A new roof is being put in and the bodies need to be exhumed before a new floor can be put down.
Quiche culture requires bodies to be properly buried before their spirits can be released to the next world.
"It is a sin that his bones are here, that he is still in the world suffering with us," said Mejia. "He should be in the cemetery so I can visit with flowers and candles and so God can take his spirit away."
But she wants to see the former civilian patrols punished.
"I want justice," said Mejia. "I want to see them dead."
 Load-Date: May 23, 1997

 

End of Document
