

Life as a teen in the MLS
The Associated Press
July 7, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 601 words
Byline: By AARON J. LOPEZ, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: DENVER
Body




Cummerbund or cleats. Tuxedo or team jersey. Prom or pro soccer. The scheduling conflict was sure to inspire teen angst.
Thanks to the Major League Soccer calendar, 18-year-old Seth Trembly had to make a decision whether to suit up for the Colorado Rapids or attend the senior prom with classmates at Arapahoe High School.
A limousine ride, dinner and boutonniere ultimately trumped a date with the Chicago Fire last month as Trembly continued to balance life as a professional soccer player with life as a teen-ager who just graduated from high school.
"It is strange, but it's kind of cool in a way," Trembly says. "I'm not Kobe Bryant walking around the streets with 50,000 fans following me. That's the good part."
Trembly is one of three teen-agers on MLS rosters this season as part of the league's Project 40 youth development program. Seventeen-year-old Bobby Convey of D.C. United and 18-year-old DeMarcus Beasley of the Fire played with Trembly on the U.S. Under-17 Team.
Like typical teens, the three stay in touch via telephone and e-mail as they contemplate a future that did not exist for most American soccer players until the MLS was formed after the 1994 World Cup.
"I wish we would have had half the opportunity these younger kids have nowadays," said Rapids defender Marcelo Balboa, a 32-year-old who has played on three U.S. World Cup teams. "But it's great. A lot of the older players have opened up a lot of doors."
Trembly's window of opportunity is just beginning to open despite a worldly resume that includes international competition in Argentina, Belgium, England, France, Germany, Mexico and New Zealand.
The 5-foot-6 Littleton native has played just 13 minutes in three games for the Rapids this year and will miss at least two weeks after breaking his left thumb while competing for the U.S. Under-20 team in Switzerland.
"I've never been one of those elegant players who tries not to get dirty at the end of the game," he said. "I've always been kind of a scrapper, I guess."
Trembly was relegated to playing linesman during Colorado's practices recently, a task that seems to fit the job description for a young player who is sometimes a gullible target for mischievous teammates.
When the Rapids traveled to Ohio to play the Columbus Crew, 34-year-old midfielder Anders Limpar told his young roommate that the game was canceled due to heavy rain. He told Trembly to be in the hotel lobby at 2 p.m.
"There was Seth with his Rapids shirt, his khaki's and his bag all packed up," Balboa said.
Of course, the game wasn't canceled and the Rapids beat the Crew later that night, 3-2.
Limpar, a well-traveled Swede with eight years of experience in the English Premier League, has taken Trembly under his wing this year, giving him bits of advice that might come in handy when teen-age temptations begin affecting his play in the field.
"When you're that young and you play MLS and you play for your country, it's very, very, very easy to fly away," Limpar said. "I've seen a lot of young guys who have been good and get fame very early and they fly away and never come back."
Fame is still fleeting for Trembly, who lives with his parents and denies any special treatment from his five brothers and sisters. He plans to take some Internet and correspondence courses to fulfill core college requirements but his soccer education is well under way.
"Being out there every day, he's going to learn so much from all the players we have," Balboa said. "Even he doesn't want to learn, he's going to learn."
On the Net: http://www.coloradorapids.com 
http://www.majorleaguesoccer.com 
End Adv for July 8-9
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY162 of July 5
 Load-Date: July 10, 2000

 

End of Document
