

Look to the springtime of the economy
The Associated Press
September 13, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 616 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It was a nice summer. It lasted more than seven years.
It was the summer of contentment - economically speaking, that is. Lots of jobs, rising wages, strong profits, soaring stocks, easy credit and plenty of consumer confidence. It added up to a feeling of wealth.
When you feel that way you tend to save less. Why worry when your stocks are padding your mutual funds and pension plan, and the market value of your house rises as regularly as the sun?
Those assets were real, if temporary. Why, you could borrow on them for vacations at theme parks or for cruises. Everyone was doing it; the travel and entertainment industries thrived. Lenders and automakers, too.
Now the question so long buried by the excitement of the good times: Is it over? Unfortunately, nobody knows.
There are indicators, of course, and so-called experts, but both have been wrong so long or have emitted equivocating signals they've lost much of their credibility. Nevertheless, they are all we have.
Major negative signs:
-The political and economic world is in chaos. The economies of East Asia have collapsed, and Russia is in turmoil. Japan is in a recession; worse, its leaders seem unable to forge a policy for recovery.
-There are indications the monetary and economic weaknesses overseas are spreading to Mexico and South America. Mexico, highly dependent on exports, relies on the United States to absorb 80 percent of its total.
Can the U.S. market, facing a slowdown, continue to buy Mexican goods and services at such a rate? If not, who in the world can Mexico, whose economy remains unstable, sell its wares to?
-The United States faces a trade deficit of $ 200 billion for 1998, 25 percent higher than in 1997. Asian trade partners cannot afford U.S. goods, but they could flood the U.S. markets with low-priced exports.
This could produce damaging competition for U.S. companies, forcing them to lay off workers. Combined with stock market problems, the decrease in discretionary income could further damage retailers and producers.
In addition, U.S. banks are heavily involved throughout the world, and stand to suffer huge losses.
-Most American households in some way, however intangible, are involved in stocks. Further erosion of stock prices could badly damage stress balance sheets and confidence.
-The level of leadership has eroded in much of the world, which is now more interdependent because of global trade. One nation's problems can spread to another in the blink of an electronic eye.
Russia is politically and economically unstable. Japan's leaders seem unable to act on economic problems. Europe seeks guidance from the United States, but the president, cabinet and Congress are preoccupied.
There are positive indications also.
-The United States economy remains strong. Companies are still profitable. Employment levels are high. Inflation seems controlled; in fact, the bigger problem could be an inability to maintain price levels.
Even the stock market, despite huge losses from its all-time highs of earlier in the year, still leaves many investors better off than they were two years ago.
-Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve chairman, has indicated a possible move by the Fed to lower U.S. interest rates. This could boost the U.S. economy, and it could help weakened foreign economies to export.
-In theory at least, the U.S. government is not nearly so dependent as other nations on the fortunes of its chief executive. The presidency is more powerful than the person who occupies the office.
The economic summer could be over, and it could be a harsh winter. But during that time a lot of necessary but delayed maintenance on the world's economies will have taken place, and spring is sure to follow.
 Load-Date: September 13, 1998

 

End of Document
