

Luck, location and chance determine the fate of crash survivors
The Associated Press
September 2, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 658 words
Byline: By KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




Carlos Bariboto's last-minute decision to ignore his seat assignment in the front of a Boeing 737 and sit in the rear with his 7-year-old son saved both their lives when their flight ended in a fiery crash that killed 70 people.
"I always thought sitting in the back of the plane might save my life one day," said Bariboto, who escaped Tuesday's crash of Flight 3142 with only minor injuries. He was released from a hospital Wednesday.
At least 64 of the 100 people on board the ill-fated flight operated by Buenos Aires-based LAPA airlines - or Lineas Aereas Privadas Argentinas - were killed, and there were also reportedly fatalities on the ground.
The city morgue confirmed it had received the bodies of 70 victims, but it was not clear how many of them were killed on the ground.
The jetliner burst through an airport fence, careered across a busy highway, dragging cars and heavy machinery, before exploding in flames alongside a golf course.
Investigators raked through the twisted wreckage Wednesday, carrying away charred bodies in plastic bags. A crane hoisted sections of the crumpled fuselage, which came to rest just yards from two sand traps.
Also today, technical experts arrived from the United States to assist the investigation. The team included specialists in aircraft systems on the Boeing 737, the world's most commonly used commercial airplane.
From the Vatican, Pope John Paul II sent a telegram offering condolences and prayers for the "serenity" of those who lost loved ones. President Carlos Menem and his cabinet attended a Mass for victims amid two days of official mourning.
Doctors said at least 10 survivors had only minor injuries and were released from hospitals. Others were critically injured. Rescue workers said Wednesday the pilot and co-pilot were among the dead.
The crash near downtown Buenos Aires's Jorge Newberry airport was Argentina's worst aviation disaster.
Relatives of those unaccounted for crowded a downtown government office to press officials for any news of their loved ones. Exasperated, they complained of a lack of information and little cooperation from airline officials.
Carlos Roman Perez sobbed as he vented his frustrations about trying to determine the fate of his 24-year-old son, a university student who traveled to Buenos Aires to take a dental class.
"I've heard so many different things … that he's injured, disappeared," he said. "I'm tired of talking to the people at LAPA. All I want is an official list of passengers who got on the plane." Roman Perez said his only hope was that his son had gone to a friend's house after fleeing the wreckage.
LAPA President Andres Deutsch said in a television interview his company was doing all it could to account for the missing.
He said he didn't believe there was anything mechanically wrong with the 29-year-old aircraft. "All of the motors and its components were working perfectly before take off," he told Cronica TV.
He suggested the crash may have been caused by birds sucked into the plane's engines during its attempted ascent. He also said one of the plane's two black boxes has been found.
For those who lived through the crash, survival was freakishly determined: whether by a last-minute decision to change seats, by a quick decision to flee the burning wreckage, or just by the luck of being in the right place on the plane.
Jose Amayo, a 47-year-old doctor, said he frantically yanked at his seat belt after the plane slowed to a halt and flames began rising outside his window, consuming the front end of the plane.
"I was the only person seated in my row so I just rushed out the back door," he said. "When I realized I was OK and in one piece, I turned around (towards the plane) and couldn't believe my eyes. I just stood there."
Also among the fortunate was 35-year-old Gabriel Vanegas, who said he felt he had been born again. He vowed to never forgot the day of the wreck.
"From here on out, I've got two birthdays a year," he said.
 Load-Date: September 2, 1999

 

End of Document
