

Making it was the challenge; now most pressure off the French
The Associated Press
July 11, 1998, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 397 words
Byline: By RAF CASERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CLAIREFONTAINE, France
Body




Just getting there was the challenge. By reaching the World Cup final, the whole of France has already fallen on its knees in gratitude.
The championship game between France and Brazil on Sunday was the biggest dream of all for the tournament's host nation. Nobody's demanding that the French win it, too.
"Glory days," headlined l'Equipe sports daily.
"Against Croatia in the semifinal, we had everything to lose. It is exactly the opposite now," French coach Aime Jacquet said.
So instead of making sure his players don't get suffocated by the pressure, Jacquet's task now is just as much about keeping the pressure on the players. But deep down among the deer and boars in the woods outside Paris, Jacquet is his own master and he knows how to work his troops.
"We're totally isolated. Time doesn't apply here," Jacquet said. "We have to realize our adventure is not over yet."
Jacquet has proved throughout he is a great motivator. Surrounding him are enough veterans, molded in so many years of playing the world's finest leagues, that a psychological letdown is out of the question.
The French love the Brazilian team almost as much as their own, making it hard to live up to that "us vs. them" attitude marking so many World Cup finals.
"It will be the most beautiful symbol of the friendship that unites the Brazilian and French people," French President Jacques Chirac said.
The players hope the Stade de France crowd of 80,000 will be more fired up than during the previous games there.
And for the first time in seven games, France won't be the favorite. Perhaps it will even be able to counterattack.
"Brazil is the favorite. The whole world sees the Brazilians winning against us. So much the better," said France's star playmaker, Zinedine Zidane.
Ronaldo will be seeking to score two goals to become the World Cup's top scorer, which his stature demands. With his lightning speed so evident late in the tournament, he would strike fear into greater men than the French defenders.
"We all know Brazil. Sometimes you don't need too much respect. We have a culture of victory now," said Lilian Thuram, who scored both goals in the semifinal win over Croatia.
Last time the two sides met at the World Cup in 1986, it produced one of the best matches in the history of the game - a penalty shootout win for the French at the end of a 1-1 draw that belied the true spectacle of the match.
 Load-Date: July 11, 1998

 

End of Document
