

Man running around the world decides to skip Colombia
The Associated Press
May 16, 2000, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 581 words
Byline: By JARED KOTLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




He came. He saw. And then he hightailed it back over the border to Venezuela.
Robert Garside, a British man trying to become the first person to run the length of the Earth's continents, has decided to take a detour around violence-wracked Colombia.
"I just can't warrant the risk," the 33-year-old said late Monday from Maracaibo, the Venezuelan city to which he scampered last weekend after a brief foray into seemingly hostile Colombian territory.
"I wanted to see what the score was with my own two eyes, and I've seen it," Garside said.
The decision to bypass this turbulent Andean nation capped an agonizing month for the runner, who in three years has already hoofed 20,000 miles across Australia, Asia, Europe and most of South America.
"I feel very relieved," said Garside, the world long-distance running champion who calls himself The Running Man on his Web site.
"Now I can get on with what I'm supposed to be doing, which is running."
The Running Man plans now to fly from Venezuela to Panama, and continue from there on his planned five-year journey. When he gets through Central America, he'll have three continents to go: North America, Africa and Antarctica.
Garside arrived in Caracas, the Venezuelan capital, in early-April after an 11-month transcontinental run that began in Chile.
He spent the next few weeks resting, buying new clothes and camera equipment, and reading menacing reports of the mayhem in Colombia.
Garside heard, for example, about the Russian cyclist murdered four years ago in Colombia while on an around-the-world trip.
He also heard about the three American activists killed last year by rebels, who may have thought their victims were CIA spies.
Still, Garside decided to go for it, charting a northward Caribbean coastal route intended to bypass Colombia's heartland, which is rife with drug gangs, guerrillas, and rival right-wing paramilitary groups. He even contacted one of the guerrilla groups to ask for assurances he would not be harmed or kidnapped.
But on Sunday - 12 days after leaving Caracas and just 24 hours after crossing into Colombia's Guajira peninsula - Garside changed his mind.
"There were just too many machine guns," said Garside, who's been no stranger to peril during the long-distance journey, having been shot at in Russia, robbed in Brazil, and jailed in China.
As luck would have it, he picked a bad day to cross into the lawless, sweltering Guajira.
A few miles down the highway, he ran into army and police convoys streaming toward the nearby town of Maicao, where angry mobs were sacking and burning a customs warehouse to protest government anti-corruption measures.
"I got within a stone's throw of Maicao and I thought: 'This is not happening, this is not good."' Garside quickly grabbed a cab back to Maracaibo, about an hour-and-half's drive back over the border.
The protests were over by Monday, but Garside had made up his mind. Bypassing Colombia and its 36-year civil war, he said, was no great tragedy in the grand scheme of the Running Man's round-the-globe trot.
Looking back on his brief Colombian adventure, Garside recalled a comical chat with a border guard that should have been enough to steer him away.
Seeing a tank rumbling by on the other side, Garside asked the Colombian official if it was really safe to go.
"Colombia, no problem," the guard said confidently.
Garside then pointed out the tank and repeated the question.
"OK," came the reply. "Colombia, some problems."
---
On the Net:
http://www.runningman.org/ 
 Load-Date: May 17, 2000

 

End of Document
