

McGwire's home run heard round the world
The Associated Press
September 9, 1998, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 389 words
Byline: By RAVI NESSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Though baseball usually gets somewhere between little and no attention in many parts of the world, even the most apathetic were unable to ignore Mark McGwire's record-breaking 62nd home run of the season.
Italians, who normally care little about baseball, were greeted with a full-page spread on McGwire in the country's major sports daily, La Gazzetta dello Sport.
In Thailand, the vast majority of people have never heard of McGwire or legendary Yankee slugger Babe Ruth. And the World Series does not even rate a passing mention on television newscasts.
But at least one television station made room in its midday newscast to broadcast McGwire's home run to a population that was likely as confused as it was excited.
In most European countries, where the home run chase has received only minor attention, McGwire's record came too late in the night to make it into most Wednesday newspapers.
But many papers did run stories on his 61st homer, including a front-page report in Tuesday's editions of the Daily Telegraph, a British newspaper.
The Japanese, who adore baseball, greeted McGwire's home run with front-page newspaper stories and a congratulatory telegram from Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi, an avid baseball fan who called McGwire a "superman."
"You have brightened up the world, which needed good news. Let me wish you continued success in your play," read the telegram from Obuchi, a baseball player in his youth.
Outside of Canada, Latin America and some Asian countries, where fans worship "America's national pasttime" as rabidly as Americans do, baseball holds little allure around the world, where soccer is king.
Many American fans themselves were disillusioned with the sport after a 1994-95 players' strike. But the excitement of watching McGwire's assault on the record has put some magic back in the game for them and brought the sport to the attention of others.
At the U.S. Open, the large scoreboards atop Arthur Ashe Stadium flashed word of the home run to the crowd there for the night tennis matches.
In Seal Beach, California, hundreds of fans packed into The Abbey, the small restaurant put on the map when McGwire made a "The Abbey Seal Beach" cap his lucky hat.
"I gave up on baseball a few years back when the strike was on," said prodigal fan Barney Caton. "McGwire brought it back. He's made the game fun again."
 Load-Date: September 9, 1998

 

End of Document
