

Medellin Informant: The Cartel Is a Relentless Force
January 14, 1996, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1014 words
Byline: By SUE PRICE WILSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RALEIGH, N.C.
Body




When Carlos Toro and Carlos Lehder Rivas were youngsters in Colombia, they were as close as brothers.
Then they grew up, and they remained friends - and, sometimes, business associates. For Lehder was one of the most powerful of Colombia's drug kingpins, leader of the Medellin carte, and money overflowed.
But eventually, the bill came due.
One day, Toro returned to his home in Florida to find his locks changed, his family gone and a man with a machine gun at his door, guarding 2,000 kilos of cocaine. The cartel's bosses had tricked his family into hiding - a move Toro described as an abduction.
Toro found his family, and then responded with his own act of treason; he went to the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration to help break up the cartel. Lehder wound up in a federal prison, sentenced to life without parole.
And Toro lives under a different name, a prisoner of fear, bound to the Witness Protection Program. Still, he feels the need to tell his story.
"It's a painful story. I've put my family through hell. I've put myself through hell too," he says.
"I will never be the same. There's no way out."
Toro paces as he talks, sometimes smiling, sometimes agitated.
His experience with the cartel is "a story about two kids, who grew up almost in one crib next to each other … and ended up being the greatest enemies, shaking the lives of many families, many people," Toro said.
Sharing a birthday, even living together for a time as youngsters, Lehder and Toro were both educated in the United States.
For years, Toro said, he maintained only a friendship with Lehder, enjoying the riches of the drug trade as his guest: weekend trips to the Bahamas on his friend's private plane; luxuries unavailable on his salary as a network cameraman in New York.
Lehder began his criminal career by running a luxury car theft ring while living in the United States, Toro said. Buyers in Colombia would pay a deposit for a specific make, model and color car. Lehder would arrange to have the car stolen and sent back to his customers with forged papers.
Lehder eventually returned to Colombia, marrying into a family with vast banana plantations. He made extra money growing marijuana between the rows of the banana trees.
And, eventually, the business was cocaine. Lehder was a good businessman. He made money and friends. Lots of friends.
"Lehder was now the richest man in the country, but at the same time he was corrupting society, the government, the church. He had money, more money than the national budget. But he made friends, feeding the poor, building neighborhoods. He was a hero to many. He got homes for the homeless," Toro said.
And Toro, although he was outside the business, remained Lehder's confidante. He said he witnessed talks about bribing Panamanian leader Manuel Noriega and Cuban leader Fidel Castro. Lehder once called to ask Toro how expensive a bracelet he should give the wife of a high Bahamian official. Would $ 400,000 be enough?
When Toro's bank account was running low, Lehder would send a few thousand dollars to tide him over.
"He was grooming me to come into the business," he recalls.
Toro was managing a business in Florida when, he said, he was finally seduced by the lure of the millions - and the power - that he knew were within easy grasp.
He was recruited by another boyhood friend from Colombia, Alvaro Triana, who was Lehder's southern Florida commander, in charge of distribution of cocaine. Toro's job was to coordinate activities in the Bahamas, assisting in distribution and coordinating money pickups.
Eventually, Toro said, Triana suspected that he was growing too powerful, and Triana and Lehder cooked up the conspiracy to abduct his family. The idea was to show him who was boss.
According to Toro, they told his family that the DEA was closing in, and took them to a safe house, where they were held against their will. By threatening workers for the cartel - he even pulled his pistol at one point - Toro learned the location of the safe house, and rescued his family.
He swore to Triana and Lehder that he'd never work for them again, but then he got into a legal tangle of his own in a Florida drug case unrelated to the cartel. Facing a possible prison term, he decided to offer some information to DEA. Then he made up with Lehder to work undercover for the government.
Though authorities said Toro provided crucial information to build the case against the cartel, he never testified against Lehder; his testimony wasn't needed, said Special Agent Michael McManus of the Drug Enforcement Administration in Miami.
"He would have been very critical," McManus said. "It was my understanding that he was the only rebuttal witness the government intended to use, but Lehder did not put on a defense, so he was never called to testify."
Even with Lehder and other Medellin leaders imprisoned or dead, Toro says he will always look over his shoulder; during Lehder's trial, Toro's family reported threats that Toro would be killed if he testified.
"The Colombian Medellin cartel is a relentless force," Toro said.
Toro and his family have had little stability. They have moved a dozen times since the trial, he said, and he fears this interview with The Associated Press will force yet another move.
"What will you say if someone asks where you met me? What will you say if they ask what I look like?" he asks.
Toro is vague about how he makes a living these days. He has at least one part-time job, and has done work for the DEA on a "contract" basis, being paid if information he provides bears fruit.
He has written a book about life in the cartel and his relationship with Lehder, and is trying to find a publisher. Telling his story and working as an undercover informant are acts of atonement, a way to explain his way of life to his children, he said.
"I'm not proud of being a great undercover agent, but I have found no other way to make up," he says.
"And I want it told because it teaches a lesson to any Colombians who are still very powerful that they sooner or later will be caught and that the drug trade is the greatest disgrace of the earth."
 Load-Date: January 14, 1996

 

End of Document
