

Miami, a poor city of roguish charm, may be erased from the map
March 23, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1391 words
Byline: By WILL LESTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




This city of roguish charm is best known for its stunning waterfront skyline, the azure waters of Biscayne Bay and its role as a beacon of hope to much of Latin America.
But take a ride down Miami Avenue to better understand why the so-called Magic City is fighting to stay afloat financially and a move to abolish the city altogether will soon reach the ballot box.
If Miami - with its $ 68 million deficit - is out of money, it's at least partially because many of its people don't have much to give it. And because city officials were careless with much of the rest.
The wealthy remain in their well-guarded condos and enclaves near Biscayne Bay, but the city's middle-class neighborhoods are dwindling. And the tax burden on city residents and businesses is among the highest in the state.
Miami, with almost a third of its residents living under the poverty line, is the fourth-poorest of the nation's large cities, behind Detroit, Laredo, Texas, and New Orleans.
"This is a very poor city," says Fred Santiago, a tax accountant on Miami Avenue who has lived in the city for almost 50 years. "I do taxes for 3,000 people. I see the poorest of the poor."
A federal kickback investigation that snared three top city officials last year indicates the primary focus for some at City Hall apparently was self-enrichment rather than city development.
That infuriates Bill Armstrong, a maritime consultant who moved to Miami from New York City a quarter century ago. He favors a citizens' initiative to dissolve Miami into Metro Dade County government.
"We elected officials in Miami who have a banana republic mentality," says Armstrong, while taking his afternoon walk along Miami Avenue. "They grew up in a system where the loudest mouth won the point. I think it would be wise to just do away with city government."
The isolation of the city's largely Cuban American leadership from the despair of many Miami neighborhoods is a common complaint. Even Mayor Joe Carollo says creative development of the city, including the downtown area, was neglected for too long by past administrations.
The city's financial disparity is well illustrated on Miami Avenue.
To the east of the avenue, an 8.2-mile stretch that bisects the city, are pockets of upscale condo dwellers and upper middle-class homeowners. To the west stretch miles of modest-to-poor neighborhoods.
Several of the neighborhoods adjacent to Miami Avenue are best known for the riots named after them - all in response to minority residents killed by police.
Liberty City, just north of the city limits, exploded in 1980 after a verdict in a police brutality case. Wynwood in northern Miami erupted in 1991 and Overtown, in the heart of downtown, rioted in 1982, 1984 and 1989.
"Miami Avenue is the dividing line between the haves and the have-nots," says Santiago, who lives in Wynwood.
In Wynwood, the avenue's warehouses and stores have barred windows and barbed wire rimming the roofs. The pastel homes that front the road are solidly built, but in dire need of a make-over.
Many of Miami's residents are immigrants, but the type of immigrants has changed over the years.
Capitalist exiles fleeing communist Cuba in the '60s brought education and entrepreneurial spirit that once fueled Miami's economic growth and bolstered neighborhoods.
The new immigrants who come here from Central America and the Caribbean often lack the skills or education to move easily into the work force or start businesses.
"Many of the Cubans left the city and moved farther up north," says Billy del Valle, a community activist of Puerto Rican descent who lives in the Little River community on the northern edge of Miami. "The Central Americans and South Americans have taken over."
Still, Miami remains a symbol of hope for immigrants. And they flatly reject suggestions that their immigration is a burden.
"Our reason to be here is to work hard to get a better life," says Dubionel St. Surin, a radio writer and producer who came here from Haiti 20 years ago. "We are hard-working people. There's no way our presence caused the downfall of Miami."
The citizens' move to abolish Miami, even as the city struggles with state help to regain its financial footing, should fail, he says.
"We have to pay the consequences of crooked politicians," says St. Surin, referring to the kickback scam.
Efforts to abolish Miami have arisen repeatedly since the Metro Dade government was created 40 years ago to provide an umbrella of services to all the residents of Dade County. Petitions have been certified to force a referendum, but the city commission has not set the election date.
The abolition movement's leaders include residents of Coconut Grove, an affluent neighborhood on the southern end of town, and Key Biscayne attorney Gene Stearns, who argues abolition would sharply cut tax rates for all Miamians.
"The city is depleted and it's getting worse," Stearns says. "It's a cycle you see in cities all over America. Municipal boundaries were not allowed to grow and suburban governments have grown up around it. The city of Miami is giving Miami a bad name."
The city, with a population of 350,000, is only a small part of the Metro Dade area, which has a population of 2.1 million and includes Miami Beach and a ring of well-to-do suburbs and smaller cities.
The proponents want to remove city boundaries and place the city's basic services under Dade County. If passed, the city might become a special district so city residents would be responsible for the city's bond debts.
The abolition would have no effect on the other two-dozen or so cities in Dade County. They provide their own basic services such as police and garbage collection, but rely on Metro Dade to handle regional operations such as the airport and the Port of Miami.
A dramatic reminder of the disparity between rich and poor is Miami's Design District, an oasis of dozens of trendy arts, antique and furniture shops adjacent to Miami Avenue in one of the city's most depressed neighborhoods. The wealthy think nothing of dropping $ 100,000 in a day to furnish bayfront mansions from the shops in the district.
Beneath the city's glitzy skyline, Miami Avenue runs past the homeless shelters and vagrants, through downtown - within view of Freedom Tower. Once the center for processing Cuban exiles seeking freedom, the vacant tower has the emotional force of the Statue of Liberty for thousands here.
The avenue downtown is crammed with small electronics shops, camera stores offering passport photos and discount clothing stores that cater to a dwindling Caribbean clientele. The atmosphere is closer in spirit to Port au Prince or Santo Domingo than Madison Avenue.
Shop owners stand in front of their stores with signs boasting "los precios bajos" - the lowest prices - and long for the days when visitors from the islands flocked to shop in downtown Miami. They blame poor exchange rates, economic woes in the islands and better shopping options elsewhere in South Florida.
"Business is very slow down here," says Pepe Kerbel, a Cuban American who spends his days at the shop run by his wife. "Five years ago, it was better. People came from the Bahamas and Haiti to shop. Now people go where it's nice and happy. It's very sad here."
While the northern end of Miami Avenue cuts through some of the city's poorest neighborhoods, the change south of downtown is dramatic.
There, the avenue runs through exclusive Brickell, a fashionable residential area near the international banking district and dotted with neighborhood restaurants and bars.
Near Key Biscayne, the avenue takes on the toney name of Bayshore Drive and curves past the bayfront mansions of celebrities such as Sylvester Stallone and Madonna, and into the wealthy neighborhoods of Coconut Grove, the hotbed of the abolition movement.
Bayshore Drive also runs right in front of City Hall, where city officials have a waterfront view of sailboats and sunrises.
Despite the city's deep problems, many say they still love Miami.
Susane Ronai, an antique and arts dealer who works in the Design District, has lived in Budapest, Paris, Rome and Vienna.
"I have the opportunity to live anywhere in the world. But I like Miami," she says.
"We are among the poorest cities in the nation. We have one of the highest crime rates, some of the worst traffic jams," she says. "It's like being in love with a bad boy."
 Load-Date: March 23, 1997

 

End of Document
