

Migrants may make Bombay the world's second-largest by 2015
The Associated Press
July 12, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 727 words
Byline: By RAMOLA TALWAR BADAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOMBAY, India
Body




To Laxmi Annaya, Bombay was the answer to her dreams. To people who live in this teeming city, India's largest, migrants like her are the problem.
Millions of newcomers to Bombay are being blamed for driving up the city's population, pushing it from the world's fifth most populated city today to becoming the second by 2015.
"My son and daughter can speak English. They will work in an office. That is my dream," said Annaya, 38, who works as a maid and earns $70 a month.
"I work less than I would have in the fields at home, but I earn more," she said. "So what if I live in a slum?"
Annaya came to Bombay as a bride 15 years ago and says her two children would never have been able to attend English-language schools in her hometown in southern India.
With 15 million people as of 1995, Bombay ranks in population behind Tokyo, Sao Paulo, New York, and Mexico City, United Nations statistics say.
But Bombay's population will reach 27.37 million in 15 years, placing it just behind Tokyo, which will have 28.7 million, according to U.N. projections released during a Berlin conference last week.
The United Nations predicted that of 27 mega-cities, with 10 million or more people, 18 will be in Asia. In anticipation of World Population Day, which was Tuesday, the report warns of the urgency to manage space and improve transport systems in urban areas.
More than half the people who live in Bombay sleep on the sidewalks or live in cramped brick and tin huts that line the streets. Many are drawn to India's financial and entertainment industry capital by an old migrant maxim: "No one in Bombay sleeps on an empty stomach."
Most find jobs as daily wage workers at housing and road construction sites or sell wares ranging from hair clips to potato chips in crowded trains. Others beg.
But the city's infrastructure is struggling to cope with escalating demands for water, health, housing, transport and education. Tankers carrying water trundle along potholed roads to thousands of buildings where there is not enough public water.
The situation worsens during the monsoon, when small lanes and shanties built alongside high-rise buildings are flooded with filthy water due to choked drains.
The city has asked the federal government for a 10-year package of $3.14 billion to upgrade Bombay's services, said the municipal commissioner, V. Ranganathan.
Land is a problem, as is maintaining sanitary facilities, "due to continuous migration into Bombay," Ranganathan said. The city's 100-year-old storm drains need to be urgently mended, he said, as they clog during heavy rain.
More than 6.5 million people jostle for space in packed state-run trains and buses, suffering through an average 3-hour daily work commute. Plans by the administration to attract corporations to satellite townships and suburbs failed due to shoddy construction and an absence of amenities.
State-sponsored family planning programs are hindered by illiteracy and high infant mortality rates. Many people either don't understand the information or aren't interested in limiting the number of babies they have since so many die young.
While municipal workers boast that 60 percent of Bombay's residents are covered by family planning programs, they say the rising population is the fault of the migrant slum population and rural poor who flock to the city.
Nitai Mehta, founder of Praja, a volunteer organization that works with city officers, says migration is caused by lopsided development that makes Bombay attractive and deprives countryside dwellers of amenities and ways to earn their living.
"Why do people live near sewage lines in Bombay? Because they are driven out of their villages," said Mehta.
He said friction between rich and poor is on the rise, as is frustration. "The smallest incident can spark a violent reaction."
Shanty dwellers resisted recent attempts to remove unauthorized constructions from parks and near railway lines. Municipal demolition squads are now accompanied by armed police for protection against stone- and brick-throwing migrants.
Some who work in the slums have a dismal view of the city's future.
"People come here to work because in Bombay they can do any odd job anywhere and their stomach can be filled," said Vimal Bhagwat, a municipal midwife. "But in a few years there will not be any place to walk on the streets. There will be so many people and huts."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo BOM101
 Load-Date: July 13, 2000

 

End of Document
