

Military commanders redefine their role in the Americas
The Associated Press
November 15, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 365 words
Byline: By PETER McFARREN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LA PAZ, Bolivia
Body




Four decades after they banded together against communism, military chiefs from the Americas redefined their roles Monday, targeting new enemies - drugs, terrorism, poverty - and promising support for democracy.
When the Conference of Armies of the Americas convened for the first time in 1960, the triumph of the Cuban revolution was still fresh and much of Latin America was ruled by the military, often backed by the United States.
Now, as two dozen army commanders from the region opened their 23rd conference here under strict security, civilian rule prevails throughout the continent.
Organizers said the meeting was planned to coincide with the Ibero-American Summit opening today in Havana, Cuba, involving the leaders from Latin America, Spain and Portugal.
Bolivian army chief Gen. Gen. Gonzalo Arredondo opened the conference, saying that the gathering will define a new role for the army in the next century in the context of a "strong respect for democracy."
Bolivia's Defense Minister Jorge Crespo said the South American armed forces aim to contribute to the war against poverty, drug trafficking and terrorism.
Shades of the era of military rule intruded into the conference as some participants condemned Spain's attempts to bring former Chilean military dictator Augusto Pinochet to trial for alleged human rights abuses under his regime. Spain has also indicted members of Argentina's former military junta.
Adm. Jorge Zabala, Bolivian Chief of Staff, condemned Spanish Judge Baltasar Garzon to try Pinochet and the Argentine officers for abuses that occurred during their reigns in the 1970s and 1980s.
"Any decisions regarding these past events must be made within the context of an absolute respect for the sovereignty of the people," he said. "We do not accept any type of foreign interference."
Although the Spanish efforts are not on the conference agenda, the commanders from Chile and Argentina will address the issue and seek a condemnation of the trials, conference sources said.
Chile is represented by Gen. Ricardo Izurieta, who succeeded Pinochet as army chief last year.
Pinochet has been in police custody in London for more than a year fighting extradition to Spain.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo LPZ101
 Load-Date: November 16, 1999

 

End of Document
