

Ministers visiting the Antarctic express concern about its future
The Associated Press
January 27, 1999, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 478 words
Byline: By SALLY ARTHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: McMURDO BASE, Antarctica
Body




Officials from 24 countries meeting in the Antarctic said today that the region faces several serious threats, including illegal fishing. But they stopped short of taking any specific steps to protect it.
Environmental groups such as Greenpeace had urged the delegates at the first meeting of Antarctic Treaty nations ever held on its frozen tundra to achieve more than a photo opportunity.
The group's final statement, however, did little more than name a few of the challenges facing the Antarctic, the only region in the world devoted to peace and science and which does not contain a single country, government or armed force.
"Representatives expressed in particular their grave concern at the threat posed by continuing illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing for toothfish," it said.
British environmental minister Michael Meacher had earlier urged the delegates to protect the Antarctic by asking the world to cut greenhouse gas emissions, reduce ozone depletion and control illegal fishing in the Southern Ocean.
Other delegates expressed concern about the damaging effects that growing tourism is having on the region's environment.
And Simon Upton, New Zealand's minister for the Antarctic, gave an emotional speech comparing the illegal fishing to piracy and saying that the region lacked any means of enforcing its rules.
"Frankly, this is an awful indictment of us and our claim to be the stewards or guardians of the Antarctic," Upton said.
The statement urged the Treaty nations to continue working closely together, especially with important scientific research in the area in areas such as global climate change. And it looked forward to any steps that the group may decide to take at its May 24 meeting in Lima, Peru.
During their visit, the delegates stayed at the U.S. McMurdo Base and New Zealand's Scott Base on Ross Island. They took helicopter tours across the desolate Antarctic, visiting places such as huts that had been used by famous explorers of the region.
Upton said the Antarctic Treaty contains strict rules regarding vessels from member countries that enter the region carrying fishermen or tourists. But he said the region often lacks the ability to enforce them by going after violators.
For instance, at least 70 illegal fishing ships are currently plundering the Patagonian toothfish, and selling them for huge profits in Japan and the United States. One of the illegal vessels threatened to ram a licensed New Zealand fishing boat, and legal Australian ships also have been menaced.
The illegal fishing often results in other unwanted species being netted and then dumped, scientists told the delegates.
Tourism also is growing rapidly, thanks to cruise ships carrying helicopters that fly passengers inland to sightsee across the frozen region. The delegates heard about one ship that recently visited and left behind a trail of garbage.
 Load-Date: January 27, 1999

 

End of Document
