

Ministers visiting the Antarctic express concern about its future
The Associated Press
January 27, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 484 words
Byline: By SALLY ARTHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: McMURDO BASE, Antarctica
Body




World officials wrapped up their first meeting in the Antarctic with a statement Wednesday warning of environmental threats to the frozen continent, where cruise ships dump garbage and illegal fishing boats plunder the icy waters.
Environmentalists had urged the delegates from Antarctic treaty member states to propose specific steps to protect the world's most unspoiled region. But the officials' final statement did little more than list the challenges facing the continent.
The Antarctic Treaty, signed 40 years ago and now with 27 members including the United States, dedicates the continent to peace and science, leaving it the only region in the world without a government or armed force.
"Representatives expressed in particular their grave concern at the threat posed by continuing illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing for toothfish," it said.
British environmental minister Michael Meacher had urged the delegates to call on governments to cut greenhouse gas emissions, reduce ozone depletion and control illegal fishing in the Southern Ocean.
During the session, which began on Monday, other delegates expressed concern about the damaging effects that growing tourism is having on the region's environment.
Simon Upton, New Zealand's minister for the Antarctic, gave an emotional speech comparing the illegal fishing to piracy and saying that the region lacked any means of enforcing its rules.
"Frankly, this is an awful indictment of us and our claim to be the stewards or guardians of the Antarctic," Upton said.
The statement urged the treaty nations to continue working closely together, especially with important scientific research in the area. And it looked forward to any steps that the group may decide to take at its May 24 meeting in Lima, Peru.
During their visit, the delegates stayed at the U.S. McMurdo Base and New Zealand's Scott Base on Ross Island. They took helicopter tours across the desolate Antarctic, visiting places such as huts that had been used by famous explorers of the region.
Upton said the Antarctic Treaty contains strict rules regarding vessels from member countries that enter the region carrying fishermen or tourists. But he said the region often lacks the ability to enforce them by going after violators.
For example, at least 70 illegal fishing ships are currently plundering the Patagonian toothfish, and selling them for huge profits in Japan and the United States. One of the illegal vessels threatened to ram a licensed New Zealand fishing boat, and legal Australian ships also have been menaced.
The illegal fishing often results in other unwanted species being netted and then dumped, scientists told the delegates.
Tourism also is growing rapidly, thanks to cruise ships carrying helicopters that fly passengers inland to sightsee across the frozen region. The delegates heard about one ship that recently visited and left behind a trail of garbage.
 Load-Date: January 27, 1999

 

End of Document
