

MLS Deputy Commissioner Likes Behind-The-Scenes Role
March 31, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 489 words
Byline: By BRIAN TRUSDELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




In his job as deputy commissioner of the new U.S. pro soccer league, Sunil Gulati has traveled over a quarter of a million miles in the last year on nearly two dozen trips to Asia, Europe and South and Central America.
While MLS chairman Alan Rothenberg is the one in the public eye, Gulati is the guy in the background putting in 18-hour days trying to get Major League Soccer off the ground. Gulati will see the results of his work April 6, when the first game is played between D.C. United and the San Jose Clash.
"Sunil was the key guy on all levels: federation, World Cup, creation of MLS," said Rothenberg, also head of the 1994 World Cup and president of the U.S. Soccer Federation.
"The one guy out there who understands from playing to organization, from grass roots to the top level internationally, is Sunil. I've relied on him for four or five years."
Gulati, a 36-year-old native of Allahabad, India, has been responsible for every player acquisition by MLS and has been involved in nearly every facet of the fledgling league, down to the game program.
"Soccer has been a lifetime obsession, but it's only been a profession for three years," Gulati said. "I'm committed to this professional soccer league, but that doesn't mean I'm committed to being a full-time employee forever."
Gulati has negotiated player, television and apparel contracts; wooed sponsors; and conducted the player draft. As deputy commissioner, he will be responsible for "conduct of game in general terms," according to commissioner Doug Logan.
"I don't think MLS would succeed without him," said Hank Steinbrecher, executive director of the U.S. Soccer Federation. "He's a very, very important figure, from player acquisitions right down to selling tickets."
Gulati came to the United States as a 5-year-old when his father arrived to finish his doctoral studies in mathematics.
Growing up in Storrs, Conn., he received his American citizenship before earning a degree in economics from Bucknell. After that, he earned his masters from Columbia University, where he was an assistant professor from 1986-90. He also worked for the World Bank.
As the U.S. Soccer Federation's international games committee chairman from 1986-90, Gulati was the architect of the plan to put U.S. players, who were scattered around the globe in foreign soccer leagues, under contract to the U.S. federation so they could train for international competition.
The strategy helped the United States, who hadn't played in a World Cup in 40 years and didn't have a pro league, qualify for the 1990 World Cup. The American team reached the second round in 1994.
"Sunil Gulati is absolutely brilliant," said Logan, an admitted soccer neophyte who has come to depend on Gulati. "Unfortunately during the course of life you can't pick up many more brains, so you gotta make it on what you're born with, and Sunil is extremely well-endowed.
"He is a walking encyclopedia of the modern game."
 Load-Date: March 31, 1996

 

End of Document
