

More than half the world's rivers are in serious trouble, report says
The Associated Press
November 29, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 592 words
Byline: By PAULINE JELINEK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Governments must cooperate more to save the world's polluted rivers, says a panel formed to ensure the next century's water supply.
The World Commission on Water for the 21st Century said Monday more than half the world's major rivers are going dry or are polluted. The commission said the main reason is lack of coordinated management of watersheds, which often cross national boundaries or, as with the heavily polluted Colorado River, several state boundaries.
"All the success stories show that cooperation leads you everywhere," said Arienne Naber, a geologist and commission consultant.
The findings, released in Washington, are part of a report the commission expects to complete at a two-day meeting ending Tuesday at The Hague, Netherlands, a commission spokesman said.
Backed by the World Bank and by U.N. agencies on children, development, the environment and other issues, the commission's mission is to find a way to ensure enough water will be available for the world's growing population in the next century. The final report is to be presented in March to the World Water Forum in The Hague.
"We have to pay attention to how the world manages its water," Naber said in an interview. "Production has to be increased, quality improved … to guarantee that we can meet the water needs of all the people on earth and protect the environment."
The commission is recommending comprehensive regional planning among a long list of other remedies, she said.
Fouling of rivers and surrounding river basins contributed to 25 million environmental refugees last year, a number that exceeded for the first time the world's 21 million refugees from warfare, the commission said.
The commission gathered information on the river portion of the study from specialists around the world and an analysis of existing material.
It did not name the troubled waterways, but concluded that of the 500 major rivers in the world, the Amazon in South America and the Congo in sub-Saharan Africa are the healthiest. Both have few industrial centers near their banks, the report noted.
By contrast, overuse and misuse of land and water resources in river basins elsewhere has "seriously depleted and polluted" half of the 500, the commission said. That, it said, is "degrading and poisoning" the rivers' surrounding ecosystems, "threatening the health and livelihoods of people who depend upon them for irrigation, drinking and industrial water."
Among other findings in the report:
-The Yellow River in China's most important agricultural region is severely polluted and ran dry in its lower reaches 226 days out of the year in 1997. Health problems are growing because of poor water quality.
-Amu Darya's and Syr Darya's flow into the Aral Sea in Asia has been reduced by three-quarters and has caused a catastrophic regression in sea levels - 53 feet between 1962 and 1994. The region suffers the highest rate of infant mortality of all regions of the former Soviet Union because poor water flow and fertilizer runoff have fouled the seabed.
-The Colorado River in the United States, irrigating more than 3.7 million farm acres, is so exploited and polluted by agriculture that little is left to protect the ecosystem downstream, which has turned from lush green to salty and desolate marshes.
-More than 90 percent of the natural flow of Africa's Nile, the world's longest river, is used for irrigation or is lost through evaporation, primarily from reservoirs. What reaches the Mediterranean Sea is heavily polluted with irrigation drainage and industrial and municipal waste.
 Load-Date: November 30, 1999

 

End of Document
