

Names In The Game
August 29, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 618 words
Dateline: LOUISVILLE, Ky.
Body




Natalie Cole, actor James Earl Jones and comedian Jeff Foxworthy are among the celebrities stepping into the ring for the Muhammad Ali Tribute to Amateur Boxing.
Cole will perform a miniconcert at the Sept. 20 event, which will benefit Louisville's planned Muhammad Ali Museum and Education Center as well as the youth programs of USA Boxing Inc. Louisville is Ali's hometown.
Jones will contribute his famous baritone to deliver a tribute to amateur boxing written by Ali.
Two-time Olympic gold medal hurdler Edwin Moses will also participate, as will WBA heavyweight champion Evander Holyfield and former heavyweight champion Ken Norton.
Those with the money and courage can climb into the ring with some of the fighters, including Holyfield. Donations start at $ 50,000.
---
LAS VEGAS (AP) - Singer Tony Bennett was the prime attraction until Michael Jordan showed up.
Bennett entertained a VIP crowd at the opening of a $ 90 million addition at a Strip attraction billed as "the Shopping Wonder of the World."
Some 2,000 special guests - ranging from politicians to entertainers and shopping center developers - cheered as Bennett wrapped up a 30 minute performance with his patented song, "I Left My Heart in San Francisco."
Then, Jordan appeared.
The Chicago Bulls star stopped in an upscale men's clothing store Bernini Collection and carried on an animated conversation with clerks as crowds gathered around the window.
He drew a similar crowd when he stopped at lingerie shop Victoria's Secret.
Asked for comment on his new contract - said to be $ 33 million - Jordan just grinned and walked away.
Jordan was in Las Vegas conducting a pricey basketball clinic at a local hotel and casino.
---
SANTA ANA, Calif. (AP) - Todd Marinovich is being sued by a man who claims the former Southern Cal and Raiders quarterback injured him in an auto accident.
Harry Kassabian filed suit in Orange County Superior Court on Thursday claiming wage loss, hospital and medical expenses and property damage from the June 11 accident.
The accident took place in Newport Beach when Marinovich rear-ended another car and set off a six-car pileup. Marinovich, Harry and Ida Kassabian, and another man were treated at hospitals.
It was the latest of Marinovich's problems. He was accused of cultivating marijuana and two drug-related misdemeanors after police said they found a marijuana plant, a bag of marijuana, a syringe and prescription medicine at his Dana Point home in March.
---
SEVILLE, Spain (AP) - Brazilian midfielder Denilson became the world's most expensive soccer player when he signed with Betis of Spain, which will pay $ 35 million to Brazil's Sao Paulo team.
The 20-year-old Denilson, who won't play for Betis until after the World Cup, signed an 11-year contract worth $ 36 million.
The record transfer fee for the midfielder topped the
$ 27 million Inter Milan paid Barcelona for Brazilian forward Ronaldo, buying him out of his eight-year deal with the perennial Spanish power.
One of Sao Paolo's conditions was that Denilson not play in Spain until next season, so he can stay in Brazil until after World Cup in France next summer.
---
CATANIA, Sicily (AP) - Primo Nebiolo, president of track and field's world governing body, and his wife were hurt in a traffic accident with a police car Friday.
Nebiolo, 74, escaped with minor bruises to his head, but his wife, Giovanna Nebiolo, suffered a fractured arm, according to police.
The officers in the police car were not seriously injured.
In addition to heading the International Amateur Athletic Federation, Nebiolo is president of the International Federation of University Sports, which oversees the World University Games.
He was in Sicily for those games, which end Sunday.
 Load-Date: August 29, 1997

 

End of Document
