

Names In The Game Steve Young and Jeff Suppan.
December 15, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 657 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LINCOLN, Neb. (AP) - Nebraska volleyball coach John Cook was named the NCAA Division I coach of the year Thursday by the American Volleyball Coaches Association.
In his first year as coach, Cook guided the Cornhuskers to a 32-0 record, a No. 1 ranking, a Big 12 Conference championship and a berth in the NCAA national championship match.
Cook was an assistant under Terry Pettit - the coach he replaced - at Nebraska from 1988-91.
He then coached Wisconsin to a 161-73 record from 1992-98. The Badgers advanced to the NCAA regional finals his last two seasons, including a five-game loss to the Huskers in 1998 that was Cook's last at Wisconsin.
He returned to Nebraska in 1999 as an assistant.
---
DUNEDIN, Fla. (AP) - David Wells will marry longtime girlfriend Nina Fisher on Friday at the Renaissance Vinoy Resort and Golf Club in St. Petersburg, Florida.
Wells, who was 20-8 with a 4.11 ERA has been mentioned in numerous trade rumors involving the Indians and Mets since the end of the 2000 season. Wells could join former teammates Clayton Andrews and John Bale in getting traded or assigned by the Blue Jays prior to their nuptials.
Andrews was traded to Cincinnati on the Wednesday prior to his November 25th wedding, while Bales went to Venezuela for winter ball on the day - November 4th - that he was supposed to wed the sister of Tampa Bay Lightning captain Vincent Lecavalier.
Bales has since been traded to the Baltimore Orioles.
---
VANCOUVER, British Columbia (AP) - A few Vancouver Canucks players handed out holiday gifts to patients at B.C. Children's Hospital last week.
The Canucks signed and gave out hockey cards, and distributed teddy bears to wide-eyed youngsters in an activity room before visiting more than 100 sick children in various wards.
"For me, especially being a new father, it means more, and just shows how blessed we are with good health," defenseman Adrian Aucoin told the Vancouver Province.
The Canucks are very active in the Vancouver community. The team was a finalist for the World Sports Humanitarian Hall of Fame's pro-team community award last summer, won by the NBA's San Antonio Spurs.
---
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - Retired San Francisco 49ers quarterback Steve Young became a father last week, his former team said.
Young, 38, and his wife Barbara, 31, who were married in March, had a baby boy on Dec. 6. The child weighed 8 pounds, 7 ounces and was 20 1/2 inches long.
The two-time NFL Most Valuable Player has led a quiet life since retiring from football in June after suffering four concussions in three years.
Young said a prayer at the recent Republican National Convention, leading some to speculate that he may crave a political career either in Utah, where he played at BYU, or in Northern California.
But Young said his primary focus was on starting a family.
---
CLEMSON, S.C. (AP) - Bob Bradley, Clemson's longtime sports publicist who died in October, will be inducted into the Gator Bowl Hall of Fame.
Bradley will be enshrined with Penn State coach Joe Paterno and former Missouri quarterback Terry McMillan.
Bradley worked as Clemson's sports information director from 1955-89. He continued helping school athletic events until shortly before his death after a three-year battle with cancer.
Clemson played in five Gator Bowls while Bradley was at the university.
---
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) - Jeff Suppan, who led the Kansas City pitching staff this year with his second-straight 10-win season, has been named the Royals' pitcher of the year.
The 25-year-old right-hander was chosen by a vote of the Kansas City chapter of the Baseball Writers Association of America, the team announced Thursday.
Suppan made a team-high 33 starts in his second full season with the Royals and set career highs with 217 innings pitched and 128 strikeouts. He was 10-9 with a 4.94 ERA.
After the All-Star break, he went 8-3 in 15 starts with a 3.99 ERA. He closed the season with complete-game victories over Anaheim and Detroit.
 Load-Date: December 16, 2000

 

End of Document
