

Names In The Game Canada, Rashaad Hines.
The Associated Press
April 24, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 627 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK (AP) - All season, Larry Johnson played it low key with "the Big L," his celebratory sign after making big shots for the New York Knicks. Now, with the playoffs under way, Johnson has reinstated it.
Johnson formed the wrist-to-elbow sign after nailing a tie-breaking 3-pointer with 43 seconds left in the Knicks' 92-88 victory over Toronto on Sunday.
"I caught so much flak from it last year," he said, explaining why he had put the sign in mothballs. "But in the playoffs … we feed off emotions, so I had to put it up."
---
PONTE VEDRA BEACH, Fla. (AP) - The wife of PGA Tour caddie Bruce Edwards was charged with arson Monday for setting fire to their home after he told her that he wanted a divorce, the St. Johns County Sheriff's Office said.
Sue Edwards was arrested after being released from Flagler Hospital, where she had been kept for evaluation. Bond will not be determined until her court appearance Tuesday.
Edwards, Tom Watson's caddie for nearly 20 years, was with Watson at the PGA Seniors Championship in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., when the fire severely damaged the home April 16.
Investigators said an accelerant was used in an upstairs closet to start a fire that spread to the roof and caused it to collapse into the house. They said Sue Edwards, 38, was destroying memorabilia belonging to her husband.
Among the items recovered was an autographed flag from the 18th hole of Augusta National, sheriff's spokesman Kevin Kelshaw said. Watson won the Masters in 1977 and 1981.
Edwards also caddied for Watson when he chipped in for birdie on the 17th hole at Pebble Beach in 1982 to win the U.S. Open.
Kelshaw said the divorce papers were served Friday.
 
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Romario wants a spot on Brazil's Olympic team, and coach Wanderley Luxemburgo now has three more reasons why he deserves it.
The veteran striker scored three goals Sunday, leading Vasco da Gama to a 5-1 victory over Flamengo and the championship of the Guanabara Cup. Romario scored on a rebound, a breakaway and a penalty shot.
At 34, Romario is playing some of the best soccer of his career. It's a remarkable achievement for a player many Brazilians thought was finished after being cut from Brazil's 1998 World Cup team because of a leg injury on the eve of the tournament.
But Romario returned to lead Flamengo to the Rio state title in 1999, before a falling-out with club directors led to his transfer to Vasco.
---
ST. PETERSBURG, Russia (AP) - Help wanted. Defensemen needed for Team Canada in the World Hockey Championships that begin Saturday.
General manager Cliff Fletcher signed Mike Wilson of the Florida Panthers, but a routine medical exam revealed that Wilson has a broken foot and will be out for three months. That leaves Team Canada with only four defensemen - Ed Jovanovski and Adrian Aucoin of the Vancouver Canucks, Robyn Regehr of the Calgary Flames and Yannick Tremblay of the Atlanta Thrashers.
Last-minute injuries also cost Canada the services of centers Vincent Lecavalier (ankle) of the Tampa Bay Lightning, Joe Thornton (shoulder) of the Boston Bruins and Andrew Cassels (back) of the Canucks.
Forwards Trevor Letowski of the Phoenix Coyotes and Mike Sillinger of the Florida Panthers joined the team Monday, giving Canada 15 players, seven short of the 22-man roster.
---
CORPUS CHRISTI, Texas (AP) - Rashaad Hines, a junior guard, has been dismissed from the Texas A&M-Corpus Christi basketball team for an undisclosed violation of team policies.
Hines had averaged 12.1 points and 2.1 rebounds in eight games since joining the Islanders between semesters. He was a transfer from North Idaho College.
"Our team has certain rules we must follow on and off the court, and these rules weren't met in this situation," coach Ronnie Arrow said.
 Load-Date: April 25, 2000

 

End of Document
