

Names in the news
September 10, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 774 words
Dateline: MIAMI BEACH, Fla.
Body




Julio Iglesias and Gloria and Emilio Estefan have high hopes for the new Latin Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences.
The three became charter members of the group Tuesday night, and within 18 months the group will be host of its own Grammy awards show.
"To have our own awards and our own distinction, it will serve Latins very well," Iglesias said. "The whole world will know we have incredible music."
The National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, which is host of the music industry's Grammy awards show, is behind the nearly 10-year effort make the Latin group a reality.
The new group's mission is to build the Latin music industry, develop new talent and stimulate an increase in crossover acts. It also will lobby for stricter enforcement of music piracy laws in Latin America.
---
ALBANY, N.Y. (AP) - For Sol Wachtler, it was good to be home again.
The disgraced former chief judge of New York's highest court was welcomed back for a celebration of the Court of Appeals's 150th anniversary Monday.
It was Wachtler's first return since he resigned in 1993 after being charged the previous year with harassing his former mistress. He served a 15-month prison term.
"I approached the whole thing with a great deal of trepidation. It's been a long time. It's been a very difficult time," said Wachtler, one of about 150 guests.
"It's good to be home," added Wachtler, once a prospective candidate for governor.
Wachtler, who wrote "After the Madness: A Judge's Own Prison Memoir," has been working as a mediator and teaching at the Truro Law School in New York City.
"I think he belonged here. He's part of our 150-year history," said Chief Judge Judith Kaye, who extended Wachtler the invitation.
---
HURRICANE MILLS, Tenn. (AP) - Loretta Lynn is getting some bigger digs.
The 3,500-acre dude ranch owned by the coal miner's daughter who rose to fame as a country singer will undergo an expansion that will double the size of the Lynn museum, daughter Cissie Lynn said in Tuesday's editions of the Nashville Banner.
The museum will showcase 35 years of memorabilia from the singer's life. Among them is the bus from the 1980 movie "Coal Miner's Daughter," about Lynn's rise from poverty in Butcher Hollow, Ky., and items from the singer's husband, Mooney, who died last year.
"The museum mom has now is small," Cissie Lynn said. "But the new one will be larger because she has a lot of things that need to be, should be and will be in it."
The ranch 60 miles west of Nashville is one of the state's top tourist attractions, featuring country music concerts, camping and horseback riding.
---
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. (AP) - The National Enquirer and the Globe won't be sending their photographers chasing after Britain's young princes, William and Harry.
This country's top two tabloids joined the British media Tuesday in pledging to respect the privacy of Princess Diana's sons.
"We've never chased William and Harry before. We're certainly not going to start now," Valerie Virga, photo editor of the Lantana-based National Enquirer, said Tuesday. "If (the British media) aren't going to run pictures of them, we certainly wouldn't."
Dan Schwartz, editorial director of the Boca Raton-based Globe, said it would not publish "unsanctioned or intrusive" photos of the princes.
"The hunt became a blood sport. The quarry dead, let us find gentler pursuits," The Independent, a British newspaper, said in a front-page editorial.
In New York, People magazine announced that Diana's image will appear on the Sept. 22 cover - the 44th time the princess has graced the cover. To honor her memory, the magazine set up a fund to fight pediatric AIDS, one of Diana's favorite charitable causes.
---
BUFFALO, N.Y. (AP) - The Indigo Girls have more than music on their minds as they trek through towns on their "Honor the Earth" concert tour.
Amy Ray and Emily Saliers see the shows as an opportunity to spread the word about environmental problems on American Indian reservations.
"We're here to play music, but we're here to use the music as a tool for change," Ms. Saliers said Monday, a day after the two-member band gave a free concert on the St. Regis Mohawk Reservation, which is near a federal Superfund site north of Buffalo.
"We're fighting battles that have to do with environmental racism," Ms. Ray said, criticizing companies for locating dump sites near Indian lands.
Each concert along the 21-stop tour will include remarks about the environmental cause from Winona LaDuke, president of the Indigenous Women's Network, the Indigo Girls said.
Indigo Girls earned a Grammy for their 1989 album "Indigo Girls," best known for the hit single and video "Closer to Fine."
 Load-Date: September 10, 1997

 

End of Document
