

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
January 28, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 724 words
Dateline: DENVER
Body




Super Bowl MVP Terrell Davis wants to finish his career with the Denver Broncos.
Neil Schwarz, agent for the running back, wants to renegotiate the final three years of Davis' contract.
The Broncos don't have to comply because Davis is in the second year of a five-year contract.
It wouldn't be the first time Davis' contract has been renegotiated.
Following his brilliant rookie year, the Broncos rewarded him with a five-year, $ 6.8 million contract.
He proved himself last season by setting Denver single-season records for rushing yards (1,538), rushing touchdowns (13) and total TDs (15). His 157-yards rushing and three touchdowns in Denver's 31-24 Super Bowl victory earned him the MVP.
---
SEATTLE (AP) - SuperSonics coach George Karl is determined to be one of the highest-paid coaches in the NBA next season.
"If they are going to make me an offer, I'll say yes or no to it," he said. "But that offer right now, they think they are going to get me on the cheap, and they are not."
Karl has the best winning percentage in Sonics history - 356-139 so far, including a league-best 33-10 this season - and is coaching his third All-Star game Feb.8, though he doesn't consider that a key factor for him.
"I think a coach that is looking for top-five money, your record of winning 72 percent of your games over the past six years is worth more than that."
Who the top five are is a matter of debate, since some wear multiple hats.
Boston's Rick Pitino, coach and general manager, seems to top the list at $ 7 million. Karl makes about $ 3.2 million now and would like $ 5 million.
Sonics general manager Wally Walker said no decision will be made until after the season.
Karl had wanted a contract extension last summer, and said Walker refused to address the issue then, too, saying he and team owner Barry Ackerley would evaluate the situation after this season.
---
BRASILIA, Brazil (AP) - Brazil's Senate Wednesday asked Sports Minister Pele to intercede and end the U.S. economic embargo of Cuba.
"The Pope put the ball in the penalty zone, now we just need to Pele to tap it in," Sen. Eduardo Suplicy said.
According to Suplicy, the Senate unanimously approved the idea that Brazil try to encourage a rapprochement between the United States and Cuba and that Pele was the selected largely because of his international prestige.
"I am available and if it's for peace I want to help," Pele told Globo television.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - New York Knicks center Patrick Ewing found a way to get involved in next week's NBA All-Star Weekend after all. Ewing missed a chance to be on the Eastern Conference team for a 12th time because of a broken wrist.
But he has been added to the cast for the NBA TeamUp Celebration on Feb. 7, the day before the game.
Ewing will join hosts Ahmad Rashad and Willow Bay in the one-hour entertainment event which will honor young people who have been involved in community service.
Other NBA and WNBA players, along with entertainers will appear on the show which will be televised on NBC, TNT, Nickelodeon, BET, Telemundo and MSG in the United States and YTV in Canada.
---
SILVERSTONE, England (AP) - Jacques Villeneuve says he has nothing to prove now that he has the Formula One driving championship to go with his 1995 Indy Car titke.
Except, that is, showing that he still is No. 1.
"I don't enjoy it when I'm not in front," the Villenueve said Wednesday at the unveiling of his new, bright red, Williams car.
"So I intend to go out and win it again."
Villeneuve, who survived a collision with his chief rival, Michael Schumacher, in the final race of last season said he no longer wants to dwell on that incident in which the German driver appeared to try to force the Canadian off the track.
"It's child's games," he said of the reports of angry twords between the two drivers. "Nothing special should happen between us."
"If he's fast, I'll have to fight against him and that's all. Last year is behind. As long as there's not too many word games, then it should be OK."
---
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - Annika Sorenstam was voted Swedish golfer of the year for the third time Wednesday, beating out Jesper Parnevik.
Sorenstam, who last season earned a record $ 1.2 million on the LPGA Tour, received 394 votes from Swedish golf writers.
Parnevik, who won his first PGA event, the Phoenix Open, on Sunday at Scottsdale, Ariz., had 342 votes.
 Load-Date: January 28, 1998

 

End of Document
