

Names In The Game for Flamengo.
The Associated Press
November 20, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 599 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MIAMI (AP) - New York Yankees pitcher Orlando "El Duque" Hernandez has obtained a marriage license, apparently with the intent of marrying his longtime girlfriend.
Though Hernandez denied to The Miami Herald that he is making wedding plans, an application filed Friday showed he applied for a license with Noris Bosch, 22, the girlfriend who fled Cuba with him in 1997.
Under Florida law, Hernandez and Bosch could marry as early as Monday but there is no word yet on the date. Their license expires in two months.
In a pending lawsuit, Hernandez's former wife, Norma Manso, is suing the baseball star over how much money he should pay for the support of their two daughters, who live with their mother in Coral Gables.
Manso is seeking $9,500 a month in child support for their two daughters, Yahmara, 9, and Stehffi, 4.
---
VIENNA, Austria (AP) - Muhammad Ali and soccer great Pele are foremost among the winners of "World Sports Awards of the Century."
They were among 91 sports greats gathered for a gala at the Vienna State Opera, where the 11 male and female winners were announced Friday night.
When an ailing Ali walked slowly to the podium to accept his granite and crystal trophy, the crowd was on its feet, clapping and shouting its approval for minutes on end.
The former heavyweight champion, who has Parkinson's disease, spoke slowly.
"I have won many awards, many championships, and many fights," he said. "None have been as great as tonight."
Other winners of the awards were: race driver Alain Prost; tennis champion Steffi Graf; basketball star Michael Jordan; Olympic gold medalists Nadia Comaneci in gymnastics, Carl Lewis in track, Dawn Fraser and Mark Spitz in swimming; and champion skiers Annemarie Moser-Proell and Jean-Claude Killy.
---
STUTTGART, Germany (AP) - Mika Hakkinen's Formula One title was celebrated by Mercedes at its factory, drawing 40,000 revelers and setting off traffic jams Saturday.
The fans of the Finnish driver threw toy turtles - Hakkinen's favorite animal - onto the stage, and were treated to tire-changing contests between the McLaren-Mercedes team and a U.S. CART series pit crew.
"It's fantastic that so many people came. It's a great experience for the people, which is fun for me too," Hakkinen said.
The title was his second straight.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Romario hasn't signed with Vasco just yet.
Days after Flamengo released Romario for sneaking out of training camp to go to a nightclub, club president Edmundo Santos Silva met with the 33-year-old forward and hinted that the club wanted him back.
"He clearly said that he would like to stay with Flamengo until the end of his career," Silva said Saturday.
However, Romario then held a news conference as his night club, Cafe do Gol, and said, "There is no possibility that Romario will work with those people."
The Brazilian media has had a field day with the tug-of-war over Romario between rivals Flamengo and Vasco. But the list of interested teams also reportedly includes national champion Corinthians and Saudi Arabia's Al Nassr, which wants Romario for the world club championship.
---
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia (AP) - A Malaysian party to show appreciation for Tiger Woods greatly impressed the world's No. 1 golfer - with one reservation.
"It felt like a retirement party," he said Saturday. "I'm not retired."
The dinner was Thursday, but by Saturday there was much more to celebrate. Woods shot a course-record-tying tying 63 to take a five-stroke lead in the individual competition at the World Cup.
He and playing partner Mark O'Meara share a seven-stroke lead inb the two-man competition.
 Load-Date: November 21, 1999

 

End of Document
