

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
March 4, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 750 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Michael Jordan's mother was greeted by the newest Chicago Bulls' fans in Israel.
While touring a hospital Thursday, Deloris Jordan entered the maternity ward and burst out laughing at the sight of five newborns dressed in tiny red jerseys, all with her famous son's No. 23.
She is on a 10-day visit to Israel, invited by the Shaare Zedek hospital, which will present her with the Raoul Wallenberg award for her work with sick children.
---
PARAMARIBO, Suriname (AP) - Suriname's Anthony Nesty on Thursday was honored as only black man to win an Olympic gold medal in swimming.
Nesty, now 31, won the 100-meter butterfly in the 1988 Olympics in Seoul.
He received a standing ovation at a meeting of the 15-nation Caribbean Community. The Suriname government presented him with a trophy.
Nesty, an assistant swimming coach at the University of South Florida, won the 1991 World Championships in Perth, Australia, and followed up with a bronze medal at the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, again in the 100-meter butterfly.
---
PORTSMOUTH, England (AP) - Calling all Portsmouths.
With the backing of movie director Anthony Minghella, famous for his Oscar winner, "The English Patient," owners of the Portsmouth soccer club are appealing to towns with the same name in New Hampshire, Ohio and Virginia to help them stay in business.
The English team, which fell on hard times after its powerhouse days of the late 1940s, celebrates its centenary this season. But it may go out of business in two months if it doesn't find an owner who can pay off its $ 10 million in debts.
"The administrators have until May 31 to find a buyer for the club and, so far, no one has come forward," said Greg Harmer, an accountant who has launched a community drive called Portsmouth United to raise the cash.
"We are appealing to anyone who has connections with Portsmouth, even through historic links with the British navy, to help us find the money to stay alive.
"Portsmouth is a famous port with a famous old soccer club and gave its name to the Portsmouths in the United States. We have the support of the local municipal council here and have written to the equivalent councils over there," Harmer said.
---
ACAPULCO, Mexico (AP) - Four members of what police called a "band of 16 dangerous criminals" have been arrested and were said to have confessed to the Feb. 17 kidnapping of the father of star Mexican soccer goalie Jorge Campos.
A search continued in the Pacific coast state of Guerrero for 12 other suspects. Alvaro Campos was released Feb. 23 after his family paid $ 63,000 in ransom.
He was in good health, apparently suffering only a sprained ankle.
Jorge Campos, Mexico's national team's No. 1 goalkeeper during the World Cup in France last year and in Los Angeles in 1994, is known for his flashy uniforms, which he used to design himself.
His new U.S. Major League Soccer team, the Chicago Fire, let him return to Mexico for the season to play for a top division team.
---
MIAMI (AP) - A man was arrested at the Doral-Ryder Open after trying to sell Raymond Floyd $ 15,000 clubs for $ 5 each.
Walter Robinson was arrested at the Doral Golf Resort and Spa on Wednesday and said to have made off with a bag of Orlimar Tri-Metal golf clubs.
Police said Robinson ran into Floyd near the spa moments later. Floyd, one of South Florida's most famous golfers who recently redesigned Doral's Blue Monster course, was not recognized by Robinson.
"These were top-of-line clubs," said Scott Smith, director of security at the resort. "It is absolutely amazing. I read a book about America's stupidest criminals. He has to be one of them. To approach Raymond Floyd, a great friend of ours … it's almost comical."
Robinson has previous arrests for burglary, armed robbery and grand theft.
---
SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - Nearly 30 years after Charlie Earp helped Greg Norman become one of golf's biggest names, the Australian coach is turning his talents to getting Aboriginals from his country into the sport.
"I can see the same kind of dedication in some of these kids, they're a lot like Greg was," Earp after a clinic with 15 Aboriginal golfers at Sydney's Terrey Hills golf club.
Two of Earp's students, Jay McDermott, 19, and Nick Carter, 22, competed in a fund-raising tournament. Both played in last year's Coolum Classic on the Australasian PGA tour and are both in PGA traineeships.
"It was a great day for us," said McDermott. "We get a chance to get coaching from the best people possible, and to help train new kids at the same time."
 Load-Date: March 4, 1999

 

End of Document
