

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
May 27, 1998, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 471 words
Dateline: SAN DIEGO
Body




Organizers of next month's Rock 'n' Roll Marathon said singer Pat Benatar and the bands The Lovin' Spoonful and Huey Lewis and the News will put on a post-race concert.
The race-day musical groups were to be announced at a news conference Wednesday.
The June 21 race, described as the first new marathon in 10 years in a major city, will feature a rock band along each mile of the 26.2-mile course.
At 4:30 p.m., after the race is over, the three headline acts will begin playing.
"After rockin' and rollin' through San Diego earlier in the day, we hope our marathoners, as well as friends, guests and the general public, will be ready to party," said Shauna Erkenbeck, the marathon's entertainment director.
Together, the three headliners have had 19 Top 10 hits, several Grammys and dozens of gold and platinum albums.
The Lovin' Spoonful's hits include "Do You Believe in Magic," while Huey Lewis and the News' include "The Heart of Rock 'n' Roll." Benatar, meanwhile, sings "Hit Me with Your Best Shot" and "Love is a Battlefield."
The marathon, sponsored by Suzuki, will have $ 100,000 in prize money.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Argentina's Supreme Court rejected Tuesday an appeal by Diego Maradona's lawyers to move his case involving four reporters to a federal court.
The case involves the soccer star's actions during a February 1994 incident when Maradona fired an air rifle at photographers and journalists outside his country home.
Maradona had offered to do community service, but a provincial court hearing the case rejected the petition.
The rejection by the country's high court opens the way for Dante Pietrafesa, the presiding judge, to make a ruling in the case.
Prosecutors are seeking a four-year sentence.
Maradona, 37, has been suspended from soccer twice. The first time for 15 months for cocaine use after a 1991 Italian League match, and the second for use of ephedrine during the USA '94 World Cup.
---
INGLEWOOD, Calif. (AP) - A sore left knee will keep Los Angeles Sparks guard-forward Mwadi Mabika out of the world basketball championships.
Mabika had been set to leave the WNBA team's training camp to play for Congo, formerly Zaire, in the quadrennial 16-team tournament which began Tuesday in Germany.
"She's really been pounding (her knee) overseas," Los Angeles coach Julie Rousseau said of Mabika, who spent the offseason playing in Greece. "I understand the court she was playing on had concrete underneath. We just really want her to rest."
The 5-foot-11 Mabika will be examined again next week, Rousseau said.
Mabika will miss Los Angeles' exhibition games against Sacramento on Saturday at Anaheim and Sunday in Sacramento.
Mabika, 21, played for Zaire in the 1996 Olympics.
Sparks centers Lisa Leslie and Haxia Zheng are playing in the world championships for the United States and China, respectively.
 Load-Date: May 27, 1998

 

End of Document
