

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
November 21, 1998, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 675 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: ST. LOUIS
Body




Mark McGwire might have been second in the National League MVP voting, but he's tops as far as St. Louis aldermen are concerned.
The city's Board of Aldermen voted Friday to proclaim McGwire the most valuable person of the year, in essence, the city's MVP. The resolution passed 19-0, with one abstention.
Some aldermen thought the resolution was silly, but still voted in favor of it. Aldermen also praised Sammy Sosa, the Chicago Cubs' slugger who beat out the hometown home run hero for the award in voting announced Thursday.
---
WINNIPEG, Manitoba (AP) - It's been a long time since Sheldon Kennedy has been able to smile about a hockey game.
The 29-year-old forward was able to do just that Friday night after playing his first game in 1 years and scoring the winning goal in a 5-2 win by the Manitoba Moose over the Kansas City Blades in an IHL game.
"I looked in the stands and saw a few people I knew were happy for me. It was a good feeling," Kennedy said. "It was uplifting and exciting."
The teams were tied 2-2 late in the second period when Kennedy drew a hooking penalty against the Blades. He then scored on the ensuing power play to give the Moose a 3-2 lead.
His teammates mobbed him and the crowd of almost 6,000 gave him a standing ovation.
"If you look at the Sheldon Kennedy story there was always a sad ending; not like this goal-scoring thing," Kennedy said.
Kennedy, a veteran of 310 NHL games with Detroit, Calgary and Boston, went public in January 1997 with his account of sexual abuse by his former junior coach Graham James, who was subsequently convicted.
Last summer, Kennedy completed a 136-day, 5,000-mile in-line skate across Canada, which raised $ 3 million towards his foundation for aiding child victims of sexual abuse and to build the Anaphe Ranch in British Columbia for abused kids.
---
MANAGUA, Nicaragua (AP) - Nicaragua officially renamed its national baseball stadium Friday in honor of Atlanta Braves pitcher Dennis Martinez, a Nicaraguan native whose 22-year career in the major leagues has made him a popular figure here.
The President's Office issued a decree changing the name of the Nicaraguan National Stadium to the the Dennis Martinez Stadium "in honor of his sports achievements."
Martinez attended the renaming ceremony and pledged to "seek more aid so that this country can get over the tragedy it is suffering today" due to flood damage caused by Hurricane Mitch three weeks ago.
At least 2,000 Nicaraguans died in flooding and mudslides, and the country suffered widespread material damage.
"(Martinez) is the highest glory of our country's sports, and he has done honor to our country abroad," states the decree, issued on the 50th anniversary of the stadium's inauguration.
President Arnoldo Aleman called Martinez "an example for the youth and glory" of Nicaragua at the ceremony.
Martinez, 44, has a career record of 244 wins. On July 28, 1991, he pitched a perfect game for Montreal Expos against the Los Angeles Dodgers.
The stadium has had various names since it was built in 1948. It was named the National Stadium in 1990.
---
CINCINNATI (AP) - Boomer Esiason is glad he is now in the television announcer's booth, rather than still operating as quarterback of the Cincinnati Bengals.
"No regrets. Not now," he said.
Bengals coach Bruce Coslet, trying to break his 2-8 team out of its slump, decided this week to bench starter Neil O'Donnell in favor of the team's former No. 3 quarterback, Paul Justin.
"Maybe they would have been benching me," said Esiason, who revived the Bengals at midseason last year and later retired from the game. He now announces games on ABC's "Monday Night Football."
"I feel horrible for Bruce," Esiason said. "I feel badly for Neil. I saw this coming eight months ago. I knew what the schedule was going to be and they were going to go with young guys on defense and sign veterans to just try to fill gaps on the line."
Esiason came off Cincinnati's bench last season to replace starter Jeff Blake, and directed the Bengals to one of their most prolonged scoring outputs in years.
 Load-Date: November 21, 1998

 

End of Document
