

Names in the news
The Associated Press
July 10, 1998, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 711 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Francis Ford Coppola hopes the $ 80 million he's been awarded in his lawsuit against Warner Bros. will change some things in the movie-making business.
Coppola, who already had been awarded $ 20 million in compensatory damages, was granted another $ 60 million in punitive damages Thursday in his 1995 lawsuit that accused Warner Bros. of stealing his screenplay for a feature-length "Pinocchio" film.
"Warner Bros. has traditionally not treated its creative people well," Coppola said. "Hopefully, this will teach them to treat creative people as an asset, not as serfs."
The studio said the latest award was "simply ludicrous." A Warner Bros. spokeswoman said the studio would appeal.
Coppola, director of the "Godfather" trilogy, said the studio thwarted his dream by threatening to sue any other studio that tried to produce the project, which it eventually dropped.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Sandra Bullock says she learned to love her body during a visit to the famous Copacabana beach here last year.
Bullock, the "Hope Floats" co-star, was inspired by seeing Brazilian women freely showing off their bodies, she says in the latest issue of Manchete magazine.
"In Brazil, people are voluptuous but are extremely comfortable with their bodies," she told the weekly magazine, adding that the same was not true in the United States.
"When a friend and I first went to Copacabana beach fully dressed we felt ridiculous," Bullock said. "The next day I was already more liberated. I was even thinking of wearing a G-string bikini!"
---
PHOENIX (AP) - A plan to immortalize Barry Goldwater at the airport didn't fly with everyone.
Bowing to public pressure, Mayor Skip Rimsza said Thursday that he was dropping his plan to have the airport renamed for the late Republican senator.
Goldwater, a five-term senator and 1964 presidential candidate, died May 29. He was 89.
Rimsza called Goldwater "my hero" and said the community should find "a suitable way to honor this most honorable man."
The mayor's idea was to rename Sky Harbor International Airport to Goldwater Sky Harbor International Airport, a plan the City Council approved June 16. A week later, Rimsza ordered the final decision postponed, after hundreds of callers objected to the change.
Some critics said the City Council vote came too soon, without opportunity for public input. Others said Goldwater had enough things named after him, including a Phoenix high school, a Scottsdale street, a conservative think tank, an Air Force gunnery range in southwestern Arizona and a terminal at Sky Harbor.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - "Lolita" finally will be screened in U.S. movie theaters, despite balking by distributors over its depiction of a man sexually obsessed with a 12-year-old girl.
"It is a brilliant motion picture," Jeff Lipsky, head of marketing and distribution for the Samuel Goldwyn Co., said Thursday. He added that "people have nothing to fear" from the movie.
The adaptation of Vladimir Nabokov's novel stars Jeremy Irons as Humbert Humbert, a 45-year-old professor in a romance with his young stepdaughter.
U.S. film distributors had refused to show "Lolita" after it had been released to mixed reviews in Europe last summer. Filmmakers said it was because the subject matter was shocking; some distributors said it was because the R-rated movie is dull.
"Lolita" is to get a weeklong run beginning July 22 in Beverly Hills. The official opening will be in New York and Los Angeles on Sept. 25, extending to about two dozen big cities within two weeks.
Cable TV's Showtime channel previously announced it will show "Lolita" in August.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Robert Watchel, a musician-arranger who has worked with Fleetwood Mac and Linda Ronstadt, was arrested for investigation of possessing child pornography.
Police arrested Watchel and his wife, Annie, after raiding their home Thursday.
"We found that he had a computer with child pornography," said Detective Bill Dworin of the juvenile sex crimes unit. He said Watchel had produced copies of the images "that he kept in his bedroom. His wife was aware of this material."
As police led her away in handcuffs, Mrs. Watchel said, "I haven't done anything." Each was charged with one count of possessing child pornography.
Arraignment was scheduled for July 23.
 Load-Date: July 10, 1998

 

End of Document
