

Names In The Game Tom Hammond.
The Associated Press
March 23, 2000, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 713 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




DAYTON, Ohio (AP) - Magic Johnson is buying a piece of sports team, but it doesn't play on a court. It's a minor league baseball team.
The amount of money Johnson intends to invest in the Dayton Dragons, the Class-A affiliate of the Cincinnati Reds, was not disclosed.
The Dragons, owned by California-based Mandalay Sports Entertainment, played in Rockford, Ill., as the Rockford Reds last season. They will play in Dayton this year in the Midwest League in a new $23 million stadium.
The team's owners had promised the Reds there would be minority ownership involved with the Dragons. The Reds had made that condition part of the agreement to bring the farm team to Dayton.
Initially, former Ohio State football star Archie Griffin was named as a minority stockholder, but Griffin has not invested in the team.
---
CALCUTTA, India (AP) - Calcutta's poorest children have been adopted by another sports star.
Former Wimbeldon champion Pat Cash has been in the city this week on behalf of the Ireland-based GOAL organization, which funds the care of street children in India.
"When I heard and saw the conditions of the street and destitute children in various underdeveloped countries, it shook me," Cash said Thursday. "They look so happy when they find someone who loves and cares for them.
UNICEF estimates there are 100,000 children living on Calcutta's streets.
Former Swedish tennis great Mats Wilander was in Calcutta several years ago to spend time with the poor. Australian cricket star Steve Waugh is sponsoring children at the Udayan leper treatment center in the city.
---
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Tight end Ben Coates, meeting with the Tennessee Titans, says he's still a Pro Bowl-caliber player.
Coates, released by New England in February, said he can still play at the level he achieved with the Patriots from 1994 through 1998.
Coates said he would have no problem joining a team that already has Frank Wycheck, a Pro Bowl tight end.
"I think Frank is the kind of guy who wants to have me here to play with him," Coates told The Tennessean.
Michael George, Coates' agent, said he expects to begin contract talks with the Titans right away. Tennessee lost free-agent tight end Jackie Harris last week to the Dallas Cowboys.
---
SANTIAGO, Chile (AP) - Soccer great Diego Maradona calls his fight against cocaine a battle against death.
"I am taking the treatment seriously and I am doing better," the 39-year-old Argentine star told Chile's state TV in an interview conducted in Havana. "I can analyze myself and decide between death and life, and I choose life."
Maradona, who says he became addicted 16 years ago, went to Cuba on Jan. 18 to undergo treatment for a heart condition and the cocaine addiction that caused it
"I am feeling much better after arriving here almost dead," he said. "Now I have control of the ball."
---
PALM SPRINGS, Calif. (AP) - Celine Dion came out of her self-imposed retirement long enough to sing five songs for fellow golf enthusiasts.
"I'm nervous. I haven't trained," she told about 1,000 people attending a dinner Wednesday night for the LPGA Nabisco Championship golf tournament. Earlier, she had played in the pro-am with her husband, Rene Angelil.
Dion's performance at the Palm Springs Convention Center was her first since a farewell concert on New Year's Eve in Montreal. In January, she began a two-year hiatus.
Dion sported a new super-short blond hair cut as she sang to a prerecorded version of Frank Sinatra's "All The Way," with Sinatra's voice accompanying her.
"Thank you, Frank," she whispered at the end while snapping off a skyward salute to the late singer.
Between jokes about her struggling golf game, Dion also sang her hits "Because You Loved Me" and "My Heart Will Go On."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - NBC basketball commentator Tom Hammond is on injured reserve and won't be working Sunday when he was scheduled to call the game between the Miami Heat and Orlando Magic.
Hammond was playing in his weekly pickup basketball game when he took an elbow to the nose, breaking it and requiring surgery.
His broadcast partner, Hall of Famer Bill Walton, who had 13 broken noses in his career, offered two suggestions for Hammond: "Don't play defense with your face, and stay outside and shoot 3s"
Paul Sunderland will work the game with Steve Jones.
 Load-Date: March 24, 2000

 

End of Document
