

Names In The Game
April 3, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 628 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LOUISVILLE, Ky.
Body




President Clinton, a big college basketball fan, is preparing to invite the national champion Kentucky Wildcats to the White House although no date has been set.
Clinton, who spoke Monday night with coach Rick Pitino and leading scorer Tony Delk after Kentucky's 76-67 victory over Syracuse, closely follows college basketball.
Clinton's favorite team, not surprisingly, is the University of Arkansas Razorbacks. Two years ago, Clinton attended the Final Four in Charlotte, N.C., when Arkansas was playing. A graduate of Georgetown, he also attends Hoyas games in Washington.
During a mid-March trip to the Middle East, Clinton paused during his flight back to Washington to read a fax of a wire story with NCAA tournament scores. He handicapped the teams and discussed their performances in detail.
"He's an avid, avid basketball fan," said Julie Green of the White House media office.
But the subject isn't a particularly happy one for Green.
"As a Syracuse alum, this is a little bittersweet for me," she said.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Pele, long cited as a possible presidential candidate, has hit the campaign trial - to re-elect President Fernando Henrique Cardoso.
"To all those who want to vote for Pele, or want Pele to run for president, you should vote for the president to continue," soccer's greatest player said in a televised interview late Tuesday.
Brazil's constitution doesn't allow a president to serve consecutive terms. But many Brazilians favor a constitutional amendment to allow re-election of the popular Cardoso.
Pele, 54, is Brazil's sports minister. Although in the past he has said he wants to run for president, Pele said he now is behind Cardoso.
"Brazil is on the right path," Pele said. "I'm with him."
---
LIMOGES, France (AP) - Boris Becker's playing status remains in doubt for the Davis Cup quarter final between France and Germany.
Becker was scheduled to return here from a quick trip to Germany in a private plane and then work out. How he does will determine his availability to play singles or doubles for the German team.
Bronchitis caused Becker to withdraw from two tournaments in the United States after winning the Australian Open last January.
German Davis Cup captain Niki Pilic was not optimistic about Becker's chances of playing singles.
"He has taken a lot of antibiotics in the last days and weeks," Pilic said. "We had tried four times in training and each time he was flat after an hour. A match of five sets is too much to think about for him."
"There is a chance for the doubles," Pilic added.
---
MILWAUKEE (AP) - A Milwaukee bank presented Green Bay Packers star Reggie White with a check for $ 94,782 on Wednesday to rebuild his burned Tennessee church, bringing Wisconsin area donations to more than $ 249,043.
White previously received a $ 143,261 check in Green Bay in March for the Inner City Church in Knoxville, where he is an associated pastor. He shed a few tears then, but promised not to cry today to avoid any further ribbing from his teammates.
White said he has been touched by the public support since the Jan. 8 arson fire and asked Wisconsin to adopt him as part of its extended family.
"You people are some of the best people I've ever met in my life," White said. "I find it an honor and a pleasure to be a part of this state."
But White criticized the investigation of the fire by agents of the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms. He again denounced federal authorities for including church leaders in their probe.
The Rev. Jerry Upton, who was among church officials the FBI submitted to polygraph tests, said today's check would help the church rebuild and help the needy in its community.
Authorities have said that the fire may have been racially motivated, although the congregation is multiracial.
 Load-Date: April 3, 1996

 

End of Document
