

Names in the news
The Associated Press
February 28, 1998, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 604 words
Dateline: LISBON, Portugal
Body




Martin Sheen and Emma Thompson reportedly have signed up to make a movie about the disputed territory of East Timor.
Indonesia annexed East Timor in 1976, a year after its troops intervened in a civil war that broke out a few months after the departure of Portugal's colonial administration.
The United Nations does not recognize Indonesian rule in the territory and is brokering ongoing talks between Lisbon and Jakarta to resolve the dispute.
"It won't be a political film because I know Hollywood is very afraid of political issues," U.S. film producer Dean Stoecker said in the Portuguese newspaper Jornal de Noticias.
"But between the romance and adventure, it will be possible to tell the tragic history of a people who continue to see their land occupied illegally," he said in Friday's newspaper.
Sheen would play a British Ambassador to the United Nations whose half-Timorese daughter becomes involved in the struggle against Indonesian rule, and Thompson would portray an Australian woman whose journalist husband is killed in the territory.
Locations in Brazil, Puerto Rico and Australia are being considered for filming.
---
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. (AP) - One of his best movie moves was parting the Red Sea. Now Charlton Heston might be associated with splitting the atom.
The actor who starred as Moses in "The Ten Commandments" will appear on camera and do a voice-over to promote Sandia National Laboratories, a nuclear research center based in Albuquerque.
Heston will make a video about Sandia's micromachine technology, which creates nearly invisible mechanical gears, engines and transmissions in layers of silicon. Sandia scientists say the tiny machines will have uses in nuclear surgery and for nuclear warhead locks too small to pick.
---
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - Hoosier rocker John Mellencamp will have a captive audience in Gov. Frank O'Bannon for the next two months.
Mellencamp's oil painting "The Party Goers" is one of 48 pieces from 14 Indiana artists that will hang in the governor's residence through April. The display is part of an arts series sponsored by O'Bannon's wife, Judy O'Bannon, and the Indiana Arts Commission.
Mellencamp, a native Hoosier, is known more for his songs like "Small Town" and other tunes about life in the Midwest than for his paintings. He lives outside of Bloomington, about 50 miles south of Indianapolis.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - The home of the Braves is about to get some pure country.
George Strait will bring his touring country music festival on May 30 to Turner Field, where he'll perform in a 10-hour show with John Michael Montgomery, Lila McCann, Lee Ann Womack and the husband-wife team of Tim McGraw and Faith Hill.
The concert is a first for the Atlanta Braves' new ballpark, which opened last year.
"That stadium is so versatile, there's a business there we could really develop - and we're looking for every buck we can get," Braves President Stan Kasten said.
Owner Ted Turner might not be too impressed, however.
"I can't say for certain he knows who George Strait is," Kasten said.
---
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Harry Belafonte is getting the $ 100,000 Marian Anderson Award, named for the late contralto.
Belafonte, 71, will be the first recipient of the city's Anderson award, which pays tribute to artists who exhibit leadership. He is scheduled to accept the honor on June 27.
Belafonte was a prominent voice in the civil rights movement and also served as host of the World Summit for Children at the United Nations.
In 1987, the singer-actor was appointed a UNICEF Goodwill ambassador.
Anderson, a Philadelphia native, was the first black soloist to sing at New York's Metropolitan Opera.
 Load-Date: February 28, 1998

 

End of Document
