

Names In The Game
August 6, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 750 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Two more former athletes have found their way back into the broadcasting booth.
Pam Shriver will be part of the USA Network announcing team for the U.S. Open tennis championships starting later this month.
Shriver, who won 21 singles and 93 doubles titles, made her first big splash at the U.S. Open in 1978. She got to the finals as a 16-year old amateur.
Shriver previously was an anaylst for EPSN and ABC Sports.
Trev Alberts, whose NFL career as a linebacker with the Indianapolis Coltst was ended this summer by injuries, will be a college football analyst for CNN/SI. Alberts was a standout at Nebraska and played a big role in the Cornhuskers winning three Big 8 titles and Orange Bowl berths.
Alberts worked as a colllege football analyst for ESPN in 1994. He also had a weekly show during the football season for the NBA affiliate in Indianapolis while he played for the Colts.
---
WASHINGTON (AP) - Former major league catcher Joe Garagiola saw the numbers and beamed.
The annual National Household Survey on Drug Abuse released Wednesday showed the use of smokeless tobacco among teen-agers decreased from 2.8 percent to 1.9 percent from 1995 to 1996.
"Throughout my baseball career, my statistics were never really anything to be excited about. This is one statistic I'm thrilled to see," said Garagiola, who heads the National Spit Tobacco Education Program.
Donna Shalala, U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services, praised Garagolia's organization for spreading the word about the dangers of spit tobacco among major and minor league players and Little Leaguers.
She said the effort was aimed at breaking the "100-year link between baseball and spit tobacco."
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - The president of international soccer's governing body, Joao Havelange, and soccer legend Pele are feuding. Both are Brazilians.
Havelange threatened to exclude Brazil from the 1998 World Cup if the nation's Congress approves a proposal by Pele that would radically change professional soccer.
Havelange said the changes would violate FIFA regulations.
Pele, Brazil's minister of sports, presented a draft of the bill to President Fernando Henrique Cardoso. The proposal is being studied by legal experts and will likely be modified before it goes to Congress.
The bill would eliminate the reserve clause and make all players free agents within two years.
Soccer clubs would be required to become businesses, subject to public inspection. Clubs that fail to pay salaries on time - a common practice today - would be subject to sanctions.
"If this really is approved there will be no other alternative" but to keep Brazil from next year's world cup, Havelange said in an interview Wednesday with Rio newspaper Jornal do Brasil.
 
 FRANKLIN, Tenn. (AP) - If the last five weeks are any indication, 8-year-old Patrick Wood could someday have a golf game like Tiger Woods.
The 4-foot, 60-pound Patrick has scored two holes-in-one and knocked 10 strokes off his game this summer.
"I love it," Patrick said after shooting a 39 at Through The Green golf course, an executive course made up of mostly par 3s. "It's my favorite sport."
His dad, Tom, introduced him to golf only last year.
On June 29, Patrick used a 5-iron to ace the 125-yard eighth hole at Through The Green. He got his second hole-in-one Monday with a 3-wood on the uphill 110-yard sixth hole.
"On the second one, I was sort of having a bad round," the youngster said. "But after I hit my shot, I looked at my dad and I looked at the green and I said 'Dad, where'd my ball go?' And he said 'It went in the hole."'
Patrick was asked to account for his success.
"I practice a lot because that's what it takes," he said. "I like Tiger Woods. He's a good golfer. He must practice a lot."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - A snowball fight in Central Park in August?
But there was Olympic downhill champion Tommy Moe, former Olympic moguls champion Donna Weinbrecht and a handful of U.S. Ski Team members plus a dozen young racers tossing snowballs at each other.
"This was a gas," said Moe. "I didn't really count on a snowball fight in the summertime in Manhattan."
Nine U.S. alpine, nordic, freestyle and disabled teams athletes were at on hand Wednesday for a news conference announcing Healthy Choice foods as official nutritional consultant for the U.S. skiers during the 1998 Olympic season. Hundreds of 300-pound blocks of ice were fed through a portable ice-chipper to produce a snowy backdrop and snowflake-blowing machines on three hydraulic lifts provided the ambience.
 Load-Date: August 6, 1997

 

End of Document
