

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
November 13, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 722 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: GREENSBORO, N.C.
Body




Heather Sue Mercer, who failed for three straight years to make Duke's football team as a placekicker, is now 0-4.
A federal judge dismissed her lawsuit against the university and football coach Fred Goldsmith. Mercer claimed she wasn't given a fair chance to make the team.
The judge said Duke wasn't required to allow a woman to join its football team.
The lawsuit alleged Duke violated Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of gender in educational programs getting federal funding.
U.S. District Judge N. Carlton Tilley Jr., however, said Duke had the right to prevent a woman from participating in a contact sport under a subsection of Title IX.
"As football is clearly a 'contact sport,' a straightforward reading of this regulation demands the holding that, as a matter of law, Duke University had no obligation to allow Mercer, or any female, on its football team," Tilley wrote in his decision this week.
Mercer's attorney, Burton Craige, said he planned to appeal.
Mercer, a third-team All-State high school kicker in New York, practiced with the Duke team in fall 1994 and the following spring. During the annual Blue-White scrimmage in 1995, she kicked a 28-yard, game-winning field goal.
Afterward, Goldsmith said she had made the team. Later, he said he had gotten "carried away at the time" and shouldn't have made the statement.
In fall 1995, Goldsmith said that while Mercer could kick field goals in the 35-yard range, he had other kickers with a longer range, and she did not make the team.
In her suit, Mercer said she was not allowed to try out for the team in 1996.
---
DETROIT (AP) - The plane that usually takes the Detroit Pistons to away games will fly food and supplies to Central America to help victims of Hurricane Mitch.
On Nov. 23, Roundball One will fly 15,000 pounds of food and baby supplies to La Ceiba, Honduras.
"As best we know, the place we're going to has had one plane full of supplies so far," Pistons president Tom Wilson said.
Most of the roads and bridges were wiped out by the storm. Wilson expects to make the trip with Pistons coach Alvin Gentry, and possibly Art Van Elslander, the chairman of Art Van Furniture.
Van Elslander, Detroit's WDIV-TV and the Pistons began the aid effort on Thursday. Art Van Furniture stores will be collecting the food and supplies through Nov. 19.
---
MOSCOW (AP) - Marc Rosset responded to criticism that men's tennis is boring by attacking the women's game.
"Maybe four or five girls on the tour" are powerful players, "but I think the rest of the women are not in good shape," said Rosset, who is playing in the Kremlin Cup.
The men's game has been criticized for lacking a charismatic star. Meanwhile, the women's game has several exciting young players like Martina Hingis, Anna Kournikova and the Williams sisters - Venus and Serena.
Rosset disagreed.
"I don't think Pete Sampras, to stay No. 1, has plenty of time to go for shopping or sightseeing and to (be a) fashion model on the street," he said Friday. "So if (the women) have time, I think it's because the tennis is really weak."
Rosset wasn't quite as harsh as former Wimbledon champion Richard Krajicek, who once said that "80 percent of the top 100 women are lazy, fat pigs."
Rosset did complain, however, that women players "are making huge money with no big effort."
---
ST. LOUIS (AP) - Mark McGwire may be the world's most imposing fashion designer.
The St. Louis Cardinals home run king designed a necktie for the company Stonehenge Ltd. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the tie go to The V Foundation for Cancer Research, named for former North Carolina State basketball Jim Valvano, who died of the disease.
The McGwire tie features a likeness of a sunrise with birds above the sun. Stonehenge issued a special "62" edition of the tie to commemorate McGwire's 62nd homer, breaking Roger Maris' single-season record of 61 in 1961. McGwire eventually hit 70 homers.
Several other sports celebrities have donated tie designs, including St. Louisan and NBC broadcaster Bob Costas, Pittsburgh Steelers coach Bill Cowher, Baltimore Orioles outfielder Eric Davis and figure skater Peggy Fleming.
The ties are available in major department stores. The Jimmy V Neckwear label has raised nearly $ 300,000 for the V Foundation, according to Stonehenge officials
 Load-Date: November 13, 1998

 

End of Document
