

Names in the news
The Associated Press
August 8, 1998, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 691 words
Dateline: LIVINGSTON, Mont.
Body




An apology and a promise to behave mean Peter Fonda can avoid charges for threatening a prosecutor.
Fonda "has expressed remorse" for leaving threats on Park County Attorney Tara DePuy's answering machines, Assistant Attorney General John Connor Jr. said this week.
No charge will be filed if Fonda abides by terms of a deferred-prosecution agreement.
The actor apologized in a letter to Ms. DePuy and has promised not to have any contact with her or her family or staff for a year.
The messages stemmed from a letter Ms. DePuy had written to the actor in connection with an earlier incident. She and Connor would not elaborate.
Fonda lawyer Herman A. Watson III was out of town, said a baby sitter who answered the phone at his house Friday evening. Fonda lives on a ranch south of Livingston.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Michael Douglas says there's no truth to a lawsuit alleging he struck a caddy with a golf ball and then made a racial comment while walking away.
"We rushed to his aid and then I immediately left to seek help," Douglas said Friday, a day after James Parker, who is black, filed an $ 85 million federal lawsuit against the actor.
"At no time did I or anybody in my presence make any racial slurs and the suggestion that it was I who hit the ball and uttered the comment claimed is totally false and slanderous," Douglas said.
Parker's lawsuit alleges he was hit and injured by a ball launched by the actor at the Elmwood Country Club in Westchester County in October 1997. The actor stuffed $ 60 in his pocket and made a racist remark as he walked away, the lawsuit contends.
---
LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (AP) - No stranger to high-powered negotiations, former Clinton administration adviser Mack McLarty sold a controlling interest in his family's car dealerships.
McLarty will be chairman of a new venture between McLarty Automotive Group and Philadelphia-based Asbury Automotive Group, which bought an undisclosed stake.
The McLarty Group has six locations and 19 dealership franchises in Arkansas and Texarkana, Texas. The deal was announced Thursday.
"This is a profoundly changing industry, McLarty said. "And this is how we are going to ride that wave of change."
McLarty, a boyhood friend of the president, served as Clinton's chief of staff and later as special envoy to Latin America before leaving the post in June.
---
CHALMETTE, La. (AP) - John Goodman hit on just the name for his new nightclub-restaurant: Johnny B Goods.
Goodman, who lives in nearby New Orleans, said his restaurant in St. Bernard Parish should be open within a month and will feature live bands and games. The actor's partners include Frank Doll, who was a lighting designer on "Roseanne."
Goodman borrowed a page from rock 'n' roll history when deciding on a name for the spot.
"Well, Chuck Berry had this song 'Johnny B. Goode' and my name is John Goodman. It seemed kind of co-inkadinkle, as Curley (of the Three Stooges) used to say," Goodman said Thursday.
Then he cracked a few jokes about what patrons can expect.
"We're going to have a synchronized swimming dance team - all male. They'll call me Orca," he said. "We've got arm-wrestling every night. Beat me and get a free drink."
---
CINCINNATI (AP) - City leaders who long have wanted to send Larry Flynt's adult bookstore packing aren't happy that the city may have to pay for the move.
The Hustler magazine publisher's bookstore sells adult videos, magazines and sex toys.
The city, which is buying up downtown property so that an arts center can be built, this week notified Hustler News and Gifts Store and five other businesses they could receive up to $ 20,000 if they relocate to a properly zoned area.
The notices and aid offers are required by law, said Scott Stiles, city relocation manager.
"I think we should look to see if there is some way we can prevent this from happening," City Councilman Charles Winburn said Friday.
Mike Chiodi, the store manager, said Friday that Flynt and his brother, Jimmy, "are here to stay in the Cincinnati area."
The Flynts face trial in January on charges they sold sexually explicit videos at the store, and that a 14-year-old boy was one of the buyers. They have pleaded innocent.
 Load-Date: August 8, 1998

 

End of Document
