

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
October 21, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 742 words
Dateline: SYDNEY, Australia
Body




Pat Rafter's right shoulder rotator cuff injury is more serious than originally thought and he will miss the Davis Cup final against France Dec. 3-5 and possibly the Australian Open in January.
Rafter, the world's No. 1 player for one week in August, needs exploratory surgery.
"An MRI scan showed the tear had only partially healed even though Pat has trained hard over the last six to eight weeks," a Tennis Australia official said.
Davis Cup captain John Newcombe will now turn to youngster Lleyton Hewitt and Mark Philippoussis, coming back from knee and ankle problems, for the Cup final.
---
CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) - Minnesota Vikings star receiver Randy Moss was asked Thursday to pay restitution for a crime he committed while in high school.
Ernest Johnson, who was beaten by Moss and another student at Dupont High School in 1995, filed a motion in Kanawha County Circuit Court saying a judge never followed through on a promise to make Moss pay.
Johnson was hospitalized with injuries to his spleen, liver and kidney, and a concussion.
Police and school officials at the time said the fight was racially motivated and concerned a slur written on a desk. Moss and the other student charged are black; Johnson is white.
Moss later publicly apologized for the fight. He pleaded guilty to battery and was placed on probation.
Johnson's motion said that during Moss' sentencing, Judge Charlie King ordered Moss to pay "for the damages and consequences of the incident."
Johnson's lawyer, Andrew Chattin, said, "The court promised to set restitution in the future and never did."
Chattin refused to say how much money Johnson is seeking, or why he is seeking it so long after the fight. King scheduled a hearing on the motion for Nov. 2.
---
CAIRO, Egypt (AP) - Diego Maradona is in Libya to offer advice on developing that country's soccer program.
Egypt's Middle East News Agency reported Thursday that Maradona was invited by Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi's son, Al-Saaidi, who also is the head of the Libyan Football Federation.
Former Argentine national coach Carlos Salvador Bilardo also is in Libya to assess the national team while he considers the possibility of training it.
Al-Saaidi Gadhafi is trying to revive Libyan soccer, which has been affected for seven years by U.N. sanctions that included a ban on international flights. The sanctions were imposed to force Libya to hand over two suspects in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet over Lockerbie, Scotland, that killed 270 people, including 189 Americans. Libya handed over the suspects in April for trial in the West.
---
KAILUA-KONA, Hawaii (AP) - Of the nearly 1,500 competitors in Saturday's Ironman Triathlon World Championships, none is likely to have the emotional impact of Dick and Rick Hoyt.
Dick, 59, and Rick, 37, are the only tandem ever to complete the race together.
Rick has had cerebral palsy since his birth in January 1962. In 1977, Rick asked his father if he could participate in a five-mile race to benefit an athlete paralyzed in an accident. Dick agreed and pushed his son in his wheelchair for the entire distance.
Afterward, Rick typed out a message on a machine which his father had purchased to allow his son to communicate using a head switch to select letters and spell out words. The message read: "Dad, when you pushed me in the race, I felt like I wasn't handicapped."
Within two years, the Hoyts had a custom running chair built and were entering races on most weekends. They competed in their first Boston Marathon in 1981, and have competed in the race every year since.
The Hoyts competed in their first Ironman Triathlon World Championship in 1989. In the triathlon swim, Rick sits in a life jacket, belted to a chair, with a rope attached to a wetsuit vest that Dick wears. In the bike portion, Rick sits in a chair attached to the front of Dick's bike, and on the run, Dick pushes Rick in the race chair.
---
NOTTINGHAM, England (AP) - Kieren Fallon has become the third jockey in British racing history to ride 200 winners in three straight seasons.
The Irish jockey rode Alva Glen to victory Thursday in the Oath Maiden Stakes at Nottingham to match the feat achieved by Sir Gordon Richards and Fred Archer.
Richards reached the 200 mark in seven consecutive seasons from 1946-52, and 12 times overall. Archer had 200 or more winners from 1881-85.
Frankie Dettori is the only other rider with more than one season of 200 winners. He accomplished the feat in 1994 and 1995.
 Load-Date: October 21, 1999

 

End of Document
