

Names In The Game hockey, Brazilian road race
December 30, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 398 words
Dateline: TEHRAN, Iran
Body




Three Iranian soccer players were charged by police in connection with riots at the end of a game between the country's two most popular teams, the Islamic Republic News Agency reported Saturday.
The unidentified players were charged with disturbing public order at Friday's Pirouzi-Esteqlal game, according to Brig Gen. Mohammad Royanian, head of the control center for Tehran Law Enforcement.
Fights started among players after the referee dismissed Esteqlal's goalkeeper in the 90th minute for punching a Pirouzi player in the face. The game ended 2-2.
Afterward, some of the more than 100,000 fans destroyed about 250 buses along the 3-mile route from the stadium to the capital.
---
MOSCOW (AP) - Jay Bouwmeester is using the world junior hockey tournament as a stage to stamp himself as a bonafide NHL prospect.
The 17-year-old defenseman has been paired with Steve McCarthy of the Chicago Blackhawks on Canada's blue line.
"It's hard to believe he's only 17," McCarthy said. "He's an unbelievable hockey player. He's very easy to play with. You give him the puck and let him go, and he's something to watch. I can't really say enough about him."
This is Bouwmeester's second world junior tournament. He was the youngest player to be named to the national junior team a year ago. Now, he's added muscle and size.
"Usually when you're that young you're a little bit awkward and a little clumsy," McCarthy said. "That's not the case with Jay.
"It seems the bigger he gets the better he gets. It's going to be scary when he's 19 or 20 years old and developed."
 
---
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - New Year's celebrations in South America's biggest city start early Sunday, with thousands of athletes from around the world running in the traditional St. Silvester road race.
Paul Tergat of Kenya, going for an unprecedented fifth victory, leads some 14,000 athletes - about 12,000 men and 2,000 women - from about 15 countries on the 9.3-mile route.
With last year's victory, Tergat joined an exclusive club of four-time winners. He also won the race in 1995, 1996 and 1998 and holds the race record of 43 minutes, 12 seconds, set in 1995.
"I don't like thinking I'm the favorite because it makes the pressure grow inside me," Tergat said. "But I hope to win and come back next year to win a sixth time."
Rosa Mota of Portugel is the only six-time St. Silvester champion, winning every year from 1981 to 1986.
 Load-Date: December 31, 2000

 

End of Document
