

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
April 7, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 573 words
Dateline: SANTIAGO, Chile
Body




Chile's Marcelo Rios, the new No. 1 in the world tennis, expects to play in next week's Conde de Godo tournament in Spain even though he has tendinitis in his left arm.
"I hope I will be able to travel on Thursday and play the tournament," Rios said Tuesday, only hours after his doctor ordered him not to swing a tennis racket for a week.
Still, he said he plans to start some mild exercising Wednesday, "and if I feel well, I will go to Barcelona the next day."
Dr. Roberto Yanez said he told Rios to rest because although "it is not a serious injury, it's the type that will recur if not taken care of properly."
Rios pulled out of Chile's Davis Cup match against Argentina on Sunday because of the injury. He picked up Chile's only point of the series with a victory over Hernan Gumy in the opening match.
Rios flatly denied suggestions by Argentine newspapers that he feigned injury so he could drop out of the series when it became apparent Chile had little chance of winning.
"I have a career ahead of me and other tournaments to play," he said.
He also used his weekly column in the Santiago daily El Mercurio to deny the reports in Argentina, which he attributed to "a bit of envy" because of his new No. 1 ranking by the ATP.
---
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - In the biggest tax case ever against a Swedish sports star, skier Pernilla Wiberg has been charged with owing nearly $ 750,000 in back taxes.
Tax authorities claim that Wiberg, who won the silver medal in the downhill at the Nagano Olympics, transferred her prize money and advertising income from 1992-1995 to the tax haven Isle of Man.
The transactions were handled by Nordic Star Management, a London-based company that handles many contracts for athletes from high-tax Sweden.
Her manager, Keith Karlsson, denied any tax laws were violated. Under the contract with NSM, the player receives a monthly salary.
Wiberg's attorney, Staffan Andersson, said the decision will be appealed.
Wiberg moved to Monaco in 1995.
Recently, Wiberg signed sponsorship contracts with the German airline Lufthansa and automobile-maker Audi. She has contracts with international ski equipment companies and Alpine resorts in Sweden.
---
VILNIUS, Lithuania (AP) - Sarunas Marciulionis, the first player from the former Soviet Union to play in the NBA, has a new job: Lithuania's ambassador to the United States for special missions.
He will lead efforts to promote sports, business and cultural ties between the United States and Lithuania.
Marciulionis, a guard, was signed to the Golden State Warriors in 1989 when Lithuania was still a Soviet republic. He went on to play for the Denver Nuggets, who released him last season.
He also played on Lithuania's 1992 Olympic team, which won a bronze medal and delighted the crowds with its Grateful Dead warmup suits.
---
ULM, Germany (AP) - Steffi Graf's father, Peter, lost his bid for early release from prison Tuesday.
A district court said it saw no grounds for freeing the 59-year-old Graf, who was sentenced to three years, nine months in January 1997 for evading taxes on $ 6.55 million of his daughter's earnings.
Counting the 15 months he served in investigative custody, Graf asked the Ulm district court to parole him under a law making him eligible after serving half his term. Judge Reiner Gros rejected the request, citing the nature of Graf's offenses and his personality. Gros did not elaborate.
Graf is serving his term in a low-security prison in Ulm.
 Load-Date: April 7, 1998

 

End of Document
