

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
November 13, 1999, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 636 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) - Sammy Sosa celebrated his 31st birthday with guests ranging from ordinary Dominicans to his country's leader and a number of celebrities.
Donald Trump, musician Kenny G., salsa star Celia Cruz, singer Ana Barbera and actor Edward James Olmos were there Friday night, along with the Rev. Jesse Jackson, Dominican President Leonel Fernandez, former Spanish President Felipe Gonzalez and former Colombian President Belisario Betancourt.
Baseball players Pedro Martinez, Alex Rodriguez, Jose Rijo, Glenallen Hill and commissioner Bud Selig also were on hand to toast the Chicago Cubs slugger and help open his $5 million mansion in Santo Domingo.
"This is the first time I've ever celebrated my birthday. I've never had such an experience," Sosa said. "I feel great that all these big celebrities have come to visit our beautiful country."
---
EAST STROUDSBURG, Pa. (AP) - When boxer Lennox Lewis goes into the ring tonight in Las Vegas for a rematch against Evander Holyfield, he'll have a Pennsylvanian by his side.
Dr. Brettney Ramsour of East Stroudsburg has been Lewis' chiropractor since 1994. Fifteen minutes before each fight, the 33-year-old Ramsour gives Lewis a spinal adjustment and walks Lewis to the ring.
"Lennox wants to be the best that he can possibly be before a fight," Ramsour said.
Lewis, 34, will fight Holyfield, the current IBF and WBA heavyweight champion, at the Thomas and Mack Center. The two fighters met at Madison Square Garden in March in a controversial fight that ended in a draw.
Ramsour met Lewis five years ago while he was preparing for a fight at Ceasars Brookdale in Scotrun.
"There's nothing wrong with him. He's in tremendous shape," Ramsour said of Lewis.
Some athletes, including the football players on the Carolina Panthers, have found that getting their spines, hips and other joints gently popped into alignment eases their minds about going out and violently jolting them back out of alignment.
Ramsour has walked Lewis to the ring many times and said the pre-fight ritual is exhilarating for Lewis and everyone in his camp.
"It's the most intense rush you can ever feel. There's 60,000 people out there cheering for (Lewis). It's unbelievable," he said.
Ramsour also trains alongside Lewis. Ramsour said the fighter is in the best condition of his career and is determined to become the champion. After his bout with Holyfield earlier this year, many thought Lewis should have been declared the winner.
"He's really determined and focused. He wants his belts. He doesn't feel that Holyfield should even have those belts. They belong to him," Ramsour said.
Ramsour said he knows from personal experience that Lewis is a formidable opponent on and off the field.
"He's always very good at whatever he does," Ramsour said. "I've never beaten him at chess."
---
CINCINNATI (AP) - Cincinnati Reds first baseman Sean Casey has been chosen as the winner of the 1999 Hutch Award, named for former Reds manager Fred Hutchinson.
"The award is especially meaningful to me because because it's named for one of the great managers in Reds history," Casey said Friday. "I've only been in the majors for one full year, but I already know Fred Hutchinson's integrity and winning attitude make him a great role model for me."
Casey, 25, batted .332 with 25 home runs and 99 RBIs last season.
The award is sponsored by the the Hutchinson Center, a non-profit cancer research center in Seattle. Hutchinson, who led the Reds to the World Series in 1961, died of cancer in 1964.
Competitive spririt and ability to battle through adversity are among criteria for the award. Casey sustained what could have been a career-ending injury in 1998 when he was struck in the eye by a thrown ball, necessitating surgery in which a metal plate was screwed into the bones around the eye.
 Load-Date: November 14, 1999

 

End of Document
