

Names in the news
September 12, 1997, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 796 words
Dateline: MEMPHIS, Tenn.
Body




Colin Powell wants people to remember the nation's civil rights struggles, especially those of not so long ago.
The retired Army general and the late baseball great Jackie Robinson were honored Thursday night with 1997 Freedom Awards from the National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis.
Earlier in the day, Powell and his wife, Alma, toured the museum. At a display of old news films showing black students being beaten at an all-white 1960s lunch counter, the Powells stood quietly shaking their heads.
"The struggle is not over," said Powell, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. "But I wish every American had the opportunity to come here and be reminded again of what took place, not just in Memphis but throughout America, 30, 35, 40 years ago."
Robinson, the Hall of Famer who broke the game's color barrier 50 years ago by signing with the Dodgers, died in 1972 at age 53. His widow, Rachel, represented him at the awards banquet.
---
MIAMI (AP) - John Gotti doodles and the poor people of South Florida reap the benefits.
The man once regarded as one of the nation's most powerful mobsters drew the head of a roaring lion while in solitary confinement at a federal prison in Marion, Ill., where he's serving a life sentence for murder and racketeering.
The drawing will go up for auction Oct. 25, along with several other sketches, in the Seventh Annual Celebrity Doodle Art Auction.
"This is one of the best in seven years," Elizabeth Alexakis, the auction program's development officer, said Wednesday. "Gotti has so much detail. It's amazing."
Other celebrity artists include Muhammad Ali, Wilt Chamberlain, Cher, Clint Eastwood, Bob Hope, Steve Martin, Grace Slick and John Travolta. Work by Manuel Noriega, Panama's former dictator who is serving a 40-year prison sentence for drug trafficking, is also among them.
Auction proceeds will go to a Miami-based food bank that distributes more than 1 million pounds of food to charity.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Michael Jackson said he sold pictures of his baby to tabloid newspapers for millions of dollars to set the record straight.
"There were some illegal pictures out … someone had taken pictures of a baby for millions of dollars and said here's Michael's son," Jackson said in an interview with Barbara Walters that was to air tonight on ABC's "20/20."
They weren't really his son, Prince Michael Jackson, born Feb. 13 in Los Angeles, Jackson said.
"So I took pictures of the baby … they're forcing me," Jackson said of his decision to sell the pictures to the National Enquirer for $ 2 million and to European newspapers for a reported $ 1 million, even though he has pleaded for his privacy.
Jackson said he gave the money to charity.
---
WASHINGTON (AP) - Charlton Heston turned the tables on reporters in defending the constitutional right to bear arms.
The 72-year-old actor, a newly elected first vice president of the National Rifle Association, said the Second Amendment - which guarantees the right to keep and bear arms - is under attack from many in the news media, who often invoke the First Amendment guarantee of free speech.
"The Second Amendment must be considered more essential than the First Amendment," he told the National Press Club Thursday. "This may be a bitter pill to swallow."
Heston urged more media balance in reporting on gun issues.
"There can be no free speech … without the Second Amendment to fight for it," he said.
---
SIMSBURY, Conn. (AP) - Oksana Baiul is selling her house in the Connecticut foothills community that has become home to a handful of fellow Ukrainian figure skaters.
It was unclear Wednesday whether Baiul, who at 16 won the gold medal in figure skating at the 1994 Olympic Games in Lillehammer, Norway, was moving away from Simsbury for good. She once said the area reminded her of her Ukrainian homeland.
But several months after she crashed her car in a drunken-driving wreck in January, Baiul said she would like to move to New York City.
The skater moved to Simsbury shortly after the 1994 games. She soon was followed by other Russian skaters, including Viktor and Nina Petrenko, and Ekaterina Gordeeva, who remains in town raising her daughter after the 1995 death of her husband and former skating partner Sergei Grinkov.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Muscle man Kevin Sorbo, star of the new movie "Kull the Conqueror," was hospitalized for an aneurysm in his left shoulder.
Sorbo, the 38-year-old star of TV's "Hercules: The Legendary Journeys," was treated with medicine and released Wednesday from Cedars-Sinai Medical Center.
He had been at the hospital since Sept. 5.
Sorbo's day shooting "Hercules" is typically 12-16 hours, much of it running, jumping, fighting and falling. He does many of the stunts. After a day on the set, he spends 90 minutes working out, then goes for a run.
 Load-Date: September 12, 1997

 

End of Document
