

Names In The Game Braun, Florida football recruit, Brazilian coach
The Associated Press
January 30, 2000, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 669 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - After buying large tracts of land in western Brazil, Rev. Sun Myung Moon wants more - a piece of Brazilian soccer.
The Folha de Sao Paulo newspaper reported Sunday that the Korean minister has assembled a professional soccer team to compete in the Mato Grosso do Sul State championships in March.
The team is called Cene, a Portuguese acronym for New Hope Sports Center, and its headquarters are in Jardim, a small-town where Moon has in recent years acquired the 138,000-acre New Hope Ranch, 870 miles west of Rio de Janeiro.
Moon also owns the South Korean soccer team Il Hwa Chunma.
---
PHENIX CITY, Ala. (AP) - The coach of Phenix City's Little League champions has taken his son off the team and is moving to Georgia, saying he's upset with the animosity from residents and members of the sports community.
Tony Rasmus was packing Saturday, wearing a "United States Champions" T-shirt he got after his team lost the Little League World Series to Japan last August.
Despite losing, team members had a lavish homecoming, with limousines, fireworks and a bash featuring Gov. Don Siegelman. They appeared on national talk shows and took the field with the New York Yankees. But even then, Rasmus said, problems were brewing.
A string of undefeated seasons had annoyed Little League officials and rival coaches, he said, some to the point that "Rasmus rules" were created to keep his teams from winning so often.
Since the World Series, Rasmus said some of Phenix City's 25,000 residents have painted him as an attention-seeker whose goal was to promote himself and his two sons, who played on the team.
"He painted a fairy tale for his own glory," City Councilman Mark Carter, father of a player on the championship team, said.
Other residents claim Rasmus played favorites in all-stars, leaving the sons of adults he didn't like on the bench, and pushed for additional television airtime for himself and his sons during the World Series.
 
---
LEIPZIG, Germany (AP) - Egidius Braun, the powerful boss of German soccer, will not serve another term as vice-president and treasurer of UEFA.
Braun, 74, said Sunday he has already informed president Lennart Johansson that he won't seek another four-year term when Europe's soccer governing body holds its congress in late June.
Braun previously said he didn't want another term as president of the German Soccer Federation DFB when his current term expires in 2001. That would end his long career as a soccer functionary in 14 months.
But there might be considerable pressure on Braun in Germany to change his mind and stay in UEFA, since he is highly influential internationally.
 
---
GAINESVILLE, Fla. (AP) - A high school football recruit from Georgia was in jail Sunday after being arrested for entering the apartment of a Florida freshman and fondling her, police said.
Jason Respert, 18, was charged with attempted sexual battery and was booked into the Alachua County Jail. No bond has been set.
Police said an 18-year-old woman was asleep in her apartment bedroom when Respert entered the room and put his hands down her pajama pants. The woman's covers also were off and her shirt had been pulled up, according to a police report. The report also indicated that the woman didn't know Respert and did not invite him into the apartment.
Coach Steve Spurrier and the Gators were hosting Respert, a 6-foot-4, 300-pound offensive lineman from Warner Robins, Ga., who was making his final college visit before national signing day Wednesday.
 
---
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - Brazil national coach Wanderley Luxemburgo has seen his approval rating plummet from 80 percent to about 50 percent.
A study published Sunday in the Folha de Sao Paulo newspaper polled 630 people on the coach's popularity.
The fans three main criticisms of Luxemburgo were that he lacked creativity, relied excessively on defense and had an authoritarian nature.
"I know we are on the right track and we will classify," Luxemburgo told the paper when questioned about his flagging popularity.
 Load-Date: January 31, 2000

 

End of Document
