

Names In The Game
January 9, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 723 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: DENVER
Body




Leslie O'Neal will play in his sixth Pro Bowl next month, then leave the San Diego Chargers, who released him last week. Denver might be his next stop.
O'Neal said Denver is one of the teams he is eying to continue his career.
Because the Broncos' No. 1 off-season priority is a pass-rushing defensive lineman, O'Neal would seem to fill the bill. O'Neal ranks ninth in NFL history with 105 sacks.
"Definitely I'm interested," he said. "I've seen their scheme. I like their coach, Mike Shanahan. He's a veteran-type guy. He doesn't babysit. He wants a guy to go out and do the job, and that's what I'm looking for."
Clearly, the Broncos need help with their pass rush. They recorded only 30 sacks last season. Simon Fletcher, their career leader in sacks, is retiring, and Dan Williams, their No. 1 pick from 1993, has undergone his seventh knee operation.
O'Neal had 12 sacks last season, ranking fifth in the league.
"The fans in Denver I've always been impressed with," O'Neal said. "They're always cheering for their team, always wearing orange. When you have fans like that, they understand the game. That makes it a lot easier to play.
"A lot of times when we played here (San Diego), there were just as many Raider fans for Bronco fans."
The Chargers chose not to re-sign O'Neal or running back Ronnie Harmon.
"It's a business," said O'Neal, in his 10th year. "I didn't expect to be here as long as I was. They didn't say I didn't play good or I wasn't at the top of my game. They just wanted to go in a different direction."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Bob Lanier and Doug Moe be the coaches at the Rookie Game, which is part of the NBA All-Star weekend next month in San Antonio.
The game, featuring 16 of the top first-year players, will be played Saturday night, Feb. 10.
Lanier had a 14-year career with the Detroit Pistons and Milwaukee Bucks.
Moe coached for 12 years in the NBA and was coach of the year after taking Denver to a 54-28 record.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Diego Maradona says if his country or president calls, he might get involved in Argentine politics once his playing days are over.
The soccer star told the newspaper La Capital that his first priority would be to coach.
"But, if the president asked me I would even consider becoming a politician with the sole objective of giving to sports something that it now lacks," he said.
"That's all I'm' going to say now, but I just want you to know what I'm thinking about," said Maradona, who accompanied President Carlos Menem to Mar del Plata to open a government sponsored anti-drug program.
Maradona, who now plays for the popular Argentine first division club Boca Juniors, admitted in a magazine interview last week that he started taking drugs at the age of 22 while playing in Europe and said he struggles daily to overcome addiction.
The former Argentine national team captain was arrested for cocaine possession in Buenos Aires in 1991 and underwent two 15-month suspensions, in 1991 and 1994, after testing positive for drugs.
---
KNOXVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Investigators combed through the rubble Tuesday of the burned-out sanctuary of Inner City Church looking for clues among the gunpowder, kerosene and Molotov cocktails left behind by arsonists.
Reggie White, ordained minister and star defensive lineman with the NFL Green Bay Packers, is an associate pastor and executive board member of the church, which has a multi-racial congregation of 400.
There were no injuries, perhaps only because the church was empty when neighbors reported seeing flames about 4 a.m. Monday.
The sanctuary was destroyed but incendiary devices, including at least 18 Molotov cocktails, were found in an undamaged adjoining building that housed church offices, a day-care center and a radio station.
---
TRENTON, N.J. (AP) - Dick Case said Tuesday he will retire as executive director of USA Baseball next Jan. 1.
Case has been the executive director of USA Baseball for 16 years, since the post was created. He has worked in baseball for 46 years.
"It has been my pleasure to serve USA Baseball since its inception," Case said. "Now it is my desire to step down from my current position with the organization but to remain involved in amateur baseball on specific projects in a consultant's role."
Case also is secretary general of the International Baseball Association, based in Lausanne, Switzerland.
 Load-Date: January 9, 1996

 

End of Document
