

Names In The Game
October 21, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 678 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body



Contains items on Sir Bobby Charlton, Damon Bailey, Bootsie Washington, Romario, Dave DeBusschere and Phil Esposito
 Sir Bobby Charlton will head a delegation to the United States and two other countries to promote England's bid for the 2006 World Cup.
The former England and Manchester United star will leave Thursday with sports minister Tony Banks on an eight-day promotional visit to New York, Costa Rica and Trinidad & Tobago.
Football Association chief executive Graham Kelly and bid director Alec McGivan will complete the four-man delegation, which will meet officials of the world governing body FIFA in all three countries.
The bid to bring soccer's showpiece back to England for the first time since 1966 was boosted Tuesday by a $ 4.9 million grant from the Sports Council.
England faces strong competition from Germany. Soccer's European governing body, UEFA, initially endorsed Germany as the sole candidate for 2006, but England insisted it should be allowed to go ahead with its bid.
Bids also are expected from Africa and South America. FIFA will decide on the venue in June 2000.
 
FORT WAYNE, Ind. (AP) - Damon Bailey, back home after playing in Europe, plans to play this season with the Fort Wayne Fury of the CBA.
The former Indiana high school Mr. Basketball and Indiana University star played with the Fury two years ago and part of last season.
Bailey has not signed with the Fury, but said that probably would be done this week.
Bailey, a second-round NBA draft pick by the Indiana Pacers in 1994, was sidelined by an injury his rookie season. In 1995, he was beaten out for the final Pacers roster spot by Fred Hoiberg and averaged 12 points and four assists per game with the Fury.
In the 24 games he played with the Fury before leaving for Europe last season, Bailey averaged 18.3 points and was second in the CBA with 7.2 assists per game.
 
CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) - Two years ago, coach Monte Cater of Division II Shepherd found Bootsie Washington working in the college cafeteria.
Now the defensive back and return specialist is serving up touchdowns instead of food and setting NCAA records.
"He broke our back," said Concord coach Bob Mullett, whose team gave up two TDs on Washington punt returns two weeks ago.
Washington followed that with three more returns for touchdowns last weekend in a 48-3 victory over West Virginia Tech. He returned the opening kickoff and two first-half punts for scores on consecutive kicks.
Three straight returns for touchdowns set an NCAA Division II record.
Washington's six returns for TDs this season ties the NCAA Division II record. His four punt returns for touchdowns also ties the single-season record.
Cater credits Washington's success to his size and speed. At 5-foot-6, 178 pounds, Washington runs about 4.4 seconds for the 40.
"He's small," Cater said. "He's like a jitterbug. One of those guys with a low center of gravity who can bounce around. A lot of people felt he was too small when he came out here."
"I think size makes a lot of difference because I can just sneak up behind my blockers and do what I do," Washington said.
 
MADRID, Spain (AP) - Soccer star Romario reportedly told Valencia's new coach Claudio Ranieri on Tuesday to mind his own business after Ranieri tried to chastise him up for staying out until 4 a.m. two days before a league match.
Romario's outburst was said to have occurred in Valencia's dressing room Saturday. Later that day, an irritated Romario said: "In my private life I do what I like and whoever doesn't like it … my teammates can get stuffed."
"The night is my friend," the 1994 FIFA Player of the Year said. "If I don't go out, I don't score."
On Monday, Romario appeared to backtrack slightly, saying he hadn't meant to insult his teammates.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Dave DeBusschere, former New York Knicks forward and a member of the Basketball Hall of Fame, and Phil Esposito, formerly of the New York Rangers and a member of the Hockey Hall of Fame, were inducted into the Madison Square Garden Walk of Fame Tuesday.
DeBusschere and Esposito joined 43 others in the Walk of Fame.
 Load-Date: October 21, 1997

 

End of Document
