

Names In The Game
December 6, 1996, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 696 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: PORTLAND, Ore.
Body




Nike has signed the Brazilian national soccer team to a 10-year contract that puts the athletic shoe and apparel company into the sports promotion business.
The Oregonian quoted unidentified sources today as saying Nike paid $ 200 million to outfit all Brazilian national teams, with the men's soccer team the big prize because of its prominence in the sport.
Nike spokesman Jim Small wouldn't confirm the figure, but said Brazilian soccer is worth as much as any athletic franchise in the world.
"This is a very special team," Small said. "Probably in no other sport is there a team held in such reverence."
The agreement gives Nike the right to sell replica jerseys and stage five exhibition games each year featuring the Brazilians. Nike Sports Entertainment, a newly created division designed to stage and promote sporting events, will be in charge of the games.
---
MINNEAPOLIS (AP) - Former Minnesota Twins star Tony Oliva is suing to recover the silver bat he received for winning the 1964 AL batting title.
But Ray Crump, the owner of a souvenir store and museum, said Thursday he got the bat from former Twins owner Calvin Griffith. For his part, Griffith said that's true, but the bat goes back to Oliva when Griffith dies.
While the two sides argued over custody, Hennepin County sheriff's deputies Thursday seized the bat from Crump's museum near the Metrodome and held it until a judge determines ownership.
"The only thing I want is to get my bat back," Oliva told KSTP-AM.
Oliva, who won three batting crowns, said he wants to give the bat to one of his children. He has two bats at home and three kids.
Oliva filed a lawsuit Wednesday in Hennepin County District Court, asking that the bat be returned or that he be compensated. Oliva and his attorney, Russell Ingebritson, have tried to recover the bat since October.
"I think it's a sad day when somebody like Tony, who has contributed so much to the community and the team, has to file an action to recover a memento of his career that is really important to him," Ingebritson said.
---
CHICAGO (AP) - It might be. It could be. It is!
Holy Cow! Hall of Famer Harry Caray will return for his 53rd season behind the mike doing Chicago Cubs' play-by-play.
Caray - who formerly called games for the St. Louis Cardinals, Oakland Athletics and Chicago White Sox - will begin his 15th year with the Cubs on WGN-TV and WGN-AM next season, the stations said Thursday.
WGN also said that Josh Lewin, who once did play-by-play for the Baltimore Orioles Radio Network, has been added to the Cubs' broadcast team.
Lewin will do telecasts, filling in for Caray at road games and doing middle innings at home. Caray, who plans to do only home games in 1997, will continue to do the first and last three innings of Cubs home games on TV, while doing the middle three on radio.
---
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. (AP) - Dan Reeves will use anything to motivate the New York Giants, even Miami Dolphins coach Jimmy Johnson.
Reeves has made sure his players know that Johnson all but promised a victory Sunday against the Giants on a radio talk show.
"It doesn't make a whole lot of difference what he says, but our guys are aware of it anyway," Reeves said Thursday. "They still have to do something about it."
For the record, Johnson called WQAM radio and said he remains confident in his team, even though the Dolphins (6-7) have lost two in a row and are on the verge of elimination from the playoff race.
"Everybody is going to have smiles on their faces after Sunday," he said. "You can count on it."
Johnson later said his comments shouldn't be interpreted as a guarantee.
---
GREEN BAY, Wis. (AP) - Antonio Freeman had one of his greatest thrills when Chicago was on hand for a big game this week.
No, it wasn't Sunday, when he set career highs with 10 catches for 156 yards in Green Bay's victory over the Bears in his first game back from a broken forearm - although that was nice, too.
Freeman's memorable moment came two nights later, when he had front-row seats to watch Michael Jordan and the Bulls beat the Bucks.
"Oh man, that was fantastic. That was a dream, to see the greatest athlete ever?" Freeman said. "I'd seen him before, but not that close up."
 Load-Date: December 6, 1996

 

End of Document
