

Names in the news
April 3, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 547 words
Dateline: LEXINGTON, Ky.
Body




University of Kentucky basketball coach Rick Pitino may be popular enough to be governor, but being a politician is the last job he would choose.
"It's just that I don't think it's a noble profession," Pitino said Wednesday, two days after his team lost to Arizona in the NCAA championship game.
Pitino said U.S. Rep. Jim Bunning, R-Ky., had a lot to do with souring him on politics. Bunning fired off a scathing message to Pitino after the coach introduced President Clinton during an election-eve rally last year on the Kentucky campus.
"That (anyone) would change their vote because the basketball coach is introducing the president, to me, is insulting the intelligence of the Kentucky people," Pitino said on WVLK radio. "I was highly insulted."
Bunning, who last week announced he was running for Democratic Sen. Wendell Ford's seat, said he stands by his criticism.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Forget those reports about Val Kilmer being an on-set terror, fellow collaborators on his new movie "The Saint" say the actor is just that.
Reports in several publications characterized Kilmer as difficult during the shooting of "The Island of Dr. Moreau" with Marlon Brando.
And his refusal to play "Batman" again in a fourth installment of the movie franchise led director Joel Schumacher to call him "badly behaved" and rude.
"I obviously have no idea what somebody else's experience with Val would be, but mine was a really good working experience," said Elisabeth Shue, his co-star in "The Saint."
"The Saint" director Phillip Noyce agreed.
"Working with Val made me wonder about the people who were telling the stories, rather than the actual stories themselves. He was thoroughly professional," Noyce said.
---
WALTHAM, Mass. (AP) - Talk about tough acts to follow.
Whoopi Goldberg will be on the dais with three Nobel Prize winners at the Brandeis University commencement ceremony. Fortunately for the actress, she won't have to make a speech.
Former Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres and former Costa Rican President Oscar Arias will be the keynote speakers at the May 25 ceremony, and Goldberg and Nobel-winning chemist Roald Hoffman will get honorary degrees, the university announced Wednesday.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Carl Wilson, lead guitarist of the Beach Boys, is undergoing chemotherapy and radiation treatment after cancer was found in his brain and a lung.
Doctors believe they identified the cancer early and can control it in order to provide a speedy recovery in time for the group's annual summer tour, publicist Alyson Dutch said Wednesday.
"Apparently they caught it and he will be able to tour by May," she said.
Wilson is declining interviews for now, but "his spirits are really great and that's nice," she said.
The Beach Boys plan about 16 concerts across the United States during their summer tour with the band Chicago.
---
BALTIMORE (AP) - After one-hopping a 30-foot toss to open the Baltimore Orioles 1997 season, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said she'd stick to diplomacy.
"I think I'll keep my day job," she said.
Albright had prepared for Wednesday's big moment, practicing with her security detail over the weekend in the State Department basement.
Aides tried in jest to put the best face on her one-hop toss. "It was a curve ball that broke too soon," one said.
 Load-Date: April 3, 1997

 

End of Document
