

Names In The Game soccer, Thomas Haessler, Italian cycling and Roger Hodge
The Associated Press
May 22, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 646 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - World-record breaking swimmers Susie O'Neill and Ian Thorpe on Monday joined Olympic Aid, a project created to raise money for refugees and disadvantaged children.
Olympic Aid was founded in 1994 by Johann Olav Koss, the speedskater who won three gold medals at Lillehammer, Norway, and is part of the IOC's athletes' commission.
The program has raised about $31 million. The Australian athletes aim to raise nearly $3 million before the Sept. 15-Oct. 1 Sydney Olympics.
Funds would benefit the United Nations High Commission for Refugees in its work with displaced families in East Timor, Kosovo and West Africa.
"Children are the world's biggest assets and, by helping them, we can make the world a better place," said Thorpe, who set three world records last week at the Australian Olympic selection trials.
---
JEFFERSON CITY, Mo. (AP) - The late Payne Stewart may soon have a stretch of Missouri highway named after him.
A part of Interstate 44 would be named after the Springfield native. The two-time U.S. Open Champion and five-time Ryder Cup team member who died in an airplane crash in October.
"It's certainly a thrill to me and my two daughters that they'll be naming this section of this highway after my son," said Bee Payne-Stewart, the golfer's mother. "It will proclaim to everyone that this is Payne's home."
Gov. Mel Carnahan plans to sign the measure, which is part of a larger transportation bill.
---
BELTSVILLE, Md. (AP) - Shaquille O'Neal will be featured in a new ad for the Internet services firm Digex.
The ad, which makes its debut Tuesday, shows the NBA's MVP wearing a Digex jersey with children playing basketball in the background.
Digex provides Web services for its clients to assist in electronic retailing and online banking.
---
CARDIFF, Wales (AP) - Wales has a plan to stop Brazil's fluid and rhythmic attack: make the soccer field look like a rugby field.
The groundskeepers were told to narrow the field and let the grass grow, making it more difficult for the swift and talented Brazilians during Tuesday's exhibition game
"Why not?" Wales coach Mark Hughes said. "It's our pitch so I want it to be to our advantage, not to the opposition's advantage."
Millennium Stadium was built for the 1999 Rugby World Cup, but the grass is usually cut shorter for soccer.
Brazil will be without Romario. The star striker has a foot injury that will also force him to miss the game against England on Saturday.
---
FRANKFURT, Germany - Thomas Haessler, a star midfielder who has not played for Germany since the 1998 World Cup, will play for his country at next month's European Championship.
Haessler, who turns 34 this month, was part of the team announced Monday by national coach Erich Ribbeck.
Germany's recent lackluster games revealed a worrisome lack of creativity and Haessler could provide a spark.
---
ABETONE, Italy (AP) - Francesco Casagrande of Italy took the overall lead in the Giro d'Italia with a runaway win Monday in the first mountain stage of the grueling three-week race.
He completed the ninth stage - an 86-mile test of climbing in just under 4 hours, 23 minutes.
This leg was dedicated to Gino Bartali, Italy's cycling great and three-time Giro winner, who died this month.
There are increasing complaints by Italian teams about the financial arrangements of the Giro. They are threatening to not wear the race's assigned colors and not take part in ceremonies. Twelve of the 20 teams are Italian.
---
SAVANNAH, Ga. (AP) - Roger Hodge, a former assistant coach at Liberty University, was hired Monday as women's basketball coach at Armstrong Atlantic State University.
Hodge helped Liberty earn three straight NCAA tournament berths and four straight Big South Conference titles in his four years at the Virginia school.
Armstrong Atlantic State plays in Division II and finished 7-19 last season under former coach Lynn Jarrett.
 Load-Date: May 23, 2000

 

End of Document
