

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
July 22, 1998, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 733 words
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




Nine days after Brazil's loss to France in the World Cup finals, speculation about what happened to star forward Ronaldo continued to be a hot topic in the Brazilian press.
"One day doctor Lidio (Toledo) is going have to reveal what really happened to Ronaldo," Roberto Carlos told the O Globo newspaper in Tuesday's editions.
Roberto Carlos was Ronaldo's room mate when he suffered a 30- to 40-second convulsion before the World Cup final.
"Perhaps then people will stop asking me about what happened. I don't know the name of what Ronaldo had. All I know is that it was serious, very serious," Carlos said.
He said Ronaldo had been "burdened with nerves and worries" in the days leading up to the final on July 12. He was talking to Carlos in their hotel room before the big match when Ronaldo stopped talking, went pale and started to sweat heavily.
As the convulsions started, his arms went crooked and his hands looked deformed because of nervous tension. Other players say he foamed at the mouth and swallowed his tongue.
In an interview with Brazilian newsweekly, Isto E, Toledo said it would be necessary to do "detailed tests" to find out what caused Ronaldo's fit.
He did not rule out the sudden illness being an epileptic fit, saying it was possible that people without a history of epilepsy could suffer a one time occurrence of it.
But he denied claims that Ronaldo had an adverse reaction to an injection of painkiller, saying he would not have administered this prior to a game as it would have contravened anti-doping regulations.
---
SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. (AP) - Phoenix Coyotes defenseman Jim Johnson announced a switch in careers Tuesday.
Instead of stepping onto the ice next season, the former Coyote will be stepping into the broadcast booth as the Coyotes' new radio color analyst.
Johnson, who spent most of last season sidelined due to a game-related injury, joined the Coyotes in 1996 after playing 829 games over 11 NHL seasons with Pittsburgh, Minnesota, Dallas and Washington. The 35-year-old defenseman helped lead Minnesota to the Stanley Cup Finals against Pittsburgh in 1991.
In addition to joining veteran play-by-play announcer Curt Keilback in the broadcast booth, Johnson will serve as a consultant in the Coyotes pro hockey, corporate and community relations departments.
---
HONOLULU (AP) - A local political action committee opposed to same-sex marriage is planning to air television ads featuring Green Bay Packers defensive end Reggie White.
The ad features White, who doubles as a Baptist minister, and his wife, Sara, telling voters to support a proposed state constitutional amendment giving legislators the authority to ban same-sex marriages.
The commercial was taped last week, the same time a similar full-page advertisement appeared in USA Today. No air date was given.
Linda Rosehill, a spokeswoman for Save Traditional Marriage-'98, said White is a natural ally for the group's cause because of his fondness for Hawaii and commitment to preserving marriage as a union between man and woman.
"He wants to help us pass this amendment because he cares about Hawaii's future," Rosehill said.
White has played in the Pro Bowl in Honolulu for the last 12 years and gave a sermon at a Honolulu church last year.
Earlier this year, he gave a speech to the Wisconsin Legislature in which he stereotyped ethnic groups and called homosexuality "one of the biggest sins in the Bible."
Dan Foley, a lawyer who represented three gay couples that sued the state for the right to marry, said using White could backfire because of the backlash he has faced since that speech.
"Bringing people from outside of Hawaii to tell the people of Hawaii what to do isn't particularly wise," Foley said.
---
SION, Switzerland (AP) - Sepp Blatter, the newly-elected president of soccer's world governing body (FIFA), has decided to step down as head of the committee bidding for the 2006 Winter Olympics to come to Switzerland.
The organizing committee, bidding to host the games in Sion - in Blatter's home state - said Wednesday he would resign the chairmanship on August 28, when a replacement will be named.
Blatter, 62, has said he doesn't think holding the double role of head of FIFA and of the Winter Olympics bid is possible any longer.
However, he is one of the most prominent campaigners for the Sion bid and has said he will continue to support it.
Blatter was elected as FIFA president in June.
 Load-Date: July 22, 1998

 

End of Document
