

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
February 8, 1998, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 690 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Toronto Raptors general manager Glen Grunwald has squelched rumors that coach Darrell Walker is about to be fired.
"I do not foresee firing Darrell," Grunwald said. "I remain a big fan of his."
Toronto papers have speculated that Walker might not last the season. The rumors resurfaced in a report in Saturday's New York Post, which said the 11-36 team was about to fire Walker and replace him with assistant John Shumate.
"As far as I know, it's wrong," Walker said of the report.
The Toronto Star, meanwhile, said in its Sunday's editions that Walker's future was tied to that of star point guard Damon Stoudamire. Citing three unidentified sources, the Star said the Raptors will fire Walker if Stoudamire is traded by the Feb. 19 trading deadline.
The Star said if that were to happen, assistant Butch Carter would become coach.
 
LONDON (AP) - Prime Minister Tony Blair will order ministers to stay away from this summer's World Cup in France to avoid charges of freeloading at the taxpayers expense.
Fans already have complained about a shortage of tickets, and Blair will ask that even ministers buying their own tickets get permission to attend.
"Even when they are going in their own personal capacity, under their own steam, they will have to get permission," a spokesman for Blair said. There are 110 ministers, 20 of whom are cabinet ministers.
"The prime minister is determined to avoid any political fallout from VIPs getting tickets with ease while fans cannot get them at all," the spokesman said.
Donald Dewar, the minister responsible for Scotland, is expected to be granted permission to attend Scotland's opening game against Brazil and Blair is expected to watch at least one England game.
Tony Banks, the sports minister, will urge ministers to watch the events on big screen TVs across the country - just like ordinary fans.
"Ministers are no different than anyone else," he said. "They want to get involved in the World Cup, but it is right that they show restraint."
 
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - Free agent Cincinnati Bengals wide receiver Darnay Scott has rejected a three-year, $ 7.2 million offer to stay with the team, two newspapers reported Sunday.
Scott wants $ 9 million over three years, the Dayton Daily News reported. He turned down a four-year, $ 8 million deal during the season.
The Cincinnati Enquirer reported Sunday that Scott's demands have increased following the five-year, $ 15 million contract that unrestricted free agent wide receiver Johnnie Morton received Friday to remain with the Detroit Lions.
"We're still a ways apart," said Bengals negotiator Paul Brown, who met with Scott's St. Louis-based agent, Rocky Arceneaux, Friday.
"It's another indication of where the market is," Arceneaux said. "It says everything we're saying, that we know the numbers are going way up. I guess that makes Darnay a $ 3 million receiver."
Scott caught 54 passes for 797 yards and five touchdowns last season. Scott, who made $ 785,000 in 1997, caught 156 passes in the previous three years compared with 102 for Morton.
Bengals general counsel Katie Blackburn said the team would continue efforts to sign Scott, along with free agent defensive linemen Dan Wilkinson and John Copeland before the free agency signing period begins Friday.
 
HOLLIDAYSBURG, Pa. (AP) - By hitting a 3-pointer, Northern Bedford's A.J. Nastasi did what nobody had done for 28 years: he became Pennsylvania's career scoring leader.
Nastasi, a 6-foot guard, had 26 points in the Panthers' 72-49 win over Everett Saturday - giving him 3,627 career points. That broke the record of 3,608 set from 1967-70 by Mansfield's Tom McMillen, who went on to play for Maryland and the Washington Bullets.
"This is a dream that became reality," Nastasi said during a 20-minute ceremony after his record-breaking basket.
Nastasi, the younger brother of Penn State football player Joe Nastasi, has been a starter since he was a freshman. He has signed a letter of intent to play football for West Virginia next season and is a three-year starter on the baseball team.
Nastasi is 15th on the national career scoring list. Greg Procell of Noble Ebard (La.) leads with 6,702 points.
 Load-Date: February 8, 1998

 

End of Document
