

Names In The Game; Contains items on Ronaldo, Michael Schumacher, Paul Stewart, Larry Holmes, Tiger Woods, Ryan Taylor
The Associated Press
April 13, 2000, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 773 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




PARIS (AP) - Brazilian superstar Ronaldo underwent surgery Thursday, less than 24 hours after re-injuring his right knee in a long-awaited comeback match.
The 23-year-old Inter Milan striker had the ruptured patella tendon in his right kneecap completely rebuilt by the same doctors who operated on his knee on Nov. 30 - and cleared him to return to action 10 days ago.
He's expected back on the field in seven to eight months.
Ronaldo's comeback in an Italian Cup match Wednesday night was just seven minutes old when he fell to the turf, untouched by any opponent, clutching his knee in agony. The two-time FIFA player of the year, considered heir apparent to Pele and Diego Maradona, was carried off on a stretcher.
Ronaldo, who came to Inter in 1997 from Barcelona, has been troubled by injuries since the World Cup in France, when Brazil lost the title to the home team. His history of knee problems goes back to 1996 when he was playing in the Netherlands.
 
---
LONDON (AP) - Driver Eddie Irvine believes Michael Schumacher already has wrapped up the Formula One title after winning the first three races of the season.
"The only way I can see Michael losing it is if he breaks his leg playing football or something like that," Irvine said.
That's what happened last season when Schumacher broke his leg in the eighth race of the season - the British Grand Prix - and lost his chance to win a third season title.
Schumacher will go after his fourth straight victory April 23 at the British Grand Prix, which is three months earlier on this season's F1 schedule.
The two-time world champion is 21 points ahead of second-place teammate Rubens Barrichello in the standings.
 
---
LONDON (AP) - Paul Stewart has stepped down as the chief operating officer of the Jaguar Formula One Racing Team after being diagnosed with colon cancer.
Stewart, son of three-time Formula One champion Jackie Stewart, is undergoing chemotherapy at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., Jaguar said Thursday.
Stewart, 34, has been diagnosed with a malignant lymphoma and will receive chemotherapy treatments for at least three months.
 
---
EASTON, Pa. (AP) - Larry Holmes' hometown has blocked the former heavyweight champion's plans for a topless bar, but the fight might not be over.
City officials denied an application Wednesday in which Holmes sought to open a topless club in downtown Easton. Holmes' publicist, Jay Newman, said his client has not decided if he will appeal.
In rejecting the application, city zoning administrator Robert O'Neil cited a provision in the zoning ordinance that allows the city to ban from the business district the exhibition of "obscene" material. The U.S. Supreme Court also ruled last month that municipalities can restrict such businesses.
Holmes can appeal the decision to the city's zoning board. His first opportunity is at the panel's May 15 meeting.
 
---
CLEVELAND (AP) - Tiger Woods lost the first round of a lawsuit against an artist who sold copies of a painting of the golfer.
U.S. District Judge Patricia Gaughan on Wednesday threw out a lawsuit that accused an Alabama artist of unfairly profiting from Woods' fame by selling prints of the golfer's 1997 Masters victory.
The lawsuit was filed in Cleveland because Woods' company, ETW Corp., is based in the offices of his agent, Cleveland-based International Management Group.
Gaughan ruled that trademark or property rights laws do not protect Woods' image and that the First Amendment allows artist Rick Rush not only to paint Woods' image but also to profit from copies of the artwork.
 
---
OKLAHOMA CITY (AP) - A 9-year-old soccer player whose walker led to a court fight over whether he should be on the field is back with the team.
Ryan Taylor, who has cerebral palsy, has played in each game he's gotten to this season with his Pioneer Park Thunder teammates, positioned as a defender near the goal with his four-wheeled, red padded walker in front of him.
There's usually not much action on Ryan's end of the field, but JoAnne Taylor said her son is just happy to be on the field with friends.
"There's three of them down there, and I think they're picking flowers and going to sleep most of the time," she said.
Ryan gained the right to play the final game of last fall's season from a federal judge. The Lawton Evening Optimist Soccer Association had suspended him from the field over safety concerns about the walker.
The judge ruled that the Americans with Disabilities Act required the league to provide a reasonable accommodation for Ryan, but the decision applied only to the one game.
However, the league has since agreed to let Ryan play this spring and fall, his mother said.
 Load-Date: April 14, 2000

 

End of Document
