

Names In The Game
December 12, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 621 words
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




World Series hero Edgar Renteria of the Florida Marlins was voted Man of the Year in Colombia in an opinion poll published Friday. He left the nation's top politicians far behind.
Renteria, whose two-out single in the bottom of the 11th inning of the seventh game, led Florida to its victory over the Cleveland Indians, became an instant icon, even in this soccer-crazed country.
The mayor of his hometown, Barranquilla, declared a two-day celebration to welcome back the 22-year-old.
Renteria got 31 percent of the vote for Man of the Year, nearly double the figures for leading presidential candidates Horacio Serpa and Alfonso Valdivieso, who each got 13 percent.
President Ernesto Samper, in the last year of his scandal-plagued presidency, received just 9 percent.
The telephone poll of 1,002 people, conducted by the National Consulting Center for El Espectador newspaper and CM& television news, had a margin of error of 3 percent.
----
COLUMBIA, Mo. (AP) - Brock Olivo won a national award, but it's an honor a little closer to home that he calls "the neatest thing in the world."
Olivo's jersey number 27 will be retired. That decision came after Olivo became the first recipient of the Mosi Tatupu Award as college football's outstanding special teams player.
Under Missouri athletic department policy, a player who wins a national award automatically has his number retired when he graduates.
Olivo plans to complete degrees in English and communications one year from now. His last game with Missouri (7-4) will be the Holiday Bowl Dec. 29.
Olivo seemed taken aback by the prospect of his name and number being added to the six on the partitions that front the stands at Faurot Field.
"That's up to the Missouri football gods," he said. "I'm not going to mess with that. If they want to do that, I think that's the neatest thing in the world. I'd love to have my name on that wall."
Among the numbers on the wall were those worn by running back Johnny Roland, quarterback Paul Christman and tight end Kellen Winslow.
---
LOCK HAVEN, Pa. (AP) - The women's soccer coach at Lock Haven, accused by a player and trainer of throwing a game to keep a rival team out of the playoffs, resigned Friday.
Trevor Warren said he "decided to pursue another avenue" and had found a new job coaching soccer. He declined to say where.
He also denied telling his players not to win when they played West Chester on Nov. 1. Lock Haven lost the game 5-1, and when East Stroudsburg won two games that weekend, Bloomsburg was knocked from the Pennsylvania State Athletic Conference playoffs.
Soccer trainer Dan Gales said earlier this week that several members of the team had come to the training room several days after the West Chester game and said the coach told them to "throw the game."
And Dusty Rovenolt, a defensive player, said Warren told the team at halftime, "I want you to lose."
Sharon Taylor, Lock Haven's athletic director, said, "We have addressed the issue, a personnel decision was made and Trevor tendered his resignation."
She declined on Friday to comment directly on the allegations; earlier this week she said she wouldn't characterize the loss as a "thrown game."
"There were some decisions made … that were not in the best interest of the program and university. There were decisions made about substitution and positioning," she said.
---
TORRINGTON, Wyo. (AP) - The last surviving member of a baseball team made up of nine brothers has died at age 90.
Bill Marlatt and his siblings competed in several baseball leagues around Goshen County area. In 1925, the team won the "World Championship of Brothers Teams."
Marlatt had eight brothers and seven sisters.
He died Thursday. Before retiring, he was a school teacher in Hawk Springs, Wyo.
 Load-Date: December 12, 1997

 

End of Document
