

Names In The Game
September 9, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 630 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LAUSANNE, Switzerland
Body




Roy Jones Jr., who did not get the Olympic boxing gold medal he felt he deserved, is getting a consolation award instead.
Jones, now the WBC light heavyweight champion, was awarded the Olympic Order, one of the IOC's highest honors.
The decision came three months after the IOC ruled against Jones' bid to claim the gold medal from the 1988 Seoul Olympics.
The IOC said it had found no evidence to support bribery allegations against the judges who voted 3-2 in favor of South Korea's Park Si-Hun against Jones in the final of the 156-pound light-middleweight division.
Jones, who reclaimed the WBC light-heavyweight title last month by stopping Montell Griffin in the first round, was one of 12 people awarded the Olympic Order.
---
LONDON (AP) - Mohamed Al Fayed, whose son was killed in the car crash with Princess Diana, drew cheers Tuesday from fans of the soccer team he owns.
"I just want to say, thank you and God bless you all," Al Fayed told fans at Fulham FC, before its match in London against Plymouth.
His son, Dodi Fayed, 42, died in the Aug. 31 crash in Paris, along with the driver.
In ceremonies before the match, Al Fayed's spokesman, Michael Cole, said the family had recevied 60,000 messages of condolence. Cole read out a statement which concluded:
"If this planet lasts for another 1,000 years, people will still be talking about the terrible events we are living through together. But what they will remember most is the affection that existed between two wonderful people, Diana, Princess of Wales, and my son Dodi.
"Our hearts are broken, thank you for sharing our pain."
---
ZURICH, Switzerland (AP) - Brazilian soccer star Ronaldo became even more expensive on Tuesday. Inter Milan was ordered to pay Barcelona an extra $ 1.8 million for Ronaldo.
The ruling soccer's world governing body raised to about $ 28 million the price the Italian team had to pay to get FIFA's player of the year.
This is in addition to the $ 14 million signing bonus and annual salary of $ 3 million Ronaldo is getting from Inter Milan.
An FIFA committee rejected the Italian club's argument that it should not have to pay more than the $ 26 million it had already given Barcelona for releasing Ronaldo from his eight-year contract.
FIFA explained that it takes into account a player's age, salary, potential future career and international status in calculating transfer fees.
FIFA stepped in after the two clubs failed to reach an agreement.
---
DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. (AP) - Bobby Johns will have to come up with another name for his bar and grill in Martin County, Fla.
A federal court ruled that NASBAR and Grill was too close to NASCAR's name and told Johns to cease and desist.
"NASCAR has spent decades building up its good name and reputation," said George Payne, NASCAR's vice president of licensing and consumer products, adding that the organization will continue to aggressively protect itself when organizations attempt to trade off that name.
 
 LOS ANGELES (AP) - The second half of the football game between California State at Northridge and Hawaii game never showed up on Fox Sports West 2. It was preempted by the Adam & Eve adult channel.
Just as the second half was about to begin at midnight Saturday, TCI East Valley Channel 40 automatically switched Adam & Eve.
There were no complaints.
"Nobody called in. It's one of the most amazing things," TCI spokesman Andrew Johnson said.
"If you wanted to watch one of the halves, the first half was the one. I have no comment on Adam & Eve. But that wasn't our doing," Northridge coach Jim Fenwick said.
The score was Hawaii 34, Northridge 21.
FSW2 spokesman Steve Webster said he hopes future games can be shown in their entirety. Five more Hawaii games are scheduled.
"We're going to ask that they waive their automatic switch," Webster said.
 Load-Date: September 9, 1997

 

End of Document
