

Names In The Game soccer.
December 12, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 480 words
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




In the end, Pele was king, national pride was saved, and Brazilian fans were placated - sort of.
After a survey to choose the century's best soccer player surprisingly named Argentina's Diego Maradona instead of Pele, the sport's ruling body found a diplomatic solution: It awarded two prizes.
Maradona, who won two Italian league titles with Napoli and led Argentina to the 1986 World Cup, won an Internet poll. He polled 54 percent of the online vote, followed by Pele at 19 percent.
FIFA came up with a "football family" award for Pele, a three-time World Cup winner and the sport's career leading scorer. Pele took 73 percent of the ballots cast through internal FIFA balloting, with Maradona third at 6 percent behind fellow Argentine Alfredo Di Stefano with 10 percent.
In Brazil, the FIFA balloting passed almost unnoticed until the voting ended Nov. 20.
"To choose the best in the world by keyboard is a joke," said Mario Zagallo, who played with Pele on Brazil's World Cup champion teams in 1958 and 1962 and coached him on a third in 1970. "But those who really understand soccer gave the prize to Pele."
---
LAS VEGAS (AP) - Dennis Rodman denies accusations he pinched and grabbed a cocktail waitress.
As part of a lawsuit against him, Rodman spent about two hours answering questions Monday.
Gloria Chapa says Rodman pinched and grabbed her breasts while he was seated at a gambling table in June 1998. She filed the lawsuit in July 1999 against Rodman and her employer, the Las Vegas Hilton.
"He vehemently denied all the allegations," said Rodman's Las Vegas attorney Corey Eschweiler.
When Rodman failed to show for the original court-ordered deposition Nov. 21 it was rescheduled for Monday.
---
HELSINKI, Finland (AP) - He's a two-time Formula One champion. Now Mika Hakkinen is a father.
His wife, Erja, gave birth Monday in Monaco to the couple's first child - a boy weighing 9 pounds, 4 ounces, the Ilta-Sanomat newspaper reported.
"My head's still spinning," the Finnish driver told the newspaper.
Although he doesn't normally smoke, Hakkinen said he was going to buy some cigars.
Hakkinen won the Formula One title in 1998 and 1999. Last year, he lost it to Germany's Michael Schumacher.
---
ATHENS, Greece (AP) - The state of Greek soccer is so troubled the players are seeking spiritual help.
The soccer players' association recently asked the Greek Orthodox Church to name a patron saint for their sport.
The answer: Saint Nestor, a third century Christian martyr who was executed after slaying a champion gladiator.
The government contends Greek soccer is awash in corruption - money laundering, game-fixing and embezzlement. Soccer organizers have denounced the government assault. In protest, they shut the league for two weeks in October.
Taking on sports corruption in Greece is a formidable task because of many of the nation's top industrialists have a stake in soccer teams.
 Load-Date: December 13, 2000

 

End of Document
