

Names in the news
May 31, 1997, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 629 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Former Notre Dame football coach Lou Holtz doesn't like being No. 2 in anything.
At Friday's meeting of CBS affiliates, Holtz, a new member of the network's team, exhorted his colleagues to become No. 1.
TV station executives must "know the fundamentals. We're gonna block, we're gonna tackle," said Holtz, who won a national championship with the Irish in 1988.
He will join Jim Nantz as an analyst on the "College Football Today" pre-game show this fall.
Holtz wasn't the only sports figure on hand.
With CBS holding broadcast rights to the 1998 Winter Olympics in Japan, the network paraded New York Rangers star Wayne Gretzky, ice skaters Todd Eldredge and Tara Lipinsky and skier Picabo Street before the group.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Madonna is going from first lady to prison inmate.
Fresh from her role as Argentina's first lady Eva Peron in "Evita," Madonna will star with Goldie Hawn in the movie version of the hit Broadway musical "Chicago," Miramax Films said on Friday.
Madonna will have the role of murderess Velma Kelly, the tough cellmate of Hawn's Roxie Hart.
"She's over the moon - very, very excited," said Liz Rosenberg, Madonna's publicist.
Larry Gelbart, who wrote "Tootsie " and "Oh, God!," adapted the screenplay for the movie, which does not yet have a director.
"It goes without saying that Roxie and Velma are two of the greatest roles ever written for musical actresses," Miramax co-chairman Harvey Weinstein said in a statement.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - A judge has taken the first step in what could be a defamation lawsuit against radio shock jock Don Imus.
State Supreme Court Justice Harold Rothwax, 67, has asked the court to order the release of radio programs from last September when Imus allegedly called him "senile" and "a drunk."
The judge said his requests for the tapes have been ignored.
"I may not be the most popular judge in the world, but I'm not senile and I'm not a drunk." said Rothwax, who is known as a tough judge and is called the "Prince of Darkness" by defense lawyers.
Imus was apparently upset that the judge excused his wife - Deirdre Coleman-Imus, 31 - as an alternate juror for a murder trial last fall. Court papers show that she asked to be excused.
In a letter, Imus accused Rothwax of trying to humiliate his wife and called his actions those "of an embittered old fool."
Rothwax's lawyer, Peter Vigeland, said he wants the tapes so he can frame a defamation complaint against Imus and his broadcasters.
Imus' syndicated show is produced by Infinity Broadcasting, which did not return calls Friday seeking comment.
---
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Hank Williams Jr. has a new baby boy who came into the world "loud, kicking and screaming."
Mary Jane Williams gave birth to a boy, Samuel Weston, at Vanderbilt Medical Center on Friday. The mother and baby were doing fine.
The singer said the boy was "loud, kicking and screaming," publicist Kathy Gangwisch said.
Williams has one other son and three daughters.
Williams, 48, son of the country legend, is the longtime singer of the theme for "ABC's NFL Monday Night Football" and has recorded hits that include "All My Rowdy Friends."
---
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) - It was a warm and fuzzy day at the Texas Capitol for Ed Asner.
The Texas Senate approved a resolution Friday praising the work of the longtime actor who starred in "Lou Grant" and "The Mary Tyler Moore Show."
Asner was in Austin to film a public service announcement about cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
"Some call him liberal, as I call myself a liberal, and that is not a bad word," said Sen. Gonzalo Barrientos of Austin. "I am proud to be a liberal in humane causes - and conservative with my money and the people's money, of course."
Added Sen. Gregory Luna of San Antonio: "If the world had more Ed Asners, we'd have many less problems."
 Load-Date: May 31, 1997

 

End of Document
