

Name In The Game
September 20, 1996, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 665 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




It's just another example of Jorge being Jorge.
Flamboyant Los Angeles Galaxy goalkeeper Jorge Campos will pull another stunt more wild than some of his jerseys this weekend, taking a private plane out of Honduras early Sunday morning so he can play for both Mexico and the Galaxy within 24 hours.
Campos had asked U.S. Major League Soccer for help in getting him from San Pedro Sula, where the Mexican national team plays Honduras in a CONCACAF semifinal round World Cup qualifying game Saturday night, to Los Angeles for Sunday's 1 p.m. match against Dallas, the final game of the MLS regular season.
MLS deputy commissioner Sunil Gulati said the league tried to get a commercial flight out of San Pedro Sula Saturday night, but the airport in the city of 300,000 near the Guatemalan border doesn't have any lights, so none was available.
That left the league to charter a private jet, which will leave San Pedro Sula at 6 a.m. to get Campos to the MLS match by kickoff.
"Jorge is doing what Jorge does. That's Jorge," said MLS communications director Dan Courtemanche.
It's not the first time Campos has gone to extreme lengths to play. He started and played 90 minutes in both games of a doubleheader on June 16 at the Rose Bowl, first for Mexico against the United States in the finale of U.S. Cup '96, and then changed shirts to play for the Galaxy against Tampa Bay.
He also played started and played the first half for the Western Conference in the MLS All-Star Game and played the first half of the FIFA All-Star Game July 14 in East Rutherford, N.J.
---
OVIEDO, Spain (AP) - International Olympic Committee chief Juan Antonio Samaranch has denied a report that his longtime rival at the IOC was pursuaded to quit by offering her a secret $ 7.3 million payoff.
Samaranch told the state news agency EFE on Thursday that IOC administrator Monique Berlioux agreed to leave her job in 1985, three years before her contract expired, on condition the remainder of her contract was paid out.
The German daily Berliner Zeitung, citing a former agent of East Germany's Stasi intelligence agency, reported Wednesday that the IOC offered Berlioux a multimillion-dollar package to leave the organization in June 1985, on the condition that she keep quiet about the committee's inner workings.
"If all the Stasi's documents are as accurate as that report, it's laughable," Samaranch told EFE.
Samaranch's tense relationship with Berlioux was an open secret at IOC headquarters in Lausanne, Switzerland, almost from the moment the Spaniard took up his post in 1980.
---
LONDON (AP) - Arsenal defender Nigel Winterburn was charged Friday with bringing the game into disrepute for allegedly insulting disabled Sheffield Wednesday fans.
Winterburn allegedly made obscene gestures and taunts toward the spectators seated in the wheelchair section at Highbury during Arsenal's 4-1 win Monday night.
"The player has been charged on the basis of reports filed by the referee Mike Reed and the fourth official Paul Alcock," Football Association spokesman Steve Double said. "He has the usual 14 days to respond and request a personal hearing if he desires one."
---
ESTORIL, Portugal (AP) - Formula One team Jordan-Peugeot Friday signed Ralf Schumacher, younger brother of two-time World Champion Michael Schumacher, to a three-year deal. The 21-year-old Ralf Schumacher will make his debut next season.
The German driver leads the standings in his first season on Japan's Formula 3000 circuit.
Ralf said he was stunned by his quick ascent to the Formula One.
Michael Schumacher, who now drives for Ferrari, also made his Grand Prix debut with Jordan back in 1991.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Dave Scott decided that at age 42 he is not quite through as a triathlete.
The six-time Ironman champion said he is coming back to try to win this year's Ironman on Oct. 26 in Kona, Hawaii. The event consists of a 2.4-mile swim, 112-mile bike race and a 26.2-mile run.
He finished second two years ago, at age 40, and then announced his retirement.
 Load-Date: September 20, 1996

 

End of Document
