

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
February 2, 2000, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 568 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




GENEVA (AP) - Brazilian soccer star Ronaldo promised to use his popularity to spotlight the plight of the poor in his new role as a United Nations goodwill ambassador.
"I accepted this important appointment in my life because I have seen poverty firsthand," the 23-year-old Ronaldo said at the U.N. European headquarters Tuesday.
"I know what it is to experience hardship, and unfortunately hardship is the common lot in many countries."
Ronaldo, twice voted world player of the year, grew up in a poor neighborhood on the outskirts of Rio de Janeiro, and began his soccer career playing barefoot in the streets.
Other goodwill ambassadors include actor Danny Glover and South African novelist Nadine Gordimer.
---
TAMPA, Fla. (AP) - Though Tino Martinez would like to finish his career playing for the New York Yankees, he knows it won't be his decision.
The first baseman is entering the final year of a five-year contract, and his long-term status will likely depend on factors outside his control.
With the Yankees' payroll climbing and highly touted prospect Nick Johnson advancing through the minors, the 32-year Martinez may find himself elsewhere in 2001.
"I'd love to finish my career here with the Yankees," Martinez said Tuesday after working out at the team's Florida training complex. "It would be nice. I'm sure the Yankees have some things in mind. We'll have to see what happens. Whatever happens, I've had a great time."
Since he was acquired from Seattle in December 1995, Martinez has played an instrumental role in the Yankees' three World Series titles. He has averaged 31 homers and 122 RBIs for New York.
Although he dipped last season to a .263 batting average, Martinez still had 28 homers and 105 RBIs.
Most scouts rate Johnson, who hit .345 with 14 homers and 87 RBIs at Double-A Norwich last season, a can't-miss prospect.
"It's not a distraction, not at all," said Martinez, who would like to play four or five more years. "I can't control the situation. I'm just going to go out and play hard like I do every year."
---
DALLAS (AP) - So much for Scottie Pippen's theory.
Michael Finley is an All-Star, and he credits Pippen - who isn't - with unintentionally spurring the Dallas forward's bid by saying he wasn't worthy of the showcase event because he's on a lousy team.
What's Pippen got to say now?
"I am a very good friend of Mike's, so I don't have anything negative to say about him," Pippen said. "What they say I said I didn't say, and I'm very happy for him.
"I just said that it's hard for a guy on a losing team to make the All-Star team, but hey, he made it, and congratulations to him."
Finley got the good news Tuesday, and he believes his selection was propelled by Pippen's initial comments. A few nights after the statements were made, Finley proved he deserved consideration by leading Dallas to a 113-105 victory over Pippen and the Trail Blazers.
"Being the type of player he is and the recognition he has been given, the media and the coaches paid attention to that and the game," said Finley, who had 32 points, eight assists and six rebounds against Portland.
"Fortunately for us, we won that game and fortunately enough for me, I played really well. He brought a lot of attention to the situation and I just expanded on it."
Finley is the first Dallas All-Star since Chris Gatling was picked as a reserve in 1997. He's only the sixth player chosen in the team's 20-year history.
 Load-Date: February 3, 2000

 

End of Document
