

NamesIn The Game
February 28, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 654 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M.
Body




Al Unser Jr.'s wife wants to end their marriage after almost 14 years because she says discord and conflict of personalities have left them incompatible.
No timetable has been set for Shelley Unser and Little Al to reach an agreement, Sarah Bennett, a Santa Fe attorney representing Shelley Unser, said Tuesday.
Shelley Unser filed the divorce petition in state district court in Albuquerque.
Accompanying the petition was a temporary domestic order that limits any unusual actions by either party, such as spending too much money or trying to remove their children.
The Unsers have three children: Al, 13; Cody, 9; and Shannon, 7.
He is a two-time winner of the Indianapolis 500 and two-time points champion on the IndyCar Racing circuit.
---
BELLEVUE, Wash. (AP) - The wife of Seattle Seahawk defensive lineman Cortez Kennedy filed for divorce three days after he was arrested for domestic violence, court records show.
According to King County court records in Seattle, Nicole Kennedy filed for divorce on Feb. 15, the day her husband appeared in Bellevue District Court to plead innocent to a misdemeanor domestic violence charge.
Kennedy, a five-time Pro Bowl player, faces trial in April after he failed to take advantage of a counseling program that would have allowed him to avoid pleading guilty.
Bellevue police say Kennedy became angry when he found his wife writing down the name of a man in an address book. Kennedy is accused of shoving his wife into a bed post.
He faces a maximum penalty of a $ 5,000 fine or a year in jail, or both.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - The Minister of Sports shed suit and tie and turned back the clock, leading Santos to a 6-2 victory in a practice game.
Not bad for a 55-year-old bureaucrat - even if his name is Pele.
Soccer's greatest player returned to the club he made famous for the opening of a training center in Santos.
"It's been so long since I put on soccer shoes I hardly know how to walk," said Pele, who led Brazil to World Cup titles in 1958, 1962 and 1970. He retired as a player in 1977.
But it hardly seemed that way when he took the field. Pele showed flashes of his old form, distributing pinpoint passes, scoring two goals - one on a penalty kick - and hitting the post with a diving header in a 40-minute scrimmage.
Edinho, Pele's son and the starting goalkeeper, refused to play goal against his father. Instead, he was made an attacker - and missed an easy chance on a pass from his dad.
Edinho's decision proved to be wise. Substitute goalkeeper Nando blocked a shot by Pele and was booed by the crowd.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The NHL left New Jersey Devils captain Scott Stevens holding the phone.
The league announced Tuesday that Stevens would be available for a conference call with the media on Wednesday.
Then came the trade of Wayne Gretzky.
The conference call was called off with the exlanation, "Because of the media interest in following up on the Wayne Gretzky trade story, the league has postponed the conference call."
---
LONDON (AP) - The International Tennis Federation has rejected a bid by Ukrainian star Andrei Medvedev to play Davis Cup for Russia.
Although Medvedev was born in Kiev, Ukraine, he appealed to the ITF to allow him to play for Russia because his parents were ethnic Russians. He has always described himself as Russian, but he didn't convince the ITF.
"The ITF committee of management decided that there was insufficient evidence to make an exemption in his case," Davis Cup director Thomas Hallberg said Wednesday.
The ITF rules state that a player must not have played for another country in a period of 36 consecutive months before the application to transfer. Medvedev has played Davis Cup for Ukraine for the last three seasons and has an 11-0 record.
The problem is, Medvedev has little support on the Ukraine team whereas he would strengthen an already strong Russian squad which last season reached the final before losing to the United States.
 Load-Date: February 28, 1996

 

End of Document
