

Names In The Game
March 19, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 759 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON
Body




The Oxford and Cambridge crews have been invited to race on the Amazon River, just as they have been doing on the River Thames almost ever year since 1829.
The Amazonas state government - Brazil's largest state - has asked the two English crews to compete with the Brazilian Rowing Federation on a 4-mile course September 21.
"We are just discussing it, but both ourselves and Cambridge have already said we are interested." said Oxford director of rowing Steve Royle. His crew races against Cambridge on the Thames March 29.
"But there's still only one Boat Race," Royle said. "This would purely be a 'friendly' fixture against the Brazilian Rowing Federation, with Oxford and Cambridge taking part."
The two crews are concentrating on the 143rd confrontation from Putney to Mortlake in west London, with Cambridge trying for its fifth straight win. Cambridge leads 73-68 with one dead heat.
---
ANAHEIM, Calif. (AP) - The Anaheim Angels will tone it down this season.
No more cheerleaders, no more high-volume sound effects, no more brass bands on the dugouts.
Anaheim Sports Inc., added many entertainment elements that were out of the baseball norm last season after the subsidiary of the Walt Disney Co., bought controlling interest of the Angels.
However, following an off-season of study, the Angels decided to get rid of most of the extraneous entertainment, according to Bill Robertson, director of communications.
"From what our fans tell us, they prefer to watch the baseball game," he said. "We'll have less high-energy entertainment."
The team won't be eliminating all entertainment. The Angels, who play the Los Angeles Dodgers in exhibition games March 29-30 at Anaheim Stadium and open the regular season at home against Boston on April 2, will have mascots and a squad to give away prizes.
"We'll have better control of the entertainment to keep our loyal fans and season-ticket base happy," Robertson said. "We'll have the entertainment in the areas where most families and kids sit, and near the concession stands."
Robertson said the Angels will focus their scoreboard and musical programming on nostalgia, player statistics and tradition.
---
LONDON (AP) - Jose Maria Olazabal, stepping up his comeback after an 18-month layoff, will play in the European bracket of the Andersen Consulting World Championship of Golf.
Olazabal was the last entry in an eight-man field that already included seven of Europe's eight top players - Colin Montgomerie, Bernhard Langer, Costantino Rocca, Ian Woosnam, Sam Torrance, Jesper Parnevik and Darren Clarke.
Olazabal has finished 12th and fourth in his first two events after being out of golf 18 months with painful foot problems.
The tournament will be played May 19-20 at the Buckinghamshire Club in Denham, England.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Sportscasters played a major role in the Americanization of Henry Kissinger. The former secretary of state said it was through their radio broadcasts that learned about Americans and the American way of life after he arrived in this country as a teen-ager.
Kissinger said sometimes he was troubled by the nuances. For example, he puzzled over a single wing formation in football.
How could a team be good with only one wing, he wondered.
"I admired Zeke Bonura when he was with the Chicago White Sox because I kept hearing on the radio that he had the best fielding average of any first baseman," Kissinger said. "Then, when he came to New York with the Giants, I saw why. He didn't cover much ground, so he had fewer chances to make errors."
Kissinger made his remarks after being made an honorary member of the American Sportscasters Association at the organization's awards dinner.
---
PROVO, Utah (AP) - Former Brigham Young football player Derik Stevenson will have to do 240 hours of community service as punishment for possessing a dangerous weapon on school property.
Sixth District Judge David L. Mower also placed Stevenson on probation until June 18 and ordered him to attend an anger management class.
Stevenson, 22, was charged by the Sanpete County attorney last month with illegal possession and use of a firearm. The counts were filed after he shot a pistol into the air to break up a fight between his friend and a group of men in a parking lot at Snow College.
He pleaded guilty Jan. 22 to possession of a dangerous weapon on school premises and to an amended charge of attempted threatening with or using a dangerous weapon in a fight or a quarrel.
Stevenson withdrew from BYU after he was charged with the misdemeanors and following reports of past brushes with the law.
 Load-Date: March 19, 1997

 

End of Document
