

Names In The Game
August 13, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 622 words
Dateline: MONTE CARLO, Monaco
Body




Primo Nebiolo, who prides himself on the number of honorary titles he receives, has another one: Knight of the Legion of Honor.
Nebiolo, the Italian who heads the International Amateur Athletic Federation, issued a press release announcing that he had been nominated by French President Jacques Chirac as "Chevalier de la Legion d'Honneur."
"The IAAF president expressed his deepest gratitute to President Chirac for this great honor," the release said.
As head of track and field's world governing body, Nebiolo considers himself one of the most powerful men in sport and expects to be treated as such.
Nearly everywhere he travels, Nebiolo receives an honorary degree - more than 20 so far, according to an IAAF spokesman. He goes by the title Dr. Nebiolo, though he has no medical degree.
One of Nebiolo's latest awards came two weeks ago when he was named an honorary citizen of Athens on the eve of the World Championships in the Greek capital.
By the end of the 10-day championships, however, the Greeks probably wished they could revoke Nebiolo's citizenship after he criticized the Greek organizers. Greek officials accused Nebiolo, a prime figure in Rome's bid for the 2004 Olympics, of trying to undermine Athens' bid.
Nebiolo dismissed the comments as those of a publicity-seeking politicians.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Short on cash and talent, the Fluminense soccer club is offering fans an unusual investment opportunity to help the team out of Brazil's first-division cellar.
It's the "Ball in the Net" investment fund, created to help the struggling team buy stars for its low-watt lineup.
Fans can buy shares of the fund, which will trade on Brazilian stock markets. The minimum investment is about $ 46.
Fluminense will start buying players when the fund reaches a certain amoount, club president Alvaro Barcellos said. Share prices will rise - or fall - with the value of players.
"The better you perform, the greater the value and the return," said veteran forward Paulinho McLaren.
Barcellos said the fund was likely to be a better investment than savings accounts, which yield barely 1 percent a month.
Fluminense is one of Brazil's oldest clubs and was national champion in 1984. Among its members is FIFA President Joao Havelange.
Last season, the team fell to the second division but was resurrected by order of Ricardo Teixeira, president of the Brazilian Soccer Confederation. This year, Fluminense is winless in eight games and is last among 26 teams in the first division.
---
WARRENTON, Va. (AP) - A judge kicked Jack Kent Cooke's widow out of the couple's mansion Wednesday and denied her a $ 10,000 monthly allowance from the estate of the late Washington Redskins owner.
Marlena Ramallo Cooke had asked to stay in the $ 3 million Washington house with living expenses while her husband's complicated will is settled in court.
Cooke cut his wife out of his will weeks before he died April 6 at 84.
Lawyers for his estate said Mrs. Cooke violated a premarital agreement by maintaining a separate apartment during the marriage and by abandoning her husband in the last weeks of his life.
"They did not live as man and wife," estate lawyer Daniel Webb said at a hearing in Fauquier County Circuit Court. "She was absent continually throughout the marriage."
Circuit Judge William Shore Robertson ruled the premarital agreement, signed one day before the couple's second wedding in 1995, is valid until proven otherwise. The agreement gave Mrs. Cooke no claim to the Washington house.
"People are foolhardy and sometimes not very smart in the agreements they enter into, but they are stuck with them," Robertson said. "They have to live up to them until it's found invalid."
Robertson set a tentative trial date of April 20.
 Load-Date: August 13, 1997

 

End of Document
