

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
January 12, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 516 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: INDIANAPOLIS
Body




Hours of extra practice have paid off for Rodney Thomas, an Indiana-Purdue-Indianapolis junior who leads the nation in 3-point shooting percentage.
"I'll shoot until my legs get tired," said Thomas. "In the offseason, I may put up 300-400 shots a day."
The 6-foot-2 guard Thomas has hit 38-of-65 long-range shots (.585) this season and he doesn't need much instruction.
"My job is not to screw up his shot," coach Ron Hunter said. "Except in rare instances, Rodney has the green light to shoot whenever he feels comfortable. He rarely forces a bad shot."
Thomas went to the school because he liked the coach's sales pitch.
"Ron recruited me because he knew I could shoot," Thomas said. "He told me he wasn't recruiting me to play defense. He has a lot of confidence in my shooting."
Hunter, however, said Thomas is not a one-dimensional player.
Confidence is the key to being a blue-chip 3-point shooter, Thomas said.
"I know of lot of guys who can shoot well from the perimeter, but when they get into a game they are not very confident," he said. "If you don't think you can make 3-pointers, you won't. If I can get a little bit of daylight, I can put it in the hole."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Atlanta Hawks center Dikembe Mutombo will head a worldwide project to get young people involved in the fight against poverty.
Mutombo will be designated a youth emissary for the United Nations Development Program.
This program is aimed at creating projects in developing countries to help youth fight poverty in their communities.
Mutombo, who is from the Congo, has spoken extensively on the need for helping youth-related programs in Africa, and he has put his NBA money where his mouth is.
Two years ago he established a foundation to improve health and education services for children and to raise their quality of life.
Mutombo will be honored at a ceremony in Washington on Thursday.
---
ROTENBURG, Germany (AP) - Johan Cryuff and Pele were voted the top soccer players of the century in a poll of soccer writers, historians and others rated as experts.
Cryuff, of the Netherlands, was selected as the best in Europe and the Brazilian Pele as the best in South America.
The poll was conducted by the International Federation for Football History and Statistics.
Cryuff edged Franz Beckenbauer of Germany, whom he faced in the 1974 World Cup, by 753 votes to 709.
Pele, the Brazilian legend, had 220 votes and beat Argentina's Diego Maradona at 193 points.
George Weah, the AC Milan forward, was voted Africa's top player with 95 votes.
---
ROMFORD, England (AP) - British soccer star Trevor Sinclair will have to pay for damaging a woman's car when he jumped on it after a team Christmas party.
The West Ham player was fined $ 417 Tuesday and ordered to pay the woman $ 376 in compensation.
The court at Romford was told that the car's driver, beauty therapist Belinda Knowles, was "shocked and frightened" after Sinclair leaped on to her car and rolled off it into the street as some West Ham players spilled out of a wine bar.
Sinclair pleaded guilty to damaging the car.
His attorney said the player had apologized to Knowles.
 Load-Date: January 12, 1999

 

End of Document
