

Names In The Game
September 28, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 515 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Stan Musial will be the honorary grand marshall of the Pulaski Day parade on Oct. 6, and will lead more than 100,000 marchers up Fifth Avenue in the nation's largest Polish-American celebration.
The parade, as it always does, will stop at St. Patrick's Cathedral, where Musial, possibly the greatest St. Louis Cardinal of all time, will get to meet another Cardinal, John O'Connor.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Pele is upset at the small crowds at Brazilian national soccer league matches.
As sports minister of the country, the former soccer great wants a new professional league to give soccer a boost in popularity.
"It worries me to know that more people attend rodeos than soccer matches in Brazil," Pele told the Jornal do Brasil Saturday. "Brazil is the only four-time world champion, but most of its soccer clubs are broke."
The 24-team national league and it's grueling twice-a-week schedule has generated little interest in soccer-crazed Brazil. Many teams have to play exhibitions in Europe to stay afloat financially.
Pele criticized irregular scheduling and bad administration by many soccer club directors as hurting the image of Brazilian soccer. "If we don't organize our most traditional soccer teams into a truly professional league, they may be doomed to bankruptcy."
---
ENCINO, Calif. (AP) - Troy Aikman, Dan Marino, Steve Young, Jerry Rice and Emmitt Smith are among NFL stars featured on a new type of collectors card that shows them in motion.
Motionvision's NFL Digital Replay card uses a motion imaging process developed by The Eastman Kodak Company and Motionvision. The process captures actual game footage from NFL Films by taking live action film images and transferring them to a film emulsion. With a flick of the wrist, those holding the card can create an action sequence.
--- .
NEW YORK (AP) - Meadowlark Lemon established a worldwide reputation with the Harlem Globetrotters. Now, he says, watch Lamont "Showboat" Robinson.
"He's the new clown prince of comedy basketball," said Lemon.
Lemon has reason to be proud, according to Robinson, who played in Europe and the United States Basketball League.
"He taught me comedy basketball," said Robinson. "I started mimicking him, his voice, the way he throws the ball, everything."
Robinson will play for the Harlem Road Kings, who will tour the country and overseas with a schedule of at least 20 games. The Washington Clippers will usually provide the hapless opposition, but the Road Kings also will take on teams of local celebrities.
Robinson said he will visit schools in the cities on the tour to demonstrate his skills and urge the students to stay in school and stay away from drugs.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Five 1996 Hall of Fame inductees have sent acceptances to the Boys Club of New York for the organization's All Sports Hall of Fame dinner Oct 30.
Pro football's Dan Dierdorf and Mel Renfro, basketball's Gail Goodrich and David Thompson, and tennis' Rosie Casals have said they will be there.
The Boys Club each fall honors the year's Hall of Fame inductees in baseball, football, basketball, golf, tennis and hockey.
 Load-Date: September 28, 1996

 

End of Document
