

Names In The Game
December 3, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 738 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Queen Elizabeth II awarded soccer great Pele a honorary knighthood on Wednesday.
The man regarded as the best soccer player in history received the insignia of honorary Knight Commander of the British Empire at Buckingham Palace.
In this case, "Sir," does not go with the honor, but Pele may use the letters "KBE" after his name.
The title was bestowed on Pele in his capacity as Brazil's sports minister. He accompanied President Fernando Henrique Cardoso on a state visit.
"This makes me feel very, very happy," he said afterward. "It's a big responsibility. I thank the British people for their trust in me and for believing in my work."
Asked about England's chances of winning next year's World Cup, Pele sided with defending champion Brazil.
"I hope Brazil will be in the final and if it's with England, I think that's not good for England."
---
CHATTANOOGA, Tenn. (AP) - Reggie White's mother does a lot of rooting for her son and the Green Bay Packers, but she declined an invitation to do it in a cheerleading outfit on national television.
A Campbell's soup commercial features a woman dressed in Green Bay Packers' outfits, urging her son to eat his Chunky Soup. At the end, the woman is in a cheerleading uniform, shimmying with the rest of the girls.
The woman is an actress, not Thelma Collier.
"I'm 55 years old," said Collier, who lives in Chattanooga. "I would have taken any part except the cheerleading part.
"It's funny, but it's not for me."
Collier said she turned down a chance to appear in the commercial because she didn't want to travel.
---
HAMILTON, Bermuda (AP) - It's an unlikely place for a Winter Olympics medalist. But Bermudian Patrick Singleton might well become his island's first.
The 23-year-old former competitive sailor placed third Sunday in the luge at the Nations Cup Olympic qualifier in France, the first Bermudian to win a medal in the one-man sled competition.
On Friday, Singleton will learn if he's headed for Nagano.
Not bad, considering it has never snowed in Bermuda and the highest point is 259 feet above sea level.
Singleton hopes to become the first Bermudian to place at the Winter Olympics, and only the second to qualify. He already is the center of attraction among his friends.
"They went to raise the Bermuda flag at the medal ceremony … and they didn't have one," he joked.
A graduate of Elon College in North Carolina, he took his first sled ride 18 months ago. Singleton trained in France, Germany and Canada before setting up his permanent training camp in Innsbruck, Austria, with his Romanian coach.
"Ever since I was a little boy I've wanted to compete in the Olympics," he said. "I never knew how I was going to get there, but I sure didn't think I'd get there in luge."
---
LAUSANNE, Switzerland (AP) - Formula One racing's world governing body became the latest federation to be recognized by the International Olympic Committee on Wednesday. But don't look for Olympic competition in cars.
The Paris-based international automobile federation, FIA, was granted provisional recognition by the IOC executive board. The recognition can be become permanent after two years.
"This has nothing to do with placing auto racing on the Olympic program," IOC director general Francois Carrard said. "It is clear they are not seeking that. There are a number of areas where their experience can be interesting for us, and they recognize the overall role the IOC is leading."
Sports director Gilbert Felli said the IOC recognizes 25 non-Olympic sports, including ballroom dancing, surfing and rugby.
Karate, which has been torn by disputes among rival federations, had its provisional recognition extended until April 1998.
---
MARSEILLE, France (AP) - Joao Havelange is scheduled to give up his job as head of soccer's world governing body this summer after the World Cup. He's been president for 24 years and is 81 years old.
The question is, who will succeed him?
Havelange supports Sepp Blatter, FIFA's secretary general.
"He would be a great president," Havelange said. If Blatter would run and lose, "I would be a sad man," he said.
Havelange has long been feuding with Lennart Johansson of Sweden, head of the European federation and the only candidate so far. Johansson has often said Havelange's style was too autocratic.
Names of potential successors range from German star Franz Beckenbauer to the current head of the World Cup organizing committee and France's greatest player, Michel Platini.
 Load-Date: December 3, 1997

 

End of Document
