

Names In The Game
May 20, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 680 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Sports marketing specialist Mark McCormack believes the British Labor government's plans to ban tobacco advertising will damage the the country's sport.
"My strong belief is that it will harm the development of young people in sport," said McCormack, head of the worldwide marketing company IMG.
"Obviously, the health reasons are pretty important in this, but I don't think you can ignore the benefit to sport and the development of sport that results from the money.
"So much of the money is responsible for growth in sport and, as one example, women's tennis would not be where it is today if it was not for the money generated from the Virginia Slims sponsored tournament which has helped develop stars such as Martina Navratilova. There are many other examples, too.
"It is a difficult decision for the government but I personally subscribe to the fact that if tobacco money is being used to further the interest in sport and to bring up the awareness of sport then that is not all bad.
Monday's announcement by prime minister Tony Blair's new government to ban cigarette advertising and bar the sponsorship of sports events by tobacco companies will affect the future of high-profile sports such as Formula One auto racing, cricket, rugby league, as well as snooker and darts.
The proposed ban is intended to help reduce smoking-related deaths, but sports officials complain they will be deprived of vital funds.
McCormack said, however, that there would be enough potential sponsors from other avenues to ensure that the damage to the health of British sport would not be fatal.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Carlos Reutemann, runnerup in the 1981 Formula One World Championship, said he will seek the Peronist Party nomination for president in 1999.
"I told President (Carlos) Menem on Sunday night about my decision and he gave me his total backing," Reutemann, former governor of Santa Fe province, was quoted as saying in Tuesday's edition of the newspaper Clarin.
Reutemann, 55, won a total of 12 Formula One races during his career in which he drove for Williams-Ford, Brabham-Ford and Ferrari. He came second in the 1981 championship, behind Brazil's Nelson Piquet.
Menem, currently serving a second consecutive term, is barred by the constitution from running for a third term in 1999.
He personally encouraged Reutemann to run for the Santa Fe governorship in 1991. Reutemann is now senator for the province, about 300 miles north of Buenos Aires.
---
DETROIT (AP) - General Motors Corp. plans to expand its support of breast cancer research and education through its marketing sponsorship of the new WNBA.
The automaker will announce Wednesday that it will make a 50-cent donation to the National Alliance for Breast Cancer Organizations for each ticket sold during the league's inaugural season, which begins June 21. GM expects its donation to total more than $ 250,000.
The nonprofit group has more than 370 affiliates that work to increase knowledge about the detection and treatment of the deadly disease.
General Motors said its league sponsorship and support of breast cancer research and education are part of an effort to increase its visibility among women, who buy half of GM's vehicles and influence 80 percent of all car purchases.
---
CHICAGO (AP) - Phil Woosnam, commissioner of the now defunct North American Soccer League for 12 years, heads a list of six men selected for the National Soccer Hall of Fame.
Woosnam was designated for a meritorious service induction along with the late Walt Chyzowych, who was best known for developing soccer coaches.
Both began their careers as players.
Four players also were selected, Alexandre Ely, who played for the U.S. national team in international competition six times from 1960-65, including Olympic and world qualifying matches; Jimmy Roe, 88, who was known for his playmaking ability in 1930s; Johnny Moore, who made 11 international appearances for the national team from 1972-75; and Robert Craddock Jr., a member of the 1950 World Cup team that upset England 1-0.
Inductions will take place June 15 in Oneonta, N.Y.
 Load-Date: May 20, 1997

 

End of Document
