

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
October 30, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 779 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON
Body




WBC heavyweight champion Lennox Lewis went to Buckingham Palace on Friday to pick up a new title - Member of the Order of the British Empire.
Lewis, in top hat and tails, received his MBE from Prince Charles and said his next goal is to unify the world heavyweight crown.
"He asked me about my next fight and I told him I would be bringing the two other world heavyweight titles back to Britain," Lewis said.
Lewis is expected to fight Evander Holyfield, who holds the IBF and WBA titles, on March 13.
"I've got an MBE now and I am the WBC champion, so now I just need the IBF and WBA," Lewis said. "And it's just as well I know my ABCs."
The MBE is an honorary title bestowed by Queen Elizabeth II for distinguished achievement. It ranks below knighthood, as well as the Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) and Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE).
---
CHARLOTTE, N.C. (AP) - Carolina Panthers coach Dom Capers has put running backs Fred Lane and Tshimanga Biakabutuka on notice they must stand for the national anthem - and not sit and talk as they did last Sunday.
The players apologized and promised to stand for the playing of the "Star Spangled Banner" during games.
"I did not mean anything by it and I did not mean to offend anyone," Lane, the Panthers' leading rusher with 373 yards, said in a statement released by the Panthers' front office. "I shouldn't have done it and it won't happen again."
"I expect all … to stand up for the national anthem," Capers said Thursday. "I said we've got to make sure this doesn't happen again."
Lane and Biakabutuka remained seated and chatted through the national anthem before the nationally televised Buffalo Bills game.
Biakabutuka, a Zaire native who grew up in Canada, said he did not intend to make a political statement by remaining seated.
"There is nothing behind it," he said. "I was talking and not thinking. It's something you don't want to do."
---
ST. ANDREWS, Scotland (AP) - A combined British-Irish team may be forced to pull out of the women's World Amateur Golf Team Championship in Chile in two weeks because of concerns for player safety.
Julie Hall, secretary of the Ladies' Golf Union, said Friday she would follow the direction of Britain's Foreign Office, which is advising against nonessential travel to Chile in the wake of the arrest in London of former Chilean dictator General Augusto Pinochet.
The women's tournament involving three dozen teams is set for Nov. 12-15 in Santiago, the Chilean capital.
"We do not have to make a decision until the end of next week, but if there is danger the right thing is to pull out," Hall said.
The combined Britain and Ireland team members are Rebecca Hudson, Becky Morgan, and Kim Andrew.
The men's event is set for Nov. 19-22 in Santiago, giving the Royal and Ancient Club an extra week to decide. Men's team members are Gary Wolstenholme, Luke Donald, Lorne Kelly and Paddy Gribben.
---
SOFIA, Bulgaria (AP) - IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch urged Bulgaria's government and soccer federation Friday to iron out their differences over a failed drug test.
Bulgaria's national sports committee suspended the soccer federation last month, saying it failed to punish a soccer player who tested positive for drugs.
The soccer federation appealed the suspension to a high court, which hasn't ruled yet.
Samaranch said sports organizations "must work closely with governments and the governments must respect the autonomy of sports organizations."
Bulgaria's Olympic Committee is headed by Ivan Slavkov, son-in-law of the late communist dictator Todor Zhivkov.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - Prosecutors are asking the former coach of Colombia's national soccer team, Francisco Maturana, to explain 10 checks he received from a jailed Cali drug cartel boss.
Maturana, who just took over Costa Rica's national team and recently coached the Ecuadorean squad, is not charged with any crime but is being investigated for his questionable financial dealings, the chief prosecutor's office said.
Prosecutors have not said how much was involved in the 10 checks and Maturana could not immediately be located for comment.
Maturana coached the Cali club "America" in 1992, when he received the checks from Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela. Although not the titular president of the team, Rodriguez owned and ran the club, Maturana acknowledged in a British TV documentary last year.
"He made the decisions about what player to buy or sell," said Maturana. "When someone didn't get paid they needed to get in touch with Miguel because he was paying us."
Miguel Rodriguez and his brother Gilberto, who ran the Cali cartel, were captured in 1995 and later convicted of drug trafficking.
 Load-Date: October 30, 1998

 

End of Document
