

Names In The Game
November 13, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 425 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




He didn't get to hear his national anthem in Sydney, but wrestler Brandon Slay now gets an Olympic presentation like no other.
The freestyle wrestler from Texas will receive his gold medal Wednesday on the "Today" show, outside NBC's studios at Rockefeller Center.
"Unfortunately, I didn't get a ceremony in Sydney," Slay said. "So, in many ways, this is the best I could hope for under the circumstances."
Slay initially won the silver medal but was elevated to gold after Germany's Alexander Leipold tested positive for a banned substance.
The ceremony will also feature the new silver medalist, Moon Eui-jae of South Korea, and new bronze medalist, Adam Bereket of Turkey.
---
BRISTOL, Conn. (AP) - Actor Samuel L. Jackson will be the host for the ESPY Awards on Feb. 12 in Las Vegas.
Jackson, a big sports fan, was also the ESPY host in 1999.
The ESPY Awards honor the top performers and moments from the previous year in sports.
---
NAPLES, Italy (AP) - Napoli, a long way from its glory days when Diego Maradona starred a decade ago, fired its coach just six games into a winless season.
Zdenek Zeman, in his first year with the club, has also coached Lazio and AS Roma in the Italian League.
Napoli returned to Serie A this season after two years in a lower league. It is in a three-way tie for last place with four losses and two ties.
---
ATHENS, Greece (AP) - A special collection of coins is aimed at raising a whole lot of drachmas for the 2004 Olympics.
Greece's central bank Monday presented a collectors' series of 500-drachma coins that will help fund the Athens Games.
Bank officials said 24 million coins, each worth $1.25, will be issued between Wednesday and Dec. 31. The coins will bear images from the ancient Olympics and first modern Olympics in 1896.
The coins will be available at face value, but will help raise money after Greece begins using the euro Jan. 1 and the drachma is removed from circulation in 2002.
Proceeds go toward the estimated $3.3 billion budget for the 2004 Games.
---
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - Romario injured his left thigh in practice Monday and will miss Brazil's 2002 World Cup qualifying game against Colombia on Wednesday.
In the last two games, against Bolivia and Venezuela, the 34-year-old striker scored seven goals.
Romario, the FIFA Player of the Year in 1994, was replaced on the roster by Edmundo.
Wednesday's game will be the first since Emerson Leao replaced Wanderley Luxemburgo as coach.
Argentina leads the South American standings with 22 points, followed by Brazil and Paraguay with 17 and Colombia with 15.
 Load-Date: November 14, 2000

 

End of Document
