

Names In The Game
March 5, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 616 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LAUSANNE, Switzerland
Body




Pele, considered by some the greatest soccer player ever, is trying some nimble footwork on behalf of Rio de Janerio's bid for the 2004 Summer Olmympics.
The IOC evaluation report listed crime as one of Rio's drawbacks, but Pele said an Olympics would aid in the campaign to decrease crime in Brazil.
"Every big metropolis has a high crime rate," said Pele. "Atlanta certainly did, too.
"An Olympics would help get our kids and under-privileged off the streets of Brazil and involved in sport.
Also said the pope obviously thought the city was safe enough for a visit.
Pele, the honorary Brazilian Minister of Sports, got a less than honorary slap in the face back home in Sao Paulo.
For refusing to recognize a 32-year-old woman as his legitimate daughter, Pele was denied an honorary citizen title by the legislature of the Federal District of Brasilia.
The honorary citizen motion was turned down 12-8.
"The main reason for not granting him the title was that despite last year's ruling by Brasilia's Superior Court of Justice that Sandra Regina Machado is his daughter, Pele has refused to recognize his paternity," Imae Amado of the legislature's press office said Wednesday.
Amado said another "less important" reason for the denial was brought up by assemblyman Miqueias Paz who complained that Pele never involved himself in campaigns against racism nor spoke out in favor of black rights."
---
PALO ALTO, Calif. (AP) - Nikki McCray of the Columbus Quest was voted the American Basketball League's first Most Valuable Player on Wednesday. The Quest finished the season with a league best 31-9 record and won the Eastern Conference title in the league's first year.
McCray averaged 19.9 points a game and led the ABL in scoring most of the season before finishing third overall.
"We play a team concept, but at the same time, Nikki can dominate the game on both ends of the floor," said Columbus coach Brian Agler. "She has turned into an explosive offensive player."
The Quest and Richmond are tied 1-1 in the ABL championship series.
---
RICHMOND, Va. (AP) - Bobby Ross, new coach of the Detroit Lions, and Allan Bristow, who runs the Denver Broncos' operation, head the 1997 inductees into the Virginia Sports Hall of Fame.
Ross, a three-sport star at Virginia Military Institute whose coaching career has included stops at The Citadel, Maryland and Georgia Tech, was hired to coach Detroit last month. He had spent the previous five seasons coaching the San Diego Chargers.
In San Diego, he led the Chargers to the playoffs three times, including the 1995 Super Bowl, where they lost 49-26 to the San Francisco 49ers.
Bristow averaged 23 points during his college career at Virginia Tech, then played in the NBA from 1973-83.
Now the vice president of operations for the Nuggets, Bristow spent the previous five seasons coaching the Charlotte Hornets.
Another of those elected was Roger Brown, a former lineman with the Lions.
---
TORONTO (AP) - The Toronto Raptors already have a 7-footer, but the NBA team will have a 4-footer on its bench Friday.
Eight-year-old Brodie Walker of Kitchener, Ontario, won a Sears Canada contest to be a "Raptors rookie for a day."
Walker will be there for coach Darrell Walker's pre-game talk and sit on the bench for the game against the San Antonio Spurs.
---
HIALEAH, Fla. (AP) - Dan Leary, a veteran sports publicist, will serve director of publicity for Hialeah Race Course, which opens a 61-day meet on Monday, March 17.
Among positions held by Leary, 39, a native of New York, were assistant director of public and media relations for the New York Racing Association in 1991-96 and, before that, director of information for the NHL.
His appointment was announced Wednesday.
 Load-Date: March 5, 1997

 

End of Document
