

Names In The Game
June 26, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 709 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: PORTLAND, Ore.
Body




The agent for Portland Trail Blazers guard Marcus Brown said Brown will return to Kentucky today to face misdemeanor charges that he provided alcohol to five underage girls.
"Marcus didn't know he was doing anything wrong. He was just celebrating with some friends," Craig McKenzie told The Oregonian.
Brown was charged Monday with five counts of unlawful transaction with a minor, and prosecutors have asked that he turn himself in.
Two of the girls, who are all 17, were hospitalized overnight for excessive alcohol consumption.
The girls were participating in the Upward Bound program at Murray State University, where Brown played basketball from 1992-96. Brown returned this summer to work toward completion of his degree.
David Harrington, the Calloway County, Ky., district attorney, said the case could be handled during a pretrial conference in August.
"I watched Marcus play basketball, and I know him," Harrington said. "To people here, he was a model student and a good person. It sounds like maybe he made a mistake, but it turned out to be one that resulted in no permanent injury. It could have been a lot worse."
Brown, 23, faces up to one year in jail and a $ 500 fine for each count.
---
LONDON (AP) - Three days before he fights Tony Tucker for the WBO heavyweight title, Herbie Hide appeared in court Wednesday accused of soliciting a prostitute.
The former world champion pleaded innocent to propositioning a woman from his car in north London April 9.
The case was adjourned until August 27 and Hide was released on his own recognizance.
Hide meets Tucker, a former IBF champion, in his hometown of Norwich on Saturday.
---
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) - Cuba's Javier Sotomayor, the world record holder in the high jump, said Wednesday he will skip this week's Central American and Caribbean Athletic Championships because of an ankle injury.
"I'm coming as an invitee, but I won't jump," Sotomayor said moments after arriving at San Juan's international airport.
Sotomayor had been the favorite to win Saturday night's final at Sixto Escobar Stadium, where he became the first person to clear 8 feet during a meet in 1989. He set the current mark of 8 feet- inch in 1993.
But he has suffered over the past year due to a series of injuries, and failed to qualify for the medal round at the Atlanta Olympics.
Sotomayor hurt his right ankle while jumping at a track meet earlier this month in Italy. He sat out the Cuba Cup, Cuba's national games, last week, but hopes to compete at the World Championships in Athens, Greece, in August.
"I am doing various exercises, but without jumping above the bar," Sotomayor said.
---
CALGARY, Alberta (AP) - Sheldon Kennedy was recuperating Wednesday from a nasty cut and a badly broken hip - the latter the result of a recreational accident and the former an unexpected blow from his NHL team.
The Calgary Sun says the Boston Bruins have effectively released Kennedy from the team by sending out a letter of intent to the right-winger's agent, Tom Laidlaw, that they would not be issuing him a qualifying offer.
It is believed the Bruins' acquisition of Mike Sullivan from the Calgary Flames at last weekend's NHL draft made Kennedy expendable.
The ex-Flame made headlines around North America last year for his courage in admitting he was a victim of sexual abuse by former junior hockey coach Graham James.
Kennedy was injured Monday when he flipped an all-terrain vehicle he was driving on an abandoned rail line.
He had four hours of surgery on Wednesday to have a pin put in his upper leg, and was listed in stable condition.
Kennedy stunned hockey circles with revelations of sexual abuse by James when both were with the Swift Current Broncos of the Western Hockey League.
In January, James was sentenced to 3 years after pleading guilty in Calgary court to assaulting Kennedy and another player whose name has never been made public.
Kennedy has appeared on talk shows across North America to shed light on the issue of sexual abuse and has set up a foundation that is now establishing a ranch in British Columbia for sexually abused youngsters. He is also close to signing a movie deal.
"We know he's doing OK, but what we don't know is the extent of the injury," said Chris Brown, the foundation's executive director.
 Load-Date: June 26, 1997

 

End of Document
