

Names In The Game
August 15, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 454 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LAUSANNE, Switzerland
Body




Contains items on Olympic Bid Cities, Gil Brandt, Jason Kidd, Kasey Keller
 A record 11 cities have submitted bids to host the 2004 Summer Olympic Games.
The International Olympic Committee said Thursday the bids came from Cape Town, South Africa; Buenos Aires, Argentina; Istanbul, Turkey; Lille, France; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Rome; San Juan, Puerto Rico; Seville, Spain; Stockholm, Stockholm; Athens, Greece, and St. Petersburg, Russia.
The previous high was nine bids made for the 2002 Winter Games which went to Salt Lake City.
The bids were delivered at IOC headquarters by representatives of the candidate cities. The deadline was Thursday.
The bids include financial plans, sites of the sports venues and proposals for transportation and security.
The IOC Evaluation Commission will analyze the bid packages and visit each of the sites between September and December 1996. It will make its report in February 1997 and the winner will be announced in September 1997.
 
DALLAS (AP) - Gil Brandt, who helped build great Dallas Cowboys teams for three decades, detained a man he found inside his ransacked home, authorities say.
Brandt, who left as vice president of personnel development for the Cowboys in 1989, returned to his home in the Dallas suburb of University Park last Friday and found it had been burglarized.
Lt. Gerry Bishop of the University Park Police Department said Brandt then discovered a man on his back porch and held him until police arrived.
Brandt said he did not use force to restrain the man.
"I told my wife to call the police and to get me a gun, and I told him to put his hands behind his head and go to the front porch and stay there," Brandt said.
Brandt said his wife had to go next door to get a gun from a neighbor.
"I realize now it may not have been a very smart thing I did," Brandt said.
James Tippett, 31, of Dallas, was arrested at Brandt's home, police said. Police later arrested a second man, Jason Burk, 17, and recovered some jewelry taken from Brandt's home.
Both men were being held Thursday in the Lew Sterrett Justice Center in lieu of $ 25,000 bond.
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - NBA All-Star Jason Kidd of the Dallas Mavericks is going from the hardwood to the small screen.
Kidd will portray himself as the fiancee of Robin Givens' character, Wilma Cuthbert, in the TV premiere of the UPN half-hour television comedy, "Sparks," Monday, Aug. 26.
 
LEICESTER, England (AP) - Goalkeeper Kasey Keller, a member of the 1990 U.S. World Cup team, completed a $ 1.39 million move from Second Division club Millwall to Premier League team Leicester City Thursday.
Keller, Millwall's No. 1 goalkeeper for the past four seasons, will play his first Premier League match Saturday when Leicester meets Sunderland.
 Load-Date: August 15, 1996

 

End of Document
