

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
December 24, 1999, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 860 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) - Philadelphia Eagles running back Duce Staley donated $25,000 to South Carolina Gov. Jim Hodges' First Steps early childhood education program.
The contribution presented Thursday night is the program's first from an individual and reflects Staley's commitment to the state and to children, Hodges said.
Staley, 24, played football at Columbia's Airport High School and, later, at the University of South Carolina. The Columbia native presented the check to Hodges, along with a souvenir jersey and an autographed Eagles helmet for Hodges' son Sam.
"This is my first step in having Gov. Hodges try to get things cleaned up," Staley said. "Let's continue to keep the focus on education."
Staley says his contribution is a step in trying to help improve education.
The Eagles signed Staley to a six-year, $16.3 million contract extension earlier this year. The contract will keep him in Philadelphia through the 004 season.
---
CLEVELAND (AP) - A relief fund set up by Cleveland Indians shortstop Omar Vizquel to help his native Venezuela get through its worst natural disaster has raised $350,000 in its first two days.
"We are collecting a lot of money to try to do something good for those people who are in need of so much," Vizquel said Thursday from his home in Issaquah, Wash., outside of Seattle.
Vizquel plans to fly to his hometown of Caracas, the nation's capital, in early January for three weeks to help survivors of mudslides that have killed between 5,000 and 30,000 people since Dec. 15.
Days of torrential rains caused an avalanche of mud, water and boulders to crash down a mountain near Caracas, devastating many of the city's poorest areas.
"I know how little they had before the disaster, and now they've lost everything," the seven-time Gold Glove winner said.
None of Vizquel's relatives were affected, but he said many of his friends live in the hardest-hit areas. Vizquel wanted to help, so he contacted World Vision, a privately funded humanitarian organization based in Federal Way, Wash. World Vision has assisted him in creating the Lend a Hand to Venezuela Fund.
Vizquel has donated some of his own money to the fund, as have some of his Indians teammates. In addition, the Indians organization has contributed $10,000 and Vizquel is recruiting fellow Venezuelans on other major league teams to help.
Money raised by his organization will be used for transportation and distribution of relief supplies and possibly for rebuilding in the disaster-stricken communities.
---
EDEN PRAIRIE, Minn. (AP) - Mitch Berger was pumping gas in 1995 after getting cut by an NFL team for the fifth time. Now, he's the first Minnesota Vikings punter ever selected to the Pro Bowl.
"About four years ago, all I wanted was a job, let alone going to the Pro Bowl," said Berger, who leads the NFC in both punting average and net punting average.
The job he landed was a part-time gig at his buddy's gas station in North Delta, a suburb of Vancouver, British Columbia.
"I was your full-service gas attendant back in Canada," said Berger, who would work the 6 a.m.-10 a.m. shift so he could kick, run and lift weights in the afternoon in case he ever got another chance in the NFL.
Berger was drafted by Philadelphia in the sixth round in 1994 out of Colorado. He was released by the Eagles that year and spent the rest of the year on Cincinnati's practice squad.
In 1995, he signed with Chicago but was released after the Bears drafted Todd Sauerbrun. He went to Indianapolis but was waived once again.
He arrived in Minnesota in 1996, where special teams coach Gary Zauner recognized the 6-foot-2, 217-pound punter's potential and went to work. Zauner, intrigued by Berger's size, said the punter's improvement was simply a matter of maturity.
"Basically, all I did was tell him the two or three things he needed to work on and he worked on them," Zauner said.
"He's taking his job seriously. Before, he was like a lot of players who are just glad to be here. He had the leg. Now, all he needed was consistency, and the consistency came with good work ethic, what he does in the offseason, what he does in practice."
---
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - John E. Berry Jr., the Massachusetts college student who gave up his football career to donate a kidney to his ailing brother, is being honored with the NCAA Award of Valor.
As a junior at Williams College, Berry was an all-New England Small College Athletic Conference performer who returned his first two interceptions of the year for touchdowns. He helped lead the Ephs to an 8-0 record.
He dropped out of the football program when he learned he was a donor match for his brother DeAngelo, a husband and father of three who was diagnosed with renal failure at the age of 26.
Berry will receive the award during a ceremony Jan. 9 in San Diego.
The award is presented only when the NCAA feels there is a worthy candidate. It recognizes a current coach or administrator, or current or former varsity letter-winner at an NCAA institution.
The Award of Valor has been presented only seven previous times. The last award was given in 1998 to Hawaii football player Shannon Smith, who died while saving a child from drowning.
 Load-Date: December 25, 1999

 

End of Document
