

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
January 28, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 760 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




Super Bowl tickets are so difficult to get that even Panamanian President Ernesto Perez Balladares gave up.
"He's not coming," said Raquel Alfaro, spokeswoman at the Panamanian Embassy in Washington. "The consul was trying to get tickets - and I'm sure they didn't want just any seats. They wanted good ones. And they weren't available."
Other politicians did find tickets. Former President Jimmy Carter will attend, said Carrie Harmon, spokeswoman for the Atlanta-based Carter Center. Carter will have a good seat in Pro Player Stadium Sunday as guest of commissioner Paul Tagliabue.
"He'll be in the commissioner's box," said Darrell Hatton, an Atlanta Convention Bureau executive working with next year's host committee. "Tagliabue's wife is from Georgia - I think that's the connection there."
Nicaraguan President Arnoldo Aleman planned to attend the game at the invitation of personal friends. He has a layover in Miami en route to the inauguration of Venezuelan President-elect Hugo Chavez on Tuesday.
Atlanta Mayor Bill Campbell and Denver Mayor Wellington Webb will fly in from the U.S. Conference of Mayors in Washington.
Colorado Gov. Bill Owens and Georgia Gov. Roy Barnes also were scheduled to be there.
Fund-raising groups for Democrats and Republicans planned exclusive travel packages to the big game as a perk for major donors.
The National Republican Congressional Committee will hold a Super Bowl getaway at Turnberry Isle Resort in Aventura. New House Speaker Dennis Hastert will participate, as will Rep. J.C. Watts, R-Okla., a former quarterback in the CFL.
---
ARAPAHOE, N.C. (AP) - This rural eastern North Carolina town will never be confused with Las Vegas or Atlantic City - exactly the reason fighters like Michael Grant prepare here for their next bouts.
The International Boxing Council heavyweight champion just completed a month of training at the Donald Turner Boxing Camp in Arapahoe in preparation for his fight Saturday night with Ahmad Abdin at the Atlantic City Convention Center.
Turner, a trainer from Philadelphia for 30 years who also works with heavyweight champion Evander Holyfield, began bringing boxers to train at his camp four years ago.
Although the 6-foot-6, 240-pound Grant may have turned some heads as he jogged down country roads and worked out at a local health club, the time away from the glitz of big cities proves invaluable.
"There are no distractions here," said Mike Borkowski, Grant's strength trainer. "There are no places to get in trouble. You can totally focus on what you have to do."
Borkowski said Grant's boxing ability stems from his pure athleticism. Grant was a three-sport letterman at his Chicago high school. He got serious about boxing after watching the Holyfield-Riddick Bowe fight in Las Vegas.
"I just went to the gym and started it," said Grant, now 26.
Grant and Holyfield are good friends, so it's unclear if they would ever agree to fight one another.
---
NOTTINGHAM, England (AP) - Midfielder John Harkes of D.C. United was loaned Thursday to Nottingham Forest, which is in last place of England's Premier League and is likely to play in Saturday's game against Everton.
Harkes, 31, played for the United States in the 1990 and 1994 World Cups and was captain of the team when he was unexpectedly dropped last spring by coach Steve Sampson, who quit after the tournament.
Before joining D.C. United, Harkes played in England with Sheffield Wednesday, Derby and West Ham. He will remain with Nottingham Forest until after the English season, which ends in May.
"I am glad it's all sorted out," Nottingham Forest coach Ron Atkinson said. "John will prove to be a worthwhile acquisition and will more than likely play some part on Saturday."
Harkes played under Atkinson at Sheffield Wednesday. He became the first American to collect a winners' medal at Wembley when Wednesday beat Manchester United in the 1991 League Cup final.
---
MIAMI (AP) - Soccer star Carlos Valderrama and three of his Miami Fusion teammates joined the effort to help earthquake victims in Colombia by signing autographs in exchange for donations on Thursday.
Valderrama, who was born in Colombia, and countryman Diego Serna joined Colombian-Americans Nelson Vargas and Carlos Parra.
"I'm here because it's my duty to help our people," Valderrama said as he signed soccer balls. "The situation in our country is terrible and this is the least we can do."
The athletes and the Club Kiwanis Colombia collected food, medicine, canned goods and diapers and expect to send it to the stricken South American country in the next few days.
 Load-Date: January 28, 1999

 

End of Document
