

Names in the Game Contains items on Lawrence Taylor; Muhammad Ali, Michael Jordan and
The Associated Press
November 16, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 778 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LARGO, Fla. (AP) - The informer who helped police arrest football Hall of Famer Lawrence Taylor in an undercover drug sting has fled to avoid testifying and is wanted by police.
Clemente Brown Jr., 41, of St. Petersburg, did not attend a pretrial hearing in the case Friday despite a subpoena ordering his testimony.
Prosecutors told Pinellas County Circuit Judge Lauren Laughlin about Brown's disappearance outside the hearing. Lawyers led the media believe the hearing was postponed after the state objected to Taylor's motion to dismiss the case.
Prosecutor Michael Marr did not want the news made public, to allow police a chance to find the informer.
Laughlin has ordered Brown jailed, if found, to guarantee his testimony. Taylor's trial is scheduled for Nov. 30, but is expected to be delayed.
"We're looking for him, and we obviously need him," prosecutor Michael Marr was quoted as saying in Tuesday's editions of the St. Petersburg Times. "I think he helps our case significantly. Can I proceed without him? Yes. But I'd rather not have to."
Lawrence's lawyer told Laughlin on Friday that Taylor had been entrapped as result of police misconduct and asked the judge to drop the charges against the former New York Giants defensive lineman. Laughlin told Taylor's lawyers to reword and resubmit their motion Nov. 30.
Taylor, 40, of Saddle River, N.J., was charged in October 1998 in St. Pete Beach with buying the crack cocaine, possession of crack cocaine, and possession of drug paraphernalia after allegedly buying the drug from an undercover police officer.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Muhammad Ali, Michael Jordan and Wayne Gretzky have agreed to attend Sports Illustrated's 20th Century Sports Awards on Dec. 2.
Arnold Palmer, Tiger Woods, Jack Nicklaus, Bill Russell, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Magic Johnson, Hank Aaron, Dick Butkus, Pele, Billie Jean King, Chris Evert, Martina Navratilova and Peggy Fleming also have confirmed, the magazine said Tuesday.
The event will be televised live on CBS.
---
SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - Sports fans were to blame for drug use by athletes such as Diego Maradona, an Argentinean delegate told an international doping summit Tuesday.
Jose Luis Vignolo, the Argentinean consul general in Australia, said the idolization of athletes led them to drugs.
"Society treats athletes like machines or demigods rather than human beings," Vignolo said. "Society worships athletes and to a certain extent it might allow these athletes, because of this worshiping, to go astray."
Vignolo used the example of Maradona, who was banned for 15 months after testing positive for cocaine while playing for Italian club Napoli in 1991 when he was widely acknowledged as the best player in the world.
He returned for the 1994 World Cup but received another 15-month suspension for taking a cocktail of illegal drugs.
"He ruined his career, the Argentine soccer team during the 1994 World Cup and gave the most awful example to Argentine youth," Vignolo said. "Why is that? Because Argentine society and most of the world's society thought he could get away with whatever he wanted to do."
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Flamengo terminated Romario's contract Tuesday for sneaking out of training camp to go to a nightclub.
In an unrelated development, the Saudi Arabian club Al-Nassr announced it had contacted Romario for FIFA's first world club championship, scheduled to played in Brazil in January.
The decision to get rid of Romario, announced Saturday, was confirmed after a three-hour meeting with the player's manager Luis Moraes, Flamengo President Edmundo Santos Silva told reporters.
Romario, the FIFA player of the year in 1994, and teammates Fabio Baiano and Leandro Machado went to a nightclub hours after Flamengo's 3-1 loss to Juventude on Wednesday in the final regular-season game of the Brazilian national championship. Flamengo needed a win to keep alive its chances of making the playoffs.
The club, however, backed off its decision to punish the other two, deciding instead on fines.
---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - The right leg of Mexican soccer player Cesar Andrade was amputated just below the knee by doctors following a car accident last week.
The surgery was performed Monday in Guadalajara, home to the 21-year-old midfielder's team, Atlas, Mexico City media reported Tuesday.
Andrade and teammate Javier Amador were injured when their car crashed into a wall along a highway between Guadalajara and Zapopan on Nov. 10. The two had been returning home from a dinner party.
Doctors had hoped to save the limb despite multiple fractures, but after waiting five days it was determined that toxins generated by the injury were spreading through Andrade's body.
 Load-Date: November 17, 1999

 

End of Document
