

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
July 21, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 665 words
Dateline: FRANKFORT, Ky.
Body




Democrat Ken Lucas is charging that his Republican opponent for Congress is anti-NASCAR, a very serious allegation to some Kentucky voters.
Lucas, a former Boone County chief administrator running for the House seat being vacated by Republican Jim Bunning, cites two resolutions taken up in the Kentucky Senate in 1996 that Republican Gex Williams opposed. One honored stock car race driver and Owensboro native Darrell Waltrip, and the other proclaimed "NASCAR Legends of Owensboro Day."
Williams was the only member of the Senate to vote against the ceremonial resolutions.
"How could anyone oppose Darrell Waltrip? This is unconscionable behavior and an insult to all Kentucky natives. Williams' votes should be a yellow caution flag to all voters," Lucas said.
Williams blamed a clerical error in the way his votes were recorded, and insisted he has nothing against stock car racing.
---
LONDON (AP) - David Beckham has been taking a thrashing from the British media and soccer fans since being ejected in England's World Cup loss to Argentina.
But Victoria Adams, better known as "Posh Spice" of the Spice Girls, has come to the defense of her fiance.
Adams told the Daily Mail newspaper that the midfield star made a mistake but should not take all the blame for England's World Cup exit.
Beckham was ejected for kicking an opponent during the second-round loss to Argentina, leaving his team a man short for 70 minutes before England ultimately lost in a penalty shootout.
"I'm not going to defend him for what he did - it was wrong," Adams said. "But there were other people in that competition who did wrong. He can't take all the flak for the defeat."
After the World Cup, Beckham flew to America to be with Adams, who was touring with the Spice Girls.
"I just think it's sad that before he was playing, everyone wanted him to play, and now they want to hang him," Adams said.
Adams, who admitted she's not the "football wife type" and doesn't really know the rules of soccer, said Beckham was a very private person and a "modern man."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Another plaque is going up Monument Park at Yankee Stadium. The late broadcaster Mel Allen, the "Voice of the Yankees" for 26 years, will be honored Saturday during Old Timers' Day.
Allen's will be the 16th plaque in the area, where only four former Yankees are honored with monuments - Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, Mickey Mantle and Miller Huggins.
---
ROME (AP) - Cesare Maldini is out as coach of Italy's national soccer team.
Italian Federation president Luciano Nizzola will decide on a successor "in the coming days," his office said Tuesday.
Dino Zoff, former goalkeeper and captain of the Italian team and now in the front office of Serie A club Lazio, is regarded the leading candidate for the job.
The next coach will be the third in 19 months.
Italy lost to eventual champion France on penalty kicks in the World Cup quarterfinals.
Under Maldini, Italy had 11 wins, 7 ties and one loss - 2-0 to England in an exhibition match last year - while scoring 30 goals and allowing 12.
---
OMAHA, Neb. (AP) - Heather Farr's death in 1993 inspired fellow LPGA golfer Val Skinner to join the fight against breast cancer.
"Her death hit us hard," Skinner said at the Methodist Special Friends Celebrations Classic at the Champions Club, an annual pro-am golf tournament benefiting breast cancer research.
"You feel so helpless, and this is a way not to feel so helpless," Skinner said.
Farr, a standout at Arizona State, was 28 when she died in after a four-year battle with breast cancer.
"As an athlete and as a woman, I'm among those who has the opportunity to help advance the fight for breast-cancer research, early detection, prevention and treatment," said Skinner.
She is honorary chairwoman of the National Breast Cancer Coalition Tour for a Cure charity pro-am in Jackson, N.J., which raised $ 500,000 in its three years. USA Weekend magazine selected her in 1997 as one of the five Most Caring Athletes for raising awareness and money for the cause.
 Load-Date: July 21, 1998

 

End of Document
