

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
February 25, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 484 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NASHVILLE, Tenn.
Body




The Vols were in the House. It wasn't Neyland Stadium, but it was packed, and it was full of orange.
The state Legislature held a joint session Wednesday to commemorate Tennessee's national championship football team.
The crowd clapped in time to "Rocky Top" as coach Phillip Fulmer, his wife Vicky, football operations director Condredge Holloway and players Jeff Hall, Tee Martin and Mercedes Hamilton made their way to the well of the House.
The joint session passed two resolutions. One honored the team as a whole, the other commemorated quarterback Martin.
Gov. Don Sundquist said the Vols, who finished 13-0 and beat Florida State 23-16 in the national championship game in Tempe, Ariz., would be remembered for their "heart and spirit."
"There was no quit in them," the governor said.
"It's a difficult thing to carry an entire state's hopes on your shoulders every Saturday afternoon. You did it well. You did us proud. You're champions for the ages, and we thank you."
---
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - Sammy Sosa was honored Thursday by Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, himself a diehard fan who grew up dreaming not of politics but of becoming a professional baseball player.
Sosa, the Dominican Republic star who hit 66 home runs last season for the Chicago Cubs, was decorated in the presidential palace with Venezuela's highest sports honor, the Brigido Iriarte Order of Sports Merit.
"Things were not easy for me, but I never allowed myself to go back. That is why I receive this decoration with the affection of a man who with faith and work has achieved success," Sosa said.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - As prize money soars on the PGA Tour, consider that not even the top players such as David Duval and Tiger Woods figure to approach the kind of year Byron Nelson had in 1945.
Nelson, who will be featured in a PBS documentary "The Story of Golf" that airs next week on public television station, won 18 tour events in 1945, including an astounding 11 in a row. He earned a record $ 63,000, which would amount to about $ 10 million this year.
Presented and underwritten by Deloitte & Touche, "The Story of Golf" traces the evolution of the game and spotlights such personalities as Neslon's contemporaries, Ben Hogan and Sam Snead.
---
TAMPA, Fla. (AP) - The long expected two-year contract extension for New York Yankees manager Joe Torre has been finalized.
"Obviously I'm happy it happened, but it happened a long time ago … I just didn't get around to signing it," Torre said Wednesday. "We had agreed to it, probably, during the World Series."
The deal with owner George Steinbrenner, worth about $ 2 million a year, covers 2000 and 2001. While leaning toward stepping down when the deal expires, Torre has not ruled out a longer stay.
"I don't see it going past what my contract is now - but you never now. As long as it's fun," Torre said. "That's my end of it. Now you have to ask George the same question.'
 Load-Date: February 25, 1999

 

End of Document
