

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
December 7, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 729 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: BALTIMORE
Body




The lineup card and other memorabilia from the game in which Cal Ripken broke Lou Gehrig's consecutive games streak could fetch as much as $ 30,000, the auctioneer selling the items says.
The items are being sold by former manager Phil Regan, who filled out and signed the card, said Steve Ryan, president of North Shore Sports, the Chicago-area memorabilia company handling the sale.
The lineup card, the pen used to fill out the card and the lineup card from the record-tying game will be sold.
Advance telephone bidding for the card and pen from the record-setting game went as high as $ 8,400 on Friday, while the bidding for the card from the record-tying game reached $ 2,000, Ryan said.
Ryan said he expects the pen and lineup card from the record-setting game to sell for between $ 20,000 and $ 25,000. The card from the record-tying game should sell for between $ 3,000 and $ 5,000, he said.
Tom Mortenson, editor of Sports Collectors Digest, said the prices seemed realistic.
"We've seen some astounding prices recently. If you were going to buy one lineup card, that would be the one," Mortenson said.
Regan said he gave the items to his daughter, who will keep the money.
"That's her decision," said Regan, who lives in Byron Center, Mich. "I don't keep a lot of stuff."
Regan used carbon paper to make five copies of the lineup card from the record-setting game. He kept the original and the ceremonial pen and gave copies to Ripken, the opposing manager, the Baseball Hall of Fame, the plate umpire and to the Babe Ruth Museum in Baltimore.
Plate umpire Larry Barnett gave his copy and other items to Bowling Green University, which put the items up for sale with a $ 1 million asking price. The items were removed from the market after a buyer could not be found.
---
GENOA, Italy (AP) - Police early Monday stopped a Mercedes driven by Argentine soccer star Ariel Ortega and cited him for drunken driving.
His teammate on Sampdoria of Genoa, Fernando Cordoba, was cited for drunkenness.
Police officer Sebastiano Salvo said Ortega's car and driver's license were taken away. Licenses can be suspended in Italy for drunken driving for up to six months.
Cordoba, also Argentine, was cited for drunkenness and making threats for allegedly telling police that they would get in trouble for stopping them.
No action was taken against a third player in the car, Brazilian Cate. All three players were taken to a police station for alcohol-level tests.
Police stopped the car at 4:30 a.m. after someone complained that people near a Mercedes parked in a downtown square were exchanging insults and having a loud discussion.
Ortega, who leads Sampdoria with three goals this season, joined the Serie A club after the World Cup.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan will receive the Jesse Owens Global Award, which is presented biennially to an individual making a significant contribution "to peace from a background of sports."
The recipient also is a person who has "shown distinguished leadership in the field through personal example of work, deeds or written and spoken statements over a period of years."
Annan was a former star sprinter at Macalester College in 1960, helping the team win the Minnesota Intercollegiate Athletic Conference championship. He also was a member of the soccer team in 1961, the year he graduated.
Annan will be honored along with the winner of the 1999 Jesse Owens International Trophy Award at a dinner Feb. 11.
---
HOUSTON (AP) - Mark OMeara, Se Ri Pak and Hale Irwin were overwhelming winners of the Golf Writers Association of America 1998 Player of the Year Awards.
The 41-year-old O'Meara won both the Masters and British Open, finished in the top 10 in seven of 19 PGA Tour events, and finished seventh on the 1998 money list.
The 53-year-old Irwin set a single-season earnings mark for both the PGA Tour and Senior PGA Tour with $ 2,861,945, and set the all-time scoring average on the senior tour with 68.59.
Pak made the biggest impact of any LPGA rookie since Nancy Lopez. The 21-year-old from South Korea won four times, including two majors - the LPGA Championship and U.S. Womens Open. She was the LPGAs Rookie of the Year.
She set LPGA scoring records for 18-holes (10-under-par 61) and 72-holes (261). She finished in the top 10 eight times in 25 tournaments and was second to Annika Sorenstam on the money list with $ 872,170.
 Load-Date: December 7, 1998

 

End of Document
