

Names In The Game
January 14, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 552 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW ORLEANS
Body




Ozzie Smith, after a 19-year career at shortstop for the St. Louis Cardinals, is turning broadcaster.
Smith will host "This Week In Baseball," a weekly TV show of baseball highlights produced by Major League Baseball.
Mel Allen hosted the program for 20 years before his death last year.
Smith, an All-Star for 15 years, will debut with the show April 5.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Bill Guilfoile, a public relations director for the Pittsburgh Pirates during the 1970s, is this year's winner of the Robert O. Fishel Award.
The award, given each year for excellence in public relations, is named in memory of a longtime New York Yankees publicist.
Guilfoile was vice president of the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., and Fishel's assistant for 10 years. Guilfoile retired in the fall.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The owner, trainer and jockey of Cigar were selected Tuesday to receive the 1996 Big Sport of Turfdom Award by the Turf Publicists of America.
The TPA, an organization of approximately 130 thoroughbred racing publicists and marketing executives, said Allen Paulson, Bill Mott and Jerry Bailey were selected because they "graciously answered countless inquiries from the media and racing fans alike" as they travelled the world with Cigar.
Paulson, Mott and Bailey will accept the Big Sport of Turfdom Award Feb. 4 at the Indian Creek Country Club in Miami.
A few hours after receiving the Big Sport of Turfdom Award, the Cigar crew will be honored at Eclipse Awards Dinner at the Sheraton Bal Harbour. Cigar has already been selected the Eclipse Award winner as the top older male and he is favored to receive the Horse of the Year for a second consecutive year.
For the second consecutive year, Paulson, Mott and Bailey will be honored as thoroughbred racing's outstanding owner, trainer and jockey.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Soccer star Diego Maradona's personal manager left jail Tuesday, three months after being arrested and indicted on drug-trafficking charges.
Guillermo Coppola was released after a judge ruled there was no proof he had let friends consume drugs in his apartment during a party last September.
On Dec. 30, a federal court paved the way for Coppola's freedom, ruling there was insufficient evidence that he was part of a drug-trafficking ring which allegedly peddled cocaine in coastal resorts along Argentina's Atlantic coast.
Coppola left the Buenos Aires jail, where he had been 97 days, and was bundled into a van by police who had to fend off dozens of reporters and cameramen.
Court officials said he will still face trial for drug possession, but under Argentine law such charges do not warrant jail terms.
Later, in a telephone interview with a TV station, Coppola said he was relieved, but angry at what he said was an injustice.
"I just want to be with my family and hug Diego (Maradona)," he said.
---
ANNAPOLIS, Md. (AP) - When the Washington Redskins move to their new stadium in Maryland next season, smokers will have to leave their seats and head for the concourses if they want to light up.
A Redskins lobbyist and two state senators announced Tuesday that team owner Jack Kent Cooke has agreed to ban smoking in the stands and will not allow cigarettes to be sold in vending machines.
But Cooke did not agree to ban tobacco advertising in his new stadium in Prince George's County.
 Load-Date: January 14, 1997

 

End of Document
