

Names in the news
April 15, 1997, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 637 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Billy Bob Thornton is asking for privacy now that his marriage to his fourth wife has collapsed.
Pietra Dawn Thornton filed for divorce on Friday in Superior Court, less than three weeks after the 41-year-old actor won an Academy Award for best adapted screenplay for his film "Sling Blade." They were married in 1993.
She cited irreconcilable differences and sought sole custody of the couple's sons, William, 3, and Harry James, 2.
"It is a painful and personal time right now," Thornton said Monday. "Both Pietra and I would appreciate that our privacy be respected during this time."
 
 ---
NEW YORK (AP) - From royal family member to diet-program spokeswoman to newspaper columnist, the Duchess of York's career path took another turn today with the debut of her syndicated column.
The former Sarah Ferguson's maiden column for The New York Times Syndicate includes her observations on the nation of Argentina.
"Argentina is my second home," Fergie writes. "My mother still lives there. A part of me - perhaps the best part - resides there as well."
The divorced mother of two also muses on Chivilcoy, the birthplace of former Argentine first lady Eva Peron, and Madonna's portrayal of Peron in the film "Evita."
"So when the movie ended, and Madonna stood up, I was teary-eyed. I was crying for Argentina," Fergie writes.
The ex-wife of Britain's Prince Andrew has a two-year deal to do the column, which will reach 2,000 papers worldwide.
In addition to her autobiography, which came out last fall, she has written several children's books. She also is a spokeswoman for Weight Watchers.
 
 ---
ASHEVILLE, N.C. (AP) - A lawyer for former television evangelist Jim Bakker has admitted to embezzlement and filing incorrect tax returns.
Jim Toms pleaded guilty to the federal charges on Monday in a deal that calls for five years of prison time. A judge will determine the exact sentence, U.S. Attorney Mark Calloway said.
Toms was accused of embezzling $ 2 million from more than a dozen personal trusts and accounts. Prosecutors also said he understated his income - by $ 539,000 in 1990 and by $ 222,000 in 1991.
Toms may be best known for his close association with Bakker, who served four years in jail for bilking investors in his PTL religious theme park out of $ 159 million.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Babyface, Rosie O'Donnell and, of course, Tiger Woods - all on Time's latest list of America's 25 most influential people.
The magazine says of the 21-year-old Woods, who on Sunday became the youngest golfer to win the Masters Tournament and the first black to win a major title: "He has been likened by overheated journalists to Jesus, Mozart and Gandhi … He is 'The Man."'
And of Grammy-winning producer Babyface: "Think everything that today's often raucous pop music usually isn't, and you'll have Babyface. He is yin to gangsta rap's yang."
Also on Time's second such list, in the April 21 issue, are "X-Files" creator Chris Cater, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and working-class cartoon "hero" Dilbert.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - An avid fan of Richard Crenna was ordered to stay at least 100 yards away from the actor and his family for the next three years.
Superior Court Judge Anthony Jones on Monday extended a temporary restraining order that Crenna had filed against Veronika Kuncova, who claims she came from the Czech Republic to meet the actor.
Ms. Kuncova showed up at the actor's home in October and took a few photos with him, and then returned twice in March, Crenna said in court papers.
The 70-year-old actor called police after the March visits. Ms. Kuncova was carrying a phone book listing her as "Veronika Crenna" and giving her address as the actor's home, police Detective Paul Wright said in court papers.
Crenna has appeared in the "Rambo" movies, and also in the 1950s sitcoms "Our Miss Brooks" and "The Real McCoys."
 Load-Date: April 15, 1997

 

End of Document
