

Names In The Game
June 3, 1996, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 588 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Jose Maria Olazabal has pulled out of this week's English Open and next week's U.S. Open because he is still suffering from rheumatoid arthritis in his feet.
Olazabal, who has not played a tournament since last September, was due to play in this week's English Open at the Forest of Arden and then go on to Michigan.
But still suffering pain in both his feet, the 1994 US Masters champion withdrew from both events Monday and has now set his sights on returning in the French Open in Paris June 27-30.
 
MILLINGTON, Tenn. (AP) - Playing baseball in an Olympic year is tough work. Just ask pitcher Mark Johnson who keeps reminding himself that baseball is supposed to be fun.
"There's definitely pressure, but you know baseball is a game. You've got to go out there and work hard and have fun, enjoy what you're doing," Johnson said. "You can't be unhappy and play baseball."
Johnson is one of 21 members from last year's USA baseball team who is back as the squad prepares for the 1996 season, which will be capped by the Olympic Games.
Johnson, a junior at the University of Hawaii, started two games for the USA team last year and pitched in 13. The 6-foot-3, 215-pound right-hander was 5-0 with two saves in 42 innings and a 2.34 earned run average. He's back hoping to jumpstart a professional career by playing in the Olympics.
"It's just an honor to be selected, to be in consideration for making this team," Johnson said.
 
TOPEKA, Kan. (AP) - Track legend Jim Ryun, who broke two world's records before he was 20, filed Monday as a candidate for the 2nd Congressional District.
Ryun, 49, is the only Republican candidate to file for the office so far. State Rep. Doug Mays of Topeka announced his candidacy but withdrew when he learned that Ryun would run.
The seat became open when U.S. Rep. Sam Brownback decided to seek the U.S. Senate seat being vacated by Bob Dole, the presumptive GOP candidate for president.
Ryun became the first high school student to run the mile in under four minutes. He set a world's record for the mile twice while a student at the University of Kansas, and was on three Olympic teams - 1964, 1968 and 1972.
 
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Two years after they led Brazil to the World Cup title, Bebeto and Romario are teammates again.
Bebeto arrived early Monday from Spain and went straight to the headquarters of Flamengo, which outbid Valencia and a Japanese club to sign the 32-year-old forward.
Fans cheered and fireworks exploded as Bebeto arrived at the club that projected him to stardom a decade ago.
"I've come home," he said. "I probably will end my career on Flamengo."
Bebeto, whose actual name is Jose Roberto Gama de Oliviera, then posed with new teammates Romario and Savio, his probable companions on Flamengo's front line.
"Every time we played together, Brazil won," Bebeto said.
 
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - Lou Holtz doesn't expect to set any speed record when he runs a leg of the Olympic torch relay through Indianapolis on Tuesday.
In fact, the Notre Dame football coach said, the entire Olympic schedule might have to be revised.
"They haven't announced this yet, but I believe the Olympics is going to be moved back a day … because they asked me to carry the torch for six-tenths of a mile in Indianapolis. If that happens, it definitely will be late in arriving in Atlanta," Holtz said Monday.
Organizers have allotted four minutes for his leg of the relay.
"I don't have a personal trainer to prepare me for this. I don't know if they will allow me to smoke my pipe when I carry it," Holtz said.
 Load-Date: June 3, 1996

 

End of Document
