

Names In The Game
August 12, 1996, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 976 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: BRUSSELS, Belgium
Body




Contains items on European Union-Olympics, Filipino Olympic Medalist, Maradona, Marv Albert, Teen-age Hockey Team, Malaysian Soccer Player, Argentine Soccer Player, Walter Swinburn
 The European Union won the Atlanta Olympics.
That's how the number crunchers at Eurostat, EU's statistical agency, looked at it Monday.
The 15 nations of the EU won 229 medals at the Olympics, compared to 101 for the United States. But the EU is 15 countries, the United States is only one.
So?
"With a total of 229, the EU won 6.16 medals per 10 million of its population at the Olympic Games," the Eurostat statisticians said. "This is ahead of Russia (4.27), the USA (3.84), Japan (1.12) and China (0.41), but a little behind Canada (7.43) and way behind Australia's impressive tally (22.78)."
The EU won 75 gold medals, or 2.02 per 10 million population. This was ahead of all the other countries except Australia (5.00).
Germany won a total of 65 medals, or 7.96 per 10 million population, the most of any EU country. That included 20 golds, or 2.45 per 10 million. The Netherlands won 19 medals, putting them at 12.29 per 10 million, but only four golds, dropping them to 2.59.
 
MANILA, Philippines (AP) - Filipino boxer Mansueto Velasco, a silver medalist at the Olympics, received a golden welcome home Monday.
Riding on the back of a 10-wheel flatbed truck decorated like a boxing ring, his medal draped over his white Navy uniform, Velasco was driven from Manila to suburban Makati in a raucous motorcade.
"He's my hero because he showed us how good Filipino boxers are," office worker Ferdinand Gallo said.
Velasco, the only Filipino medal winner at the Atlanta Games, was greeted by thousands of well-wishers carrying small Philippine flags.
An elderly vendor grabbed a handful of candy from her cart and offered it to Velasco. Workers threw yellow confetti made from shredded telephone directory yellow pages out of office windows.
Velasco shook hands and signed autographs, and threw plastic bottles of sports drinks to the crowd.
For winning the country's only medal at the Games, Velasco received a citation from President Fidel Ramos, plus a check for $ 19,200 and a promise of a monthly stipend of $ 269 - the first lifetime pension given to a Filipino athlete. Velasco, a sailor in the Philippine Navy, also received a three-rank promotion to technical sergeant and is expected to be given a new house and two cars by private businesses.
 
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Diego Maradona, under fire from fans for missing five consecutive penalty kicks, is quitting his club, Boca Juniors.
Maradona, 35, announced the decision before Boca's final home game of the season Sunday.
"You walk along the street and people say you're a coward, that you missed penalties, that you're fat, even that you're a junkie," the former Argentine captain said. "Nobody has the right to make my daughters cry. So these are my last two games for Boca. The decision has been taken."
Boca president Mauricio Macri said he felt Maradona had spoken in the heat of the moment. "He doesn't always end up doing what he says he'll do when he's angry," Macri said.
 
ST. ALBERT, Alberta (AP) - Forget about winning or losing or even playing a baseball game. The questions are, who is Jean Chretien, where does he live and what are the words to Canada's national anthem?
Members of the Oakland (Calif.) Select, competing in the amateur World Series for 14-year-olds, had to sign a contract saying they would study Canada before joining the team. They also learned the words to O Canada and took a test to prove they knew something about their Northern neighbors.
"We provided them with the words to O Canada so that at the opening ceremonies they'd be able to join into the singing of that ..." Alan Silver, the team's manager, said. "More than half of them were able to do that."
Silver said most Americans know very little about the countries they visit, let alone their closest neighbors.
"I asked 50 people in the U.S. - some of them very successful business people - to tell me the name of the prime minister, Jean Chretien, and none of them could," he said.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Marv Albert will be honored for his 30 years as a sports broadcaster with a roast on the floor of Madison Square Garden Sept. 12.
The black-tie event will be hosted by MSG Network and will benefit the March of Dimes.
Among the celebrities expected to attend are Bob Costas, Tom Brokaw, Mike Fratello and Phil Simms.
 
SINGAPORE (AP) - Defender K. Gunalan has rejected a place on the Malaysian soccer team for a regional tournament of 10 nations in favor of experiencing the birth of his first child.
Gunalan went to the team training camp for a physical last Friday, but was concerned about his wife who is due to give birth next month.
Malaysia begins the ASEAN Football Federation Championship Sept. 1 with a game at Singapore. Gunalan feels he should be with him wife during that time.
"I always believe in giving my best," he said. "Under the present circumstances, it is not possible for me to do so and I have to opt out."
 
AVELLINO, Italy (AP) - A haircut was the condition imposed on Argentine forward Leonardo Ricatti for his possible transfer to Italian third-division soccer club Avellino.
"Before beginning any negotiation, you must have a haircut," Avellino's president Antonio Sibilia said. "There is no room for the hippy look at Avellino."
 
WINDSOR, England (AP) - In his first race following a serious accident, English jockey Walter Swinburn rode Talathath to victory Monday in the Royal Bank of Scotland Handicap.
"I just wanted to come back and ride, but to have a winner on top of that is something ..." said Swinburn, a three-time English Derby winner who broke a shoulder, several ribs and his collarbone six months ago in a spill in Hong Kong. "I think I got a bigger round of applause than the three Derbys put together."
 Load-Date: August 12, 1996

 

End of Document
