

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
March 20, 1999, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 735 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: HOUSTON
Body




The first man on the moon will be the last to throw out an opening day ceremonial pitch at the Astrodome.
Neil Armstrong, who was among 23 astronauts who threw first pitches in the stadium's inaugural regular-season game on April 12, 1965, will do the same to start the Astrodome's final season on April 6.
In 2000, a downtown retractable-roof stadium will replace the Astrodome, the world's first domed stadium.
Armstrong, an Ohio resident who usually shuns the spotlight, will toss out the first pitch before the Astros' home opener against the Chicago Cubs. The Astros also will unfurl their second consecutive NL Central banner before the game.
Living in Houston during his astronaut years, Armstrong was a frequent visitor of Colt .45s games before construction of the Astrodome in 1965, when the team changed its name.
Armstrong became the first human to walk on the moon on July 20, 1969.
---
VERO BEACH, Fla. (AP) - Los Angeles Dodgers vice president Ralph Avila, who has overseen the team's Latin American program for over 20 years, will semi-retire at the end of the year, the team said.
Avila, 69, originally hired by the Dodgers as a part-time scout in 1970, is in his eighth year as vice president of Campo Las Palmas, the team's baseball academy for developing major league prospects in the Dominican Republic.
He was the regional coordinator of the academy from 1987, when it opened, until being named vice president of the facility on Dec. 12, 1991.
Among those who passed through Campo Las Palmas on their way to the big leagues are Pedro Astacio, Adrian Beltre, Roger Cedeno, Wilton Guerrero, Pedro Martinez, Ramon Martinez, Raul Mondesi, Jose Offerman, Felix Rodriguez, Henry Rodriguez and Jose Vizcaino.
"It was a very difficult decision for me, but I want to stay with my grandchildren a little more, they need me," said Avila, who will continue to work in the Dodgers' organization after the end of the year as special advisor to president Bob Graziano.
"For sure, I'm going to miss the uniform, but I'm going to stay close to the organization," Avila said. "I'm going to hang around."
Avila was promoted to full-time scout in 1972 and served as the Dodgers' scouting supervisor in Latin America from 1975-86.
"Ralph Avila has made a tremendous contribution to the Dodgers' organization over the years, helping us sign and develop some of the best players in all of baseball," Graziano said. "I look forward to working with Ralph in the future as he will help us as we continue to try and build a championship team."
---
OGDEN, Utah (AP) - Ron Abegglen, who led Weber State to the Big Sky Conference basketball title and an upset victory in the first round of the NCAA tournament, was chosen as league coach of the year Friday.
Abegglen, whose eight-year career at Weber State ended with an 82-74 overtime loss to Florida in the tournament's second round, received the award on a vote of the conference's nine head coaches.
The honor came less than a month after Weber State's board of trustees unanimously upheld university president Paul H. Thompson's seven-month-old decision to terminate Abegglen's contract after the 1998-99 season.
An Aug. 4 agreement between Thompson and Abegglen was reached after the coach was involved in a domestic altercation with his wife, Nedra. Abegglen and the WSU basketball program already were under NCAA and university-imposed probation for violation of NCAA rules.
Abegglen, who had four years remaining on a seven-year contract extension he signed in 1995, will receive a $ 95,000 buyout that is considerably less than his $ 86,000 per year salary.
Abegglen, while repeatedly refusing to discuss his future as fans clamored that he be retained, led the Wildcats to a 25-8 record, won the Big Sky regular-season title and the postseason tournament.
Entering the NCAA tournament as the No. 14 seed in the West last week, Weber State defeated heavily favored third seed North Carolina, 76-74.
It was the second time in his career at Weber State that Abegglen led his team to a first-round upset of a No. 3 seed. In 1995, the Wildcats knocked off Michigan State in the first round before losing to Georgetown in the second.
Abegglen's 25-8 record was the third-best at Weber State and best in 19 years at the school. In eight seasons at Weber State, Abegglen was 152-83 (.647) overall and 86-34 (.717) in Big Sky games, won or tied for three league titles and twice finished second.
 Load-Date: March 20, 1999

 

End of Document
