

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
October 12, 1998, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 708 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: PITTSBURGH
Body




Citing a slowdown in ticket sales, a lawyer for Roger Marino has demanded that the city and Allegheny County drop their lawsuit against the Pittsburgh Penguins co-owner.
Attorneys for city agencies received a letter Friday from James Weisman, Marino's attorney, saying the lawsuit has alarmed fans and therefore discouraged them from buying tickets for the 1998-99 season.
The suit "has seriously interfered with the significant progress being made to breathe new life into the Pittsburgh Penguins," the letter read.
Steve Leeper, executive director of the Public Auditorium Authority, said the lawsuit will proceed.
The Public Auditorium Authority, a city-county agency that owns the Civic Arena, and SMG Pittsburgh Inc., which operates it, filed the lawsuit Wednesday in Allegheny County Court, seeking an order to bar any discussions about relocating the team before its lease commitments expire June 30, 2007.
The financially strapped Penguins had signed a contract stipulating they not discuss moving the team until then.
The suit alleged that Las Vegas officials secretly provided Marino with the terms under which they would relocate the Penguins and that Marino has also talked with officials from Houston, Oklahoma City and Kansas City.
Last week, the Penguins asked the city and the arena agencies to consider a $ 4 million rent reduction. Last year, the county's Regional Asset District pledged $ 12.9 million to improve the Civic Arena.
Weisman's letter also complained that the Penguins have been promised less help than the Pittsburgh Steelers or the Pittsburgh Pirates, both of which have been promised new stadiums.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Dressed in the country's yellow and green strip, Brazil's soccer fans are famed for adding color to the World Cup with smiles and samba music.
However, hooliganism blights Brazilian national and regional soccer leagues, deterring 61 per cent of supporters from going to games, according to research published Sunday.
The figure is part of a survey by pollsters Ibope, commissioned by sports daily Lance!, in which 3,000 soccer fans were asked what kept them away from matches.
"The problem (of hooliganism) is much the same as in England. There is a very active minority of fans involved," said Col. Silvio Roberto Villar, who heads policing of Sao Paulo soccer stadiums, in an interview with radio station CBN on Sunday.
"Ideally, supporters should not wear their teams' colors when leaving stadiums in case they are attacked. It's an absurd situation but that is the state of things."
Since the early 1990s, rival 'fan clubs' loyal to their local Brazilian team have clashed sporadically, causing the deaths of two teenagers in the last three years.
Last season, a youth was killed in a street fight following a game between Rio teams, Flamengo and Vasco da Gama. In Sao Paulo, a 16 year old died during a 1995 stadium riot involving fans of Sao Paulo FC and Palmeiras, prompting a judge to ban fan club members from city stadiums.
Since then, security cameras have been installed in Rio's 100,000-capacity Maracana stadium to clamp down on violence and meeting rooms for fan clubs have been shut.
The Ibope survey found the second reason fans stay away from games is because of high ticket prices, cited by 16 per cent as a problem. Fourteen per cent said "poorly organized" leagues were the chief reason they missed matches.
---
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Garth Brooks has no plans to quit singing to become a right wing with the Nashville Predators. But coach Barry Trotz likes what he's seen of Brooks in skates.
"He's a banger," Trotz says. "He's aggressive."
The friendship between the hockey coach and the country and western singer goes back two years to when Trotz was coaching an AHL team in Portland, Maine. There was a Brooks concert at the arena one night and Trotz, when he heard that the singer and some of his band members were hockey fans, helped arrange ice time afterwards.
"We played shinny till 3 a.m.," Trotz said. "We had a great time."
Trotz also helped arrange for ice time in other towns for Brooks.
"You know, he probably would be a good hockey player," Trotz said. "I haven't seen him skate in two years but he's as fit as an athlete and he plays hockey just like his shows - all out."
 Load-Date: October 12, 1998

 

End of Document
