

Names in the news
The Associated Press
March 2, 1998, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 730 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Maybe Christopher Darden will have better luck in the movies.
The former Los Angeles prosecutor who failed to convict O.J. Simpson in real life gets a second chance - of sorts - in a TV movie with a remarkably similar plot.
"One Hot Summer Night," which airs on ABC on March 12, has Darden playing a detective who investigates the death of a sports figure's blonde wife. Sound familiar?
"I'm sort of playing me," Darden admits in the March 7 TV Guide. "As a prosecutor, one is very much a cop."
Darden, who retired as a prosecutor after Simpson was acquitted of killing Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman, had a small role as a preacher in "Touched by an Angel."
---
SWARTHMORE, Pa. (AP) - James Michener never forgot the generosity that allowed him to attend Swarthmore College and overcome his poor childhood.
When the author died in October at age 90, he repaid the college - and then some. He left the school the bulk of his estate, adding $ 10 million to its $ 650 million endowment.
And he also left Swarthmore copyrights and royalty rights to his 43 books. Officials at the liberal arts college in suburban Philadelphia expect Michener's generosity to swell their coffers for years to come.
"It's a wonderful gift," Swarthmore President Alfred Bloom said last week. "It's a further expression of Jim's confidence in the college."
Michener, who attended Swarthmore on a four-year scholarship before graduating in 1929, also gave $ 5 million in 1991. Overall, he donated more than $ 100 million to charity.
In a letter to the college in 1969, Michener wrote: "The fact that Swarthmore gave me the money to pay for my education was an act of faith which I have never forgotten."
Michener's longtime literary agent, Owen Laster of the William Morris Agency, said annual royalties from Michener's books in the last years of his life amounted to hundreds of thousands of dollars.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Filmmaker John Sayles figures he has turned out some impressive movies at a relative bargain.
Sayles estimates all 11 of his works have been produced for under $ 30 million - one-seventh of the amount James Cameron spent making "Titanic."
Sayles, whose screenplays for "Passion Fish" and "Lone Star" were nominated for Academy Awards, used $ 1 million of his own money to help finance his latest film, 'Hombres Armados" ("Men With Guns").
The film is set in a Latin American country torn by civil war and follows a doctor as he tracks down medical students he trained to work in remote mountain villages. The movie was filmed in Mexico, including in the troubled Chiapas region; Sayles says he included scenes based on incidents from all over the world.
"Some of them are taken from Bosnia, some are based on incidents in the former Soviet Union, some of them based on things that happened in Vietnam," he said in Sunday's Los Angeles Times.
"I think this is a story and theme that goes beyond ideology," he said.
---
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - A documentary that suggests Kurt Cobain's death wasn't a suicide opened in San Francisco, despite a warning from lawyers for his former girlfriend, Courtney Love.
"Kurt and Courtney," by British filmmaker Nick Broomfield, opened Friday at the Roxie Cinema. The theater has received a letter from Ms. Love's lawyer warning that it would share any liability with the filmmaker and those who raise questions about Love's role in Cobain's death.
"We are told that Mr. Broomfield's movie conveys the message that Ms. Love killed her husband Kurt Cobain or somehow participated in his murder. Such accusations are false and defamatory, nothing more," the letter from attorney Michael Chodos said.
Cobain, lead singer of the band Nirvana, was found dead in his Seattle home in 1994 of an apparently self-inflicted gunshot to the head. He was on heroin at the time and though his death was ruled a suicide, questions and conspiracy theories continued to swirl on the Internet.
In one scene, Broomfield visits a musician who claims Ms. Love offered him $ 50,000 to "whack" Cobain.
Hank Harrison, Ms. Love's estranged father, along with many of the couple's former friends, says in the film that he believes Ms. Love may have been involved in Cobain's death.
Ms. Love succeeded in getting the film withdrawn from Sundance Film Festival in January, claiming it featured unauthorized music. Broomfield said all licensing was in order and accused festival organizers of cowardice.
 Load-Date: March 2, 1998

 

End of Document
