

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
April 25, 1999, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 595 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: ST. PETERSBURG, Fla.
Body




Karen Smyers, plagued by injuries the last two years, and Tony DeBoom led the qualifiers for the U.S. triathlon team at this summer's Pan American Games.
Smyers, the 1995 Pan Am women's gold medalist from Boston and the only woman ever to win the world championship and the Hawaii Ironman in the same year, finished in 2 hours, 4 minutes, 33 seconds to beat Jill Newman of Colorado Springs, Colo., who finished in 2:05:12. Jennifer Guitierrez of Denver was third in 2:06:16.
The top two U.S. times in Saturday's race qualified for the Pan Am team.
In the men's race, DeBoom, a former Army Ranger from Colorado Springs, beat Venezuela's Gilbert Gonzalez, 1:51:38-1:52:08. totoDeBoom's younger brother, Tim, finish third in 1:52:55 to win the second men's Pan Am spot.
---
LEEDS, England (AP) - David O'Leary celebrated twice Sunday, signing a $ 9.7 million contract extension as manager of Leeds and then guiding the team to a 1-1 tie with Manchester United.
O'Leary joined the club last September and had two years left on his contract. The new deal keeps him at Leeds for five years.
"I'm delighted to commit myself to Leeds," he said. "My ambition now is to see the club become genuine title challengers and I hope within the next five years we can win the championship again."
The draw, built on a goal by Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink in the 32nd minute, prevented Manchester United from passing Arsenal at the top of England's Premier League and left Leeds fourth, virtually assuring a spot in European club tournaments next season.
United salvaged a draw on a goal by Andy Cole in the 56th minute and trails Arsenal by one point. Cole later withdrew from the English squad for Wednesday's exhibition against Hungary because of injuries.
---
KNOXVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - They're getting ready for the next college football season, and Tee Martin is still unbeaten.
Martin, who led Tennessee to the national championship last January, threw for 105 yards without an interception Saturday in guiding the White team to a 20-10 victory in the Volunteers' Orange & White spring game. He didn't play the second half.
"It is always comforting to have a quarterback coming back that you know can play," coach Phillip Fulmer said. "Tee Martin looked like Tee."
In past years, Fulmer ran the Orange & White game in a "best against the rest" format, pitting the starting offense and defense against second-stringers.
But with 14 players sidelined with injuries, the coach turned the end-of-spring contest into a full-dress scrimmage before 15,400 fans in 102,000-seat Neyland Stadium.
---
RIYADH, Saudi Arabia (AP) - Luis Alberto of Brazil was signed Sunday as coach of Saudi Arabia's Olympic soccer team, the 10th coach of the national squad in four years.
The official Saudi Press Agency said Alberto signed a two-year contract to lead the national team in qualifying for the 2000 Games in Sydney.
The Saudi soccer federation announced Tuesday that it had fired German coach Piet Hamburg following the under-20 team's first-round elimination from the World Youth Championship.
---
BALMORAL, Scotland (AP) - No time off for Tegla Loroupe.
A week after winning the Rotterdam Marathon, Laroupe took the 10-kilometer Caledonian Run in 32 minutes, 26 seconds at Balmoral Castle on Sunday.
The 25-year-old Kenyan surged to the front after two kilometers and kept control, finishing 22 seconds in front of Germany's Irina Mikitenko.
Canadian Kathy Butler was third in 33:01.
"It was easy today," Loroupe said. "I wasn't expecting to run that quickly so soon after the marathon."
Thomas Nyariki won the men's race in 28:25.
 Load-Date: April 25, 1999

 

End of Document
