

Names in the Game Sutton; Hank Aaron; and Nicolas Anelka
The Associated Press
March 29, 2000, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 716 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




STOKE-ON-TRENT, England (AP) - Students at an English university are rushing to enroll in a course examining such weighty topics as soccer star David Beckham's new haircut, his celebrity marriage to Victoria Adams and his red card against Argentina in the World Cup.
Staffordshire University is offering a "football culture" course as part of its degree studies program. The university expects the 12-week course to be oversubscribed.
Professor Ellis Cashmore said Beckham would feature heavily in the course. He described the 24-year-old England and Manchester United midfielder as "the icon of the icons."
"He's the object of a great many fantasies, and he and his wife seem to mesmerize the population, so we will be looking at the reasons why this has come about," Cashmore said.
When Beckham appeared with a new close-cropped hair style in Manchester United's game against Leicester 10 days ago, it was national news. The story featured on front pages across the country and was the topic of television and radio talk shows for several days.
Not everybody agrees that Beckham deserves to be the focus of a university course.
"I struggle to find a practical use for it," said David Kidney, a Labor Party member of Parliament.
---
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) - With a mouse click, Ronaldo could be heading to England. Welcome to e-transfers.
A British Internet startup and a German software company are joining forces to create an electronic transfer market connecting top soccer clubs around the world.
InterClubNet Ltd. and realTech AG of Walldorf, near Frankfurt, plan to launch the private Web site by the end of May.
Sixty clubs already have given commitments to sign up, realTech said Wednesday. Among them are Manchester United, Paris-St. Germain, Internazionale of Milan, AC Milan, Bayern Munich and the entire Brazilian first division.
The Web site will be able to handle up to 2,000 clubs around the world, the company said, with a database including up to 20,000 players.
---
SHREVEPORT, La. (AP) - Hal Sutton came back to his home town with $100,000 checks for his alma mater and his favorite charity.
He presented money to Centenary College and United Way of Northeast Louisiana on Tuesday, one day after beating Tiger Woods by one stroke to win The Players Championship.
And he repeated what he'd said before, during and after Monday's victory: Woods is a great player, but not the only potential winner on the PGA Tour.
"I think Tiger elevated the play of everybody on the tour. But if you've got two or three of the top five players in the world saying, 'I don't think I can beat him,' well then, we're going to start back down. I just didn't want to see that happen," he said.
The money for the United Way of Northeast Louisiana and for a program to teach golf at Centenary College came from last fall's Ryder Cup.
A month before the Ryder Cup, PGA of America announced that players would be able to direct $100,000 to charity and $100,000 to college "golf learning programs."
Sutton was one of four players who made only two grants; others split the money as many as 10 ways.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Hank Aaron will be honored by the Arthur Ashe Institute for Urban Health on April 26, receiving the group's annual "Leadership in Community Service" Award.
Aaron is the founder of the Hank Aaron Chasing the Dream Foundation. Children 9-12 receive awards to pursue a talent for which they have shown early ability, such as art lessons, transportation to art classes and musical instruments.
---
MADRID, Spain (AP) - Real Madrid said Wednesday it will lift Nicolas Anelka's 45-day suspension next week, allowing him to play in one of two European Champions Cup games against Manchester United.
The French forward will miss Tuesday's first leg in Madrid but will be eligible for the second leg two weeks later in Manchester.
Real also said that even after Anelka rejoins the team April 5, his pay will be withheld for the full duration of the suspension. Team spokesman Jaime Ussia put the amount at $350,000.
The suspension was imposed against Anelka on March 13 after he refused to attend three straight training sessions, complaining that Real was wasting his talent.
Wednesday's decision came after a three-hour meeting of Real's board of directors and a day after Anelka publicly apologized for his misbehavior.
 Load-Date: March 30, 2000

 

End of Document
