

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
June 27, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 523 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: ENGLEWOOD, Colo.
Body




Running backs Warrick Dunn and Tiki Barber will speak from experience when they tell 240 NFL draft picks what to expect if they make it in the league this year.
"Life as a Rookie" is the topic of a panel discussion at which Dunn of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, Barber of the New York Giants, Detroit Lions tight end Pete Chryplewicz and Minnesota Vikings defensive end Stalin Colinet will relate how it was for them last season.
The topic is part of Rookie Symposium which starts Sunday and runs through Wednesday.
Broncos quarterback John Elway and some retired players will lead a discussion on "Success in the NFL and life after football."
Among the other subjects: how to deal with the media, financial education, continuing education, and the league's substance abuse program.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Speedskater Chris Witty will compete at the Goodwill Games next month. Not on skates but on a bicycle.
Witty, a world record holder at 1,000 meters and Olympic silver and bronze medal winner at the Nagano Games, will ride for the United States in the cycling competition July 25-26.
Other speedskaters have been winners in cycling, but Witty may eventually be the best, in the view of some.
"I expect a great performance from her at the Goodwill Games," said Witty's coach, world class cyclist Connie Paraskevin-Young.
"This will help push Chris to her ultimate potential."
Witty was an alternate on the U.S. cycling team for the 1996 Olympic team.
One dream she allows herself: she could be the first to gold medals at both Winter and Summer Olympics.
---
BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) - Thailand's political opposition failed Saturday to do on the soccer field what it could not accomplish in Parliament - bring down the government.
In a match marked more by enthusiasm than athletic prowess, the government team beat its political opponents 4-2.
The game celebrated the official opening of the 60,000-seat Rajamangala National Stadium, where the opening and closing ceremonies will be held for the Asian Games in December.
Spectators included Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai and opposition leader Chavalit Yongchaiyudh, who has tried to muster a movement to bring down the government because of Thailand's economic crisis.
The government team wore the colors of Argentina while the opposition's uniforms were similar to those worn by Brazil's national team.
---
CLEVELAND (AP) - Indians pitcher Jose Mesa won another off-the-field decision. An appeals court upheld a ruling that police erred when they seized a gun from Mesa's car.
Judge Thomas Patrick Curran of Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court held in April, 1997 that police in the Cleveland suburb of Lakewood lacked authority to search Mesa's car for a gun.
Without having the gun as evidence, Mesa was not prosecuted on the charge of carrying a concealed weapon.
The 8th District Ohio Court of Appeals upheld Curran's decision by a 2-1 decision Thursday.
George Sadd, head of the prosecutors' appellate section, said his office was considering whether to appeal to the Ohio Supreme Court.
A jury acquitted Mesa last year of rape, gross sexual imposition and theft. Curran dropped a felony assault charge against him.
 Load-Date: June 27, 1998

 

End of Document
