

Names In The Game Renaldo, jockey Frankie Dettori, under-18 soccer title, soccer
The Associated Press
July 24, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 912 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




LINCOLN, Neb. (AP) - Neigh.
That's the official University of Nebraska reply to a Colorado horse seller's $2,500 asking price for a gelding named Big Red.
Last week, the university's public relations office received a letter from Johnene Barras of Welona, Colo.
"Enclosed you will find two pictures of our horse," Barras wrote. "His name is Big Red. Notice that he has a 'N' on his one side."
She said the "N" was birthmark formed by white hair on Big Red's right side.
"We are going to sell him and wanted to know if you would be interested in him for a mascot," Barras wrote.
But officials decided not to purchase the 15-year-old gelding.
"The university is saying 'neigh' to this equestrian opportunity," said spokesman Dave Fitzgibbon. "At the risk of offending Nebraska oat farmers, we don't want to get saddled with the feed bills," Fitzgibbon told the Lincoln Journal Star. "However, we are delighted he is galloping around wearing the Nebraska 'N' and we wish him well."
---
ATHENS, Greece (AP) - IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch gave olive branches to Greece's premier and the leader of the beleaguered 2004 Olympic committee.
He said Prime Minister Costas Simitis and Gianna Angelopoulos-Daskalaki seem to be working together to organize a successful Olympics. Angelopoulos-Daskalaki reportedly threatened to resign as head of the Athens organizers because of bureaucratic problems.
Samaranch was in Athens to inaugurate the International Olympic Truce Center, a non-governmental organization promoted by Greek Foreign Minister George Papandreou. The center aims to revive the ancient Greek tradition of ceasing hostilities during the Olympics.
---
MILAN, Italy (AP) - Ronaldo, Brazil's recuperating soccer superstar, says he would be better off playing for Rio de Janeiro's Flamengo before returning to the rugged competition of Italy's Serie A.
The 23-year-old Internazionale of Milan striker, who is recovering from a twice-injured right knee, told La Gazzetta dello Sport that going directly to the top Italian league could again put his health at risk.
Earlier this month, his manager had raised the possibility that Inter might loan Ronaldo to Flamengo to ease him back into top form.
Ronaldo said he hoped Inter officials would consider the temporary transfer, but an Inter spokesman said Monday a loan would be unlikely.
---
NEWMARKET, England (AP) - Jockey Frankie Dettori galloped horses Monday, almost two months after escaping from the wreckage of a plane crash. He said he could make his racing comeback in 10 days.
"Today, I really felt like a fish out of water," said Dettori, who returned to Newmarket Race Course, scene of the crash. "You know, everything was not quite right. Obviously, I am going to be very sore tomorrow, my muscles are going to ache."
The plane carrying Dettori and jockey Ray Cochrane crashed shortly after takeoff at Newmarket in May. The pilot was killed. Dettori broke an ankle and had head and facial injuries.
Dettori had intended to return at the Ebor meeting at York, which starts Aug. 22. A return next week could see him at the five-day "Glorious Goodwood" meeting. Cochrane returned to racing at Newmarket four days ago.
---
NUEREMBERG, Germany (AP) - Substitute Herve Bugnet's goal in the 80th minute lifted France to a 1-0 victory over Ukraine on Monday in the under-18 European soccer championship.
Three weeks after France won the European championship, the juniors followed up with the fourth under-18 title for a French team since 1983.
Germany defeated the Czech Republic 3-1 for third place Sunday.
---
LEEDS, England (AP) - A jury was discharged Monday after failing to reach a verdict in the trial of a policeman accused of manslaughter in the Hillsborough soccer disaster.
After 24 hours of deliberation at Leeds Crown Court, the jury was dismissed after it was unable to reach a verdict in the case of former chief superintendent David Duckenfield.
A court hearing will be held Wednesday when lawyers for the families who brought the private prosecution are expected to announce whether they will press for a retrial.
Duckenfield, 55, had pleaded not guilty to manslaughter in the deaths of two of the 96 fans who were crushed to death at the FA Cup semifinal between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough stadium in Sheffield on April 15, 1989.
Duckenfield's deputy, former superintendent Bernard Murray, was cleared of the same charges Friday.
During the six-week trial, the prosecution case centered on allegations the officers failed to close the tunnel leading to two pens where the victims died.
---
COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. (AP) - Eight female road cyclists will represent the United States in three road cycling events in Europe, beginning July 25.
2000 Olympic team nominees Mari Holden of Colorado Springs, Colo., Karen Kurreck of Los Altos, Calif., and Nicole Freedman of Stanford, Calif., lead the squad, which will be directed by three-time U.S. Olympic coach Henny Top.
Allison Dunlop of Colorado Springs, 1996 road Olympic cyclists and 2000 Olympic mountain bike competitor, will also race.
The squad is rounded out by Dede Demet-Barry, Boulder, Colo.; Jennifer Eyerman, Encinitas, Calif.; Lara Ruthven, Austin, Texas; and Kim Smith, Highlands Ranch, Colo.
The first of the three events is the International Thuringen-Rundfarht Tour in Germany on July 25-30, followed by Trophee International on Aug. 4 in France and the women's version of the Tour de France, The Grande Boucle Feminine Internationale, Aug. 6-20.
 Load-Date: July 25, 2000

 

End of Document
