

Names in the news
The Associated Press
July 4, 1998, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 618 words
Dateline: EDINBURGH, Scotland
Body




Along with most Britons, Queen Elizabeth II took exception to the English soccer team's disallowed goal during a gritty World Cup match against Argentina.
"We are not amused," the queen said, in a parody of the famous quote by her ancestor, Queen Victoria, according to a witness who was with her Tuesday night watching the match.
Argentina eliminated longtime rival England from the World Cup in a penalty shootout following a 2-2 tie in which Sol Campbell's goal was disallowed.
"She was excited at the standard of football on display, but she was disappointed when the goal was disallowed," said Eric Milligan, mayor of Edinburgh. Then she uttered the parody.
The queen held a dinner party at her Edinburgh residence, the Palace of Holyroodhouse, timed to end so that the royal party could watch the match, said palace superintendent David Anderson. The queen retired to her private apartments in the palace to watch the penalty shootout, which England lost 4-3. Her reaction to the final score wasn't known, Anderson said.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Two and a half years after producer Don Simpson died of a drug overdose, a judge has ordered two of his doctors to turn over medical records to authorities.
Simpson, who teamed with producer Jerry Bruckheimer for movies including "Top Gun" and "Beverly Hills Cop," died Jan. 19, 1996 from an overdose of 21 drugs. He was 52.
Superior Court Judge David A. Horowitz' order this week comes after Simpson's former psychiatrists, Nomi Fredrick and Robert Gerner, have refused for a year to produce the records, citing patient privacy rights.
The California Medical Board wants to review the doctors' records to determine whether they "can continue to practice medicine safely."
Fredrick's lawyer, David Rosner, said his client will follow the court's order. Gerner did not return calls seeking comment.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - On the July Fourth birth date of jazz trumpeter Louis Armstrong, his foundation is hitting a sweet note with a $ 1 million gift to bring children and jazz together.
The money will be used to introduce jazz to youngsters in grades four through eight, using compact discs, workbooks and other educational materials.
The jazz curriculum will be tested in five cities next year. In 2000, the curriculum will be published and made available to schools and the public.
The $ 1 million gift is "historic and monumental," said Wynton Marsalis, artistic director of Jazz at Lincoln Center, which will oversee the project.
Armstrong, who was born July 4, 1900, launched his education foundation in 1971, two years before his death.
The Independence Day gift carries on one of the trumpeter's favorite traditions, said Phoebe Jacobs, vice president of the Louis Armstrong Education Foundation.
"Throughout his lifetime, Louis gave gifts to people on his own birthday," she said.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - "Baywatch" casting directors have seen it all, auditioning about 10,000 wannabe television lifeguards.
Here's some inside advice: Implants are OK but an ounce of cellulite will get you axed, casting directors Susie Glicksman and Fern Orenstein say in the July 13 issue of People.
Acting skills are nice - though not at the expense of physical talent.
"Hey, if someone can put two sentences together and she looks right, I will get her an acting coach immediately," Glicksman said. "That has happened several times."
Glicksman said "Baywatch" passed on "Party of Five" actress Neve Campbell. Orenstein said she "didn't think she was right" for the show. "Plus she is pale. That wouldn't work."
Orenstein also tackled this question: How might "Titanic" star Leonardo DiCaprio fare? "He would probably have to go to the gym and get in shape. If he bulked up, he could do it," she said.
 Load-Date: July 4, 1998

 

End of Document
