

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
January 4, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 852 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: MORRISTOWN, N.J.
Body




Keith Jackson, who has covered 10 Olympic Games, and is the only man to win five straight Sportscaster of the Year awards, is the winner of the National Football Foundation and College Hall of Fame 1999 Gold Medal award.
The 70-year-old Jackson, who broadcast his final game Monday night at the Fiesta Bowl in Tempe, Ariz., will receive the award at the foundation's dinner in December.
In addition to broadcasting the Olympics and college football, Jackson has worked major league baseball, basketball, boxing and auto racing.
"What I'm most proud about is having been involved with college football every year since 1952, with the exception of one (1970, when he was assigned to ABC's NFL Monday Night Football)," Jackson said.
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Disillusioned with politics, Pele has rejected an appeal from President Fernando Henrique Cardoso to stay in the government.
"He invited me to a post, and I begged off," the retired soccer star said Monday.
After four years as Brazil's special minister of sports, Pele is unhappy with politicians.
"A lot of people go to Brasilia to take advantage of their post, forgetting the country," Pele said. "Some politicians disappointed me."
Pele's law requiring soccer clubs be run as businesses and abolishing the reserve clause binding players to teams has yet to take effect. Club directors say it will ruin them, but Pele sees it as their salvation.
"The goal of the law was to find a way for clubs to escape bankruptcy," he said. "With the club-as-business there will be more responsibility. Directors will have to show their accounts."
 
PONTIAC, Mich. (AP) - Matt Millen, who owns three Super Bowl rings from three different teams, is discussing the possibility of a front office position with the Detroit Lions.
Millen confirmed that he has spoken with Lions vice chairman William Clay Ford Jr. about a role with the team, the Detroit Free Press and The Detroit News reported Monday. But Millen said discussions have not progressed beyond speculation.
"All it's been is talk," Millen told the Free Press.
Lions vice president Bill Keenist also confirmed that Ford had a discussion with Millen regarding "a significant football role" that could entail "general manager-type" responsibilities.
Millen never has held a front office position with an NFL team. But he is respected in NFL circles for his football knowledge. Since his retirement as a player, Millen has been an NFL broadcaster for CBS.
The former linebacker's NFL resume includes Super Bowl championships with San Francisco, the Washington Redskins and the Oakland Raiders.
The Lions do not have an official general manager. Instead, personnel decisions are made by coach Bobby Ross and other front office officials.
 
GOLD COAST, Australia (AP) - Women's tennis has overtaken the men's game as an attraction, 1995 Australian Open champion Mary Pierce of France says.
One-sided matches in women's tennis now have virtually been erased and a many interesting personalities have enlivened its appeal, she said Monday.
"I love watching men's tennis but nowadays I think women's tennis is much more exciting because there's so much more depth," Pierce said.
"Our top 20 girls are great and can beat anyone on their day. There are no easy first rounds anymore. I think it's more exciting for the public."
Women's tennis often has been criticized for being too predictable and not worthy of equal prize money with the men in the Grand Slam events.
Pierce, the top seed in this week's Australian women's hardcourt tournament, said the equal prize money issue was one which continues to cause much discussion among women players.
 
PARIS (AP) - The accolades keep pouring in for French soccer star Zinedine Zidane. But even he blushed when a French newspaper voted him the world's best sportsman.
"I don't live on the same planet as Michael Jordan," Zidane said when shown a poll by sports daily L'Equipe with him out front and the Chicago Bulls star a distant second.
In 1998, Zidane scored twice to help France beat Brazil in the World Cup final, won the Italian championship with Juventus and led Juventusto to the final of the European Champions League.
In December, Zidane won France Football's prestigious Golden Ball award for soccer players.
"Frankly, it makes me laugh that I'm ahead of Michael Jordan. He's so exceptional," Zidane said. "There's no comparison to be made."
 
MONTREAL (AP) - All the elements are in place - including a new Canadian sponsor - for the new British American Racing team to win at least one Formula One event this year, driver Jacques Villeneuve predicted Monday.
"Everything is there - the budget, the engineers, the technology," Villeneuve said at a news conference to announce that Teleglobe Inc., a Montreal-based communications company, had signed a five-year sponsorship deal with the team.
"There's no reason why we shouldn't be competitive right away."
The heavily financed BAR team has promised a competitive team in its first season. But only one of its two cars was ready for the first Formula One winter practice sessions last month in Spain, and that one flew into pieces at top speed.
 Load-Date: January 4, 1999

 

End of Document
