

Names In The Game Casey, Paulo Guerra, Cathy Freeman
December 10, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 646 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




ROME (AP) - Hoping to quell the simmering Maradona-Pele feud, FIFA has decided to name not one, but two players of the century at its year-end gala Monday.
FIFA president Joseph Blatter said Sunday the world soccer governing board will hand out two trophies for the 20th century's top player - one for the man chosen by internet voting, the other picked by FIFA officials and through votes cast in its magazine.
Blatter said he has been assured that Maradona will be present Monday alongside the century's great players, after the Argentine had threatened not to come to the Rome ceremony.
Maradona - who reportedly won the internet balloting - had complained in recent days that FIFA was trying to lessen his status by changing the terms of the award.
"The people voted for me," he said on Argentine television late Thursday night, after reports that the award would be broken into three time periods. "Now they want me to share the prize with Pele. I'm not going to share the prize with anybody."
Earlier in the week, Pele told Brazil's Globo TV network that Maradona took a back seat to a handful of Brazilian greats.
"Socrates, Rivelino, Romario, Tostao..." the 60-year-old Pele said. "I think that if Maradona wants to speak with Pele, he has to speak to them first."
 
DUNEDIN, Fla. (AP) - The Toronto Blue Jays will name their new minor league spring training complex after 85-year-old scout Bobby Mattick, who has been with the team since 1976.
Construction on the new facility will start sometime after Jan. 1 when state funding becomes available. In September, the Blue Jays reached an agreement that will keep the team's spring training site in Dunedin for at least 15 more years starting in 2002.
 
ITOMAN, Japan (AP) - Shingo Katayama's victory in the season-ending Fancl Okinawa Open on Sunday gave him the 2000 money title on the Japan Professional Golf Tour.
The 27-year-old Katayama, winner of five tournaments this year, became the youngest earnings leader since Masashi "Jumbo" Ozaki won the title at age 26 in 1973, when the current tour system started in Japan.
Katayama entered the Fancl Okinawa second on the money list at $1.43 million, just behind Toru Taniguchi's $1.5 million. Sunday's win put Katayama at $1.6 million.
Katayama's final round of 1-over-par 73 left him at 11-under 277 that held off a charging Taniguchi by two strokes.
Taniguchi, winner of two titles this season, shot a 69 for a 279 total. He started the round six strokes off the pace.
 
DORTMUND, Germany (AP) - University of Portland striker Conor Casey has signed to play for Borussia Dortmund, one of the top Bundesliga teams.
Casey, 19, signed a five-year contract. He will first play for a Dortmund affiliate in a lower division.
 
MALMO, Sweden (AP) - Paulo Guerra of Portugal held off Ukraine's Sergiy Lebid by 10 seconds down the stretch to win the men's 9.7-kilometer race Sunday at the European Cross Country Championships.
It was the fourth title for Guerra, who was timed in 29 minutes, 29 seconds.
Driss El Himer of France was six seconds behind Lebid in third place, clocking 29.45. Fourth and fifth also went to French runners, Lyes Ramoul and Mustapha El Ahmadi, each clocked in 29.47.
Ireland's Keith Kelly, who won the NCAA championship a few weeks ago running for Providence, finished a distant 25th in 30.30. A total of 99 runners finished the men's race.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Cathy Freeman's emotional victory in the women's 400-meter run at the Sydney Olympics was chosen by Time magazine as the best of the year in sports.
Time saluted Freeman, an Aborigine, for winning "the most sociopolitically burdened footrace since Jesse Owens ran upside Hitler."
The magazine's choice for worst in sports was "Big Men Wielding Wood" - Marty McSorley's stick swinging against Donald Brashear in an NHL game and Roger Clemens throwing a broken bat toward Mike Piazza in Game 2 of the World Series.
 Load-Date: December 11, 2000

 

End of Document
