

Names In The Game
July 5, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 574 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: STOCKHOLM, Sweden
Body




Carl Lewis wants to be a part of two winning teams in Stockholm - the 400-meter relay at the DN Galan meet and the team promoting the Swedish capital's Olympics bid.
The latter shapes up as the tougher challenge.
The nine-time Olympic gold medal winner, in his last year of competition, told a news conference Saturday that he and his teammates not only are optimistic about winning Monday's relay, but they want to go beyond that.
"Our goal is to have at least the fastest time in the world this year," he said.
That would please Swedes who took Lewis to their hearts this spring when he became a spokesman for Stockholm's candidacy to be host for the 2004 Olympics.
Lewis said he supports Stockholm not only because of its facilities plan but because of the organizers' warmth.
"We can have the big cities and the huge new stadiums and all this stuff going on all we want to but if the people are not friendly … then it doesn't fly," he said.
Lewis said his "commitment is very strong" to promoting Stockholm's bid, but admitted that may not be enough.
"One thing I can do is communicate to people, but sometimes they may not listen," he said.
----
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Diego Maradona says he feels physically as well as he did in 1990, the year he led Argentina into its second consecutive World Cup final.
The soccer star just returned from two weeks of training with Canadian sprinter Ben Johnson in Toronto. Johnson was with him at the news conference.
Both have had trouble with substance abuse.
"I'm returning because I want to be champion with Boca Juniors again," said Maradona, who won his first league championship in 1980 with Argentina's most popular team.
Looking healthy and trim - he said he is down to 170 pounds after losing about 24 pounds in two months - Maradona showed off his stamina by running for several minutes on a treadmill
"I owe it to Ben (Johnson), the fastest man in the world," he said. "He gave me stamina, I've never been stronger in my life."
Johnson said, "Maradona is a fun guy to work with. Age is no problem. He believes in his heart and soul he can be the best in the world again, and he'll do it.
Johnson was stripped of his Olympic 100-meter gold medal in 1988 and suspended for two years for using steroids. The IAAF banned him for life after he failed another drug test in 1993. A court decision on whether he should be reinstated is expected by July 21.
Maradona, 36, was suspended by FIFA for 15 months in 1991 after testing positive for cocaine use following an Italian league game. He also was thrown out of the 1994 World Cup and suspended for using banned stimulants.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Vladimir Konstantinov, the Detroit Red Wings player hospitalized with severe injuries from a limousine crash, was honored in absentia Saturday.
Konstantinov was among five Russian players who helped the Red Wings win the Stanley Cup. The others were Slava Fetisov, Igor Larionov, Vyacheslav Kozlov and Sergei Fedorov. They made up the largest concentration of Russian players on any NHL team.
A reception for the five was held at the Russian World Gallery on Fifth Avenue. Gallery owner Felix Komarov, a self-described hockey nut, had made for each player a sterling silver regulation-sized hockey puck engraved with the player's name and the Stanley Cup logo.
A similar ceremony will be held in Moscow next month where some of the NHL's Russian players will present a silver and gold plaque to Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov.
 Load-Date: July 5, 1997

 

End of Document
