

Names In The Game Rusedski
The Associated Press
December 24, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 527 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




ARBROATH, Scotland (AP) - A woman who stripped to her underwear and raced onto the 18th green to kiss and hug Tiger Woods five months ago in the British Open has been fined $400.
Yvonne Robb, 21, was fined $160 for the dash July 15, and $240 more for assisting a man two weeks later who sold photographs of the her adventure to a British newspaper.
Robb, wearing only a black bra and matching panties, startled Woods as he was standing waiting to putt in the Open in Carnoustie.
"She was dared by one of her friends to run on to the 18th green," Billy Warden, representing Robb, told the Arbroath Sheriff Court. "The drink getting the better of her, she ran. I understand the player smiled and said, 'Thank you."'
Outside court, Robb, who works as a dancer in a club in Aberdeen, did not rule out another show next year during the British Open in St. Andrews.
"I'm going to have to surprise you," she said.
 
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - The U.S. national team figured out how to get a hold of Swedes Daniel and Henrik Sedin, ice hockey's most talented twins.
But there was no message, just a lot of clutching and grabbing.
"The Americans played very aggressive in their own end, with holding tactics, things that probably don't favor the Sedin twins," Swedish head coach Lars Molin said after a 2-2 tie Wednesday night in the final exhibition match before the start of the World Junior Championship.
The 18-year-old twins were picked second and third by the Vancouver Canucks in this year's NHL Entry Draft. But they remained at home and played there this season.
"It's an incredible feat to have two people of their age, who are playing against men, voted co-MVP's in the Swedish League," Vancouver general manager Brian Burke said.
 
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Ronaldo, the star forward of Brazil's national team and Internazionale of Milan, has married Milene Domingues in a civil ceremony at his mother's house.
The ceremony Friday was attended by about 50 family members and close friends of the couple.
Still limping from knee surgery earlier in the month, the 23-year-old player and his 20-year-old fiancee, who is five months pregnant, walked out to talk briefly with reporters.
"We'd like to wish you all a merry Christmas and a great New Year and we hope you'll all be as happy as we are," Ronaldo said.
Ronaldo, FIFA's player of the year in 1996 and 1997, has had knee problems since the 1998 World Cup.
"I don't know when I can take this happiness I'm feeling to the soccer field," he said. "I hope that this moment helps me to return to being the player that I was, and that next year I am once again the best player in the world."
The player's manager said that the couple would marry again in a religious ceremony in June.
 
LONDON (AP) - Canadian-born Briton Greg Rusedski ruled himself out of next month's Australian Open after having surgery on his right foot.
"The operation was straightforward and a complete success, and I hope to be playing again in early February," said Rusedski, No. 14 in the ATP Tour rankings.
The British are hoping Rusedski will be ready for his country's difficult first-round Davis Cup tie in February in Ostrava against the Czech Republic.
 Load-Date: December 25, 1999

 

End of Document
