

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
May 10, 2000, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 695 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK (AP) - Two famous Fraziers - the former heavyweight champion, Joe Frazier, and basketball Hall of Famer Walt Frazier - are among six men that will be honored by the National Father's Day Committee at its annual luncheon May 18.
Joe Frazier has 11 children, five boys and six girls ranging in age from 8 (Derrick) to 39 (Marvis). His daughter, Jacquelyn Frazier-Lyde, has embarked on a professional boxing career.
Walt Frazier has two children, a son, Walt III, and a daughter, Angel.
---
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - More than a year after he last played for Brazil's national team, star striker Romario is back.
The 34-year-old topped a list of 18 players selected by coach Wanderley Luxemburgo on Tuesday for two exhibition matches. Brazil will play Wales on May 23 and England in London on May 27.
The last time Romario played for the national squad was April 28, 1999, in an exhibition match against Barcelona that ended in a 2-2 draw.
In 1998, he was cut from Brazil's World Cup team on the eve of the tournament because of a leg injury.
"Romario was convoked because of his strong desire to return to the national team," Luxemburgo said. "And from the way he has been playing (in the Copa do Brasil and the Rio de Janeiro state championship), he definitely deserves a spot on the team."
Romario, who plays for Vasco, is the top scorer in the Rio de Janeiro championship with 15 goals.
---
WASHINGTON (AP) - President Clinton presented the U.S. Air Force Academy football team with its third straight Commander-in-Chief's Trophy on Tuesday, praising the squad for winning the award nine of the last 11 years.
The trophy, established in 1972, goes to the service academy with the best record in their annual head-to-head matchups. The Air Force Academy, in Colorado Springs, Colo., beat both Army and Navy last season and has won 28 games overall the past three years.
"I try to be completely neutral in these things, but the Army really was hurt that you beat them this year - with a better ground game," Clinton joked.
Air Force has captured 13 Commander-in-Chief's Trophies, 11 under current head coach Fisher DeBerry.
Thirty-six members of the Falcons football team, dressed in blue uniforms, were recognized during the ceremony in the Rose Garden of the White House. The team gave the president a blue Air Force hat and a football jersey emblazoned with his name and the number one.
---
DENTON, Texas (AP) - Erric Pegram's proudest day was always Sunday. Not this week.
Nine years after leaving school, Pegram, a former NFL running back, will receive his Bachelor of Arts Degree in Emergency Administration and Defensive Planning from the University of North Texas on Saturday.
"As much as I thought of it (coming back to finish college), my father would never let me forget it," Pegram, 31, said. "He was always on me about it. I was trying to get back into the NFL in 1998 and finally I gave it up. That's when I decided I need to finish up."
Pegram's professional football career helped him support his family and put two brothers through college, but he knows how important it is that his children see his accomplishments off the field, too.
"They need to see their father, the college graduate," Pegram said of his daughters - Alexandria, 9, and Taylor, 4. "I want my kids to see that I was successful as a player, successful in getting my college degree and successful in being a good father."
Pegram was the fourth-leading rusher in the NFL in 1993 with 1,185 yards for the Atlanta Falcons.
His role was reduced when new coach June Jones implemented a run-and-shoot offense the following season, so Pegram signed with Pittsburgh in 1995.
He ran for 813 yards, had five touchdowns and was the starting tailback when the Steelers lost to the Dallas Cowboys in the Super Bowl.
A calf injury in 1996 limited him to 509 yards rushing in 12 games. The next season he was traded to the San Diego Chargers, and his career was over by 1998.
"You need a job, but you cherish your children. That's what playing in the NFL did for me," Pegram said. "It wasn't about all the things that other people think it is about. It was about taking care of my family and providing for my children."
 Load-Date: May 11, 2000

 

End of Document
