

Negotiators talk through the night hoping to avert strike at Bridgestone/Firestone
The Associated Press
September 1, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 662 words
Byline: By KARIN MILLER, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NASHVILLE, Tenn.
Body




Union negotiators and Bridgestone/Firestone Co. executives talked through the night, took a break and then resumed discussions Friday morning as the clock ticked down toward a midnight strike deadline.
"They negotiated all night long, wound up at 6 a.m. and were going back in at 9," said Larry Odum, a regional coordinator for the United Steelworkers of America and former Bridgestone/Firestone factory worker.
Odum said negotiator Larry Pierce, vice president of the United Steelworkers Local 1055 in LaVergne, told him "there was some progress, but critical issues still remain."
A strike could disrupt production at nine of the company's 11 tire plants in the United States. The company - already dealing with major headaches involving a recall of millions of tires - has not discussed its contingency plans but said it expected a strike would have only minimal impact on production.
Bridgestone/Firestone officials declined Friday morning to discuss details of the talks, which are taking place at a St. Louis hotel. Spokeswoman Cynthia McCafferty said the company remains "hopeful we can still reach an agreement before the deadline."
Odum said the union is moving ahead with its plans to strike at nine Bridgestone/Firestone tire plants at 12:01 a.m. CDT Saturday if no deal is reached. Such a strike would affect about 8,000 workers.
On Thursday afternoon, some 200 union activists made their feelings clear to the company with a march and rally at the corporate headquarters in Nashville.
Eleven-year Bridgestone/Firestone employee Ivan Stithem wore a green "Camp Justice" T-shirt he had earned in 1996 for sleeping 20 nights at a union campsite set up to berate the tire maker for not rehiring co-workers after a yearlong strike.
A new "Camp Justice" sign was erected Thursday near the company's Nashville headquarters.
"It is going to be a war, a war to the end," Stithem said. Steelworkers also held a rally at the company's Decatur, Ill., plant.
Employees acknowledge that the timing of the possible strike couldn't be worse for Bridgestone/Firestone.
Bridgestone/Firestone has recalled 6.5 million tires. The federal government is investigating hundreds of accidents allegedly related to some Firestone tires that lose their tread and may have been responsible for 88 deaths and more than 250 injuries.
Authorities in Venezuela have recommended criminal prosecution of Ford Motor Co. and Bridgestone/Firestone.
"We would rather be the straw that broke the camel's back than work with the contract they've proposed. We can find other jobs," said Jeff Sherels, a worker from LaVergne, Tenn., who wore a sandwich board proclaiming, "Judgment Day is Here."
Besides LaVergne and Decatur, the union represents workers in factories at Akron, Ohio; Bloomington, Ill.; Des Moines, Iowa; Noblesville, Ind.; Oklahoma City, Okla.; Russellville, Ark.; and Warren County, Tenn. The company also had two nonunion plants, one in North Carolina and the other in South Carolina.
Bad feelings for the company have festered since the so-called "war of '94" when United Rubber Workers at seven plants went on strike.
The company continued production and hired about 2,000 replacement workers in January 1995. The United Steelworkers of America, which had merged with the Rubber Workers, ended the strike in May 1995.
It took more than a year for most union workers to be rehired. "Camp Justice" came down in December 1996.
But the history of hard feelings dates to long before Japan's Bridgestone Corp. bought Firestone in 1988.
"There was always a turbulent relationship between the union and Firestone, between the company's policies and the union's responses," said Harley Shaiken, a professor at the University of California at Berkeley, who specializes in labor issues.
On the Net:
United Steelworkers of America: http://www.uswa.org 
Bridgestone/Firestone: http://www.bridgestone-firestone.com 
Ford Motor Co.: http://www.ford.com 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: http://www.nhtsa.gov 
 Load-Date: September 2, 2000

 

End of Document
