

Never mind the content, what's it called?
The Associated Press
November 30, 1999, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 447 words
Byline: By NAOMI KOPPEL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEATTLE
Body




Perhaps it's not very important in the global scheme of things, but for the proud leaders of the Seattle business community, if there's going to be a new trade round, it is going to be a Seattle Round.
Never mind that most of the European countries are referring to the Millennium Round. Never mind that the Clinton administration would still like to believe there could be a Clinton Round - after all, there was a Kennedy Round. In Seattle, it's a matter of pride.
So delegates arriving to collect their identity badges were handed a box of Seattle food and drink and an umbrella - printed with the words "The Seattle Round."
William Stafford, of the Seattle organizing committee, said the umbrellas were paid for by the committee from donations made by local and national businesses.
"We figured it would be nice for it to be the Seattle Round, given all the trouble we've gone to," he said.
"Seattle is named after an Indian chief and it's sort of symbolic. It's a modern city but it's also the name of an indigenous person who cared about his community and the environment. We think they should at least think about it."
Seattle also has precedent on its side. The last round, the Uruguay Round, took its name from the fact it was launched in Punta del Este, Uruguay, in 1986.
---
It is probably true that at least half of all the souvenirs of Seattle contain reference to being "sleepless" in a bow to the popular movie, but for those looking for something more unusual, the gift shop at the convention center has a suggestion.
"My trade minister went to Seattle and all I got was this lousy T-shirt," reads the slogan on one piece of clothing.
And if that's not enough of an in-joke, the shop offers another version: "All I got was this lousy tariff deal."
---
While protesters marching down the street dressed as sea turtles or scaling giant construction cranes with their anti-WTO banners have been dominating the television coverage of the Seattle talks, the business community is trying to make its presence known in a more low-key manner.
They have scheduled dozens of briefings for the press to discuss such sizzling topics as the need to make sure that electronic commerce remains duty-free and the trade distorting impacts of agricultural subsidies.
The National Association of Manufacturers and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce has also bought time to run pro-trade ads on television during the meetings.
"The protesters who would have you believe it's just a bunch of big companies greedily pursuing profits are not right," said Jerry Jasinoswki, president of the National Association of Manufacturers. "Ninety percent of small manufacturing companies are engaged in international trade."
 Load-Date: December 1, 1999

 

End of Document
