

New Panamanian president turns the tables on the past
The Associated Press
May 3, 1999, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 276 words
Byline: MICHELLE RAY ORTIZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PANAMA CITY, Panama
Body




As a young woman, Mireya Moscoso married a defeated leader, a president toppled by the military and thrown into exile.
Thirty years later, she has turned the tables with an election victory over the son of the general who helped overthrow her husband.
The 52-year-old Moscoso became the first woman president of Panama in Sunday's election, riding on a platform as the candidate of change and concern for the poor.
Moscoso was born to a lower-class family in the provincial town of Pedasi, in the southern Azuero Peninsula. Her father, a school teacher and principal, died when she was 9 years old.
In 1969, at the age of 22, Moscoso married 67-year-old Arnulfo Arias, whose third term as Panamanian president had been ended the year before by a military coup involving Gen. Omar Torrijos.
During Panama's long military rule, Moscoso and Arias lived in exile in the United States, where she studied interior design. Arias died in Miami in 1988 and Moscoso returned to Panama.
After U.S. forces invaded in 1989 and deposed military strongman Manuel Noriega, Moscoso worked to carry on her late husband's political dreams as leader of the Arnulfista Party.
She lost her 1994 run for the presidency to outgoing President Ernesto Perez Balladares - 28 percent to 33 percent.
On Sunday she beat Torrijos' son, Martin, to claim the presidency.
Calling on her early roots, Moscoso had pledged to improve opportunities for the poor and to back off the privatization movement pushed by outgoing President Ernesto Perez Balladares.
Her coffee-exporting company, Arkapal, employs some 300 people.
She is the mother of a 7-year-old adopted son. Her second marriage ended in divorce.
 Load-Date: May 3, 1999

 

End of Document
