

New York a hard come-down from the enviro-enthusiasm of Rio
June 25, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 684 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The only people having a hot time Wednesday at the U.N. Earth Summit were the ice sculpture "humans" melting from "global warming." Otherwise, hundreds of environmentalists who descended on New York sounded grim and frustrated about the dying "spirit of Rio."
Not even the natural-products salesman was enjoying himself.
"Business is slow," Joel Cohen lamented in the shade of his booth offering herbal drinks and other "green" items. "All the police and barricades around here are intimidating people."
"Here" was a city playground, near U.N. headquarters, where activist groups raised two dozen lonely white tents and optimistically dubbed them the "Global Gathering."
But the patch of hot, unpopulated pavement on Manhattan's East Side was a long way from the beaches, samba music and global enthusiasm that enveloped more than 10,000 "NGOs" - members of non-governmental organizations - who flocked to Rio de Janeiro for the original Earth Summit in 1992.
In Brazil five years ago, world leaders declared they would change their ways and pursue "sustainable development" - helping poor nations develop into richer ones, while protecting the global environment.
This week's conference, attracting about 1,000 activists along with hundreds of government envoys, is reviewing how well everyone has done since Rio.
The bottom line is bleak. "We are deeply concerned that the overall trends … are worse today than they were in 1992," says the political statement the representatives of 170 nations will adopt Friday.
Final summit documents will address a long list of environmental and development ills - the swift loss of forest, the scarcity of fresh water in the Third World, the growing numbers of people in absolute poverty. But they will offer few concrete decisions on how to move forward.
Governments are more worried, five years after Rio, about whose ox will be gored - or, more precisely, whose coal mines would be closed, whose timber companies reined in, whose budgets tapped for more foreign aid if the Rio principles are pursued.
"They've moved away from recognizing the global issue to countries fighting their own corner, not the big picture," said Stephen Howard of the Worldwide Fund for Nature.
The Third World Network's Martin Khor put it simply, "Five years later, we are extremely disappointed."
One of their biggest disappointments is on global warming.
Governments, negotiating under a December deadline, are trying to produce a treaty requiring cutbacks in emissions of carbon dioxide and other "greenhouse gases" that trap the Earth's heat.
The U.S. government, under pressure from American industry, has balked thus far at committing to a timetable of specific reductions. And environmentalists' hopes were fading that President Clinton, in his summit speech Thursday, will take a stand.
"What I expect to see is very little … unless a miracle happens," said Barbara Dudley, executive director of Greenpeace USA.
To dramatize their concerns over global warming, the Friends of the Earth organization erected 15 ice sculptures in a park across from the United Nations, to quickly melt in Wednesday's 90-degree-plus New York heat.
The elegantly carved blocks of ice, in human shapes, encased roses, peppers, apples and other natural forms.
"This is a symbol of just how fast climate change is catching up with us," John Gummer, Britain's former environment minister, said of fast-disappearing display.
New York City's veteran parks commissioner, Henry Stern, was also there and decided to give a pep talk to the environmentalist twenty-somethings gathered in his green domain.
"NGOs are like the canaries in the coal mine," he told them. "It's people like you who are sensitive to these things, who carry the message, and who I hope will have an influence on those in the great towers."
Five years may simply be too soon to tell, said one American "green" campaigner.
"NGOs say the Rio spirit has disappeared," said Michael McCoy, co-chairman of the summit's NGO steering committee. "But I think in the long term sustainability is a 50-year effort. Look at it that way and maybe we haven't done so bad."
 Load-Date: June 25, 1997

 

End of Document
