

Nicaraguans Prepare for Referendum on the Past
October 17, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 600 words
Byline: By JOSEPH B. FRAZIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MASAYA, Nicaragua
Body




In a stifling market, Amadea Ibarra sits amid her bags of rice and red beans and weighs her options. She says she sees few, despite major differences among candidates in Sunday's presidential election.
"No government has ever helped me," she says through a half-smile. "We were born poor and we'll die poor no matter who wins."
Poor people like Ibarra are a majority in Nicaragua and the target of most of the campaign promises: jobs for the 60 percent who are unemployed, a better life for the 70 percent living in poverty.
Nicaraguans have heard the promises before, during a decade of loosely organized Marxism and the six years of a sometimes-chaotic democracy that followed it. Sunday's vote is a referendum on the two periods.
The race is close between the two front-runners: Nicaragua's former leftist ruler Daniel Ortega and former Managua Mayor Arnoldo Aleman, a popular conservative leading the Liberal Alliance.
Ortega, 50, of the Sandinista National Liberation Front, ran Nicaragua for a decade before being upset in 1990 elections. His successor, Violeta Chamorro, is not running and there is no "official party."
A total of 23 candidates are running for the presidency and roughly 32,000 people representing 24 parties and alliances are campaigning for 2,000 posts across the country.
Sitting in this market 20 miles southeast of Managua, the 33-year-old Ibarra says she will vote for Ortega as she did in 1990 "because he seems more like us."
But, Ibarra says, she holds little hope for a better life anytime soon. She recalls the great expectations that came in 1979 when the Sandinista revolution threw out the late Gen. Anastasio Somoza - and the ensuing disappointment.
The four decades of Somoza dictatorship were followed by rationing, suppression and censorship under Sandinista rule.
The government confiscated homes, businesses and tens of thousands of acres of land. It censored or closed newspapers and radio stations.
The Sandinistas feuded with conservative church leaders. Priests were tossed out the doors of their churches and, in one case, paraded naked through the streets.
By 1990's elections, 14 opposition parties ranging from communists to rightists had banded together under Chamorro - and won. For the first time, Nicaragua saw one administration peacefully transfer power to another.
But the one position the parties agreed upon, their dislike of the Sandinistas, was not enough: Once in power, the alliance dissolved.
Today, the poor are about as poor as they were a decade ago and most are often hungry. Nicaragua, with a per capita income of about $ 500 a year, is the second-poorest country in the hemisphere after Haiti.
Ortega represents himself as the savior of the poor. He has espoused a market-based economy, respect for the Catholic Church and non-confrontational relations with the United States, which bankrolled the Contra rebels who fought the Sandinistas.
Conservative opponents scoff, recalling similar promises when the Sandinistas were were fighting for power in 1979.
Aleman, 49, has devoted much of the campaign to whipping up fears about a Sandinista return, although he has made a conciliatory offer to include Sandinistas in his government.
The Sandinistas are trying to tie Aleman's Liberal Alliance with the old Somoza dynasty and its Liberal Party.
Two major polls show Aleman with a slight lead among voters, a third has Ortega ahead. The race apparently will be decided by the 16 percent of the country's 2.4 million eligible voters who have yet to pick a favorite.
If no candidate gets 45 percent of the vote, the top two will face a runoff in November.
 Load-Date: October 17, 1996

 

End of Document
