

Nine injured in Chile as candidates campaign down to the wire
The Associated Press
January 14, 2000, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 506 words
Byline: By EDUARDO GALLARDO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANTIAGO, Chile
Body




Running neck and neck, Chile's two presidential candidates campaigned up to the last legal minute as election-related clashes left at least nine people injured.
Right-wing Joaquin Lavin and socialist Ricardo Lagos made their final appeals today, visiting provincial areas where they have fared poorly in the past and calling upon their followers to remain calm and avoid violence ahead of Sunday's runoff vote.
"Let's not spoil a beautiful campaign with stupid things," Lavin said in the northern city of Antofagasta.
But police reported nine people wounded, two of them seriously, in a clash among campaign workers in the Santiago Maipu neighborhood of Santiago. Nine others were detained.
Police said both groups blamed each other for the violence.
"I call you to remain calm, to await the vote in peace and tranquility," said Lagos in Valdivia, in southern Chile.
The candidates seemed dedicated to attracting voters to a race that appears to remain very tight by promising more jobs, less crime and improved health services.
The final hours of the campaign were shadowed by Gen. Augusto Pinochet and Britain's announcement Tuesday that doctors have found the 84-year-old former Chilean dictator too ill to stand trial for human rights abuses allegedly committed during his regime. Spain has been trying to extradite him on those charges.
The announcement that Pinochet may be sent back to Chile soon caused a political commotion but the candidates and analysts said the impact on the vote would be minimal, if any. Lavin and Lagos supported an eventual trial of Pinochet in Chile, which human rights groups are demanding.
Average citizens didn't seem distracted.
"Pinochet is not a candidate," said Luis Zuniga, who sells fruits at a stand in downtown Santiago. "Things are different now."
Lagos spent his final campaign day in Chile's southern farming belt, while Lavin was in the mining region in the north.
In the first vote in December, the two emerged from the pack in a virtual draw: Lagos with 47.9 of the vote to Lavin's 47.5 percent. The winner of the run-off will succeed Eduardo Frei, a Christian Democrat constitutionally barred from re-election.
Lavin is the strongest right-wing candidate in decades and the first one with a real chance of winning the presidency. Lagos would be the first leftist president since Salvador Allende, the Marxist toppled by Pinochet in a bloody 1973 coup.
"Health will no longer depend on the wallets of parents," Lagos said. "We will make the economy grow by six percent this year, creating more jobs."
"They have ruled for ten years, two terms," Lavin said, referring to the coalition supporting Lagos. "Give me the chance now."
The race appears so close that Mori, the polling company that took the only nationwide opinion poll, would not name winner. It said the sample "showed a tie," with Lagos ahead by less than one percent point.
That difference is statistically irrelevant in a sample with a margin or error of 3 percent, said Mori director Marta Lagos, who is not related to the socialist candidate.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY107-108
 Load-Date: January 15, 2000

 

End of Document
