

On the Argentine Pampas: farmers troubled by slack crop prices, high taxes
The Associated Press
August 10, 1999, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 704 words
Byline: KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOBOS, Argentina
Body




Gazing out over rolling pastureland, beyond stout cattle uprooting and chomping the grass, rancher Edmundo Moore is unnerved by what he's seeing in the Argentine countryside.
"More and more I see land up for rent, plots changing hands," he lamented, pausing to scrape the mud from his leather boots. "Fields are landing in hands of people who don't know anything about farming."
Moore, 71, himself is struggling to find buyers for the cattle, corn, sunflowers and wheat he produces on his 1,400-acre spread called "El Pinos," Spanish for "The Pines."
With global commodity prices slumping to their lowest in years, farmers across Argentina - like their counterparts in the United States - are feeling the pinch.
Nestled down a red dirt road 60 miles northeast of Buenos Aires, "El Pinos" has been in Moore's family for generations. His ancestors arrived from Ireland by way of the United States in 1827 - part of a wave of European immigrants drawn to Argentina's abundant countryside.
"This is the worst I've seen it," he said.
Argentine farmers say their condition is bleak. Already saddled with some $ 7 billion in debt, the value of their crops has dropped some 50 percent in the past three years, they say. Argentina is among the world's top producers of soybeans, wheat, cotton, and corn.
Moore has been working feverishly to restructure his own debt, a figure he was reluctant to give, and making arrangements with creditors.
"I don't recall a more trying time for Argentine farmers" said Horacio Delguy, president of the farm association Frente Agropecuario Nacional. "Our backs are really up against the wall."
Making matters worse, demand for Argentine products has slackened after the country's biggest customer, Brazil, devalued its currency in January. The devaluation made Argentine products more expensive in Brazil.
Flooding earlier this year also caused hundreds of millions of dollars in damage across this heartland.
Frustrated, Argentine farmers have staged a series of protests, urging the government to provide relief. Thousands of striking farm workers descended on Buenos Aires late last month, calling on President Carlos Menem to lower taxes and help farmers fight mounting debts.
Edmundo and his 16-year-old grandson, Augustin, were among the nearly 10,000 farmers who converged on the capital for the biggest farm protest in years.
"We were in the front row," boasted the elder Moore.
Farm groups say expenses are rising: Highway tolls and gas prices - on average 40 percent higher than in the United States - are among the chief culprits. The farmers also want help with debt refinancing.
"The taxes are just killing me," said Moore. "No matter how I try to cut costs, the government keeps digging into my pocket."
The result: the loss of nearly 30 percent of producers across Argentina's famed Pampas, farm groups say. Especially hard hit are farmers who spent tens of thousands of dollars on new tractors and fertilizers, mostly on credit, to modernize their operations.
In recent weeks, the Menem government has announced a number of measures aimed at trimming farmer expenses, but say they, too, are restricted by the recession. Farmer groups argue the proposed help isn't enough.
Speaking Sunday at the Buenos Aires fairgrounds of "La Rural," the country's biggest farm and livestock show of the year, Menem told farmers that more help was on the way.
The president promised to ease taxes on highway tolls and drop a planned diesel fuel tax. He did not offer specifics, though, and other proposals have died in Congress.
"Here in Lobos, people want to farm. But what are these people going to do if more farms keep closing? Move to the city? We're talking about people who've been farmers all their lives," Moore said.
He is one of them.
Each day, he awakes before sunrise at his one-story farm house to tend to his 1,200 head of cattle. He sips a mug of Argentine mate, the bitter local tea, as he warms to the chores of the day. Then he's off to rope cattle, mend fences or work the fields. His grandson joins him some days.
Moore said he had once hoped Augustin would follow in his footsteps, but the farm crisis has made him reconsider. "I'm not sure there's much of a future for the small farmer here," he sighed.
 Load-Date: August 11, 1999

 

End of Document
