

Opponents want to see the arrest of Peru spy chief
The Associated Press
September 22, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 663 words
Byline: By RICK VECCHIO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




President Alberto Fujimori's government opened talks Friday on arranging new elections, but the opposition demanded he first arrest his powerful spy chief if the negotiations are to go forward.
Still, Vladimiro Montesinos, once Fujimori's must trusted aide but ousted after a video apparently showed him bribing a politician, may wield enough power within the courts and the military to fight on and avoid prosecution.
The videotape prompted Fujimori's stunning announcement on Saturday that he would deactivate Montesinos' intelligence service and call new elections in which he would not be a candidate.
Opposition forces went back to the negotiating table with Fujimori's government Friday in talks mediated by the Organization of American States to discuss the transition to early elections. The talks, held in a luxury hotel in Lima, are part of an internationally backed effort to strengthen Peru's democracy after Fujimori's much criticized re-election in May.
But opposition leaders warned that the dialogue on the transition could be short if Fujimori's representatives refused to first take up the issue of Montesinos. They demanded official confirmation of the spy chief's ouster and his prosecution by an independent judiciary as conditions for continuing the dialogue.
"This must inevitably begin with a resolution separating Montesinos from any public function," said Alejandro Toledo, the opposition leader who boycotted a May presidential runoff with Fujimori.
Toledo alleged at the time that election authorities were under the sway of Fujimori and his spy chief and planned to rig the ballot.
Peru's military, widely viewed to be allied with Montesinos, on Thursday issued a communique backing Fujimori's decision to hold new elections and disassemble the intelligence agency. That came after days of ominous silence, calming fears that Montesinos was organizing a coup.
In the face of opposition demands this week for Montesinos' immediate arrest, Fujimori has insisted that Montesinos be afforded due process of law.
Government critics and analysts said Montesinos would wage his counteroffensive through the courts.
Martin Belaunde, president of the Lima Bar Association, said Peru's provisional Supreme Court Judge Alejandro Rodriguez Medrano and Attorney General Blanca Nelida Colan "are open instruments of Montesinos, there to follow orders."
Colan, he noted, this week pushed aside a permanent prosecutor initially appointed to investigate Montesinos, reportedly because she favored seeking the 54-year-old spy chief's arrest.
Colan replaced the permanent prosecutor with a provisional one viewed as more pliant.
The critics say that in the last eight years Colan has shelved investigations of Montesinos' reportedly vast personal wealth and ignored accusations that he took payoffs from a convicted drug dealer.
Congresswoman Miriam Schenone, a pro-government legislator appointed to help investigate the videotape purportedly showing the bribing, said this week that the alleged corruption "was not a flagrant crime."
Citing unnamed judicial sources, Peru's leading newspaper El Comercio reported Friday that Judge Rodriguez Medrano had told a meeting of provisional justices not to panic because Montesinos still had the support of the military despite Fujimori's announcement of his ouster.
During the meeting, he allegedly said they should not lose control of politically motivated court cases.
Rodriguez Medrano and Colan did not return The Associated Press' phone calls seeking comment.
Many doubt Peru's judiciary is up to the task of judging Montesinos.
"There could never be a free trial," said constitutional expert Javier Valle Riestra, a former prime minister.
He said Montesinos should face three to six years in prison for corruption, but predicted the chances of that happening are a "utopian" fantasy.
Of the country's 1,686 civilian judges, only 20 to 30 percent have permanent appointments, according to the U.S. State Department's 1999 Human Rights report.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos LIM101
 Load-Date: September 23, 2000

 

End of Document
