

Orioles are the team of the moment in Cuba
The Associated Press
January 5, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 623 words
Byline: JOHN RICE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HAVANA
Body




Cubans welcome a plan that could lead to more U.S. money, mail and baseball heading their way.
Especially the baseball.
The possibility of a visit by the Baltimore Orioles would be the first trip by a major league team to this baseball-mad island in decades.
"How could I not go? I'll be one of the first ones in the park," said Roman Garcia, wearing a New York Yankees cap at a baseball discussion that takes place daily in Havana's Central Park.
The proposal announced by President Clinton on Tuesday would allow more Americans to send money to Cubans, offer direct mail service, expand direct charter flights and possibly let the Orioles play in Cuba.
Cuba's state-run news media mentioned the news only briefly at midday Tuesday. Foreign Ministry spokesman Alejandro Gonzalez said he would comment only after the proposal had been analyzed.
The baseball exchange is aimed at easing the plight of Cubans while maintaining sanctions against the Castro government. The measures follow an initiative by Pope John Paul II, who visited Cuba a year ago this week.
The Clinton administration said the games will be allowed only if profits go to humanitarian assistance in Cuba and not to Fidel Castro's government.
The Orioles are expected to send a group to Cuba as early as this week to negotiate arrangements for the exhibition games, with one in Baltimore and one in Cuba.
"Baseball is a wonderful medium in bringing people together. This has been demonstrated time and again in a variety of contexts. In that spirit, the Orioles welcome the opportunity to play a part in the efforts to improve relations between the two peoples," Orioles owner Peter Angelos said.
Once a fount of major league baseball talent, Cuba has been largely isolated from U.S. professional baseball since shortly after Fidel Castro's 1959 revolution. The U.S. government has blocked major league visits to Cuba.
The last major league team to visit Cuba was the Brooklyn Dodgers, who trained in Havana in 1947. In 1960, an exhibition game between the Orioles and Cincinnati Reds was canceled. In 1975-78, a number of major league teams were invited to Cuba but were barred from playing there by the commissioner's office.
A few defectors - most recently Orlando Hernandez of the Yankees - have made their way to the major leagues, and Cubans have played against Latin American major leaguers in games against Dominican and other winter league teams.
"Cuba is a country that has ballplayers growing like grass," said Garcia, 47, an unemployed driver and former amateur baseball player.
On Tuesday, a dozen men arguing baseball said they kept up with the major leagues.
"If it's a series of seven games, I would go for the Orioles," said Heriberto Portillo, a bookseller. "If it's one game, anybody could win."
Garcia noted that Cuba's team would be in peak form for the proposed March or April meeting because its baseball season ends in late March, while the U.S. team would be in spring training.
He also said technical issues would have to be settled: Cuba, for example, uses metal bats; the U.S. players use wood.
Portillo, wearing a worn windbreaker against an unusual chill, said allowing nonrelatives to send money to Cubans is "going to benefit life here a lot" because dollars sent to the island circulate through the economy.
The Clinton administration, which courted Cuban-American strongholds in Florida, has refused to lift the economic embargo imposed by the United States after Castro took power in 1959. But the administration has explored ways to boost contacts with Cubans that don't benefit the government.
The Orioles have tried to play exhibition games in Cuba since at least 1996, but the Treasury Department has rejected the requests as out of line with trade policy.
 Load-Date: January 6, 1999

 

End of Document
