

Osama bin Laden, godfather of terrorism, threatens the U.S.
May 26, 1997, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 736 words
Byline: By RICHARD COLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Hidden somewhere among the mountains of Afghanistan, a wealthy and elusive Islamic extremist is plotting the end of the last great superpower, the United States.
In his own eyes and those of many militants, Osama bin Laden and his loyal army of mujahadeen already have laid low the other infidel superpower, destroying the Soviet Union in a debilitating decade-long war in Afghanistan.
Bin Laden has now sworn to end U.S. influence in his native Saudi Arabia and eventually the Islamic world.
He has the money to do it. Security analyst Arnaud de Borchgrave, a one-time acquaintance of bin Laden's, estimates his fortune at more than $ 200 million - and warns he has the ability to tap the riches of other sympathizers, as well.
He has already left a trail of bombs and blood, a trail that may lead to the World Trade Center blast and perhaps deadly bombings that have killed 24 U.S. servicemen in Saudi Arabia since 1995.
Ominously, experts say he has joined hands with fellow terrorists, including Hezbollah and its patron, Iran's militant Islamic government.
"I think you have an 'atomic bomb' brewing, between bin Laden, Hezbollah and the Iranians," says Kenneth Katzman, Congress's terrorism analyst. "If these two huge forces are married, either could set off the spark. Sooner or later you are going to see more from these people."
What the world already has seen is chilling enough.
The State Department calls bin Laden, believed to be 44, "one of the most significant financial sponsors of Islamic extremist activities in the world today."
When he speaks, U.S. authorities listen.
In February, a renewed bin Laden threat of a "holy war" in Saudi Arabia against U.S. soldiers and civilians led the State Department to issue an urgent warning.
Last year, bin Laden warned of "preparations for major operations" if Americans don't leave Saudi Arabia. He was interviewed in Jalalabad, Afghanistan, by the Arabic newspaper, Al Quds of London.
"We had thought that the Riyadh, and al-Khobar blasts were a sufficient signal to sensible U.S. decision-makers to avert a real battle between the Islamic nation and U.S. forces, but it seems that they did not understand the signal," bin Laden said.
Bin Laden made his militant contacts during the Afghan war. He then used them to set up terrorist training camps in the Sudan and to finance attacks against the moderate governments of Egypt, Algeria, Yemen and his native Saudi Arabia, which exiled him in 1994.
Hezbollah, in turn, has its own history of terror toward the United States and its allies, including the 1983 attack on the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut that killed 241 Americans, and more recently the 1994 bombing of a Jewish cultural center in Argentina, which killed 95.
The evidence grows that bin Laden already has struck at the United States, perhaps with Hezbollah's help.
Although his role in last year's attack on Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia that killed 19 U.S. airmen is unclear, the evidence is strong his followers planted the November 1995 bomb that killed five American servicemen and two Indians in Riyadh.
The men arrested and executed for the crime said they acted after receiving faxes from an organization run by bin Laden.
And evidence mounts that bin Laden had close connections to the World Trade Center bombers who killed six and injured more than 1,000 in their February 1993 strike in the heart of the United States.
The mysterious bomb builder, Ramzi Yousef, used the Philippines as his headquarters while mapping out his U.S. attacks. The Philippine government says Yousef's group in that country received money from bin Laden's brother-in-law, Mohammed Jamal Khalifa.
"Bin Laden's activities were run through Islamic charities that we think extended as far as the Philippines - and that is where Yousef planned out his attacks on U.S. planes," a top U.S. State Department official pointedly told The Associated Press.
And when Yousef finally was captured in Pakistan, he was living in a guesthouse set up for Afghan war veterans by none other than bin Laden.
For the moment, bin Laden is being held in check. The new Islamic Taliban government that controls much of Afghanistan, and is fighting for international legitimacy, has told him to cease attacks against other nations.
But they also have said they will not extradite their honored guest to Saudi Arabia or the United States.
So bin Laden, his money and his convictions intact, bides his time.
 Load-Date: May 26, 1997

 

End of Document
