

Outside: Long waits for the buses, inside wine and shrimp
The Associated Press
April 16, 2000, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; Washington Dateline
Length: 624 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The early birds got to work on time at the spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund, despite the best efforts of protesters.
IMF officials said the work of their top policy-making body went as scheduled Sunday as thousands demonstrated in the city to disrupt the meetings.
That was technically correct. The meetings began at 8:30 a.m., in private as usual. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan was on time, as was British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown. The Japanese delegation left its hotel at 4:30 a.m. to ensure a prompt arrival.
Not all their colleagues were successful. Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers was late, not because his motorcade had trouble getting through the demonstrators but because he was appearing on Sunday television talk shows. He was trying to reassure Americans that despite the loss of $2 trillion in stock market wealth last week, the record-breaking U.S. economic expansion is not threatened.
"Our fundamentals are strong," Summers said.
So were his travel arrangements, with his Secret Service motorcade zipping him the three blocks from Treasury to IMF headquarters on a section of Pennsylvania Avenue that was barricaded and patrolled by hundreds of police.
Other finance ministers were not so lucky, even though the IMF began running buses from downtown hotels and other designated pickup points at 5 a.m. and had told the 750 delegates and staff that it was best to arrive early.
French Finance Minister Laurent Fabius, preferring his official limousine to an IMF bus, got turned back by the demonstrators at 8 a.m. and spent the next six hours waiting at the Watergate Hotel for transport with the finance ministers of Portugal, Brazil and Thailand.
Fabius said he believed the thousands of demonstrators who showed up in Washington promising to shut down the IMF and the World Bank had an "enormous misunderstanding" about the poverty-reduction missions of the two institutions, although they do "have some improvements" that could be made.
Actually, reform of IMF and World Bank procedures were high on the agenda for the two days of discussions. The Clinton administration is pushing packages to make the two institutions less secretive and more accountable for their missions.
The demonstrators have criticized the administration's reform package for doing too little to reorient institutions which they contend have done too little to alleviate crushing poverty around the globe.
But Michael Moore, head of the World Trade Organization, said, "Blaming the World Bank for poverty is a bit like blaming the Red Cross for starting World Wars I and II."
Moore, who saw his efforts to launch global trade negotiations in Seattle last December dissolve in a cloud of tear gas, spoke to reporters during a lunch break in the discussions. Behind him, in a sun-dappled multistory atrium with marble floors, delegates munched on choice shrimp and chicken entrees washed down with their choice of red or white wine, all served by tuxedo-clad waiters.
It is that kind of good living and the tax-free salaries earned by the IMF and World Bank top staffers that has drawn the ire of protesters. They say that such benefits are unseemly with hundreds of millions of people living on less than $1 a day.
German Finance Minister Hans Eichel, one of those who made it to the meetings on time, said the demonstrators should focus their efforts on reforming the lending agencies rather than trying to shut them down.
"The protesters are OK if they look forward and not backward, but not if they want to try and destroy the IMF and the World Bank," Eichel said, speaking in German.
EDITOR'S NOTE - Associated Press reporters Traci Carl and Harry Dunphy and AP photographer Scott Applewhite contributed to this story.
 Load-Date: April 17, 2000

 

End of Document
