

PANAMA NOTEBOOK: First lady misses out on the 'wheels-up' party
October 11, 1997, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 545 words
Byline: By NANCY BENAC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PANAMA CITY, Panama
Body




Hillary Rodham Clinton has caught on to a state secret that she is not happy about: She has figured out that the best party associated with her foreign trips usually happens after she has gone.
Meeting with U.S. Embassy personnel this week during her three-day visit to Panama, the first lady said she has learned that after a U.S. dignitary passes through a foreign country, there usually is a "wheels-up" party to celebrate their departure.
The visits require a lot of work by the embassy staff, which breathes "a collective sigh of relief" when the dignitary departs, she said.
"You'll probably be very happy to see me and my party leave," she said.
Not that she is offended, mind you.
"I just regret that I never get to stay for the party," she said.
 
 The first lady generally avoids public criticism of her host countries when she travels, but she did make a point of privately raising two concerns with Panamanian officials during her three-day visit this week.
Administration officials said the first lady renewed U.S. objections to the Panamanian government's efforts to deport Gustavo Gorriti, a prominent journalist who reported on corruption in the campaign and the administration of President Perez Balladares and the Democratic Revolutionary Party.
She also urged the Panamanians to ensure a "free and fair trial" for a man accused of shooting to death a U.S. serviceman in 1992. The trial began Tuesday.
 
 Mrs. Clinton and her counterpart in Panama, Dora Boyd de Perez, teamed up on Friday for a visit to a rural village where women have started a small nursery.
The women proudly told the first ladies that they are able to supplement their family income by selling plants for a reforestation project in the Panama Canal's watershed.
The first ladies nodded appreciatively, then quizzed their hosts about the ownership of the nursery land, which is leased. What does it matter?
"Mrs. Perez de Balladares and I are both lawyers," Mrs. Clinton explained. "We want to make sure you have the land."
 
 The nursery project in tiny Chica has a lofty name and purpose, even if its scope is limited.
The Association for Gender, Nature and Progress - with membership of 11 women and one man - produces 40,000 plants each year on a five-acre plot and brings in $ 3,200 a year in profits.
Faustina Nunez told the first ladies that the men of her village thought the women were silly to try to start a nursery.
"They said that our nursery was going to fail, that this was something that men did, not women," she said. "We were a society of strong-willed women and we were not going to step back."
The first lady and local villagers gave an appreciative laugh when Mrs. Nunez explained that now the men pitch in with cooking and other chores when the women work late at the nursery.
 
 Mrs. Clinton arrived back in Washington on Friday night just in time to celebrate her 22nd wedding anniversary today and then repack her bags.
The first lady leaves Sunday with President Clinton for an eight-day visit to Argentina, Brazil and Venezuela. She said she would use the trip to reprise the same message she delivered during a Panama City conference of first ladies from across the hemisphere: that the democracies of the Americas need to do more to expand women's political and economic rights.
 Load-Date: October 11, 1997

 

End of Document
