

Panama weighs future of its president, the canal
The Associated Press
August 28, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 541 words
Byline: By MICHELLE RAY ORTIZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PANAMA CITY
Body




With memories of dictatorship still fresh, Panamanians decide this weekend whether to change the constitution to give their president a shot at re-election.
Supporters argue that another term for President Ernesto Perez Balladares would assure crucial stability during one of the most important events in Panama's history: the Dec. 31, 1999, handover of the Panama Canal and U.S. military land.
Critics say it would undermine democracy in a region where many countries banned re-election to prevent a repeat a pattern of despotic rule.
Panama's constitution restricts the president to one five-year term, and re-election is only possible if a leader sits out two terms.
The next president will be elected in May and take office in September, three months before the U.S. government turns over the canal and U.S. military bases.
"The word 'stability' scares me," says Roberto Eisenmann, a prominent Panamanian businessman and government critic. "It's the good old word that was used to defend dictatorship. … And there's nothing more unstable than perpetual governments."
Nine years ago, U.S. forces invaded Panama to oust Gen. Manuel Noriega, ending 21 years of military rule. Guillermo Endara, presumed winner of the May 1989 elections annulled by Noriega, took office. Five years later, he was replaced by Perez Balladares, a sharp-dressed millionaire and free-market economist who was active in Noriega's Democratic Revolutionary Party.
Perez Balladares, nicknamed "Bull" for his burly frame, opened Panama's markets, privatized the telephone system and other industries and modernized highways, schools and hospitals.
"Why shouldn't the people have the right to decide whether we want him or not for five more years?" says Mario Rognoni, a businessman and former PRD legislator.
A $ 5 million donation by the business community helped fund the pro-Perez Balladares campaign, and U.S. Democratic Party adviser James Carville was hired to help.
Rognoni said opposition parties object to re-election because they can't take credit for the president's success. "To them, a threat to democracy is anything that doesn't put them in power," he said.
Opponents argue it's time for the Bull to leave the ring.
More than 40 percent of Panama's 2.6 million people live below the poverty level of $ 228 a month for a family of five. Unemployment is at nearly 12 percent. Industry and agriculture workers have been left behind by Perez Balladares' emphasis on the service sector.
"Everything for the rich and nothing for the poor," Esther Garcia said Thursday as thousands of anti-re-election marchers passed her lottery ticket stand in the capital's center.
Perez Balladares' administration has been accused of crowding the Panama Canal Authority, which will oversee the waterway, with cronies and of improperly allowing two Cabinet members to move into houses vacated by U.S. officials.
The president's supporters call the allegations unfounded.
The debate over re-election would be different if Perez Balladares were asking the question for a future administration, Eisenmann says.
"That's a philosophical issue. Should we have re-election or shouldn't we?" he said. "But if you say, 'No let's change the constitution to favor a sitting president' - that's just immoral."
 
 Load-Date: August 28, 1998

 

End of Document
