

Paula Jones to appeal dismissal of lawsuit against the president
The Associated Press
April 16, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 742 words
Byline: KATIE FAIRBANK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DALLAS
Body




Her voice breaking as she pronounced the word "appeal," Paula Jones said Thursday she will ask an appeals court to reinstate her lawsuit and force President Clinton to stand trial for sexual harassment.
"In the end, I have not come this far to see the law let men who have done such things dodge their responsibility," a crying Mrs. Jones said at a news conference with her lawyers.
"I believe what Mr. Clinton did to me was wrong, and the law protects women who are subjected to that kind of abuse of power."
Clinton, on a state visit in Chile, said he felt good about a federal judge's April 1 dismissal of the Jones suit and he declined to comment on the latest turn. "It's a very unusual political environment, but I'm just not going to let the politics get in my way," he said.
Mrs. Jones' widely anticipated appeal set the stage for a lengthy extension of the legal battle over her allegation of a Clinton advance in a Little Rock hotel room in 1991 while he was governor of Arkansas.
Attorneys not connected with the case say she faces long odds in trying to persuade an appeals court to overturn the dismissal.
Thursday's news conference in Dallas, where Mrs. Jones' attorneys are based, marked her first public comment on the case since U.S. District Court Judge Susan Webber Wright ruled on April 1 that her lawsuit did not merit a trial.
Mrs. Jones said she was shocked by the ruling and, after four years of ever-increasing public scrutiny, had to take time to weigh the question of an appeal against the continuing stress on her husband and two preschool sons.
"I have also considered the fact that the court's ruling affects many women other than myself," she said.
As she spoke from a lectern in a hotel ballroom, Mrs. Jones broke into tears and continued her brief statement only after her husband, Stephen, came to her side and placed his hand on her shoulder. She took no questions after delivering the statement, which she had worked out with her lawyers.
In Washington, Clinton attorney Robert S. Bennett distributed a written statement saying, "We are confident that the appellate court will not permit Paula Jones and her supporters to pursue this case.
"It is unfortunate that our legal system can nonetheless continued to be abused by Mrs. Jones' political and financial supporters who wish to harm the president," Bennett added.
Jones lawyer Donovan Campbell said his team was confident of its case accusing Clinton of harassment. "There is no one-free-flash rule" in the law," he said.
Mrs. Jones, 31, filed her civil suit in 1994 charging that Clinton had exposed himself and asked her for oral sex during a May 8, 1991, encounter. Clinton has said he does not recall such a meeting and has denied doing anything improper.
In the four years since she first aired the allegations, Mrs. Jones has rarely spoken in public about the case. Often, her friend and Los Angeles public-relations adviser, Susan Carpenter McMillan, has spoken for her.
As part of her attorneys' agreement to pursue an appeal despite little hope of collecting some $ 900,000 in legal fees, both women had to agree that all comment to the news media be filtered through the Dallas law firm of Rader, Campbell, Fisher & Pyke.
John Whitehead, also an attorney, was at Mrs. Jones' side with assurances that the Rutherford Institute, the Charlottesville, Va.-based foundation that he heads, would continue to cover her legal expenses through the appeal.
"We're in it for the long haul, no matter what it costs," he said, careful to limit his commitment to legal expenses and not Campbell's attorney fees.
An appeal to the 8th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in St. Louis could extend for years a lawsuit that has already had a considerable impact on Clinton - making him the first president to be questioned under oath as a defendant, and subjecting him and his sex life to Whitewater prosecutor Kenneth Starr's investigation of Monica Lewinsky and an alleged cover-up.
As for that spinoff investigation, Starr told reporters Thursday, "The end is not yet in sight."
In dismissing Mrs. Jones' suit, Wright said there was not sufficient merit to her allegations that Clinton's behavior was "outrageous" under Arkansas law or that he sexually harassed her under federal law. Wright noted that Mrs. Jones continued to work at the Arkansas Industrial Development Commission for an additional 19 months and never filed a formal complaint or told her supervisors after the alleged incident.
 Load-Date: April 16, 1998

 

End of Document
