

PBS Show Traces John Muir's 1867 Walking Trip Across the South
June 23, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 563 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




John Muir is best remembered as the father of land conservation in America, and the man who convinced Congress to establish Yosemite and Sequoia national parks.
Did you know that Muir also made an epic walking trip from Indianapolis to Cedar Key, Fla., two years after the end of the Civil War?
Writer-naturalist Robert Perkins decided to retrace the Muir journey. The result can be seen in "Looking for John Muir," broadcast on Tuesday on PBS.
Along his way, Perkins discovered that the locals weren't aware of the Muir walking trip. And they also couldn't identify John Muir.
Perkins, 47, has lived most of his life in the Boston area, graduating in English from Harvard University. His travels have resulted in other PBS programs, including "Yankee in Kamchatka," a journey through western Siberia, and "One Man in a Boat," a 560-mile canoe trip through rivers and canals from London to Scotland.
He also produced a recent TV show and a current book, "Talking to Angels," about his wife's unsuccessful fight against breast cancer.
"John Muir has been a hero of mine all my life," said Perkins, speaking from Boston. "When the opportunity came up, I jumped at the chance to tell his story."
Muir was born in Dunbar, Scotland. At the age of 11, he came to Portage, Wis., where his stern father farmed. After studying at the University of Michigan, Muir showed promise as an industrial inventor.
A factory accident blinded him temporarily. During the harrowing weeks of his recovery he decided he would work "for the creations of God and not the inventions of man."
He decided on the walking trip, with the aim of debarking for South America to study plant life in the Amazon basin. But he was weakened by malaria in Florida and couldn't find passage in Cuba. Instead, he went to New York and signed aboard a vessel heading to California. His great works lay ahead of him.
Muir made the 1,000-mile trip through the South in 52 days. Perkins wanted to walk it, but changed topography and the needs of a TV crew precluded that. His journey, which started in Louisville, Ky., took 30 days.
Perkins elected to make the trip by borrowed motorcycle. His wheaten terrier Sam rode along in the sidecar, cinched in with a safety belt and protected by a windscreen.
"Looking for John Muir" originated with England's Channel 4, and PBS joined as co-sponsor. Perkins had made six earlier films for both parties. The first came in 1986: "Into the Great Solitude," the story of his 72-day solo journey in the Canadian arctic.
"The shows all have an underlying theme of helping people consider the natural world that we live in," Perkins explained, "and how we should treat it a little less like dirt."
The title of "Looking for John Muir" in England was "Lost Paradise," and Perkins considers that apt. What he encountered were miles and miles of fast-moving highways, strips of cheap motels (he and Sam slept in a concrete wigwam) and fast-food emporiums, roaring motorcycles and polluted rivers - all in contrast to the unspoiled vistas that Muir had seen.
"The trip was disillusioning, except for the people I met and the spirit of them," he commented. Among them: a pair of "eco-farmers" beside the Savannah River and a woman determined to preserve the wildness of a sea island.
Next for Robert Perkins? He plans to return to his favorite area, the Canadian arctic, with the idea of traversing its width.
 Load-Date: June 23, 1996

 

End of Document
