

People in the News
December 12, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1189 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Costumes and personal belongings of the late ballerina Dame Margot Fonteyn sold at auction Tuesday for more than $948,000.
The internationally renowned dancer, who died in 1991 at age 71, was a star of the Royal Ballet for decades and created the most famous partnership in ballet, with Rudolf Nureyev in the 1960s. Audiences adored the pairing of Fonteyn's cool grace and Nureyev's fiery virtuosity.
"We are stunned by the results of today's auction, which was a triumph to the memory of Dame Margot Fonteyn," said Carey Wallace of Christie's auction house.
A tutu Fonteyn wore in "Swan Lake" went for $93,000 to a fashion museum in Santiago, Chile. Mark Walsh Antiques in New York bought two of Fonteyn's Yves-Saint Laurent dresses - one for $133,000 and another for $105,000.
SEATTLE (AP) - The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has donated $300,000 to Mercy Corps International to help people in Afghanistan who are suffering from a severe drought.
The money will be used to increase access to drinking water, provide job opportunities and help herders save their livestock, Mercy Corps said Monday.
"This tragedy is not yet well-known in this country despite the millions of people in need," said Neal Keny-Guyer, chief executive officer of foundation. "That makes this gift all the more vital."
The United Nations estimates that 60 million people have been affected by a drought in Central and South Asia that has killed livestock and crops.
The foundation started by Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates and his wife, Melinda, has an asset base of $21 billion.
KEY LARGO, Fla. (AP) - A man has been arrested and charged with stealing a multicolored, ceramic statue of a cat said to be a gift from Pablo Picasso to Ernest Hemingway.
The FBI arrested Robert J. Naughton in Stuart on Saturday and he now faces felony theft charges. He allegedly grabbed the 14-inch feline last month from its perch at the Hemingway House Museum.
Naughton had given the statue to a catamaran captain as a security deposit for a borrowed dinghy, FBI spokeswoman Judy Orihuela said.
The origin of the statue is a mystery. Hemingway's first wife, Hadley, remarked in 1972 that it was a 1920s-era gift from Picasso.
Hemingway's son Patrick has disputed the statue's origin, saying it is the equivalent of a dime store find.
The cat was displayed in a glass case, a highlight on the Hemingway House tour. It disappeared on Nov. 14, about 10 minutes after a tour guide pointed it out to sightseers.
SANTA ANA, Calif. (AP) - A federal magistrate has ordered psychiatric detention for a man who pleaded innocent to charges of threatening to kill "Valley Girl" singer Moon Zappa.
Timothy Brownfield, 40, has been diagnosed with depression and paranoid schizophrenia, Deputy Public Defender Elizabeth Macias said Monday.
Magistrate Arthur Nakazato agreed to have Brownfield moved from the Santa Ana Jail to the psychiatric unit of the Metropolitan Detention Center in Los Angeles. His trial is scheduled for January, and he faces up to five years in prison if convicted of mailing a threatening communication.
Brownfield is accused of threatening to kill Zappa in documents he mailed to the FBI's Santa Ana office on Oct. 30. Zappa did not personally receive any mail from him.
He allegedly wrote that he was angry with Zappa and her late father, Frank Zappa, for allegedly stealing the lyrics to "Valley Girl" from him. The 1982 hit single parodied the "fer shure, fer shure" lingo and mall shopping habits of teen-age girls in the San Fernando Valley.
NEW YORK (AP) - Christopher Reeve joined New York health officials in announcing the winners of $3.6 million worth of grants to fund research on spinal cord injuries.
"I'm especially proud to be a New Yorker today," Reeve said Monday.
The actor was paralyzed in a riding accident in 1995.
The grant money will go to 10 research projects at academic institutions throughout New York state. The grants are the first to be funded by the state Spinal Cord Research Trust Fund, established in 1998.
"We can now foresee the day in the not too distant future when having a spinal cord injury will not result in paralysis," Reeve said. "There's tremendous optimism, but it's going to be very, very expensive."
The trust fund, which is expected to raise $8.5 million a year, is financed through a surcharge on traffic tickets.
"Now we don't want people deliberately speeding down the Thruway in order to help this," Reeve said. "Nevertheless we're very, very grateful."
ST. LOUIS (AP) - The Rev. Al Sharpton was ordered to pay a $600 fine for blocking traffic on Interstate 70 and disobeying police during a July 1999 demonstration.
Sharpton won't face jail time and paid the fine before leaving the courthouse Monday.
Sharpton and a crowd of followers swarmed onto the main east-west interstate through St. Louis on July 12, 1999, bringing morning rush-hour traffic to a standstill. More than 100 people were arrested.
The civil rights activist said he thought other demonstrators had obtained a permit for the protest. "I would not have worn my good suit if I would have known I was going to spend time in jail," he said.
Demonstrators said they wanted to get state officials' attention about hiring more minority highway contractors. Ensuing talks led to a state agreement with MO-KAN, a minority contracting group, and the highway construction industry to establish a new job training center.
FORREST CITY, Ark. (AP) - Whoopi Goldberg made an unscheduled visit to the St. Francis County Jail after the driver of her tour bus was pulled over by police for speeding on Interstate 40.
While her driver filled out paper work and posted a $450 bond Sunday night, Goldberg signed autographs for jail staff and gave female inmates a pep talk.
According the sheriff's department, a bus carrying the actress was stopped Sunday night by Trooper David West.
In order to post his bond, Robert Ward, 44, of St. Clair Shores, Mich., followed the trooper to the jail. Goldberg went too.
Sheriff Dave Parkman said he missed the visit but that Goldberg posed for a photo beside Parkman's 1964 Chevrolet Impala and left him a note reading: "To Sheriff Dave. All my best. Stay safe. They got me trying to snatch your car! Love Whoopi."
LOS ANGELES (AP) - An aspiring filmmaker has settled a lawsuit in which he claimed the makers of "The Blair Witch Project" cheated him out of a credit on the film.
The settlement was announced Monday by Haxan Films, which produced the movie, and Artisan Entertainment, the distributor.
Sam Barber of Cocoa Beach, Fla., said he deserved part of the horror movie's $245 million domestic gross, according to the lawsuit filed in Los Angeles federal court.
Barber said he should have been listed as a producer or executive producer in the credits because he paid for some of the movie's preproduction costs.
Artisan spokesman Paul Pflug said part of the deal requires the company to consider three film proposals from Barber, although it has no obligation to produce the movies.
Barber's spokeswoman, Andrea Shea King, said he will also receive a "preproduction supervisor" credit on all future copies of the movie.
Other terms were not disclosed.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY43 of Gates, Zappa, Goldberg
 Load-Date: December 13, 2000

 

End of Document
