

People in the News
March 27, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 915 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Touched by the plight of a cancer-stricken Bolivian girl, Marlo Thomas got the hospital founded by her father to donate its services.
The actress, who raises money for Memphis, Tenn.-based St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, said she was very moved by a Daily News story about Gabriela Salinas, who came here for treatment but was turned away by a New York hospital for lack of insurance.
St. Jude, founded by the late Danny Thomas, offered to treat her for free and provide accommodations for her relatives, her uncle, Eduardo Espinosa, said Wednesday.
Gabriela and her father, Omar Salinas, came to the United States two weeks ago after doctors in South America misdiagnosed her condition as a pinched nerve.
Doctors here said Gabriela has a cancerous spine tumor that may have to be surgically removed, and that she also will need chemotherapy and radiation treatment. The treatment was estimated to cost $ 250,000, the Daily News said.
 
 PRAGUE, Czech Republic (AP) - Queen Elizabeth II and Czech President Vaclav Havel are exchanging honors: She gets a collar chain and he gets a cross.
The queen and Prince Philip, arriving Wednesday for the first visit to the Czech Republic by a member of the British monarchy, were greeting by Havel outside Prague Castle as hundreds of spectators cheered.
The queen was to get the Order of the White Lion 1st Class with Collar Chain, the top Czech honor. Havel will get the British honor, the Knight Grand and Cross of the Order of the Bath.
The evening will close with a state banquet - with lighting by the Rolling Stones. The rock group made a personal gift to Havel of a 2,000-bulb lighting system installed in the castle's Spanish Hall.
 
 NORWALK, Conn. (AP) - Martha Stewart won't be dressing up the hospital whose board she has joined: She'll offer her business smarts instead.
Norwalk Hospital officials are interested in the way Stewart has turned her entertaining and decorating knowledge into a media empire of books, magazines and television programs.
"You don't get to where she is without a good strong business mind," board chairwoman Carol B. Bauer said.
In addition to committee duties, Stewart will serve as honorary chairman of the 1996 Centennial Society Gala in Greenwich on Oct. 4.
 
 LOS ANGELES (AP) - "Renegade" star Lorenzo Lamas was ready to marry Shauna Sand "the Sunday after he met her" - instead, he waited six months.
With marriage license in hand - "The best $ 30 I've ever spent," Lamas told TV's "Entertainment Tonight" - the couple will marry April 27 in New York.
The wedding will be at the home of Lamas' mother, former film siren Arlene Dahl. Sand, who says her champagne-colored wedding dress is "tight and sexy," is ready, too.
"We're on a honeymoon every day of our lives," she said. "We have never been apart for one night since we met."
Lamas said he quickly fell in love with Sand, a "Renegade" series extra, last October.
"I would have married her the Sunday after I met her," he said in the interview for broadcast Thursday.
 
 LOS ANGELES (AP) - Don Johnson is back on TV as a cop, philosophical about roles as police officers.
"I think we are all secretly fascinated with life and death. And cops deal with life and death in a very real way every day," Johnson told TV's "Extra" in an interview for broadcast Thursday.
"We may all be in denial about our ultimate demise. It's going to happen. That's something you can count on," the 46-year-old actor said.
It's been a decade since Johnson was on TV as Detective Sonny Crockett in "Miami Vice." Johnson says his San Francisco cop character on "Nash Bridges" won't be a resurrection of Crockett.
"Nash Bridges is a character that's set in the 90s. He has all the baggage and wreckage of his life and stuff that he's dealing with, not unlike what I think we're all dealing with on a daily basis," he said.
"Nash Bridges," with Johnson as executive producer, debuts Friday on CBS.
 
 NEBO, Ky. (AP) - He's more clean-cut, and he misses the money. But Harvey Jett, former guitarist for Black Oak Arkansas, says he's gladly given up the alcohol and drugs that framed his life of fame.
Jett now lives in tiny Nebo in western Kentucky and performs at the Victory Church in nearby Madisonville every week. He's starting a Christian concert series, "Bread and Jam," which debuted recently at the church.
Jett, 47, was lead guitarist from 1967 to 1974 for Black Oak Arkansas, the rock group best known for the 1970s song "Jim Dandy to the Rescue."
"We toured every major American city at least three times in a period of about three years and all over Europe. I was a rock 'n' roll star to the max," Jett said.
"I miss making $ 30,000 a night. I miss touring the country and seeing the people. I miss being in the musical mainstream. But that life was without purpose," he said.
 
 FORT SMITH, Ark. (AP) - The King may (or may not) be gone, but the building where Elvis Presley got his first military haircut still stands, and local Elvis fans want to keep it that way.
Parts of Fort Chaffee, now owned by the National Guard, are slated for demolition, including Building 133 - where Elvis got his haircut when he reported for duty 38 years ago.
Jan Honeycutt, along with her students at Beard Elementary School, hopes to buy the building with profits from a video yearbook they are about to finish.
"January is special because of his birthday," Ms. Honeycutt said. "In August we remember his death and March he got his haircut. Tourists will want to sit in the chair where he got his hair cut."
 Load-Date: March 27, 1996

 

End of Document
