

People in the News
The Associated Press
July 7, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1194 words
Dateline: MANHATTAN BEACH, Calif.
Body




Michelle Kwan has bought a townhouse in a place where the skating tends to be of the in-line variety.
The three-time world figure skating champion, who turned 20 on June 30, had been leasing the Manhattan Beach home in a gated development before she bought it for $575,000, the Los Angeles Times reported.
Kwan was born and raised in nearby Torrance and attends the University of California, Los Angeles.
Kwan is the first American woman to win three world figure-skating titles since Peggy Fleming. Kwan plans to compete in the 2002 Olympics in Salt Lake City.
SANTIAGO, Chile (AP) - Former Argentine President Carlos Menem says his current friendship with Cecilia Bolocco, a former Miss Universe and one of Chile's top TV personalities, could turn into something else.
"It is sincere friendship, at least for the time being," a broadly smiling Menem, 70, told reporters as he flew here for a three-day visit.
On Thursday, after meeting with Chilean President Ricardo Lagos, he said "only God will decide what the relationship will be in the future."
Bolocco, 35, the Miss Universe in 1987, interviewed Menem for her television program when he was still president last year and the two became friends.
Menem served as president for a decade until last year and has indicated he plans to run again in 2003.
Both Bolocco and Menem are divorced.
ROYAL OAK, Mich. (AP) - Even when trading in the concert stage for a courtroom, rap star Eminem showed Friday that he knows how to command the spotlight.
The Michigan native showed up at the 44th District Court to waive a preliminary hearing on charges that he illegally possessed and brandished a concealed weapon outside a stereo shop.
His brief appearance was enough to satisfy dozens of fans who turned out.
"He seemed like he was a nice guy," said Jennifer Juarez, 16, who got to the courthouse at 4 a.m. for the 9 a.m. hearing.
Eminem, whose real name is Marshall Bruce Mathers III, is accused of displaying a semiautomatic pistol June 3 during an argument with a fellow rapper. Hours later, Macomb County prosecutors say, he allegedly assaulted a man in a nightclub lot after seeing the man kiss his wife, Kimberly.
NEW YORK (AP) - Darva Conger may be Playboy's latest cause d'jour, but in a unique twist and use of his fame, Rick Rockwell is appearing on PAX TV.
The network, known for its promise to present programming free from senseless violence, foul language and explicit sex, apparently believes in redemption.
During his annulment tour as a stand-up, Rockwell taped an on-air promo for PAX in which he encourages viewers to watch the family-friendly network, a network he says where "people even get to know each other before they get married."
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Few people know "The Price is Right" host Bob Barker is a student of karate under the tutelage of Chuck Norris.
So, when he read the script to the slapstick golf comedy "Happy Gilmore," he immediately agreed to take the part.
"Chuck had beaten me up for eight years. I had never won a fight," Barker told Maximum Golf magazine during an interview for the August issue, on stands next week.
In one of the 1996 movie's scenes, Barker and Adam Sandler (who played Gilmore) brawl during a golf tournament and the 76-year-old Barker prevails.
"I read the script, and when I saw that I won the fight, I said, 'I'll do the picture.' So there I was, rolling around in the wet grass with this kid! It was raining and cold. I thought I would probably get pneumonia," Barker said.
TAIPEI, Taiwan (AP) - Taiwanese director Ang Lee said he wanted to unite Chinese talent from several places in his new martial arts film "Crouching Tiger, Sleeping Dragon."
The movie involves actors, actresses and other workers from China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Southeast Asia.
"Chinese are united together by their shared culture, not by political power," Lee said Thursday. "This is how a Chinese-language movie should be made."
Lee arrived in Taipei on Wednesday with the film's leads Chow Yun-fat of Hong Kong and Michelle Yeoh of Malaysia.
"With this film, I was searching for a lost China and I tried to bring forward a China that has long existed in my mind," said Lee, who as a boy was a big fan of martial arts movies.
"Crouching Tiger" is Lee's first martial arts film. His other movies include the "Wedding Banquet" and "Sense and Sensibility."
---
LONDON (AP) - "Jaws" author Peter Benchley joined a conservation group in calling for an end to industrial practices that kill more than 100 million sharks and shark-like fish annually worldwide.
"I don't think that we have the right to extinguish any species," said Benchley, whose best-selling 1974 book was about a man-eating shark.
According to the San Francisco-based organization WildAid, 90 percent of some species have been killed by crews seeking only fins and fishing techniques in which sharks are caught on multiple hooks dangling from 50-mile lines.
In comparison, the group said an average of 12 people are killed by sharks annually.
"Sharks are more often the victims than the villains," WildAid director Peter Knights said.
Benchley and Knights will take their campaign to Asia, where there is demand for shark fin soup, considered a delicacy. The tour coincides with the 25th anniversary of the Steven Spielberg film based on Benchley's book.
---
LANSING, Mich. (AP) - Bob Seger, Michigan poet laureate?
Sen. Thaddeus McCotter said he plans to introduce a bill establishing an official state poet to be appointed by Gov. John Engler. Michigan is among 13 states without a poet laureate.
"We're a hardworking Midwestern state, but we're smart, too," McCotter said Wednesday.
If given the honorary post, McCotter said, the poet would take part in state ceremonies and help foster appreciation of poetry.
Naming the poet would be Engler's call, though McCotter said he likes Jim Harrison, a nationally known poet, novelist and screenwriter from northern Michigan. He also likes Michigan-born Seger, well-known since the '70s for such rock songs as "Night Moves" and "Turn the Page."
---
LONDON (AP) - An Olympic medal and other sporting memorabilia owned by the British sprinter whose athletic deeds inspired the 1981 movie "Chariots of Fire" sold at auction for $12,420.
The collection of Harold Abraham's memorabilia was purchased Thursday by an anonymous private collector, Christie's auction house said.
Included among the Olympic posters and mementos was the silver medal won by Abrahams as part of the British relay team at the 1924 Paris Olympics. Abrahams' gold medal was not included.
"The auction has an important significance because it's an Olympic year," said Richard Barclay of Christie's. "There's a huge market for it because it transcends everybody rich or poor, slow or fast - everybody is interested in it right across the world."
Abrahams died in 1978.
---
TACOMA, Wash. (AP) - Linda Evans, who played Krystle Carrington on the television series "Dynasty," is selling her Tacoma-area mansion.
Real estate agent Heidi Bright said Evans isn't moving out of the area, she's only downsizing. The 11,000-square-foot Mediterranean-style villa sits amid three acres of gardens with 169 feet of waterfront.
The asking price is $2.5 million.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY44 of Conger, Eminem; Lee, Benchley
 Load-Date: July 8, 2000

 

End of Document
