

People in the News
February 4, 1996, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 874 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




After months of anticipation, "Friends" Rachel and Ross are going to become much more.
The actors, Jennifer Aniston and David Schwimmer, say the pair will consummate their relationship on an upcoming episode.
Schwimmer told TV Guide in the Feb. 10 issue that an escalation of the characters' romantic involvement is something the fans of the NBC comedy want - although he's worried the audience could become bored with it.
"My biggest concern is that if you have all this sexual tension going on between two characters and then suddenly it's gone, then you really have to address the 'now what?' issue," Schwimmer said.
Aniston expressed no worries about the romance, though.
"I wanted to see what would happen," she said. "It'll take us down a different road."
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Grousing from politicians trying to burnish Rio's image won't stop Michael Jackson from shooting his next video in one of the city's most notorious slums.
Jackson spokesman Lee Solters has confirmed that production of "They Don't Care About Us" will go on despite official complaints. The singer is scheduled to arrive Tuesday.
In Rio, scenes will be shot in Santa Marta, a violent hillside slum controlled by drug dealers. About one-fifth of Rio's 6 million people live in slums called "favelas."
Officials fear the exposure will hurt the city as it tries to boost slumping tourism and become the site of the 2004 Olympics.
"His visit is just to place Rio as a city of problems, of poverty," Gov. Marcello Alencar said last week. "We are trying to recover Rio's image, and this could be devastating."
But residents are eager to receive the King of Pop.
Said Jose Luis, president of the Santa Marta Dwellers Association: "The governor has no right to say that Jackson's coming here would be bad news for the city. We, the people, can't wait until he comes; everybody on the hill is excited."
---
INVERNESS, Scotland (AP) - Hollywood came to the Scottish Highlands for the world premiere of "Loch Ness," a romantic comedy starring Ted Danson.
It was the first time a feature film was unveiled at the Highland capital, where film distributor Polygram flew in the movie's stars and 170 other performers, industry executives and critics for the event Saturday.
In the film, Danson plays an American scientist looking for the Loch Ness monster and finds love with a local woman instead. British actress Joely Richardson co-stars.
Working in Scotland felt like a homecoming of sorts for Danson, who traces his lineage to the area.
"I came here with my 78-year-old mother when we were filming and I held her as she skimmed a stone across a Highland stream," he said.
Danson said he would be "extremely shocked" if he saw the Loch Ness monster, but if he did he would keep it a secret.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Too bad "Batman Forever" star Val Kilmer doesn't have Bruce Wayne's bank account.
Slapped with a $ 750,000 federal judgment over a real estate loan, Kilmer and brother Mark Kilmer filed an appeal Friday in U.S. District Court to reverse it.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. said it lost the money when the Kilmer brothers failed to honor a loan guarantee made on behalf of their father's real estate development company.
Eugene Miller's company, KEM Inc., filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in April 1991 after real estate values dropped. The brothers' company, Valmark, also filed for bankruptcy reorganization, but creditors refused to accept the plan, leaving Valmark liable.
Val Kilmer's attorney said the actor shouldn't have to pay because he wasn't directly involved in the transaction.
"His brother is the one who signed the documents," attorney Ralph Loeb said. "He didn't sign it. He didn't authorize it, and he didn't even know about it until he was sued."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Howie Long, another in a long line of ex-football greats to tackle acting, makes his film debut in "Broken Arrow," playing a big guy with muscles. So guess who his favorite actor is?
"My blueprint for success is Arnold," he told the Daily News in a story printed Sunday. "Schwarzenegger was a bodybuilder who couldn't even speak English and he built himself into a superstar."
Long, an eight-time Pro Bowl selection as a defensive end for the Raiders, joins ex-gridiron stars Jim Brown, Merlin Olsen, Alex Karras, Fred Dryer and O.J. Simpson in his acting quest.
Things are going well for Long, whose first film stars John Travolta and Christian Slater. He has a three-picture deal with 20th Century Fox and has agreed to appear next in "The Thing You Do," Tom Hanks' directorial debut. But Long knows that acting can be even more demanding than sports.
"I love to stay in shape," he said, "but I've never been a weightlifter. I never needed to do that to play pro football. But, now, I've been pumping iron because I have to look like Arnold, or Jean-Claude (Van Damme) or Stallone."
---
BOSTON (AP) - Heavyweight boxer Peter McNeeley, who barely laid a glove on Mike Tyson during their brief bout, was ordered to stay away from his girlfriend after allegedly punching her.
Bonnie Bryant was granted the order in Wrentham District Court on Friday. McNeeley called it a "preposterous claim" filed by a "nut," claiming he was in Los Angeles at the time of the alleged December assault.
 Load-Date: February 4, 1996

 

End of Document
