

People in the News
January 24, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 762 words
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




Hard-line Peronists outraged over Madonna being cast as their beloved Eva Peron might try to disrupt filming of "Evita," a newspaper reported Wednesday.
The right-wing Peronists and members of the far left are likely to stage protests once shooting begins Feb. 8, the Clarin reported, citing unidentified sources and a report it said was done by a state intelligence unit.
Interior Ministry officials said they were taking measures to protect the pop star, but denied knowledge of such an intelligence report.
Many Argentines, including Peronist President Carlos Menem, object to the raunchy pop star playing Evita.
Hard-line Peronists still worship the former first lady, who died of cancer at age 33 in 1952. "Evita Lives! Get out Madonna" was scrawled over walls in the capital city to coincide with the star's arrival Saturday.
Meanwhile, scores of fans held vigil outside her $ 2,500-per-night hotel suite for a glimpse of the star.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - Jane Fonda's latest cause is curbing curb teen pregnancy.
The 58-year-old movie star and fitness guru got husband Ted Turner's Turner Foundation to put an estimated $ 500,000 into the Georgia Campaign for Adolescent Pregnancy Prevention.
She took on the issue after attending the 1994 U.N. world population conference in Cairo.
"When you're dealing with teen pregnancy, you're also dealing with crime, alcohol and drug abuse, school dropout, alienation," she said in Wednesday's Atlanta Journal-Constitution. "We came back here thinking, 'Wow. What can we do?"'
Michael Dalmat, coordinator of the pregnancy prevention at the Atlanta-based Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said: "She's got a fire in her belly, and I think she's going to have a very positive impact."
---
LONDON (AP) - Shoe queen Imelda Marcos will be kicking herself when she gets a look at the TV interview she did with a show-and-tell comedian.
Ruby Wax, an American with a knack for getting celebrities to make fools of themselves, spent three days with the former first lady of the Philippines for a special to be broadcast Sunday on the BBC.
Mrs. Marcos sings five songs on the show, including "Feelings." During one number, Wax pulls up her long skirt to show off her shoes to the camera. The camera also peers into an upstairs closet with maybe 360 pairs of shoes.
"This is the happiest I have been since Zsa Zsa's closet," Wax says, pawing through several racks of clothes as Mrs. Marcos' aides giggled.
Mrs. Marcos "didn't have a clue" about how she was being sent up, Wax said in the Sunday Telegraph. "I thought she had guessed when I kept saying, 'Show me the shoes. Show me the shoes,' but she had no idea."
The comedian added: "I don't think you could call her a great ironist."
Mrs. Marcos left behind a legendary shoe collection when she and her husband, Ferdinand, fled to Hawaii in 1986 after an uprising.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - She performed a Puccini aria at the Miss America pageant, but Miss New York State is singing a different tune, threatening a $ 2 million lawsuit against pageant officials who are trying to take away her crown.
Pageant officials said she is unable to fulfill her duties because she has landed a role as a Broadway understudy.
"There are no duties for Miss New York," Goldsby, 25, countered on Tuesday. She alleged that pageant officials would not let her promote her platform on child abuse and failed to book appearances for her.
She took the Broadway job because "I couldn't pay my rent. I had no money," Goldsby said.
---
CAREFREE, Ariz. (AP) - The topic on "20/20" will be host Hugh Downs himself - or, more accurately, his bad knees.
The 74-year-old newsman will undergo joint replacement in both knees on Saturday in Boston, and the operation will be the subject of a segment to be broadcast on the ABC program in late February.
On Monday, Downs was filmed in this Phoenix suburb where he lives as he talked with his physician, Dr. Martin Chapman.
"He can show other senior citizens that this is doable surgery and that it can work right now," Chattman said.
Downs said he agreed to the report after he learned that about 150,000 people have such surgery each year and that about 16 million Americans have conditions that will lead to joint replacement surgery.
The newsman said he injured his knees during a race 16 years ago down 37 flights of stairs: "On about the third floor I began to feel something had gone wrong. The other guy won."
Downs expects to miss only the Feb. 2 broadcast and to return the following week. "I told Barbara Walters to simply say that I'm on assignment - which, of course, I am," he said.
 Load-Date: January 24, 1996

 

End of Document
