

People in the News
The Associated Press
January 24, 1999, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 676 words
Dateline: TOKYO
Body




John Glenn arrived in Japan on Sunday with four other crew members from the space shuttle Discovery on a trip to promote international links for the U.S. space program.
The astronauts were greeted at Narita airport, near Tokyo, by Chiaki Mukai, Japan's first female astronaut and a member of the Discovery crew that returned to Earth Nov. 7 after a 10-day mission.
Glenn and the other astronauts will hold news conferences Monday at the Japan National Press Club in Tokyo and Wednesday at the Tsukuba space center.
The seven-member crew, one of whom arrived Saturday on a separate flight, will also take a sightseeing trip to Kyoto before leaving Japan at the end of January.
Glenn, 77, who made a pioneering space flight in 1962, returned to space last year while ending his long career as a U.S. senator.
Before coming to Japan, the astronauts made stops in France, Germany, Spain and other European cities to promote the U.S. space program.
 
 ---
NEW YORK (AP) - At age 37, "The Practice" star Dylan McDermott doesn't regret waiting a few years to find major fame.
"I think if I had all that money and fame in my 20s, I might have turned to drugs and alcohol and wound up blowing everything I had," McDermott says in Sunday's Daily News. "Instead, I had the slow, steady process. Many of the movies I made did not do well. Some movies I had to go away and make didn't even come out."
McDermott, whose quality film credits include "Steel Magnolias" and "In the Line of Fire," also appeared in less noteworthy pictures including "Hamburger Hill," "'Til There Was You," "Destiny Turns on the Radio" and "Where Sleeping Dogs Lie."
McDermott grew up in New York, where his father owned the West Fourth Street Saloon in Greenwich Village and the would-be actor got to meet a lot of artistic characters.
"Put it this way, I wouldn't recommend my childhood for anyone, but it was great for being an actor," said McDermott, whose Emmy Award-winning TV series earned him a recent Golden Globe nomination.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Former "Baywatch" babe Pamela Anderson cut short a tour of Uruguay and Argentina after being harassed on a beach by scores of excited teen-age boys and pestered with questions about her famed sex videotape.
"Pamela is frightened, and though we offered to suspend her open air presentations she just wants to go home," tour manager Diego Cassagne said Saturday.
After a news conference Friday at the Atlantic resort of Punta del Este, Uruguay, scores of teen-agers surrounded Anderson on the beach, shouted vulgar remarks and tried to fondle her.
The current star of the syndicated TV show "V.I.P." immediately canceled the filming of a suntan lotion commercial in Uruguay and a guest appearance on a TV show in neighboring in Argentina.
During the televised conference where she was asked about a videotape of her having sex with estranged rock star husband Tommy Lee, Anderson said, "I think I'm going home."
Anderson initially fought the release of the tape in court, now widely available on the Internet, as an invasion of privacy.
 
 ---
BUFFALO, N.Y. (AP) - TV newsman Sam Donaldson is ho-hum about most awards.
That story changed Saturday night when he was presented with the Gilda Radner Courage Award - an honor reserved for those who generate attention to the fight against cancer.
"I'm honored to have been selected. I don't think this is a run-of-the-mill award," said Donaldson, a survivor of melanoma.
The Roswell Park Alliance gave Donaldson the award during its 10th annual benefit.
The chief White House correspondent for ABC News said he was uncomfortable at first about accepting such awards.
"It was very disconcerting," he said. "I thought, 'Hey, you can keep your awards, and I'll give you back the cancer."'
But he changed his mind when he realized the award's significance.
Donaldson was diagnosed with melanoma in August 1995. Since then, he has taken the battle public to help others.
"I think we have to work on making Congress feel the heat, and they'll produce the cash," he said. "It is the squeaky wheel that gets the cash."
 Load-Date: January 24, 1999

 

End of Document
