

People in the News
The Associated Press
July 25, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 725 words
Dateline: EAGLE POINT, Ore.
Body




Veteran actress Kim Novak watched helplessly as many of her priceless mementoes went up in flames when a fire swept through her one-story wood-frame house.
The Monday fire was apparently electrical, and probably linked to a tree falling across a power line the night before, said Deputy Fire Marshal Phil Cardinal.
The flames destroyed her scripts from the Alfred Hitchcock classic "Vertigo," and "Picnic," as well as the computer on which she had been writing her autobiography. Novak said her dogs, horses, llamas and a family of orphaned geese she had raised were spared.
"I take it personally as a sign my story should not be told," Novak said of the book she has been working on for a decade. "I read signs. Unfortunately, they have to be pretty heavy duty signs for me to recognize them."
Novak's husband of 23 years, veterinarian Bob Malloy, said a cottonwood fell across a power line Sunday night, and power company crews restored electricity about midnight.
When the couple woke the next morning, Malloy said he switched a circuit breaker to restore power. The next thing he knew, flames had spread across the back of the house.
Novak, 67, said this loss was easier to take than the destruction of her home in Bel Air, Calif., during a mudslide in the 1960s, which carried off paintings by Picasso and her own work.
"That made me realize what was valuable," she said.
---
BRASILIA, Brazil (AP) - Billionaire media mogul Ted Turner has announced plans here to dedicate $42 million of his United Nations Foundation funds to social and environmental projects around the world.
"Working with the UN, we have developed an exciting program to help protect some of the world's most important natural resources," Turner, the foundation's chairman, said in a statement Monday.
Brazilian First Lady Ruth Cardoso, who sits on the foundation's board of directors, said another area of special focus would be on improving the lives of adolescent girls.
"Addressing girls' needs for health, self-esteem, livelihood opportunities and education has been extremely successful here in Brazil, and UNF's support will help to promote a brighter future for girls all over the world," Cardoso said Monday.
The foundation was created by Turner in 1998 after he pledged to donate $1 billion to the United Nations the previous year.
---
SHREVEPORT, La. (AP) - The musical act The Cox Family is trying to regroup and plan for the future after two members were injured in a car accident.
Willard and Marie Cox were listed in fair condition Sunday at LSU Hospital in Shreveport, according to hospital staff. They perform alongside their son Sidney and daughters Evelyn and Suzanne.
Willard Cox, a Grammy Award-winning fiddler, has a crushed spine and cannot walk. Marie Cox suffered a fractured vertebrae, a broken arm and rib, a bruised kidney and a concussion.
"We're in tough shape and don't know how it's going to turn out. We'll just have to wait and see," Marie Cox said.
Evelyn Cox said her father's mood was upbeat. "We were all really sad at first, but now we're trying to look a little ahead."
The couple had stopped on a highway Wednesday when a logging truck struck them from behind, police said.
The family quartet from Cotton Valley is known for their brew of gospel, bluegrass and country. They have played together since 1976, with Willard on the fiddle, Sidney and Evelyn on guitar and Suzanne on mandolin.
The band won a Grammy in 1995 for "I Know Who Holds Tomorrow" with Alison Krauss.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - "Ziggy Stardust," once a counterculture icon, has now conquered the Internet age.
Singer David Bowie received top honors during Monday night's third annual Yahoo!Internet Life Online Music Awards celebration at Studio 54.
Bowie won The Online Pioneer of the Year Award in the event hosted by actor John Leguizamo. The award honors individuals at the forefront of the Internet music industry.
Best Internet-Only Album went to Aimee Mann's "Bachelor No. 2," while Prince's "One Song" was named the Best Internet-Only Single.
Bowie's Web page, Bowienet, was named the Best Artist Site, while Paul McCartney's performance at the Cavern Club won Best Live Online Event.
Nominees were selected by the editorial staff of Yahoo!Internet Life magazine, in conjunction with votes compiled online. Winners were then chosen by members in the music, online and entertainment industries.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY44 of Turner, Bowie
 Load-Date: July 26, 2000

 

End of Document
