

People in the News
February 8, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 663 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Christopher Reeve has signed with Random House to write a book about his life before the accident, and the struggle he faces now.
Random House refused to comment on a published report that the paralyzed "Superman" star will receive $ 3 million.
Publisher Harold Evans said Wednesday that writer Roger Rosenblatt will collaborate, and the book will be ready in 1998.
Reeve, who was paralyzed from the shoulders down in a riding accident, has said that his medical care costs $ 400,000 a year, and his insurance is capped at $ 1.2 million.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - CBS is planning a Taylor-made sitcom lineup.
Elizabeth Taylor will appear on all four Monday night comedies on Feb. 26, becoming part of a story line that will run through "The Nanny," "Can't Hurry Love," "Murphy Brown" and "High Society."
It involves her priceless black pearl necklace, which Fran Fine of "The Nanny" manages to lose.
Before the night is out, Murphy interviews Miss Taylor about the missing jewels and Fran finds redemption when the case get solved.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - It looks like a go in Rio.
A day after blocking Michael Jackson for 20 days from filming a music video in Rio's Santa Marta slum, a judge reduced the time to five days. That means Jackson could start filming Monday, a day later than planned.
"I thought better of it," Judge Luiz Haddad said after his decision Tuesday. "It's tough being a judge. One has to see both sides."
Rio de Janeiro state officials still want to stop the shoot on grounds it could scare off investors and tourists.
Spike Lee, who will direct the video, called the opposition "pathetic."
"It makes Brazil look like a banana republic," he said in an interview with the Rio daily Jornal do Brasil.
Lee said the video of "They Don't Care About Us" would last 4 minutes, 45 seconds and would include only two or three scenes from Santa Marta.
"What do Rio authorities think, that it's a secret there's poverty in Brazil?" he asked.
---
COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) - Hootie & the Blowfish have asked a federal judge in California to bar a man from selling what he claims are copies of the band's first songs.
The Columbia-based band asked for the restraining order after allegedly getting a call from Haim Mizrahi of Beverly Hills, Calif. The band said Mizrahi threatened to sell 15 songs if he didn't receive more than $ 200,000.
"We're concerned with someone who has nothing to do with Hootie & the Blowfish trying to make a quick buck," said the band's manager, Rusty Harmon.
The band sued Mizrahi on Jan. 30. The case is to be heard on Friday.
---
PORTLAND, Maine (AP) - William Cohen is leaving one institution, the Senate, for another - marriage.
He and TV personality Janet Langhart plan a Valentine's Day wedding in the U.S. Capitol.
"I feel so lucky," Langhart said. "I've been married to Bill in my heart for a long, long time."
The wedding follows a five-year courtship and comes weeks after the Maine Republican announced he will retire from Congress after 24 years.
This is the second marriage for each. While there are no immediate honeymoon plans, Langhart said: "Being with Bill is sort of a honeymoon. I've been everywhere. I'd be happy with a weekend in Camden."
Langhart is known in New England as a former co-host of the now-defunct talk show "Good Day." She is now a host of "On Capitol Hill with Janet Langhart," a weekly segment on Black Entertainment Television.
---
LONDON (AP) - The man who wrote the words to "Evita" thinks Madonna is just right for the role.
"I was very much for Madonna," Sir Tim Rice said in an interview broadcast Wednesday by BBC radio.
"I think I was probably for her more than anybody else on the project and remember having arguments long into the night with various other people involved, saying she would be easily the best.
"Madonna is a good actress, a terrific singer and has a lot of the characteristics that Eva had."
The film project has been controversial in Argentina, where many still revere Evita and her husband, President Juan Peron.
 Load-Date: February 8, 1996

 

End of Document
