

People in the News
December 14, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 667 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Prince Andrew plans to leave the Royal Navy after 22 years to promote British business abroad.
The son of Queen Elizabeth II will represent British Trade International, the government organization responsible for the development and promotion of overseas trade and investment.
"I have greatly enjoyed my service in the navy and am sad at the prospect of leaving," Andrew said Wednesday. "However, the invitation to participate in the work of British Trade International is an opportunity and challenge that I could not refuse."
Andrew, who joined the Royal Navy in September 1979, will leave at the end of July. During his military service, he fought in Britain's 1982 war with Argentina over the disputed Falkland Islands.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Life won't be continuing as normal for John Goodman's low-rated sitcom "Normal, Ohio."
Fox is putting the Wednesday night series on hiatus, making its future uncertain. This week's airing was the last one scheduled.
The show will remain in production to complete the network's original 13-episode order but Fox has declined to order any more episodes - a move that is often just shy of stamping a series "canceled."
"Normal, Ohio" marked Goodman's return to series TV after his successful run on ABC's "Roseanne." In the Fox show, he plays a small-town family man who left home after realizing he was gay and now has returned to make amends.
The show was slammed by critics and plummeted in the ratings.
Fox already had planned to pre-empt "Normal, Ohio" for the next three weeks with movies, including a Jan. 3 airing of "Mrs. Doubtfire."
PALM SPRINGS, Calif. (AP) - Nicolas Cage is being honored next month at an international film festival.
The Oscar-winning actor will receive the Charles A. Crain Desert Palm Award at the Nortel Networks Palm Springs International Film Festival on Jan. 13. Past recipients include John Travolta, Richard Dreyfuss, Susan Sarandon, Sophia Loren and Frank Sinatra.
"We are excited with having the opportunity to honor someone with such greatness. Nicolas Cage is a relatively young actor but the body of work he has been able to produce has just been fantastic," festival spokesman Denis Pregnolato said.
Cage's film credits include "Gone in 60 Seconds," "Raising Arizona," and "Leaving Las Vegas," which won him an Academy Award.
The film festival runs from Jan. 11-22.
NEW YORK (AP) - George W. Bush, Elian Gonzalez and the state of Florida are among People magazine's annual list of the most intriguing.
The "25 Most Intriguing People of 2000," which hits newsstands Friday, features politicians, entertainers, athletes and newsmakers.
For the first time, a state - Florida - made the list, both for the struggle over custody of 7-year-old Gonzalez and for the struggle over its 25 electoral votes.
Actors Michael J. Fox, Sarah Jessica Parker and Meg Ryan made the cut, as did rapper Eminem. Athletes on the list include Venus Williams and shortstop Alex Rodriguez, who this week signed a record $252 million contract with the Texas Rangers.
NEW YORK (AP) - Rosie O'Donnell as the Cat in the Hat?
The talk-show host joins "Seussical," Broadway's musical celebration of Dr. Seuss, for four weeks while its current cat vacations.
O'Donnell broke the news Wednesday during a taping of her TV show. Kevin Chamberlin, who plays Horton the elephant in the $10 million musical, came out and presented her with the Cat's signature red-and-white top hat and asked, "Would you be our Cat in the Hat?"
"We adore her, and she loves the show. It's the kind of role a personality can come into and do for a short time," said Lynn Ahrens, who co-wrote the musical.
O'Donnell will do six performances a week beginning Jan. 16. She plans to donate her salary to charity.
O'Donnell has worked on Broadway before, appearing as tough gal Betty Rizzo in the revival of "Grease," which opened in New York in 1994.
"Seussical" star David Shiner's vacation already had been scheduled before O'Donnell was signed for the part, Ahrens said. He returns to the show Feb. 13.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY43 of Cage, Goodman
 Load-Date: December 15, 2000

 

End of Document
