

Peru's hostage-takers: Who are the people behind the masks?
January 5, 1997, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 716 words
Byline: By TODD LEWAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




They go by names such as Comandante Huerta, Palestino and Arab, and walk around with 30 pounds of explosives in their backpacks as if they were carrying school books or camping gear.
They appear well-trained in urban guerrilla warfare and call themselves "social liberators" of the poor.
But who are the men and women in combat fatigues and red-and-white bandana masks who have launched one of the most audacious acts in the history of hostage-taking?
Three weeks after rebels of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement seized hundreds of hostages at a gala party at the Japanese ambassador's mansion, their identities - and even how many are involved - remain unclear.
But hostages freed from the impromptu prison describe a motley crew of hardened commandos, victims of army abuses seeking revenge, and uneducated teen-agers from rural areas who had never seen TV or played dominoes.
"Inside that group you've got a mix of planners, naive followers and probably a few suicidal types," said Raul Gonzales, an expert on the Tupac Amaru. "It's a potentially explosive combination."
The ringleader is Nestor Cerpa, one of the founders of the Tupac Amaru, a Cuba-inspired group whose attacks on U.S. targets in Peru imbued them with a mystique among some Peruvians somewhere between Robin Hood and Rambo.
Since beginning its attacks in 1984, Tupac Amaru fighters have lobbed mortars at the U.S. ambassador's residence, fired a rocket-propelled grenade at the U.S. Embassy and bombed several Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurants.
A swarthy, brash former union leader, Cerpa - who uses the nom de guerre Comandante Huerta - seems to enjoy the worldwide attention he has attracted.
He didn't confiscate his prisoners' cellular telephones, letting them give live radio and TV interviews at the outset. He even gave phone interviews and once invited photographers into the residence and posed for pictures.
Cerpa also showed a dark side: On the second morning, he told Peruvian Foreign Minister Francisco Tudela that he was to be executed at noon, then left him in a room with a Jesuit priest.
At exactly noon, Cerpa opened the door, studied him for a few moments, then told him his "sentence" had been postponed.
Beneath Cerpa are two deputies, who use the names Arab and Palestino. Both are chainsmokers apparently in their mid-30s with a gift for gab and joke-telling.
The second night after the raid, Arab removed his bandana, leaned his automatic rifle against the back of a couch, sat down and began one of several monologues, expounding vague leftist ideology for nearly three hours.
Around midnight, he smilingly autographed paper stubs and business cards: "Hugs from Arab."
"These guys went on and on as if we were old friends from school," Javier Dias Canseco, a congressman held captive five days. "They were dying to tell their war stories to anybody."
The rest of Cerpa's crew consists of 20 or so foot soldiers who looked no older than 20. Their combat uniforms hung loosely on their strong, slender frames.
One rebel, Leo, was a teen-ager from the jungle. He told a hostage he and several others had joined the Tupac Amaru out of revenge.
"He wanted to get back at the Peruvian army and the Sendero Luminoso for having attacked his family and destroying their home," said Pedro Isayama, a freed hostage.
But most of the rebels "hardly said a word when we try to talk to them. They blushed and got all nervous and clumsy," said Juan Iglesias, who was released after five days in captivity.
The little they did utter revealed accents and incorrect grammar common to peasants in Peru's highlands and jungle. Several others spoke Spanish with odd, foreign-sounding accents, hesitating at times, Iglesias said.
He recalled when a young rebel watched while six hostages killed time playing dominoes. "Want to play?" Iglesias asked. The rebel clenched his rifle, looked warily at them, and slunk out of the den.
After the raid, two female rebels spent hours in front of a television set, mesmerized by the Mexican soap opera "Maria From the Barrio."
"They sat watching it all the time when they weren't guarding us," said Carlos Aquino Rodriguez, an economic professor. He said they apparently had arrived in Lima from the jungle in September to train for the takeover.
"They were impressed even by the commercials," he said.
 Load-Date: January 5, 1997

 

End of Document
