

Rebels the holdout in deal to end Peru's hostage crisis
March 5, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 592 words
Byline: By BART JONES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




Peru supports the idea. Japan is on board, too. Even the United States has hinted it might not be opposed.
But the key players, the Tupac Amaru rebels, say they aren't ready to commit to exile in Cuba.
Peru's President Alberto Fujimori said Tuesday he has worked out all the details of the leftist guerrillas' safe passage to the communist island, as part of a potential deal to end his country's hostage crisis.
But the rebels - who have held 72 hostages at the Japanese ambassador's mansion for 11 weeks - say they won't be getting on any airplanes soon.
"If there is no liberation, what is left to us? Resistance! Resistance to the end!" they shouted in a radio transmission monitored outside the diplomatic compound.
The statement was a reference to the rebels' demand that 458 colleagues be released from Peruvian prisons. Those jailed include the common-law wife of the leader in the hostage-taking, Nestor Cerpa, and top Tupac Amaru leader Victor Polay.
Fujimori said his negotiators will put an all-encompassing proposal on the table today at the ninth meeting with the rebel leaders.
"There already is a place where they can be welcomed with all guarantees and we have even spoken of details of the departure," he said of his meeting Monday with President Fidel Castro.
"This must remain clear. The Cuban government wants this type of solution to avoid the risk of violence and in no way manifests its support for this type of action," Fujimori said.
He said he was still waiting for an answer from the Dominican Republic, which he has also sounded out about possible asylum.
The rebels stormed the ambassador's residence on Dec. 17 during a party marking the birthday of the Japanese emperor, capturing hundreds of hostages. They have released all but 72.
Fujimori's unexpected whirlwind tour of Cuba and the Dominican Republic on Sunday and Monday raised speculation the hostage crisis might be nearing an end.
The rebels quickly diminished those hopes.
In the same radio transmission, Cerpa said the rebels have "no intention of seeking asylum in the Dominican Republic or any country that oppresses its people."
"This is final and definite."
He left the door open to exile in Cuba "out of respect for the Cuban government, Comandante Fidel Castro, his revolution and his people," Cerpa said. "Our first priority is to stay in our own country."
Most of the rebels' hostages are Japanese businessmen and high-ranking Peruvian officials, including the Japanese and Bolivian ambassadors.
Japanese officials, who are strongly opposed to using force to end the crisis, praised Fujimori's trip and Castro's willingness to accept the rebels.
"I understand it is one of the effective means to resolve this problem peacefully and release all the hostages safely," Japanese government spokesman Seiroku Kajiyama was quoted by Japan's Kyodo news service as saying.
White House spokesman Michael McCurry said the United States "could understand" Fujimori's desire to do everything necessary to find a peaceful solution.
Castro said his country would take the rebels if asked to do so by mediators trying to negotiate an end to the crisis. It was not immediately known if the mediators had made such a request.
The ninth round of talks between the rebels and government representatives was scheduled for today. The two sides have talked for a little more than 24 hours in the eight sessions that began Feb. 11.
Canadian Ambassador Anthony Vincent said after Monday's talks that "both sides are completing their proposals," a sign that negotiations remain in the preliminary stage.
 Load-Date: March 5, 1997

 

End of Document
