

Retailers and Importers Say They Could Be Hurt the Most By China Sanctions
May 16, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 604 words
Byline: By PATRICIA LAMIELL, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The punitive tariffs the Clinton administration is threatening to impose on Chinese goods would bump up the price of back-to-school clothes, but the real threat is to merchants, retailers said Thursday.
Import duties of more than 100 percent will be imposed on silk, wool and cotton from China this summer if negotiations fail to settle a product piracy dispute.
Because of cutthroat competition in the clothing and fashion trade, retailers said they will have a hard time passing along most of their cost increases to consumers when they sell blouses, underwear and pants.
"The only apparel that will come in, as summer moves on, from China will be at these extraordinarily high duties," said Robert Hall, vice president for international trade at the National Retail Federation.
"I'm sure retailers will do what they can" to recoup the extra cost that a tariff would impose, "but I will say to you that the American retailing industry is quite competitive, and it's going to be difficult to pass those costs along."
Textile and clothing retailers won't be able to stockpile Chinese imports ahead of the potential trade sanctions. The Clinton administration has guarded against that by placing a tight quota on all goods from China between now and the June 17 deadline for an agreement.
Importers couldn't hasten production and shipment schedules during the busy spring and summer even if they were allowed to, said Laura E. Jones, executive director of the United States Association of Importers of Textiles and Apparel.
The other problem merchants face has to do with financing.
Importers, and retailers that import directly, work with irrevocable letters of credit, which are agreements to pay suppliers a certain price, even before the goods leave China. Importers own the goods as soon as they pass inspection and are loaded on a ship in China for transport to the United States. Once in the United States, the agreement sets a price for sale to retailers in anticipation of a guaranteed profit on the transaction.
A doubling of tariffs will reduce or eliminate a profit and, possibly, result in a loss for importers.
Under the terms of the letter of credit, "the Chinese are going to be paid" regardless of the cost to the U.S. importer, Jones said. "We're the people who are going to suffer for this, not the Chinese."
For shipments after the fall, larger retailers like J.C. Penny, Sears, The Gap and Limited Inc. will be able to turn to alternative suppliers, said John Morris a retail analyst at Prudential Securities. Because China comes up for most favored nation status every year, big importers have broadened their list of sources to avoid trade problems.
Buyers of Victoria's Secret lingerie, for example, will be able to get items imported from South America, Morris said. And the tariffs will make U.S.-made products more competitive.
But shifting production to another country will add to the price, cautioned Jeffrey White, president of Shamash & Sons clothing and fabric importers in New York. "This will mean higher prices for the consumer and inflationary pressure. There's no other way to look at it."
Denis Fred Simon, director of China strategy at Anderson Consulting, contends the Clinton administration carefully structured the timing and substance of the trade sanctions to minimize their impact on the U.S. consumer, while at the same time looking tough on trade during this election year.
"It's really not a big bite," he said. "It's a symbolic gesture done with a great deal of moderation, which is probably a good thing at the end of the day. The worst thing that could happen is a major trade war with China."
 Load-Date: May 16, 1996

 

End of Document
