

Rites old and new to ring in the new year
January 1, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 682 words
Byline: By MATHIS CHAZANOV, Associated Press Writer
Body




Flowers for the water goddess. Cow-dung firecrackers. Twelve grapes.
People around the world marked the new year today with rites old and new, from elaborate fireworks shows to simple religious ceremonies and traditional foods.
This new year also was a rehearsal of sorts for the millennium, with Pope John Paul II himself talking about throwing a big party three years from now - even though the next 1,000-year cycle doesn't technically start until Jan. 1, 2001.
In Brazil, the party had already begun.
While revelers in the Northern Hemisphere shivered, Rio de Janeiro beaches like Copacabana and Ipanema were packed with people watching 12 separate fireworks displays.
Many donned white outfits and headed to the water with flowers and other offerings for Iemanja, the Afro-Brazilian water goddess.
In Spain, hordes gathered in Madrid's Puerta del Sol Plaza to count down the year's final seconds, a celebration broadcast nationwide. Most Spanish families also start the new year by eating 12 grapes - one for each chime of the clock.
Elsewhere, people started the new year off with a bang.
In the Philippines, officials threatened to arrest anyone who set off firecrackers with more than one-third of a teaspoon of explosive per stick. Homemade fireworks can pack an unpleasant surprise - the wounded often contract tetanus from cow dung used to control the speed of burning. About 168 people were injured anyway.
Fireworks were banned in Paris this year because of security measures imposed after a Dec. 3 subway bombing. Thousands of people flooded the Champs-Elysees, which had a stronger police presence than usual.
There was no lack of fireworks in Sydney, Australia, where officials spent $ 800,000 on a display billed as a dress rehearsal for the 2000 Olympics. The celebration drew 400,000 people.
"Sydney is one of the party cities of the world," said Ric Birch, director of the event.
In Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 150,000 people jammed the city center to share champagne and hamburgers in sub-freezing temperatures - and to protest the government of President Slobodan Milosevic. Daily protests against him have been held for more than a month.
"Let us finish in '97 what we started in '96," opposition leader Zoran Djindjic urged the revelers.
But the new year was tragic for some.
In Fremantle, Australia, 35 people were injured, 13 of them seriously, when an overcrowded balcony collapsed at a party just before midnight.
And drunken revelers rioted at the end of New Year's celebrations at the popular New Zealand beach resort of Whangamata, 60 miles southeast of Auckland.
Shots fired in a crowded restaurant killed three people early today in Wageningen, Netherlands, 50 miles southeast of Amsterdam, where more than 100 people were holding a private New Year's party. Police released no details.
In Budapest, the Hungarian capital, a rocket crashed into a building where a night club was holding a New Year's party, causing extensive damage but no injuries, state-run radio reported. The shoulder-launched projectile hit an abandoned apartment, state radio said.
In Rome, the pope called for a more sober celebration in 2000, when the Italian capital is expecting millions of people for Holy Year and millennium celebrations.
"I hope with all my heart that you will never lack the commitment to give to the city a face more in line with the values of faith, culture and civilization … also in view of the Great Jubilee of 2000," the pontiff said.
Mother Teresa attended a New Year's Mass in Calcutta, India, held four hours before midnight to make it easier on the 86-year-old nun, who is recovering from heart surgery.
In Lima, Peru, it was a somber new year for the 81 hostages at the Japanese ambassador's residence where the Rev. Julio Wicht, a hostage, gave a midnight Mass.
And in London, Big Ben almost missed its date with the new year when unusually low temperatures apparently caused some sluggishness in the bells, the BBC reported.
But engineers immediately worked on the mechanism behind the famous illuminated clock face on Parliament tower, and the familiar chime rang out at midnight.
 Load-Date: January 1, 1997

 

End of Document
