

Sandinistas challenge government in the streets
July 2, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 536 words
Byline: By FILADELFO ALEMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MANAGUA, Nicaragua
Body




It was a scene that reminded Nicaraguans of the 1979 street fights that put the leftist Sandinistas in power.
Students attacked police with rocks and homemade bombs, mortars landing almost at the officers' feet. Police fought back with rubber bullets and tear gas, clouding the air with noxious smoke.
Crudely made explosive devices spilled flames across the pavement. Protesters blocked roads to the main university, effectively dividing east and west Managua.
For more than two hours Monday, movement through the Nicaraguan capital was halted by the rioters and the crowd of spectators.
Ostensibly, the battle was over student demands for an increase in education spending. But behind it was the familiar struggle of leftist Sandinistas battling a conservative administration.
The Sandinistas ruled Nicaragua from 1979 to 1990, after toppling the dictatorship of Anastasio Somoza with unrest that spread across the city and the Central American country.
Last week, limited rioting was sparked by the government's announced cut in university spending. The conservative administration that took office in January argued that leftist university deans had misspent their budgets.
The students have demanded that the government commit 6 percent of its overall budget to education.
President Arnoldo Aleman claimed that the unrest was a Sandinista-led attempt to destabilize the country. He accused Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega of trying to turn the students into anti-government "martyrs."
"The citizens are fed up with this (violence) because the Nicaraguan people want work. Manipulation of several young people has been going on," Aleman said.
Ortega, a former president, in turn blamed the government.
"It is a common attitude from this administration. Since it is clear that the responsibility of what is happening is the government's," Ortega said Tuesday.
"I see an easy solution to this conflict - that the government recognizes this 6 percent (demand) … so that this conflict ends."
Aleman also charged that the protests were an "excuse" by Ortega to divert attention from an ongoing dispute over properties that were confiscated by the Sandinistas in the final days of their government, which lost a 1990 vote.
Aleman has demanded that the Sandinistas surrender the properties or compensate for them.
"They want to complicate things so they do not have to pay for or return the properties," he said.
Ortega, meanwhile, has rejected Aleman's call to participate in a national dialogue to resolve the property issue. Talks began Monday with other political and social activists.
Ortega says he will participate only if Aleman reverses planned cuts in government jobs and programs. He blames the government for higher electricity, telephone and food costs that have hurt poor Nicaraguans.
Aleman said it was "obsolete" to think that the state can be the main employer in the country.
Ortega claims that the government itself is threatening violence. He recently accused the government of secretly organizing paramilitary groups to battle the Sandinistas, a claim the government has denied.
But Aleman said that if armed pro-Sandinista bands in rural northern Nicaragua do not disband, "they will have to face the Nicaraguan army."
 Load-Date: July 2, 1997

 

End of Document
