

Spain's king brings cheers in the heart of communist Cuba
The Associated Press
November 15, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 644 words
Byline: By JOHN RICE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HAVANA
Body




Welcomed by shouts of "Long Live the King!" Spain's king toured the heart of communist Cuba's capital on Monday, bringing royalty to the center of revolution, as Fidel Castro marked a victory over U.S. attempts to isolate his government.
In a dinner late Monday for leaders of the Ibero-American summit, King Juan Carlos said the group should adopt economic policies aimed at benefitting all citizens, especially the poorest - a theme favored by Cuba.
But he also appeared to gently prod his host, saying, "only with an authentic democracy, with full guarantee for liberties and with scrupulous respect for human rights by all of us can our peoples face the challenges of the 21st century with success."
Earlier in the day, Spain stressed that message when Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar met with Cuban dissidents at his country's embassy. Portugal's prime minister also held a similar meeting - breaking a long-standing tradition of foreign leaders shunning dissidents while on Cuba soil.
"I hope all of this is resolved," Aznar said after meeting five prominent dissidents on Monday, including veteran human rights activist Elizardo Sanchez.
The Portuguese, Nicaraguan, Panamanian and Mexican delegations held similar meetings over the weekend.
The Spanish branch of Amnesty International issued a statement Monday calling on the Spanish government to intercede on behalf of inmates the group describes as political prisoners.
Castro spent much of the day at the airport greeting a steady stream of presidents and prime ministers. Dressed in his trademark olive green uniform, he gave an especially warm embrace to his friend and political ally Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez.
Later in the evening, Castro changed into a dark suit for a formal state dinner at his Palace of the Revolution.
This is the first time a Spanish monarch has set foot in Cuba, which Spain conquered in 1511 and ruled for nearly 400 years. Juan Carlos and Queen Sofia joined Aznar and his wife on a tour through the colonial-style streets of Old Havana, built by the Spanish.
Walking along cobblestone streets, the royal couple waved to Cubans leaning from the iron-grill balconies and shouting, "Long live the King."
Uniformed police turned away a group of elderly European tourists in shorts and T-shirts - including one wearing a Che Guevara baseball cap - shortly before Juan Carlos and Sofia arrived at Havana's towering baroque-style cathedral.
"We are proud that the king and queen are visiting us," said Hortensia Rodriguez, 57, as she waited for a glimpse of the king at the old Government Palace on the Plaza de Armas, where viceroys once ruled for the Spanish throne.
At the palace, City Historian Eusebio Leal showed Juan Carlos a throne built more than 200 years ago for a Spanish king who never arrived. Despite invitations to try it out, Juan Carlos declined even to touch it.
On the other side of Havana on Monday, foreign ministers from 21 nations began work on a document outlining the problems involved in a global economy. The heads of state will discuss the same document during their formal working session on Tuesday.
Cuban Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque said Cuba anticipates a "democratic" discussion among the countries, many of which have embraced pro-market policies at odds with the communist country's state-controlled economy.
The gathering by top leaders of 14 Latin American countries, along with those of Spain and Portugal, flies in the face of U.S. efforts to make the communist state an international pariah. Five heads of state were absent.
The presidents of Nicaragua, Costa Rica and El Salvador refused to attend because of Cuba's human rights record or a lack of diplomatic relations.
Presidents Eduardo Frei of Chile and Carlos Menem of Argentina boycotted because of Spain's attempt to extradite former Chilean dictator Gen. Augusto Pinochet from Britain.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos HAV113,116,118
 Load-Date: November 16, 1999

 

End of Document
