

Stamps in the News: United Nations issues environmental stamps
May 16, 1997, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 435 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




A plea to save the environment continues in full force via postage stamps.
"Earth Summit No. 5" is the theme of a special set of three commemorative stamps and four souvenir sheets issued by the United Nations Postal Administration to commemorate the fifth anniversary of the U.N. Conference on Environment and Development. The stamps were designed by the famed American artist Peter Max.
The conference, known as the Earth Summit, was first held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992. Participants adopted an Earth Charter for the conduct of nations and peoples to achieve environmentally sound development, say U.N. officials. An agenda for action established a work program of the international community for the period beyond 1992 and into the 21st century.
Each of the stamps portrays environmental ecosystems - oceans, mountains, rivers and forests.
For Peter Max, a well-known environmentalist, the designs for the U.N. set are a labor of love. In 1974, he created the first "Preserve the Environment" postage stamps for the U.S. Postage Service. In l992, Max designed the 12 stamps to honor the first Earth Summit.
The U.N. Postal Administration announced that the Summit issues also will include a souvenir sheet to hail the "Pacific '97" World Philatelic Exhibition to be held in San Francisco May 29 to June 8.
First-day stamps and covers for the "Earth Summit No. 5" can be ordered by calling toll-free (800) 234-UNPA. Or you can write to UNPA, P.O. Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163-9992,
---
Endangered species
Previously, we reported in this column the issuance by the U.S. Postal Administration of a set of 12 stamps dedicated to Endangered Species of the World.
Now a special collection folder of a single mint stamp for this issuance is available. This collection is contained in a specially designed album with separate pages for each of the 12 species. Each stamp is highlighted by a colorful array of photos relative to the species.
The stamps are not affixed inside the album, although spaces and mounts have been provided for this purpose.
To order the collection folder you may call the toll-free phone number: (800) 234-UNPA.
---
Dinosaurs
Reminding, the U.S. Postal Service has issued a set of 15 new 32-cent stamps featuring the mighty dinosaurs that once ruled the Earth in prehistoric times.
Collectors can still obtain first-day covers from the Philatelic Fulfillment Service, which will provide the covers postmarked with the official first-day of cancellation. Just phone toll-free: (800) STAMP-24. At the same time, you can order the quarterly USA Philatelic catalog.
 

 

 

 
 Load-Date: May 16, 1997

 

End of Document
