

Stamps In The News: Youths are urged to collect stamps by "Kids' Post"
June 20, 1997, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 457 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




The U.S. Postal Service, emphasizing that stamp collecting is fun, is going all out to encourage youngsters to collect stamps and, at the same time, become more knowledgeable about the history of the United States through stamps.
One direct method is via "Kids' Post," the USPS stamp collecting newsletter. It is available free to students and educators by sending a request to: Kids' Post, P.O. Box 2108, Vienna, Va. 22183-2108.
"Kids' Post" has been asking young artists to send in designs for future U.S. stamps. A recent sampling showed most of the designs were in the form of triangular-shaped stamps. The designs featured Black History Month, Help Fish, Love, Peace and the National Forest plus many more ideas.
The latest "Kids' Post" edition told about the new Bugs Bunny stamp, displaying the animated character with his trademark carrot while leaning against a rural mailbox. Bugs has been named ambassador for children's programs by the Postal Service.
The history section of "Kids' Post" features a quiz on U.S. stamps which commemorate and depict celebrities appearing on U.S. stamps. The answers, in the form of stamp illustrations, portray such notables as Albert Einstein, George Washington, Amelia Earhart, Babe Ruth, Duke Ellington, Walt Disney, Charles Lindbergh, Henry Ford, Woodrow Wilson, Jackie Robinson, Buffalo Bill Cody and Mark Twain.
---
Another Scott publication available
The 1998 Standard Postage Stamp Catalogue by Scott, Volume 3, countries of the world G-I, is now available.
Included are Great Britain (plus the stamps of the British Commonwealth and associated nations); Germany and its early states such as Baden, Bavaria, and Prussia; Italy and its early states including Modena, Sardinia and Parma.
The stamps of other countries in the volume include Greece, Guinea, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Iceland, Iran, Iraq and Israel.
There are more than 6,000 value changes in Volume 3, most of them increases.
One of the "hot" countries with upgraded values is Hong Kong. Indonesia, once regarded lightly, also has substantial increases.
The Scott 1998 catalogs are available at your local dealer.
---
More about Endangered Species stamps
When the United Nations issued its 1997 "Endangered Species" stamps, it made sure the selections were almost extinct in various parts of the world.
Some of the species depicted are: the African elephant, the pink cockatoo of Australia, the cougar of North America, the blue crowned pigeon of New Guinea, the Iguana of the Galapagos Islands, the guanaco of the Andes Mountains, the wild horse of Mongolia and the great anteater of South America.
For more information on the Endangered Species stamps, you may phone the United Nations Postal Administration, (800) 234-UNPA.
 
 Load-Date: June 20, 1997

 

End of Document
