

Stamps in the news: America's first black brigadier general is honored
January 3, 1997, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 448 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




Benjamin O. Davis Sr., America's first black brigadier general, has received a well-deserved philatelic salute by the U.S. Postal Service. Davis is the 20th American honored in the Black Heritage stamp series.
Entering the army as a private in 1898, Davis retired after 50 years of service in 1948. He received the personal congratulations of President Harry Truman in the White House.
His honors included the Distinguished Service Medal, the Bronze Star, the French Croix de Guerre and the Order of the Star of Africa by the Liberian government.
A new 32-cent stamp features Davis while on an inspection tour in France in 1944. His name appears at the bottom of the stamp. Along the left border is "Black Heritage."
During World War II, at the Ramitelli Airfield in Italy, Davis pinned the Distinguished Flying Cross on his son's chest for gallantry in the air over Europe as commander of the famed Tuskegee Airmen. Benjamin O. Davis Jr. later became the U.S. Armed Forces' first black three-star lieutenant general.
The Black Heritage stamp series began in 1978 with a stamp honoring abolitionist Harriet Tubman. Other honorees have included Martin Luther King Jr., Mary McLeod Bethune, A. Phillip Randolph, James Weldon, Ida B. Wells and Ernest E. Just.
First day of issue cancellations can be obtained by mail. You may purchase the stamps at your local post office, affix the stamps to your envelopes, address the envelopes and place them in a larger envelope addressed to: Benjamin O. Davis Sr. Stamp, Postmaster, 900 Brentwood Road N.E., Washington, D.C. 20066-9991. Requests must be postmarked by Feb. 27.
---
Another rose issued
As 1996 came to an end, the Postal Service issued a stamp displaying a yellow rose. The 32-cent stamp, in self-adhesive format, is the same design as the 32-cent pink rose stamp issued on June 2, 1995, and the 29-cent red rose stamp, which was released on Aug. 19, 1993.
The stamp was dedicated at a ceremony for the Tournament of Roses in Pasadena, Calif.
---
Life on Mars?
The South American nation of Guyana has issued a souvenir sheet hailing the controversial discovery of information that life may have existed on the planet Mars.
The sheet shows the tubular structure seen through an electron microscope of the Mars meteorite ALH84001 that led many scientists to conclude that life in some form once may have existed on that planet.
The meteorite fell to Earth from Mars and was discovered near the South Pole.
Daniel Goldin, chief of NASA and America's space program, was most excited about the discovery. Other scientists are in disagreement.
Guyana is the first nation to issue a stamp on this discovery. The stamps of Guyana are available at your local dealer.
 Load-Date: January 3, 1997

 

End of Document
