

Stamps In The News: Schonbrunn Palace featured on six new stamps
The Associated Press
December 14, 1998, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 379 words
Body




Schonbrunn Palace, a beautiful World Heritage Site in Austria, is featured on six new stamps released by the United Nations Postal Administration. This set is the last issued by the U.N. Postal Administration for 1998.
A World Heritage Site, according to the United Nations, is a location which exemplifies the culture and history of a particular country and is supported by U.N. funds.
The palace and gardens of Schonbrunn, just outside of Vienna, are prime examples of baroque construction which served as the summer residence of the Hapsburg dynasty. From the 16th century, Schonbrunn was the site of a hunting lodge for the Hapsburg family and friends.
Depicted on the stamps are the front of the palace, the Neptune garden, a white and gilt porcelain stove in a bedroom, a detail of a wall painting, the Great Palm House of Schonbrunn and the gardens of Schonbrunn.
The Schonbrunn stamps can be ordered directly from the U.N. Postal Administration, P.O. Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163-9992. Or you may call (800) 234-UNPA.
Also available from the U.N. Postal Administration are the annual collection folders of single mint stamps and souvenir sheets issued durung 1998. The albums are printed in full color and provide a background of information on each issue. Profiles of the artists are also included. The mint stamps and souvenir sheets are not affixed inside the albums, although spaces and mounts are provided for this purpose.
-
More on the Titanic
The Titanic popularity continues.
The Republic of Guyana, a former British colony situated in South America, has released six new stamps depicting six of the passengers aboard the ill-fated R.M.S. Titanic on its maiden voyage across the North Atlantic in 1912.
Featured are J. Bruce Ismay of the White Star Line, a survivor who directed the loading of the lifeboats; Jack Phillips, a wireless radio operator who did not survive; Margaret Brown (nicknamed the Unsinkable Molly Brown) who survived the ordeal; Capt. Edward J. Smith, who went down with his ship; Frederick Fleet, lookout in the crow's-nest, a survivor, and Thomas Andrews, managing director of the construction company that built the Titanic, who perished with some 1,500 other passengers and crew in the sea tragedy.
 
 -12-14-98 0801EST
 Load-Date: December 14, 1998

 

End of Document
