

Tech stocks took center stage in market hooked on the future
The Associated Press
December 31, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 581 words
Byline: By EILEEN GLANTON, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




American investors made their biggest bets on the future in 1999, embracing any technology company - whether it earned a profit or not. But while major indexes soared to new highs on the last day of the year, the overall market did not share in the great fortune.
"The market looked like a huge warehouse with a wild party going on in one corner," said Tom Madden, a chief investment officer at Federated Investors of Pittsburgh. "If you wander outside, or even if you're just in the wrong corner, it might look like there's nothing going on."
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 25.2 percent in 1999 and the Standard & Poor's 500 rose 19.5 percent. The tech-driven Nasdaq composite index's annual gain of 85.6 percent was more than any other major index in history.
A market enthralled by the promise of the future made any worries seem quaint. Memories of the global financial crises of 1997 and 1998 faded amid upbeat projections about the future economic prospects of Japan, South Korea and Latin America. Fears that the U.S. economy's expansion was running out of control were eased by confidence about increasing productivity.
But most of the gains were racked up by the high-technology companies, while thousands of other stocks languished. The Nasdaq composite dominated the market for the second half of the year, rising past 3,000 and straight through 4,000 while the Dow and the S&P 500 pitched in a narrow range until surging in late December.
The average stock in the S&P 500 rose only about 10 percent. Compare that to Qualcomm Inc., a wireless communications company that saw its stock soar more than 2,600 percent in 1999.
The 30 stocks in the venerable Dow had divergent results, too: Alcoa rose 125 percent while Philip Morris, the worst-performing Dow stock, fell 53 percent under the weight of tobacco litigation.
"It's a tricky market," said Larry Wachtel, market analyst with Prudential Securities. "The indexes tell you one thing and the individual stocks tell you another."
Earlier in the year, market mavens worried that the soaring valuations of technology stocks would eventually crumble, putting an end to the long bull market. But in the last few months of 1999, many leading high-tech companies extended their remarkable gains amid a growing sense that they're worth every dollar.
By contrast, investors dumped shares of many drug companies. Consumer goods stocks also fared poorly, with Gillette declining about 12 percent during the year. Analysts expect brighter futures for both of those sectors in 2000, as foreign nations increase spending on drugs and consumer staples.
Of course, the market faces some potential trouble spots in 2000. Interest rates, on the rise in 1999, could face further increases if the Federal Reserve determines that the economy is still growing too quickly.
Some analysts also believe the U.S. stock market will face more competition next year as resurgent markets in Asia and Europe attract money that's been funneled into U.S. equities in the past two years.
On the other hand, the rest of the world could become the U.S. market's biggest ally. As the global economy continues to bounce back from financial crises, many nations are spending heavily to bring technology up to par.
"The message of the market is clear," said Edward Keon of Prudential Securities. "Technology will likely continue to play a larger role in the lives of people worldwide, and technology should therefore continue to gain a larger share of the world's money."
 Graphic



 
AP Graphics DOW YEAR, NASDAQ YEAR
 Load-Date: January 1, 2000

 

End of Document
