

Text of President Clinton speech on race in America, delivered Saturday to graduates of the University of California, San Diego:
June 14, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1098 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Thank you very much. (Applause.) Thank you.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, the first thing I would like to say is that (student president) Coleen (Sabitini) spoke so well and she said everything I meant to say - (laughter) - that I could do us all a great favor by simply associating myself with her remarks and sitting down. (Applause.)
I would also like to thank Dr. Anagostopoulos for reminding us of the infamous capacity of faculty members to be contrary with one another. (Laughter.) Until he said it, I hadn't realized that probably 90 percent of the Congress once were on university faculties. (Laughter.)
Let me say to Chancellor Dines and President Atkinson, to the distinguished regents and faculty members, to the students and their families and friends who are here today, I'm honored to be joined by a number of people who reflect the kind of America that Coleen Sabatini called for: Senator Barbara Boxer; and Senator Dan Akaka from Hawaii; your congressman, Bob Filner; Congresswoman Maxine Waters, the chair of the Congressional Black Caucus; Congresswoman Patsy Mink; Congressman Jim Clyburn; Congressman John Lewis, a great hero of the civil rights movement; Congresswoman Juanita Milner McDonald; Congressman Carlos Romero Barcelo from Puerto Rico; your lieutenant governor, Gray Davis; the secretary of transportation, Rodney Slater; of Labor, Alexis Herman; of Veterans' Affairs, Jesse Brown; of Education, Dick Riley; our distinguished ambassador to the United Nations, Bill Richardson; our distinguished administrator of the Small Business Administration, Aita Alvarez, the first American of Puerto Rican descent ever to be in a presidential Cabinet. I would like to ask them all to stand, along with the members of the White House staff who are here, including Thurgood Marshall Jr., whose father has a college named for him at this great university. (Cheers.) Would you please stand? (Cheers. Applause.)
And I can't help but noting that there's another person here that deserves some special recognition: University of California at San Diego, class of 1977, a Filipino-American woman who became the youngest captain of the Navy and my personal physician, Dr. Connie Mariano. Where is she? (Cheers. Applause.)
I want to thank you for offering our nation a shining example of excellence, rooted in the many backgrounds that make up this great land. You have blazed new paths in science and technology, explored the new horizons of the Pacific Rim and Latin America. This is a great university for the 21st century.
Today we celebrate your achievements at a truly golden moment for America. The Cold War is over and freedom is now ascendant around the globe, with more than half of the people in this whole world living under governments of their choosing for the very first time. Our economy is the healthiest in a generation and the strongest in the world. Our culture, our science, our technology promise unimagined advances and exciting new careers. Our social problems, from crime to poverty, are finally bending to our efforts.
Of course, there are still challenges for you out there. Beyond our borders, we must battle terrorism, organized crime and drug trafficking, the spread of weapons of mass destruction, the prospect of new diseases and environmental disaster. Here at home, we must ensure that every child has the chance you have had to develop your God-given capacities. We cannot wait for them to get in trouble to notice them.
We must continue to fight the scourge of gangs and crime and drugs. We must prepare for the retirement of the baby boom generation so that we can reduce that child poverty rate that Coleen talked about. We must harness the forces of science and technology for the public good, the entire American public.
But I believe the greatest challenge we face among all those that Coleen talked about is also our greatest opportunity. Of all the questions of discrimination and prejudice that still exist in our society, the most perplexing one is the oldest, and in some ways today the newest, the problem of race.
Can we fulfill the promise of America by embracing all our citizens of all races, not just at a university, where people have the benefit of enlightened teachers and the time to think and grow and get to know each other, but in the daily life of every American community? In short, can we become one America in the 21st century?
I know and I've said before that money cannot buy this goal. Power cannot compel it. Technology cannot create it. This is something that can come only from the human spirit, the spirit we saw when the choir of many races sang as a gospel choir. Today the state of Hawaii, which has a senator and a congresswoman present here, has no majority racial or ethnic group. It is a wonderful place of exuberance and friendship and patriotism.
Within the next three years here in California, no single race or ethnic group will make up a majority of the state's population. Already five of our largest school districts draw students from over 100 different racial and ethnic groups. At this campus, 12 Nobel Prize winners have taught or studied from nine different countries. A half-century from now, when your own grandchildren are in college, there will be no majority race in America.
Now, we know what we will look like. But what will we be like? Can we be one America, respecting, even celebrating our differences, but embracing even more what we have in common? Can we define what it means to be an American, not just in terms of the hyphens showing our ethnic origins, but in terms of our primary allegiance to the values America stands for and values we really live by?
Our hearts long to answer yes, but our history reminds us that it will be hard. The ideals that bind us together are as old as our nation, but so are the forces that pull us apart. Our founders sought to form a more perfect union. The humility and hope of that phrase is the story of America, and it is our mission today.
Consider this: We were born with the Declaration of Independence, which asserted that we were all created equal, and a Constitution that enshrined slavery. We fought a bloody civil war to abolish slavery and preserve the union, but we remained a house divided and unequal by law for another century. We advanced across the continent in the name of freedom, yet in so doing we pushed Native Americans off their land, often crushing their culture and their livelihood. Our Statue of Liberty welcomes poor, tired, huddled masses of immigrants to our borders, but each new wave has felt the sting of discrimination.
 Load-Date: June 14, 1997

 

End of Document
