

The dirt from Ipanema - sewage fouls Rio's beaches
The Associated Press
May 1, 1999, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 572 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




If the girl from Ipanema walked to the beach these days she'd likely turn around and walk right back, holding her nose.
With a major sewer line under repair, the city is dumping tons of raw sewage into the ocean along Rio's most fashionable beaches, creating a foul-smelling brown stain that's a nightmare for a city that thrives on tourism.
Tourists riding the cable car up the famed Sugarloaf Mountain can see the fetid sewage discharging at the mountain's base as it spreads into the sea towards Copacabana beach. A few miles down the coast, another pipe poking out of a hillside of coconut and banana trees spews a torrent of dark water into the surf below, sending an evil-smelling cloud past the beach-front hotels toward fashionable Ipanema and Leblon.
"It hit us coming in. The smell was just awful," said Gregory Tennyson of Diamond Bar, Calif, gazing out the huge picture window of his luxury hotel.
"We had a room with a nice view of the ocean, but we changed it for one in the back," he said. "This is our first time in Rio, and probably our last."
The problem was created by the decrepit sewage pipe that carries untreated waste from the city's residential South Zone and dumps it far out at sea. In January, a pillar supporting the pipe collapsed, and an inspection showed that others were about to give way. The state water utility, CEDAE, built four new pillars, but a 165-foot section of pipe had to be replaced.
The government oil company Petrobras, experts at offshore drilling, supplied a barge and divers to work on the pipe, buried in silt under 80 feet of water.
But while they work, three tons of sewage per second spews onto the coast.
Samples of sea water near Ipanema register a pollution level of up to 16,000 fecal coliform bacteria per 100 milliliters of water - 16 times the accepted level and a risk for dysentery or other stomach ailments.
Most of Rio's beaches have been closed to bathers. Signs along the shore show a thumb pointing down and the warning "Not safe for swimming" in English and Portuguese. On fashionable Leblon beach, public toilets backed up Friday, spewing raw sewage over the mosaic sidewalks into the bike path.
Workers from FEEMA, the state environmental agency, patrol the shore, chasing anyone who strays too near the water and handing out leaflets to explain the danger. Swimming is considered safe only beyond Barra da Tijuca, about 15 miles down the coast.
But barring an occasional surfer, the regular beachgoers have all but disappeared.
"Usually we get lots of business, but now it's empty all day. We hardly see a tourist," said Alberto Henrique dos Santos, an attendant at one of the food and drinks kiosks lining Ipanema beach.
At a small fishing colony in Copacabana, fishermen complained that no one was buying. Consumers are afraid of contamination, even though the fish come from outside the polluted area.
Repairs should be finished by next week, weather permitting, according to CEDAE. Then, it will be another two weeks before the water is clean enough for swimming, FEEMA says.
No long-term environmental damage is expected because the pollutants are organic material that decomposes quickly, said Paulo Cesar Rosman, a professor of oceanographic engineering at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.
Still, it takes more than pollution to scare away some visitors.
"Yeah, we saw all the garbage," said Angel Melendez, a tourist from New York. "We thought it was normal."
 Load-Date: May 1, 1999

 

End of Document
