

The 'Old Lady from Ipanema' arrives in Hollywood: Fernanda Montenegro
The Associated Press
March 24, 1999, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 2317 words
Byline: TODD LEWAN, AP National Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




During her 48 years as an actress, Fernanda Montenegro has endured the kind of accolades usually lavished on the exceptional dead.
Genius, classic artist, First Lady of the Brazilian Theater, Latin American stage immortal…
It's enough reverence to enrage her.
"It's so silly, so decadent," she bristles. Those large, dark eyes - Montenegro's trademark feature - smolder. "I'm not a grand lady of anything. I'm not a star. I never was and never want to be."
Then what is she?
"An anti-star," she replies, with a mischievous grin, "a worker with vocation and a craft. I work and I live for my work - not for compliments."
Times, then, must be tough for Montenegro. At 69, an age when most big-time actresses ease into retirement, she can't get away from new admirers and newfound adulation.
Montenegro has only herself to blame because of a superb turn in "Central Station," a spare, edgy film about a hard-bitten woman who regains her decency by helping a street boy look for his father in Brazil's desolate outback.
The performance has netted her more than two dozen prizes, including best actress awards from the National Board of Review and the Los Angeles Film Critics. She was even nominated for an Academy Award - the first for a Latin American in a non-English-language movie - but she lost to Gwyneth Paltrow.
The sudden avalanche of accolades is more confusing than flattering for Montenegro, a veteran of 56 plays, 9 feature films, 200 televised theater productions and more than two dozen TV soap operas and miniseries.
"I'm supposed to be winding down a career," she says, "not peaking." She chuckles, and her piercing, brown eyes begin to stray.
They are eyes that have taken in the glaciers of Patagonia, the jungles of Amazonia. They've looked into TV cameras and into the grubby faces of street children. They've seen a military dictatorship try to choke creativity out of the Brazilian theater, and fail.
Now they're looking out the tinted windows of the lounge at the Regency Hotel on Park Avenue, as a woman, probably homeless, wobbles past, wrapped head-to-knee in a ratty comforter.
Montenegro smiles.
"Perhaps if I was 20 I'd be a lot more impressed," she goes on. "But look at me. I am not a girl anymore. I am not beautiful. I am not glamorous."
Actually, with her auburn hair tied in a bundle, a checkered, silk scarf hiding a sagging neck and a black topcoat over a cherry-red sweater, she looks more like a high school math teacher than Oscar material.
She strokes a fat, gold ring on her right forefinger. It's the one extravagance, the one bit of jewelry Montenegro indulges in - the ring of Sao Bento, a saint who mystics believe protects the vocal chords. And Montenegro is a mystic of great faith.
"I guess," she shrugs, "mine is a story that was written in the stars."
---
Avenida Vieira Souto rubs up against the swankiest sand in Rio de Janeiro, the beach where, nearly 40 years ago, a tall, tan, young and lovely girl first sauntered past the wide eyes of bossa nova composer Antonio Carlos Jobim.
Ipanema …
It is along this avenue where "The Marvelous City" plays and flirts - where surf purrs on soft sand, where salty Atlantic mists lick the palm trees, where the latest bikinis are always, albeit barely, on display.
It's the place where Fernanda Montenegro and her producer husband, Fernando Torres, are spending their twilight years, quietly, with no fuss, atop a five-story, white marble building, a stone's throw away from the sea.
Their penthouse is comfortable, not luxurious. It has a small terrace, white, stucco walls with sketches and paintings, worn sofas and Santana, a wood statue of a deity from the Afro-Brazilian state of Bahia. The rear - "the foxhole," as she calls it - has a patio for tropical plants, a large hall for rehearsing, and twin offices. There is also the "library," its walls covered in books.
Montenegro reads hungrily, storing up culture the way some women do shoes. Her favorite novel is "Joseph and His Brothers," by Thomas Mann, though writings of Carl Gustav Jung, the Swiss behaviorist, are always on her night stand.
Between rehearsals, Montenegro listens constantly to classical and Brazilian music, and had she been born with a good voice, she says, she would have been an opera singer instead of an actress.
On stage, she is instinctive, spontaneous. But at home, she's a creature of habit.
She wakes, without fail, at 8 a.m., has herbal tea, toast, then puts on square sunglasses, a cap, slacks, blouse and running shoes, and heads out in a hurried gate for a 3-mile trek up and down Ipanema's mosaic sidewalk. Next, a long shower, during which she stretches her limbs and vocal chords.
Over another cup of tea, she reads four newspapers and then slips into her office to dispatch a blizzard of faxes and letters with her personal assistant, Jadir. At 1 p.m. she breaks for an hour lunch - chowder and her one fruit of the day, usually papaya - then pores over scripts well into the evening.
Her concentration is prodigious, her appetite for work insatiable. "She's a warrior," says Ana Luiza Lumiere, her agent. "She rehearses 12 hours a day, if you let her. She outlasts her directors."
Montenegro jokes that her energy comes from "steroids." In fact, she avoids caffeine, detests sugar. Her favorite drink is water, her preferred dish, broiled chicken and carrots. Between scenes on stage, she pops raisins, nonstop.
She is an optimist, a humanist, and so, "by necessity," she says, a firm believer in the spirits. She's also superstitious. Before each theatrical performance, she scours the stage floor for loose nails. Finding one, she squeezes it, bends it - for luck - up to the moment she walks on stage.
Face to face, Montenegro is vital, informal, candid as glass. Her vocabulary is rich, at times tempestuous. When she speaks, her eyes glow, her hands and eyebrows gesture animatedly, mannerisms Montenegro says she picked up as a child mimicking the actors of silent films.
Her sense of humor is self-deprecating, dark. Asked how she felt when she heard of her Oscar nomination, she replied: "Stupid." Was she preparing an acceptance speech, in case she won? "I wouldn't waste the energy on warm-ups." Has she received any offers from Hollywood producers since her nomination? "They haven't mustered the courage to ask me yet."
She has a wide circle of friends, yet she receives few of them at home. Rarely does she venture out, except to perform, or sneak away to a rustic, country home in the mountains north of Rio.
Family friends say Montenegro became more reclusive about eight years ago, when her husband suffered a prolonged bout of depression, and, some say, a mild stroke. She won't talk about that, or her innermost feelings; there are emotions, she says, that "die when they are spoken."
And yet, it is not unusual for Montenegro to stay hours after a performance signing autographs for every last fan. "Most actresses turn up their noses at us," says Eli "Watermelon" Martins, a barrel-shaped man who has worked the lights for 14 years at Rio's Joao Caetano theater. "But every time she comes in, Dona Fernanda says, 'Watermelon, my son! Are you well?' She makes you feel like family."
Montenegro has a profound compassion for the oppressed, the mistreated, the unfortunate. She frequently arranges discount tickets for lower-income Brazilians to see her perform.
At the Leblon Theaterhouse last October, ticket prices for the Chekhov play, "The Seagull," were marked down to $ 4. A week before the show, a TV crew knocked on her dressing room door. Montenegro, not expecting visitors, appeared in a red robe, hair in curlers, face smeared in cold cream.
"She looked straight into that TV camera and implored viewers to come out to the show," says Ecila Mutzenbecher, a co-owner of the theater. "Could you imagine a Hollywood star doing that?"
---
In "Central Station" Montenegro plays Dora, a former schoolteacher who makes a living as a pen-for-hire for illiterate people in Rio's train station. There's a scene in which she gazes out the window of a grubby tenement in the poor, industrial area of Cascadura, which means "Hardshell."
A commuter train clacks past, the power lines above it throwing blue sparks, followed by Dora's melancholy stare, the look of a woman watching life lurch into darkness.
It wasn't the first time Montenegro had seen the desperate plight of the underclass of Rio's North Side. She was born and raised in the districts through which the commuter trains cut, and in fact, rode those trains to odd jobs as a teen-ager, dreaming of stardom.
Of course, she was not Fernanda Montenegro then, and the city's North Side was not a graffiti-ed, crowded jumble of tenements and shacks. Back then, Cascadura was a place where chestnut and orange trees outnumbered buildings, where goats, ducks, chickens and cows roamed in pasture, where sandy roads led to open church squares.
And Montenegro was Arlette Pinheiro Esteves da Silva, born Oct. 16, 1929, the eldest of three girls. Her father was a woodcarver who preached hard work and frugality; her mother, the daughter of Sardinian immigrants who found work in the countryside as potato pickers.
When she was 4, her father took her to see her first Charlie Chaplin film. Her first role, at age 8, was as an army officer in a school play.
"Above the audience, up on stage, I felt a magic sensation, as if I was levitating," she recalled later. She decided then and there she was going to be like her heroines - Greta Garbo, Marlene Dietrich, Bette Davis.
It was the late 1940s. Coca-Cola had just arrived in Brazil, the military government was releasing political prisoners, the Communist Party was legalized and theater was flourishing. When not teaching Portuguese to foreigners and studying English at the Berlitz school, Arlette would ride the train three times a week to see plays and movies in downtown Rio. She absorbed her favorite Brazilian actors, and devoured her favorite film, "Gone With the Wind," until she memorized Scarlett O'Hara's words.
At 16, she won a federal contest and became an announcer on public Radio MEC, reading chapters from books and plays on a program called "Literary Passage." Unable to afford college or acting school, she said years later, "The radio job was, for me, my formal education."
Finding Arlette too "un-literary sounding," she invented a new "stormy, strong" first name - Fernanda. Montenegro was the surname of a family doctor.
In 1950, with her stage name and a brand-new actress card, she tried out for a bit part in a play at the Copacabana Theater. The production lasted four months. A romance with one of her co-actors, Fernando Torres, was not as brief. They wed on April 6, 1953, and haven't left each other's side in 45 years.
Montenegro found she was also smitten with the stage. "Acting, I discovered two people inside myself," she said. The first, Arlette, was tireless, rational, meticulous. The other, Fernanda, was romantic, spontaneous, daring.
As Brazilian cities swelled in size, so did Montenegro's fame. In 1952, she won the Brazilian Theater Critics Association's prize for best new actress. Her fame grew with the arrival of television, as she performed in plays that were broadcast live to all points of the country.
For the next 12 years, Montenegro shuttled the 220 miles between Rio and Sao Paulo, lodging in dingy hotels, eating one meal a day. Between 1953 and 1964, she starred in 32 plays, won eight national acting awards and completed her first movie, "A Falecida" ("The Deceased").
Two things happened that year to slow her down: The complicated birth of her son, Claudio (she later had a daughter, Fernanda), and a military coup.
At first, the regime tolerated the arts. But by 1967, government censors were canceling plays, rewriting scripts and denying federal grants for the theater.
Brazil's secret police kept files on all actors and actresses. Blacklists shattered careers. Armed agents stormed into acting schools. It was not unusual for a writer, musician or actor to get a wake-up call in the middle of the night suggesting an immediate departure from the country, and many did.
Montenegro went the other way, opening a theater production company in Rio with her husband. But there were frustrations, as she saw plays - initially approved by censors - being banned days before opening night.
There also were death threats. "I would go on stage in absolute panic," Montenegro recalled years later.
In 1979, after a performance of the play "E … " ("It is ...") in Sao Paulo, the couple returned to the home of director Celso Nunes, where they were staying as guests. They were sitting on the bed, about to turn out the light, when the window blew apart.
"A stray bullet," the police told her. They never investigated the attack. During the play's eight-month run, six bodyguards shadowed Montenegro, except when she was on stage. Throughout each performance, the theater's lights remained on.
She took comfort in one thought: "One day, the terror must end."
---
It's a frigid February evening in New York. There is no terror. There is only joy in the Montenegro camp. Earlier this day, Hollywood had announced her Oscar nomination. And now she's appearing on the David Letterman show.
Montenegro has spent the last three months on airplanes, at award podiums, on talk show sets. The questions are always the same: Who are you? Where are you from? And, why haven't we heard about you before?
She's emotionally drained, a little jittery, her hands cold.
But there she is, in a black dress jacket and skirt, hair tied back in that spinsterly bundle, trying to explain to an American audience, in 5 minutes, what she's been doing the last 48 years.
Letterman starts simple. He wants to know where she lives.
Rio de Janeiro, she replies.
"You live right on the beach?"
"I live right on the beach. In Ipanema."
"Oh, in Ipanema!"
"Yes," Montenegro says, coyly batting her lashes, "I am the old lady from Ipanema."
 Load-Date: March 24, 1999

 

End of Document
