

The Duke of Windsor's abdication desk returns after 60 years
August 11, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 640 words
Byline: By Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Six decades after Britain's king gave up his throne for the woman he loved, the desk at which he signed his abdication is back in the country.
So are their wedding photographs, a brass bell from the royal yacht Britannia which he took into exile, and a 1965 Christmas card from his niece, Queen Elizabeth II, signed "Lilibet."
Hundreds of Britons crowded into Sotheby's auction house Monday to see 200 of more than 40,000 possessions from the Paris home of the late Duke and Duchess of Windsor, which are being sold for charity in New York from Sept. 11-19.
The sale will be a final chapter in one of the 20th century's greatest love stories. On Dec. 10, 1936, King Edward VIII relinquished an empire that stretched around the world to marry American divorcee Wallis Warfield Simpson, the woman he wanted by his side forever.
"This is a collection that is not only important to royal history and English history but really to world history," said Joseph Friedman, who was curator of the Windsor collection from 1988-93 and now heads Sotheby's furniture department.
"It is the greatest sale of royal possessions we can remember, and certainly for hundreds of years," he said.
Sotheby's chose items focusing on the duke's childhood in England and short reign as king for the London exhibition, which started Sunday and ends Friday. Other items from the Windsor collection are being shown in Chicago, Los Angeles, Sao Paolo, Brazil and Buenos Aires.
The Windsors' turn-of-the-century merchant's house in Paris' fashionable Bois de Boulogne was their only permanent home after he abdicated. Their lives ended in Paris - his in 1972, hers in 1986 - but they are buried in England, side by side at Windsor Castle.
The Windsors had no children and the duchess gave the bulk of her estate to charity, with the Institut Pasteur in Paris the major beneficiary.
Under an agreement with the city of Paris, the home could be a private museum, but not open to the public. So its current owner, Harrods department store chairman Mohamed Al Fayed, decided to sell its contents to raise money for children's charties worldwide, and use the house for himself.
A previous Sotheby's auction - of the duchess' jewelry - brought in $ 45.3 million in Geneva in 1987, a record for a jewelry sale. The New York sale is expected to make $ 7 million but Henry Wyndham, chairman of Sotheby's in Britain, said he believes it will make even more because of the romance of the Windsors.
One of the highlights of the sale is the "Abdication Desk," a mahogany library table from about 1755 with a slightly worn green leather inset on top, valued at $ 30,000-$ 50,000. A photo behind it showed its place in the Windsors' Paris home, in front of French doors overlooking the garden.
The London exhibition also features a portrait of the duke as Prince of Wales by Sir Alfred Munnings, estimated to bring between $ 550,000 to $ 870,000.
From his childhood, there's a Bible from his "loving Mama," the future Queen Mary, and the ceremonial sword used at his investiture as Prince of Wales at Caernarvon Castle in 1911.
As Prince of Wales, there's the diary he kept on a tour to Australia, New Zealand and colonies in the Atlantic and Pacific in 1920, and a huge map showing his travels around the world.
From his brief reign, royal watchers can see the red leather box in which state papers were delivered, with "The King" stamped in gold. And from his exile, there is a signed copy of the duchess' 1956 autobiography, "The Heart Has Its Reasons" inscribed, "To David, My darling W."
The exhibition in Chicago also opens Sunday and runs through Wednesday. The Los Angeles exhibition is from Aug. 18-21. The Sao Paolo, Brazil exhibition is from Aug. 13-14 and the Buenos Aires exhibition on Aug. 21-22. All 40,000 plus items in the sale will be displayed at Sotheby's in New York from Sept. 5-11.
 Load-Date: August 11, 1997

 

End of Document
