

The Bikini, Symbol of Postwar Liberation, in Fabulous Form at 50
July 14, 1996, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 565 words
Byline: By SUZY PATTERSON, AP Fashion Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




The dark days of World War II had ended and a liberated France was in the mood to let go.
So when a French automotive engineer sketched a two-piece bathing suit and named it after the South Pacific atoll where the Americans were setting off atomic bombs, the creation became an instant - though controversial - hit.
Fifty years later, the bikini is still a hit.
The naughty little two-piecer made a sensational debut at the fashionable Molitor swimming pool in Paris back in 1946. A year after the Nazis were kicked out of France, it was another Liberation of sorts.
"It meant the liberation of the body," said Catherine Join-Dieterle, head curator of the Galliera Fashion Museum in Paris.
The bikini has hardly slowed down, and now has gone high-tech. Allowing for a few blips with more modest one-piece tank suits fashionable in the late 1980s, the bikini blossoms, or rather recedes.
It is baring more flesh than ever, and often in neon shades of green or pink, though Chanel is hanging in with black and white. And the price tag gets ever larger.
The original was a much more baggy version than today's high-tech elasticized models. Today's panties often barely cover the pelvis, though they're not quite the G-string promoted in Rio de Janeiro since the 1970s.
The swimsuit fashioned of three strategic triangles was the brainchild of Louis Reard, a Renault engineer-designer who named it after the A-bomb test site. The little bikini created its own mini-explosion in the press and with early paparazzi.
Women's navels hadn't been bared in public since the days of Ramses II's slaves of ancient Egypt, and the uproar from churches and other critics was deafening. Bikinis were immediately banned on beaches in some predominantly Roman Catholic countries. Even Hollywood frowned on them at first.
But they were enthusiastically taken up by postwar French women, and soon became a trademark of curvaceous Brigitte Bardot and other nubile beauties.
Americans were late-comers and finally took bikinis to New York's Jones Beach in the late 1950s. The two-piece caught on with the baby boomers, the exploding surf culture, beach music and Hollywood cinema.
The French very often discard tops and turn the whole look into a monokini, wearing bottoms only, and baring the breasts.
Relative modesty came back a few years ago with fashionable stretch one-piece tank suits, cut-outs in interesting places, or backless looks. But designers like Karl Lagerfeld, Donna Karan and Calvin Klein have brought out two pieces again.
"The bikini has made a comeback," said Haruo Kimura, the Tokyo-based author of a book on swimwear history.
Chanel is showing teeny-weeny little bits of software for the hardware price of $ 350-$ 400. Pretty hefty for a lightweight 40 square inches of fabric.
But they're selling well, say saleswomen in the chic Avenue Montaigne shop.
"Small as it is, the bikini is a very big item," said Annick Huet, a spokeswoman for Rasurel, a top French swimwear manufacturer, now a subsidiary of the American conglomerate Warnaco. "We're seeing nearly 50 percent bikini sales, versus one-piece, up considerably over a few years ago."
She reckons the clinging new fabrics are attractive. They're also secure - gone are the days of diving into the lake and losing your bikini pants, thanks to new stretch fabrics.
"We even have some models in fabrics that mold to the skin with body heat," Ms. Huet said.
 Load-Date: July 14, 1996

 

End of Document
