

The consumer is towing the economy
The Associated Press
November 8, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 581 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Neither fear nor economic slowdown, nor business uncertainty, nor plunging stocks can keep consumers from spending, so long as they can earn or borrow the money to do so. Or so it seems.
Just a short while ago, the Federal Reserve was worried that business lenders were shying away from making loans, retailers were anticipating a dull holiday selling season, and business confidence wavered.
The reasons were obvious: an economic crisis in Asia, doubts about Latin American economies, Russia's bankruptcy, and a slowdown in U.S. economic growth to a second-quarter rate of just 1.8 percent.
The situation has improved a bit since then. Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan told securities brokers at their convention in Florida recently that business fear might be dissipating, though problems remain.
Consumers see things differently. While the latest Fed survey of its 12 districts suggested consumers, like businesses, were cautious about the economic future, the hard figures said something else.
In the third quarter, for example, consumers spent at a rate equal to 99.9 per cent of disposable personal income. While disposable income rose at a 2.6 percent annual rate, consumer spending rose 3.9 percent.
In short, while business hedged the future, consumers took risks.
To illustrate, business capital spending fell for the first time since 1991, suggesting less faith in the economy's future. But during the same period, consumers dipped into savings, indicating confidence.
In fact, fearless consumers showed so little concern about the future they reduced the personal savings rate to a postwar record low of just 0.1 percent. The consumer's role, they seemed to say, is to consume.
Added evidence of this attitude is contained in better-than-expected retail sales figures for October. Wal-Mart, the nation's largest retailer, reported a total year-on-year sales gain of 13.5 percent.
The stock market, in which today's consumers are actively involved through pension funds and mutual funds, also soared to the surprise of Wall Street old-timers. It was, they said, the shortest bear market ever.
While that might or might not be so, the latest figures from the mutual fund industry's Investment Company Institute show incoming cash rose to $ 6.53 billion in September after a $ 11.7 billion August outflow.
Perhaps the quickest explanation for the continued confidence of consumers is that American workers received a 3.7 percent increase in wages and salaries over the past year, biggest in more than six years.
In the past, raises of that sort generally were in response to or accompanied by inflation. Not this time, however. In the 12 months that ended with September consumer prices rose less than 2 percent.
That combination, plus a rising stock market, propelled consumer confidence measurements. Add to this the ease with which home equity could be tapped and multiple credit cards obtained, and spending comes easy.
Will it continue?
Evidence of an economic slowdown continues to build. Additions to payrolls are diminishing. Expectations of profits are declining. And corporations are slower than before in committing to the future.
In the past, consumers often anticipated negative events that might have an impact on their pocketbooks and, in response, began cutting their spending.
That they haven't done so indicates either of two things - that their response has for some reason been delayed, or that maybe the consumer senses an economic upswing the business world hasn't yet caught onto.
 Load-Date: November 8, 1998

 

End of Document
