

The SBA Administrator is a risk taker herself
The Associated Press
December 1, 1999, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 673 words
Byline: By VIVIAN MARINO, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Two decades ago, Aida Alvarez was an accomplished journalist, winning awards for her broadcast coverage of guerrilla activities in El Salvador.
She also was growing restless. "I wanted to do something different," she recalled. "(But) for a long time I didn't have the guts to do it."
Then it dawned on her during a television assignment in the countryside of El Salvador in the early 1980s, against the backdrop of distant gunfire:
"I was putting my physical life on the line for a story, and I'm uneasy about changing careers? The worst that can happen is that I go back to where I was."
So Ms. Alvarez moved on to jobs in public service, investment banking and financial regulation. And now she among the ranks of the most powerful women in America, serving as administrator to the U.S. Small Business Administration. She is the first Hispanic woman, and the first person of Puerto Rican heritage, to serve in the Cabinet.
It is from her own personal experience, as well as in her current capacity, that she advises today's fledgling and would-be entrepreneurs.
"Be prepared to take a risk, recognizing that failure is just one of the steps along the way to success - of course you don't start out with the idea of failure," she said during a recent interview. "It really is about letting go of your fears.
"If you have a plan, the money will come. There's plenty of money to finance businesses."
The SBA, in fact, is the nation's largest financial backer of small business loans. It's also the top adviser to entrepreneurs - last year alone it offered management and technical assistance to more than a million small business owners. It expects to be even busier as more baby boomers decide to go out on their own, including many working mothers starting businesses from their homes.
As head of the SBA, Ms. Alvarez directs the delivery of numerous financial and business development programs for entrepreneurs, including a $45 billion portfolio of direct and guaranteed business and disaster loans.
In fiscal year 1999, SBA's major programs - which include the 7(a) general loans and 504 Certified Development Company loans - guaranteed a record $12.5 billion to small businesses, up from the previous record $10.8 billion in fiscal year '98.
Ms. Alvarez notes a favorable change in the lending climate for small businesses. In 1953, when the SBA was established, few banks would take a chance on lending to small businesses, but today lenders want a piece of the small business market.
"The large business market is saturated," she said.
Other factors are helping to improve the climate for small businesses: advances in technology and the Internet, which allow someone working out of the family kitchen to gain access to a global marketplace, locate the least expensive goods and services and keep track of the competition.
"High technology used to reduce jobs, but it's creating jobs and businesses today," Ms. Alvarez said. "You can't be competitive if you don't use technology. To succeed in business you need a good product or idea and a good business plan. You also need to utilize the latest business technology."
Dropping by the midtown Manhattan boardroom of SBA lender Banco Popular, the 50-year-old Ms. Alvarez talked about a wide range of issues affecting today's small business owner.
She spoke animatedly about what she has achieved since being sworn in on March 7, 1997, and what she hopes to achieve next year.
Among her accomplishments: continued streamlining of staff within the SBA, a larger loan portfolio for small businesses and the first sale of business loans to the private sector. Among her goals for Y2K and beyond: simplify the loan process by working toward "paperless" transactions, expand markets beyond U.S. borders, expand the micro-loan program for loans under $250,000 for the smallest of small businesses.
"Small businesses are a part of our lives. They're about community," she said. "They have that neighborhood service - hire people in the neighborhood, service people in neighborhood."
 
End adv for release anytime
 
 Load-Date: December 2, 1999

 

End of Document
