

The Netherlands Wins Men's Volleyball Gold Over Italy
August 5, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 500 words
Byline: By BERNIE WILSON, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: ATLANTA
Body




The Italians had been waiting four years for the moment they'd have the Olympic volleyball gold medals draped around their necks.
Then again, so had the Dutch.
Losers to Italy in four big tournaments, the Netherlands outlasted Italy in a thrilling five-set Olympic final on Sunday.
It ended with Italian star Andrea Giani hitting a desperate shot into the out-of-bounds marker on the net.
The Dutch had lost to Brazil in the 1992 Olympics, and then to Italy in the 1994 World Championships, the 1995 World Cup, and two European Championships.
"I played only for the next point," Dutch star Bas van de Goor said after the 15-12, 9-15, 16-14, 9-15, 17-15 win. "I tried to remember what happened in the game, but I can't remember anything but the last point, Giani hitting in the antenna, then a very big amount of pressure off our backs. And finally we can say for the next four years, we're Olympic champions."
The Italians were left stunned by another failure in the only major tournament they haven't won this decade. It was the second time in less than two months that the No. 2 Dutch beat the No. 1 Italians, the first coming in a five-set World League final in Rotterdam in June.
"I'm very sorry because our boys have done all that they could," Italian coach Julio Velasco said.
In the deciding fifth set, when teams can score even if they're not serving, each squad's biggest star, Giani and van de Goor, had a say in the biggest points.
Giani spiked the ball off van de Goor's arm to give Italy match point. Van de Goor responded with a spike down the middle for a 15-15 tie.
Ron Zwerver had a kill to bring up match point for the Dutch. Van de Goor dropped in one of his powerful jump serves to begin the rally, but Samuele Papi shanked a pass that led to a desperate set, leaving Giani too tight of an angle to clear the net.
"For Italy, it is very disappointing," Zwerver said. "They have won everything except the Olympics. We pushed them so hard that maybe they flipped out."
In the 1992 Olympics, favored Italy was eliminated by the Netherlands in a five-set quarterfinal. The Netherlands then lost to Brazil in the gold-medal match.
Still, this is Italy's best Olympic finish since taking the bronze at Los Angeles in 1984.
Giani led all players with 36 kills. Olof van der Meulen had 34 for the Dutch.
Earlier, Yugoslavia returned from Olympic banishment to win its first men's volleyball medal, beating Russia in four sets for the bronze.
Kept out of the 1992 games because of United Nations sanctions stemming from its civil war, Yugoslavia made a surprising run through this tournament, capped by its 15-8, 7-15, 15-8, 15-9 win Sunday.
Yugoslavia finished sixth in its only other Olympics, in 1980.
The Yugoslavs played their last five matches without captain Dejan Brdovic, who returned home after his 14-month-old son died of a brain tumor.
Because of the U.N. sanctions, the Yugoslavs have been together only since 1995. Before that, most of their players competed professionally in other countries.
 Load-Date: August 5, 1996

 

End of Document
