

The Meadowlands bids to keep Nets and Devils at complex
The Associated Press
March 16, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 812 words
Byline: By JEFFREY GOLD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J.
Body




With two of its tenants clamoring for accommodations in different cities, the operators of the Meadowlands sports complex on Tuesday proposed a new, privately financed $ 212 million arena for basketball and hockey.
The new arena would sit next to Giants Stadium, while the existing home to the New Jersey Nets and New Jersey Devils would be demolished to make room for a privately financed, $ 165 million sports-themed entertainment, dining and retail venue.
No financing has yet been arranged for the most ambitious project in the 23-year history of the complex, totalling nearly $ 400 million.
The teams, which are being offered a piece of the action in return for being among the investors, had no immediate comment.
The plans asks taxpayers to provide $ 72 million in infrastructure improvements, such as additional parking and new roads.
The Devils and Nets have already introduced plans for new arenas - the Nets in Newark and the Devils in Hoboken. All three plans seek some public money, so Gov. Christie Whitman has some influence over the outcome.
Whitman, on a South American trade mission, issued a statement Tuesday calling the Meadowlands plan "an effective blueprint" for bringing the complex into the 21st century and protecting taxpayer interests.
She also wants to keep the state's five professional teams in New Jersey. All are now based at the Meadowlands complex: the Giants, Jets and Major League Soccer MetroStars in Giants Stadium and the Devils and Nets in the Continental Airlines Arena.
The Meadowlands proposal includes more private suites and improved lighting for the stadium, estimated to cost less than the $ 43 million spent on recent renovations.
Whitman's special advisor on the Meadowlands, Richard S. Mroz, participated in the presentation, and said the governor will be analyzing the plan and hopes to reach a consensus with the teams.
The administration has made no commitment to spending public money on any plan, and wants to see how much private money is available before setting a limit on taxpayer levy, Mroz said.
If the Nets and Devils do decide to leave East Rutherford, the Meadowlands would forego the new arena, but still raze the existing arena and build the sports-themed venue, said Dennis Robinson, president of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, the semi-public agency that operates the complex.
That would be fine with Newark deputy mayor Alfred Faiella, who is working with the new owners of the Nets to bring the team - and the Devils - to the state's largest city.
"Our project would revitalize a whole downtown and be linked to mass transit, and I don't know that you could do that at the Meadowlands," Faiella said.
Meadowlands planners envision a two-mile rail spur to the Bergen Line of NJ Transit, but it has no funding yet.
Despite that deficiency, the planners described the Meadowlands, which also includes a harness track, as nearly unique because it has so many major sports.
The entertainment venue, along with a plaza between the new arena and Giants Stadium, would create a place where fans and families could come any time, as well as before and after games, said architect Ron Turner. His firm, whose credits include Boston's Fleet Center, was retained by the sports authority to assess the future of the Meadowlands complex.
Among its conclusions: the current arena did not merit renovation.
Planners also estimate that the enhanced Meadowlands would produce $ 82.2 million in tax revenue, up 40 percent from 1998, and provide 12,750 full-time jobs, compared to 7,590 last year.
Robinson said that it would take three to four years to complete the improvements - after financing was in place and talks with the Devils and Nets bore fruit.
The Nets and Devils agree that the 17-year-old arena does not have enough luxury boxes and other amenities that make money for teams.
The planned new arena has about the same number of seats as the old one - 19,000, depending on the game - but up to 100 luxury suites, compared to 29 in the current building, and 2,666 club seats, compared to none now.
The Nets have escape clauses in their lease in 2001 and 2004, while the Devils' lease expires in 2007.
Both teams released outlines for their new arenas last week.
The Nets want both teams under one roof - a $ 300 million, 18,500-seat basketball and hockey arena they want to build on 40 acres in downtown Newark that needs $ 100 million in public financing. The plan also includes a 30,000-seat stadium for the MetroStars, an office building, a hotel and parking decks.
Devils owner John J. McMullen has insisted he can go it alone, with just $ 30 million from the state, for a $ 270 million riverfront 18,500-seat arena in Hoboken that includes movie theaters, restaurants and shopping.
Robinson and some other experts concede a single-sport venue can succeed, but all agree a two-sport building has a better chance.
 Load-Date: March 16, 1999

 

End of Document
