

The American dream of many migrant farmworkers died with big freeze
January 30, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 629 words
Byline: By TOM WELLS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FLORIDA CITY, Fla.
Body




The American Dream for Sara Rosas, her husband and their 1-year-old daughter may have slipped away while they slept.
Two weeks ago, a hard freeze in Florida, where the nighttime highs during the winter are usually in the 60s and 70s, killed millions of dollars in fruit and vegetables, wiping out the jobs of up to 20,000 migrant farmworkers.
Before the freeze, many of them, like the Rosas family, had hoped to settle down. Now they may be forced to hit the road again and return to their frayed lives looking for work from Ohio to Florida.
"I thought we had found a home. I thought our little girl could grow up without having to live out of a car and beg for the key to the restroom at gasoline stations," said Mrs. Rosas, 19, cradling her daughter in one arm while hanging out the laundry.
The Rosas and hundreds of other migrant farmworkers have been living year-round in rent-subsidized homes outside Florida City, in a neighborhood that looks no different from many in nearby Miami - new, three-bedroom houses with yards on winding streets dotted with palm trees.
The homes are a far cry from the leaky and filthy wooden shacks around the country that most of the migrants had known while growing up and traveling from place to place to harvest crops.
The Florida City housing, with its rent subsided by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, had meant that many of the migrant workers could put down roots rather than head north for the spring and summer crops.
Their savings from working hard from November through March - 10 hours a day, seven days a week - and from a little farm work during the rest of the year were enough to allow them to remain in South Florida.
But the freeze means that many will have to head for other warm spots to pick fruits and vegetables. Many of the migrant workers, mostly from Mexico, Guatemala and Haiti, don't have enough money to survive until the last winter harvest, in March and April.
"Some families have already moved. We're going to see more. There's a lot of pressure on these people to decide very quickly if they will be able to stay here or to move on," said Juanita Mainster, director of resident service for Everglades Community Association, a nonprofit group that helps migrant farmworkers.
"They're eligible for food stamps and unemployment, but it takes weeks to process their applications, and they just don't have enough money to hang on until then."
Similarly, USDA is considering waiving or deferring rent on the hundreds of USDA-subsidized homes, but that requires a federal disaster declaration first, and Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman has not yet made a decision, said Tom Kirby, government affairs director of the Dade County Farm Bureau.
The state of Florida put out a plea for charitable donations, but so far it has offered no direct aid.
Florida is the nation's No. 2 supplier of winter produce, after California. It supplies the Northeast and some of the Midwest.
The 24-degree freeze the night of Jan. 18 caused an estimated $ 93 million in damage to tomatoes, squash, corn, mangoes and other fruit and vegetables in Dade County alone. The crop damage elsewhere in Florida was put at $ 200 million and produce prices around the country are already rising.
Mrs. Rosas, who was born into a family of migrant workers from Mexico and has lived in the Florida City neighborhood for the past year, said that since the freeze she and her 24-year-old husband, Roberto, lie awake at night, fretting about what they will do when the $ 286 rent comes due, about not having enough to eat, about where to go to look for work.
It is still too cold in the northern climates for planting to begin. They said they will head for Georgia or another Sunbelt state.
Mrs. Rosas said they can't wait for food stamps: "We only have $ 20."
 Load-Date: January 30, 1997

 

End of Document
