

The worst may be yet to come in Brazil's crisis
The Associated Press
February 8, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 739 words
Byline: By HAROLD OLMOS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




Brazilians have a saying that when the team is winning, everybody plays well and the team's captain shines. President Fernando Henrique Cardoso knows the feeling.
Until recently, Cardoso was the hero of Brazil's most successful anti-inflation crusade ever. His popularity was breaking records, and he breezed to re-election in October.
But ever since Brazil's currency took a tumble on Jan. 13, less than two weeks after his inauguration, Cardoso has been struggling to save the real, the shreds of his anti-inflation plan and his own presidency.
The real - which Cardoso he used to call Brazil's "passport to modernization" - has lost 35 percent of its value against the dollar. Inflation is roaring back, after plunging from 2,700 percent in 1993 to about 2 percent last year.
While there's no consensus on how to fix Latin America's largest economy, everybody agrees that the treatment will be long and painful, and that the worst may be yet to come.
Last week, the government and the International Monetary Fund set up the prescription: deeper budget cuts to reduce the deficit and high interest rates to curb inflation.
Many analysts wonder how Brazil will do it.
Interest rates, now at 39 percent, put a tremendous strain on the government's domestic debt, which last year rose to 305 billion reals, or about $ 164 billion. The increase is equivalent to some $ 175 million a day. That is more than $ 2,000 per second.
Meanwhile, the economy spins towards stagflation, a dire condition of simultaneous inflation and economic contraction. Brazil's economy is expected to shrink some 3 percent this year while also struggling with double-digit inflation. That will only worsen the eternal inequalities of Brazil, where the richest 10 percent earn 30 times more than the poorest 40 percent.
"The social consequences of new economic adjustments will be traumatic," said Sergio Mendonca, director of DIEESE, a union-linked think tank.
As the real plummeted, the government named a new president of the country's central bank - the third in three weeks. The choice of Arminio Fraga Neto, a former associate of billionaire financier George Soros, calmed markets and strengthened the real to around 1.80-1.90.
Still, it seems everyone - in Brazil and abroad - has a prescription on what should be done.
Some think Brazil should privatize oil conglomerate Petrobras and Banco do Brasil. Others say the country should adopt a parliamentary system of government, in which Cardoso would appoint prime minsters but would lose some presidential powers.
Argentina's President Carlos Menem urged Brazil to adopt his country's system that ties the currency to the dollar. Although Cardoso discarded the idea, Menem is likely to insist on it again when they meet Friday to discuss the impact of Brazil's crisis on Mercosur, the trade bloc that includes Uruguay and Paraguay.
Brazil is the main trade partner of every country in the region. A continent-wide crisis could affect even the United States, which sends 20 percent of its exports to Latin America.
Nobody here expected the crisis to unravel so quickly.
"The storm found us without an umbrella. It's been only a few weeks, but (Cardoso's) second term looks already totally worn out," said political analyst Villas-Boas Correa.
It's a sharp contrast with 1994, when the newly created real was stronger than the dollar and sent consumers on a buying spree.
For the first time in decades, Brazilians had a taste of economic stability. Inflation measured from 1829 to 1993 it showed cosmic dimensions: A "6" followed by 18 digits.
Now, inflation is back. Sao Paulo, Brazil's biggest and wealthiest city, recorded inflation of 1.38 percent in January, more than the 1.18 percent for all of 1998.
Unemployment, which hit a 15-year high of 7.6 percent last year, is now likely to surpass 10 percent and make recession even worse.
"Without consumption there is no reason for production, and without production there is no reason to keep jobs," said Antonio Ermirio de Moraes, head the Votorantim Group, Brazil's largest private industrial conglomerate.
Unions want jobs. State governors want debt relief. Cardoso wants time to deal with problems individually, but he may not have it.
"He must act quickly and show results, that inflation will not make a comeback," Correa said. "He can still hold inflation to a single digit. Otherwise public rejection and protests will confine him to the Planalto (presidential) Palace."
 Load-Date: February 8, 1999

 

End of Document
