

Trans-Americas bikers land at the end of the world
The Associated Press
December 31, 1999, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 432 words
Byline: By KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TIERRA DEL FUEGO NATIONAL PARK, Argentina
Body




Nat Crewe knew exactly where he wanted to be for the new millennium. He left himself about four months to be sure he arrived on time.
Crewe shoved some clothes and maps in a bag and straddled his black Honda motorbike along the northern coast of Alaska hoping to be at the southernmost tip of the world some 15,000 miles later.
"I was looking to get away from all the New Year's hype," said the 28-year-old Oxford, England, native.
As he rode through sun, rain, mud, and dirt across North, Central, and South America he realized he wasn't alone in his quest.
Along the way, he met and heard of dozens of other bikers trekking across the Americas bound for Tierra del Fuego, the Southern Hemisphere's Siberia.
As 2000 closed in, adventure bikers from Germany, England, Scotland, and the United States gathered Thursday to swap stories at this Patagonian national park at the end of the world.
Crewe's journey began in August in Prudhoe Bay, Alaska.
Inspired by his father, a travel writer whose decades-long battle with muscular dystrophy ended when he died last year, Crewe set out for Ushuaia, Argentina.
Reaching the bottom of the world before the clock struck 12 wasn't his only goal: the trip had drawn sponsors whose proceeds would to the Muscular Dystrophy Group in England.
A month into his trip he arrived in Mexico, where Crewe had to zoom past gun-wielding thieves who had blocked the road.
He made his way through Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador before he rode for 17 hours straight from Costa Rica to Panama City in order to be able to ship his bike to Ecuador.
His rush to Panama proved unnecessary. A strike by Ecuadorian customs workers left his bike trapped in a holding container for a week. So he did some rafting while he waited for the government and workers to reach an agreement.
From Ecuador, the Pan American highway carried him through Peru, Chile and Argentina, through rapidly changing terrain that included long stretches of arid and forbidding desert.
"Every day it was a different stretch of desert with strong winds. It was the one of the emptiest, most hostile place I've been. You don't feel like people should be there," he said.
The only snag on his homestretch ride was running out of gas in southern Argentina. Crewe hitchhiked 60 miles to refill his tank.
On Wednesday, as he turned into the Tierra del Fuego National Park, the final destination of other trans-America bikers gathering to commemorate the New Year, a cheering crowd awaited him.
"'Don't unpack your bags' they shouted to me," he said. "They were already pouring me a drink before I even got off my bike."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos USH107-111
 Load-Date: January 1, 2000

 

End of Document
