

Travel agents again pick Orlando, Fla., and London as the hot spots
The Associated Press
February 1, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel
Length: 838 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Travel agents making guesstimates about where their clients will go in 1999 again picked Orlando, Fla., as the No. 1 domestic vacation destination and London as the top foreign spot.
The cities ranked behind Orlando were Las Vegas, New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles, in that order.
Paris was in the No. 2 spot for international destinations, followed by Rome, Cancun, Mexico, and Frankfort, Germany.
The American Society of Travel Agents/Fodor's Hot Spots Survey was based on responses from 467 of the society's member agents.
In the category of emerging hot spots, the agents picked Branson, Mo., as No. 1 domestically and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, for foreign destinations.
On the subject of money, the agents predicted budget-minded leisure travelers would most likely want to save on transportation and splurge on entertainment.
The hot emerging travel activity seen for 1999 was a runaway, with 25.5 percent of the respondents picking cruises, while adventure travel, the next closest activity, garnered only 7.7 percent of the votes.
 
 ---
 
 Take a spin around the world in a homemade, amphibious milk tanker
CAZENOVIA, N.Y. (AP) - For the traveler who's tried everything else, a $ 200,000 converted milk tanker might be just the ticket for a bumpy spin around the back roads of the world.
The homemade, amphibious Surface Orbiter has a lot of miles on it , having already journeyed to 28 countries and 38 states.
Rick and Karen Dobbertin set out in the Orbiter from Syracuse in December 1993 to drive around the world. They gave up in 1996 when they ran out of money after traveling 27,300 miles on land and 3,000 miles in the water.
The Dobbertins, of Cazenovia, are now divorced and want to sell their wheels.
The asking price is around $ 200,000. Dobbertin admits their world wagon is a tough sell, but he's optimistic that a collector will take the plunge on the amphibious auto.
"I received inquiries from New Jersey to the Arab Emirates, but most of them were tire kickers," Dobbertin told the Syracuse newspapers. "We're still looking for the right buyer."
Dobbertin recalled some of his adventures in the Orbiter, including a 110-degree-heat day in 1995 in a small town in Venezuela.
"The Orbiter's air conditioning wasn't working, we had two flat tires that day, and we had been pulled over seven times by the Venezuelan Highway Patrol," Rick Dobbertin said. "We were both ready to quit, so we decided to try and get a room in a hotel and be away from the Orbiter for a while."
The owner of the town's only hotel had heard of the "world-famous milk tanker from Cazenovia," Dobbertin recalled, and gave them free room and meals for a week.
 
 ---
 
 Lawmakers propose bungee jumping from the Rio Grande Gorge bridge
SANTA FE, N.M. (AP) - Some lawmakers are suggesting a use for New Mexico's spectacular Rio Grande Gorge bridge that would turn a profit.
Bungee jumping.
They propose that state Highway and Transportation Department study the feasibility of letting people pay a fee to bungee jump from the bridge over the 650-foot deep gorge on U.S. 84 west of Taos.
State Rep. Arthur Hawkins of Albuquerque, who introduced a bill calling for the study, says he got the idea when he recently visited South Africa, where he saw people "lined up 12 deep and ready to pay $ 75 each" to jump from a bridge that he said was not nearly as high or as striking as the one over the Rio Grande.
The gorge bridge is "an ideal promontory" for bungee jumping, he says.
"It can put New Mexico on the world map for adventure tourism," Hawkins says.
One Taos-area resident isn't enthusiastic about the idea.
"It's outlandish," says Ernie Atencio, spokesman for Amigos Bravos, a river protection group.
"If you have rafters floating below and bungee jumpers from above, how can you have a peaceful moment to fish?"
 
 ---
 
 Historical center hankers after the lonesome cowboy and his music
CODY, Wyo. (AP) - For music purists who won't confuse it with a hillbilly hoedown, the 17th Annual Cowboy Songs and Range Ballads event will be held April 9-11 at the Buffalo Bill Historical Center.
There will be concerts on Friday and Saturday nights, interspersed during the three days with lectures and symposiums on cowboy history and the origins of the first cowboy songs.
The organizers of the event call cowboy music a unique American folk tradition with similarities to the ballads sung by railroad workers and seafaring men.
For more information telephone: 307-587-4771, or e-mail: bbhc wave.park.wy.us. The center's Web site is www.TrueWest.com/BBHC. 
 
 ---
 
 Bed and breakfast inns now serving up home cooking online
GOLDEN, Colo. (AP) - The Bed & Breakfast Channel, which provides information on more than 23,000 inns and homey tourist spots, has now expanded to serve up recipes to online travelers.
The new service was created because so many guests requested recipes from stays at their favorite bed and breakast, according to Eric Goldreyer, the president of Inns&Outs and creator of the Bed & Breakfast Channel.
The address is: www.bbchannel.com/recipes. 
 

 

 
 Load-Date: February 1, 1999

 

End of Document
