

Tree planters disheartened by the dwindling pay
The Associated Press
March 7, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: State and Regional
Length: 863 words
Byline: AP Sunday in the South, By THERESA KIELY
Body




Moises Guzman heaved his hoedad overhead with a sledgehammer swing into the red Alabama soil.
Thunk. Thunk.
Guzman's stoop-shouldered step added age to his 39 years, and his shy smile is marred by worm-like holes in his front teeth.
Thunk.
The caption printed on his hat read, "Ever felt like a fire hydrant and all your friends were dogs?"
No words passed between Guzman, the Guatemalans and his fellow Mexican countrymen. They are migrants, moving with the work. The strain of their panting is the mournful music of the planting fields.
Every year, men from Mexico and Central America plant trees in the Southeast United States, working under temporary H-2-B visas issued by the Immigration and Naturalization Service. The tree planters are disheartened by the dwindling pay, but they say it is still more money than they can earn back home.
In 1997, the U.S. Department of Labor's Wage and Hour division created a five-year enforcement plan targeting the exploitation of migrant non-agricultural laborers in the forestry industry, said Barlow Curran, the assistant district director for the U.S. Department of Labor Wage and Hour Division in Savannah, Ga.
"Unfortunately, migrant laborers are a group which can be easily exploited," Curran said. "The truth of the matter is, its not a lucrative industry for them."
Supervisor Steve Swett of Eller & Sons Trees Inc., a Franklin, Ga.-based forestry contractor, stood on a hillside, surveying several workers as they planted.
"These people are the proper people to plant," Swett said. "They are good with their hands. They're not afraid of hard work. They are on the low scale of Mexican society's economics."
Nearby, Guzman knelt on the ground and pulled pine tree seedlings from a white bag the size of a baby mattress, stuffing them into two empty canvas satchels. He has cut away the fingertips of one glove, making it easier for him to grab a single stem.
Productive workers can plant 400 trees an hour and earn between $ 4,000 and $ 8,000 during the four-month season, Swett said.
Through a translator, Guzman said Swett's estimation is out of date. "I used to make $ 5,000 in four months," he said. "Now you really have to work."
Guzman's prevailing hourly rate is never less than the federal minimum wage of $ 5.15. When he signed on for the 1998-99 season, Guzman said recruiters in Mexico verbally promised a piece rate of 3 cents to 24 cents per tree. It never materialized. This season, Guzman has averaged less than a penny per tree.
"Thirty-five years ago, our bid prices were better than now," said Jerry Eller, the company president. "Some of the contracts are paying less than 4 cents a tree."
Guzman bent down and dropped the dangling roots of a pine seedling in the dirt. He tamped the soft soil with his foot and pulled out a red bandana, swabbing his wet, flushed face.
"They look at this," Swett said, "as the opportunity of their life."
It costs each Guatemalan a minimum of $ 800 to pay for a visa and travel expenses. The Mexicans spend less, often booking passage to the United States by bus. Many of the men borrow the money for the trip from village loan sharks, they said.
When they arrived, Eller & Sons lent them $ 100 each to tide them over until they began planting.
Last November, discontent among the 40-man crew grew after sleet storms battered northern Alabama. They were stranded for two weeks without work, said Eller. He extended more loans. These also must be paid back.
"We're not into exploiting people," Eller said. "When they're not making money, we're not making money."
This year, embittered by the depleted rate and inclement weather, Guzman and his fellow workers talked to Sister Rosa Mae Rausch, a Spanish-speaking Franciscan nun at St. Jude's Roman Catholic Church in Sylacauga.
"They told me about the low wages and the debt they had to pay for their trip to America," the nun said. "They had nothing left to send home."
She contacted Bishop David Foley, the head of the Diocese of Birmingham, who sent Al Manzella, the executive director of the diocese of Birmingham's Office of Social Concerns, with clothing, food and phone cards for the workers.
"In their own countries, the church has been the one voice defending their rights," Manzella said. "The men are fearful of the company. They already owe the company money."
Guzman sat on the edge of his bed at a Sylacauga motel, his hair uncombed and dark circles under his eyes. He rented the $ 176-a-week room with three men from his hometown of Oaxaca, Mexico.
The hot air carried the stench of sweat, unchanged sheets and bags of wet clothes. His blue jeans crinkled around his skinny legs, and the sleeveless T-shirt he wore lay bare his muscular arms.
As he spoke, men knocked on the entranceway to Guzman's room, poked their heads in, and politely waited for permission to join the group.
They leaned against the cinderblock walls and watched him pull a U.S. postal money order receipt for $ 500 from his wallet. In January, he sent the money home to his wife and four children.
One of his roommates, Luciano Ramos Gopal, 36, interrupted: "It should be three times the amount."
"Exactly," Guzman said. "Before, it was worth coming here. Now, it isn't."
 Load-Date: March 7, 1999

 

End of Document
