

VENEZUELA: Explore a charming mountain city high in the Andes
The Associated Press
June 22, 1998, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 761 words
Byline: By BART JONES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MERIDA, Venezuela
Body




Think Venezuela and you envision talcum powder beaches, steamy Amazon jungles and coral reefs. But snow-capped Andean mountains 3 miles high?
Yes, the country that calls itself the gateway to South America is known for its tropical delights. What's less known is that it also is home to a charming Andean mountain city with lush green valleys, starkly beautiful high plains and the world's longest and highest cable car system.
Cheap, safe and tranquil, Merida is an attractive alternative to Venezuela's main tourist destinations: Margarita Island, the pristine Los Roques archipelago and Canaima National Park, site of the world's highest waterfall.
A college town of 210,000 people, Merida is surrounded by fertile mountains where farmers still plow steep terraced plots with oxen, mark their property with stone walls and cart their carrots and potatoes off to market by mule.
The highlight of a trip to the mile-high city, located 420 miles southwest of Caracas, is the cable car.
Sightseers glide up to Pico Espejo (Mirror Peak), which at 3 miles is higher than Switzerland's Matterhorn. Espejo's sister peak, Bolivar, is Venezuela's highest at 3.1 miles.
In Merida itself, tourists can stroll through tree-lined Bolivar Plaza, visit the nearby cathedral, buy crafts and sweaters at the huge "Mercado Principal" (Main Market) and walk through the city's numerous parks. Parque Beethoven has a clock with wooden soldiers who march around a guard house to Beethoven compositions when the hour strikes.
For those looking for an unusual culinary experience, the Coromoto ice cream parlor offers - at last count - 709 flavors, including fish, spaghetti, chili, beer and corn, along with more standard combinations such as champagne, caramel and nuts. It's listed in the Guinness Book of World Records for the most - and most bizarre - flavors.
You may also want to try mountain biking or hiking, horseback riding, bathing in hot springs, trout fishing or the latest local craze - paragliding.
Some of Merida's best attractions are the quaint villages outside of it. Almost all are centered on a Bolivar Plaza and a Catholic church, underscoring both the deep religious nature of the reserved Andean people and their equally fervent worship of 19th century independence hero, Simon Bolivar.
Rent a car or hire a guide to take you north up the picturesque Trans-Andean Highway, tracing the general path of Bolivar on his campaign to free South America from Spanish rule. Or fly from Caracas to Valera in Trujillo state and make your way south along the highway to Merida.
The road climbs until it's literally amid the clouds. Paso del Aguila (Eagle Pass) is the highest point in Venezuela's highway system at 2.5 miles. You can ward off the cold there by sipping hot chocolate at a roadside restaurant.
Nearby is an entrance to Sierra Nevada National Park, notable for its haunting glacial lagoons, cotton-soft shrubs called "frailejones" and desolate but beautiful "paramos," plains that are above the tree line.
The gray-green frailejones, the paramo's main plant, are found only in Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador. From October to December they blossom with yellow flowers, turning the mountains into a mass of green and yellow.
Visitors can hike through the park to the enchanting Black Lagoon, which sits at the bottom of a valley with clouds hovering just above its water.
Bird-lovers hiking the region's mountains can spot such species as the bearded helmetcrest hummingbird, the Merida sunangel, the black-chested buzzard-eagle and, occasionally, a condor.
Farther along the highway are typical Andean villages with Indian names such as Mucuchies. In San Rafael de Mucuchies is a small, curious chapel made of thousands of stones by a local artist, Juan Felix Sanchez.
Other towns to the south and west of Merida also make for popular day trips. One, Jaji, is a lovely village set on a mountainside and restored to its colonial origins.
Even closer and equally pleasant is a drive through El Valle (The Valley) and La Culata (The Haunches), where horses and cows graze on vast green pastures.
Merida's climate is pleasant and mild, with an average temperature of 66, though it can dip to as low as 41 at night. If you forget a jacket, you can always buy a "ruana," the colorful woolen poncho typical of the region.
While the city offers a range of hotels, another alternative is the numerous "posadas" that are Latin America's version of bed-and-breakfasts (usually without the breakfast). The best ones are family-run operations that offer cozy atmospheres and personal attention.
 Load-Date: June 22, 1998

 

End of Document
