

Venezuelan flooding death toll in the thousands
The Associated Press
December 20, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 730 words
Byline: By STEVEN GUTKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LA GUAIRA, Venezuela
Body




The paratrooper broke into tears as he pulled a thick wad of identification cards from his pocket.
"They're all dead," he said, victims of the widespread floods and mudslides that have killed thousands of Venezuelans in the country's worst natural disaster this century. Official estimates of the death toll range from 5,000 to 20,000.
The paratrooper, Col. Mario Arvalaez, a commander of an elite unit that is leading the rescue effort, gazed at the tarmac where the wounded were being whisked from helicopters Monday and wept for the dead.
"When you stop in a moment of quiet, you begin to feel the pain," he said.
The smell of death was everywhere along the northern coast, the area most heavily hit Wednesday when mud, boulders and water came crashing down a mountain that separates the capital of Caracas from the Caribbean Sea.
As paratroopers and sailors rushed to evacuate survivors Monday, authorities feared an outbreak of epidemics among children suffering from diarrhea and dehydration.
For the fifth straight day, desperate and hungry survivors in the port city of La Guaira wandered in search of food and water, both in short supply. Security forces shot into the air to keep back looters.
As of Monday, 1,500 bodies had been recovered, said Foreign Minister Jose Vicente Rangel. The death toll estimates are much higher, based on the number of people reported missing and the fact that many victims were buried beneath mud and debris or swept out to sea.
Some 150,000 people were left homeless - sheltered in schools, stadiums, churches and even the presidential residence.
Donning army fatigues and his trademark red beret, President Hugo Chavez personally commanded much of the relief effort. He promised Monday that his troops would go "house to house," forge rivers and climb mountains to find people who may still be alive under rubble and mud.
Officials were too busy rescuing stranded survivors and pulling out bodies to begin assessing the economic damage to Venezuela, the world's third largest oil exporter, which is already mired in a deep recession.
But several private economists are estimating that the damage to roads, ports, electricity, telephone lines, schools, hospitals and homes could reach $2 billion - or 2 percent of the South American country's gross domestic product.
The survivors' desperation was evident Monday in a confrontation with the national guard at La Guaira's port, where thousands of people descended on crates that had been broken open by raging waters. The crowd took away food and milk, and some were seen carrying away toys and cellular telephones.
Guardsmen fired warning shots into the air and summoned a helicopter to fly overhead as the people dispersed.
There were shouts of "we're hungry" and "we need to eat" by enraged residents.
"Let them kill me," said Javier Martinez, 50. "We don't need clothes and we don't need toys. What we need is milk for the children."
Dr. Arturo Contreras, coordinating first aid at the airport's field hospital, said more fluids were needed to treat children suffering from diarrhea, hunger and the effects of drinking contaminated water.
Survivors asked to use reporters' cell phones to make calls inquiring about missing loved ones. Anyone who pulled out a bottle of water was immediately encircled by people begging for a drink.
Most of those who died were poor people living in makeshift tin-and-cinderblock shacks perched precariously on mountainsides, but there were middle and upper class victims too. Loved ones of some of the victims are already denouncing decades of government negligence in allowing construction in dangerous areas.
Officials conceded that Venezuela, a poor country despite its vast oil resources, was ill-equipped to handle a disaster of such magnitude. Nations from around the world rushed in aid.
U.S. State Department Spokesman James Foley said the United States sent "a fleet of 10 military helicopters, four C-130 aircraft and one patrol boat." About 100 U.S. servicemen have arrived.
Most of the help came from Venezuelans themselves, however. Five men from the devastated town of Los Caracas on the northern coast walked 10 hours to reach the airport at La Guaira in search of medicine for the town's children, many of whom were suffering from asthma and diarrhea.
"Everyone lost everything," said one of the men, 30-year-old Alejandro Matute. "The earth swallowed us up."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos CAR101-104
 Load-Date: December 21, 1999

 

End of Document
