

WASHINGTON TODAY: Sartorial splendor at the highest court
The Associated Press
October 9, 1998, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 671 words
Byline: By LAURIE ASSEO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Some people made fun of Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist for putting gold stripes on his black robe's sleeves. But that is downright subtle compared to the judicial splendor from other nations now on display at the Supreme Court.
A Kuwaiti robe with wide gold epaulets and a white-trimmed maroon velvet robe from Denmark are part of the "High Courts of the World" exhibit unveiled this week as the justices began their new term.
From Australia is a black colonial outfit with tailcoat and knee-britches of the type worn by justices there until the mid-1980s. A gray full-bottomed horsehair wig made in London completes the ensemble.
The show-stopper is a large photo of France's highest court in session at the Palais de Justice.
The heavily gilded Grand Chamber looks like a Hollywood movie set. The judges wear red robes with white fur shoulder coverings and a black-and-white diamond-patterned cloth over one shoulder. Medals pinned to the fur indicate their rank.
In contrast, judges on Finland's highest court wear no special judicial attire, not even a robe.
More than 75 highest courts from nations with diplomatic relations with the United States provided artifacts or information for the exhibit in the court building's museum area.
"These are the courts of last resort" in their nations, says the text, which describes how the courts operate and what role their judges play.
"Every country doesn't have the same system and the same high court" as in this country, said Matt Hofstedt, curatorial assistant at the Supreme Court. Throughout the exhibit are comparisons between the U.S. system and courts elsewhere.
Photos show the varied architecture of high court buildings, from neo-classical to super-modern.
There are scale models of the court buildings in Australia, Israel and the Slovak Republic. France's high court building dates back to the 14th century; the Pacific Island-style court building in Micronesia is built to withstand winds of up to 230 miles an hour.
Browsers can learn many facts about courts in other countries:
-Finland has two supreme courts, for general law and administrative law. But neither one has the authority to declare a law unconstitutional.
-The appointment of judges to Japan's highest court is subject to public review. However, no judge has been removed from office that way.
-Austria's Constitutional Court requires a geographical balance among its members.
-Uruguay's highest court has a ceremonial military guard, and the public can watch the changing of the guard every hour.
Artifacts include a silver model of the dome on Ireland's Four Courts building, and a plate representing the Supreme Court of India.
There are books of published court decisions from Argentina, Brunei, Switzerland and Bolivia. Three video screens allow visitors to see more court buildings, courtrooms and judges.
The exhibit also has a quiz. By touching a video screen, visitors can check how much they have learned:
What country held an architectural competition for a design for its new constitutional court in 1997? (South Africa)
At the Supreme Court of Israel, how many courtrooms are there? (five)
In Austria, the president of the Constitutional Court must reside in what city? (Vienna)
The U.S. Supreme Court's looking to the experience of other courts is not a new phenomenon.
The justices often travel abroad during their summer breaks. In July, Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Stephen G. Breyer, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Anthony M. Kennedy met in Brussels with a group of European judges. O'Connor told them, "In the next century, we are going to want to draw upon judgments from other jurisdictions."
Occasionally, oral arguments include discussion of foreign laws.
"Of course, we are interpreting our own Constitution, not those of other nations," Breyer wrote in one 1997 opinion. "But their experience may nonetheless cast an empirical light on the consequences of different solutions to a common legal problem."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Laurie Asseo covers the Supreme Court and legal issues for The Associated Press.
 
 Load-Date: October 9, 1998

 

End of Document
