

Weary of water, Argentines shelter from the floods by the thousands
The Associated Press
May 2, 1998, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 530 words
Byline: By KEVIN GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RESISTENCIA, Argentina
Body




Twelve-year-old Varios Mercedes doesn't mind spending the extra time at school, although she would rather be at home. But home is deep in water.
For more than a week, Mercedes has taken refuge with about 300 others in the red-brick Lino Torres elementary school, sheltering from the flooding of the Parana and Rio Negro rivers here in northeastern Argentina.
Across the region, two weeks of torrential rains have killed 18 people and driven tens of thousands from their homes. More than 85,000 are living in community centers, army or government buildings - or schools such as the two-story Lino Torres.
Until the waters subside, the school's faded, whitewashed hallways will be Mercedes' home - a crowded place where evacuees idle away their time playing cards, watching TV and sleeping on lumpy mattresses.
"My mom cooks and I clean - just like at home," Mercedes said, pointing to the brown gas stove and a dirty white dining room table they managed to salvage from their home.
Mercedes' family of five - including her mother, grandmother and two younger sisters - fled April 25 when the muddy brown waters began engulfing their concrete block home.
Overall in Resistencia, 655 miles north of Buenos Aires, flooding has forced some 12,000 people from their homes, said a city superintendent, Rafael Gonzalez.
Eighty of the families, mostly from low-lying districts in Resistencia's northeast, arrived at Lino Torres more than a week ago carrying everything they could: televisions, VCRs, refrigerators, and stoves.
"Everyone in our neighborhood was up to their waist in water," said 54-year-old Cellia de Gomez. "In their homes, in the streets, everywhere. I brought all the things I could manage."
On Friday, President Carlos Menem visited the school during a tour of the flood zone.
"We are not going to abandon this province," he vowed, adding that more than $ 100 million in aid would be distributed to inundated areas nationwide.
So far, the surging waters of the Rio Negro and Parana rivers chiefly have harmed only those living in humble one-story homes near the banks.
Residents of the riverside city of 250,000 have been preparing themselves for the worst: more rain, and rising water.
Using bulldozers, coast guard workers have built a series of barricades along the river's edge. Giant pumps are humming in an effort to remove water from flooded areas.
But Resistencia residents have been encouraged by a two-day respite from the rain.
The situation is bleaker in Paso de la Patria, just across the Parana River where the water is 9 feet higher than normal. An entire neighborhood is all but submerged, with only the tops of street signs poking out.
Ramon Valentin Legu Isamon moved his family from their home in Villa Rio Negro to the school over a week ago.
"It seems we always are inundated there," he said, as his three kids shared a mattress on a classroom floor.
Two or three families each share the white-walled schoolrooms, eating handouts of bread, meat, and corn. Many have bedsheet partitions for privacy. Stray dogs and cats roam the halls.
Despite the hardships, the children don't seem to mind.
"It's been fun to have all of my friends in one place," Mercedes said, smiling.
 
 Load-Date: May 2, 1998

 

End of Document
