

Will the Dow forge ahead or retreat?
The Associated Press
March 28, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 742 words
Byline: By VIVIAN MARINO, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




So can the Dow really break through 10,000? Or is it headed for 7,000?
Those are the questions investors are asking themselves as they watch the Dow Jones industrial average zigzag, unable to surpass the five-digit milestone that it touched this month.
In recent days, worries about the first-quarter corporate profit picture, have sent the Dow further and further shy of the mark.
"We're not insulated from the possibility of Dow 7,000. We're always vulnerable," said Andrew Horowitz, a money manager and financial planner from Hollywood, Fla.
Despite short-term jitters, however, Horowitz and many other market analysts are still predicting blue-chip stocks eventually will continue their advance.
"Dow 20,000 may seem ridiculous, but it's only double Dow 10,000, and we hit 5,000 on the Dow just a few years ago," on Nov. 21, 1995, said Horowitz.
That's assuming the economy retains the characteristics that got the Dow to 10,000 in the first place -- moderate growth with low inflation and interest rates and high consumer confidence.
Most economists are forecasting more of the same for this year, although some are concerned the economy could overheat, causing shortages of labor and raw materials that spur inflation, prompting the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates to cool things down.
"Then we have the potential to see the Dow at 7,000 or 8,000 again," said Larry Rice, chief investment officer at Josephthal & Co. in New York.
Another question is the Internet. Some analysts are fearful the high stock runups in these tiny and mostly-profitless companies could suddenly reverse, although few are predicting when and how.
And some market analysts note that the market's rally in recent months has been far from even, with blue-chip and Internet shares posting most of the gains.
Small stocks are depressed and "value" stocks - companies that have high potential that has gone unnoticed - have also not performed well, said Horowitz.
Despite the recent fluctuations, many investors see Wall Street as a safe place to park their money, especially given lingering recessions in Asia and Latin America.
"There's no doubt, we are in the land of opportunity right now," said Kemp Richardson, a broker with JKR & Co. in Laguna Beach, Calif. "The U.S. is faring better than most of the rest of the world."
There are long-terms signs for optimism too. As baby boomers age, they'll be paying off their mortgages and investing more for their retirement - many with stocks.
If interest rates stay low or moderate, stocks will nearly always bring a better return than bonds or CDs.
Mutual funds, 401(k) plans, Individual Retirement Accounts and pension funds have increased their presence in stocks, and most market watchers expect that to continue. And when the value of stocks rise, investors have more money for things like houses, cars and other durable goods, which feeds corporate profits all over again, prompting still further stock gains.
Some investors have been able to shake off the recent declines in stocks by looking long term.
Roy Novak, a 58-year-old retired construction salesman from Boca Raton, Fla., has a lifetime of savings tied up in the stock market.
"It's the only game in town for me," said Novak, who has about three-quarters of his $ 500,000 investment portfolio in stocks and mutual funds.
While more bearish analysts worry that, with the stock market so high, it's got to come down eventually, Novak isn't concerned that the United States is about the go the way of Japan, which has yet to recover from the popping of its stock bubble.
"If it goes down, it comes back eventually. I've seen many ups and downs over the years," he said, remembering the '87 crash in which the Dow lost 22.6 percent of its value in one day.
Over the last seven decades, there were losses in 20 calendar years, but during that time, stocks doubled in value on average every seven years, according to market researchers Ibbotson Associates in Chicago.
From 1926 to 1995, common stocks have returned 10.5 percent annually.
Market fluctuations, the experts say, are just a normal part of investing. Different sectors will rise and fall, though none will be powerful enough to hurt the overall market, they say.
"The short stuff doesn't matter to the wise investor," said Larry Elkin, a financial planner and accountant from Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y. "The only thing that matters is the long term. Who on Earth is going to remember the Internet bubble 10 years from now?"
 Load-Date: March 28, 1999

 

End of Document
