

Wine labels: They look Californian, but read the fine print
The Associated Press
December 20, 1996, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 629 words
Byline: By ROBERT GREENE, AP Farm Writer
Dateline: FALLS CHURCH, Va.
Body




There's a Central Valley in California and a Valle Central in Chile. The Valle Central shows up on the label of some well-known California brands in the California wine section.
Likewise, the Languedoc Region has mysteriously moved from France to a well-known California brand.
The labels look Californian, and only the fine print discloses that the wine was imported - in bulk - from France or Chile. Blame the confusion on a wine-grape shortage in California brought on by poor harvests and heavy consumer demand.
Many wineries call the movement a short-term fix.
Growers, for their part, want to see California labels dominate, even if there are too few grapes right now from the Golden State. But they wonder whether California's hard-gained image might suffer. After all, the Agriculture Department spends millions of dollars each year to promote California wines in Europe and elsewhere.
"I think California's big and strong," independent grower Andy Beckstoffer said from St. Helena, Calif. "We can stand the competition. What we can't stand is people importing wines and then disguising them as California wines."
Wineries have a two-word answer: "shelf space." That's the coveted space in the supermarket, which domestic wineries fight over among themselves and as a group against imports.
"It's not in the best interests of a winery to run out of wine because you can then run out of your shelf space," said George Rose, spokesman for Fetzer Vineyards in Hopland, Calif. "That's like the kiss of death."
The company announced in September that its Bel Arbor Vineyards would start selling chardonnay and other popular varieties from Chile. The company's parent, liquor giant Brown-Forman Corp. of Louisville, Ky., already owns U.S. marketing rights for Carmen wines from Chile, and owns outright the Italian Bolla wines.
You will find the Bel Arbor chardonnay in the California section of the Giant Foods megastore in this Washington, D.C., suburb. The bottles, with the Valle Central on the label, sit between Bel Arbor cabernets and merlots from California.
The word "California" appears on the cabernet and merlot labels, but not on the chardonnay. The "product of Chile" designator runs up the side of the front label in light letters.
Round Hill Vineyards of St. Helena also had "Valle Central Merlot" next to its California reds in the 1.5 liter size - the big bottles. A narrative in small type tells how owner Ernie van Asperen stumbled across the wine during a trip to Chile.
Then there's "Estate Cellars by Inglenook," the old, established winery in Madera, Calif. Its "Languedoc Merlot," with "product of France" tucked away on the back label, sits right next to its "California Cabernet" - all in the California section.
Rose, the Fetzer spokesman, says his company gives no instructions to retailers, but figures buyers of a popular wine care little about its source.
"The fan of Bel Arbor is not drinking the wine because of where it comes from," he said. "He's drinking it because of the price that's on the bottle."
Inglenook's "California Languedoc" is just there until California grape supplies increase, said Paul Hetterich, vice president of marketing for Inglenook's owner, Conandaigua Wine Co. of New York. The company says it prefers that retailers group their brand-name wines in one place.
Round Hill's president, Virginia van Asperen, said the company plans no further imports. "I think it's more confusing than workable," she said.
Other companies are standing pat, saying California or bust - even if it means rationing supplies.
"We feel it makes no sense to be, in effect, promoting the wines of regions we compete with on a daily basis," said Stan Hock, spokesman for Sutter Home Winery in St. Helena. "Also, this is going to be a short-term situation."
 Load-Date: December 20, 1996

 

End of Document
