

Winner of presidential vote will get big bonus - the Panama Canal
The Associated Press
April 30, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 682 words
Byline: AP Photos, BY ELOY O. AGUILAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PANAMA
Body




The winner of Sunday's presidential elections in this Central American country gets a big bonus: the Panama Canal.
On Dec. 31, the United States will turn the canal over to the new president, ending a relationship between the two countries that began with Panama's birth as a nation in 1903.
The Panama Canal Commission, now part of the U.S. government, will become an autonomous Panamanian agency in charge of the shortcut between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans taken by more than 14,000 ships a year.
Panama, a country of 2.8 million people in the thin waist of the American continent, is only recently returning to democracy after a U.S. invasion ended the authoritarian rule of Gen. Manuel Noriega in 1989.
So the United States and other countries have questions about the Panamanians' ability to run the canal. Panama insists those are misguided.
"We cannot afford to fail before the entire world," said Martin Torrijos, the ruling-party candidate. "We are confident that we are capable of running the canal."
It was Torrijos' father, the late military strongman Gen. Omar Torrijos, who engineered with then-President Carter the 1977 Canal Treaties whose final act of fulfillment will be the transfer of the waterway.
Mireya Moscoso, 52, the opposition candidate who polls show in a statistical dead heat with Torrijos, pledged to keep the canal free of politics and preserve the ecological balance that provides the water needed to raise and lower ships from one ocean to another through narrow locks at both ends.
"As president of Panama, I will be vigilant to make sure corruption and politics never invade the Panama Canal," she said at a campaign rally.
The official view of U.S. officials here is that the canal has lost its importance and the country its strategic value - and that there is no need for a continued military presence.
Railroad crossings and other facilities in the United States have reduced the U.S. reliance on the canal to move goods from one ocean to another.
And while Panamanian jungles have long served as U.S. military training grounds, that role has been declining as well. At the end of World War II, U.S. military here numbered 67,000. That number has dropped to 14,000 in recent years, even before the handover process began.
Privately, some U.S. officials express concern that the canal will become outdated and may fall victim to Panamanian corruption and mismanagement. They say Panama needs to reassure the international shipping community that the canal will be run efficiently.
Panamanians call that sour grapes.
"I suppose it would be logical for many to think that we are going to destroy it," said Roberto Eisenmann, former publisher of La Prensa, the country's largest newspaper. But he says critics forget that the actual transfer of the canal started in 1985, when a Panamanian became assistant administrator of the canal, and accelerated when another Panamanian was named administrator.
Today, more than 95 percent of the commission's 9,000 employees and 75 percent of the 300 pilots in charge of guiding ships through the canal are Panamanian.
The United States now pays Panama a share of the canal's revenues, about $ 100 million a year. But with the canal in Panamanian hands that income will more than double. Ships paid $ 545 million in tolls in 1998.
It is a big bonus, "but it could also be a problem," Eisenmann said. Traffic continues to increase each year, but to remain competitive, the canal needs to invest heavily in maintenance and expansion.
An audit by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determined that the canal needs to invest $ 100 million annually through 2005 in services and equipment to reduce the passage time - now nine hours - and increase traffic by 20 percent.
The canal, built in 1914, was originally designed to last 75 years.
The canal is the biggest jewel in the package the United States will transfer to Panama, but far from the only one. There are also 98,800 acres formerly occupied by U.S. military bases along the canal banks.
Panama plans to use the area to develop ecological tourism and build ports and industrial parks.
 Load-Date: April 30, 1999

 

End of Document
