

Woman demand a chair at the negotiating table of world conflicts
The Associated Press
June 8, 2000, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 531 words
Byline: By HARMONIE TOROS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Women don't have a say in most wars. But as the primary victims of war, they are demanding a right to sit by the fighters in negotiating peace.
Women should be included in all stages of peacemaking - from the peace talks to confidence-building measures to the re-establishment of democracy, said participants at a panel Wednesday that was part of this week's women's conference at the United Nations.
"There is no reason why if … those who make war are at the peace table, that (women) who sustain peace are not at the peace table. We have every right to be at the peace table," said Noeleen Heyzer, executive director of the U.N. Development Fund for Women.
Strengthening women's role in peace processes was one of the goals set at the 1995 U.N. conference on women's equality in Beijing, which is being reviewed by delegates of 188 countries and thousands of activists gathered at U.N. headquarters.
Women and children constitute the majority of war refugees and have recently become strategic targets for warring factions in several of the world's conflicts, panelists said. Recent research has also shown that some women have actively supported violent organizations and uprisings.
Including women in settlements to end those wars is not only a question of fairness.
"Women and men can experience conflicts differently" and both perspectives must be included in the peace-building process, said Angela King, U.N. special adviser on gender issues.
For example, most women in Sierra Leone were opposed to the amnesty granted to Foday Sankoh and his rebels in the peace agreement signed in Lome, Togo, last year, said Amy Smythe, former minister of gender and children's affairs in Sierra Leone.
"One wonders whether the rape, sex slavery, mutilations, amputations … that women have suffered will all be swept under the table," Smythe said. "Amnesty cannot be a foregone conclusion."
Sankoh's Revolutionary United Front has killed tens of thousands of civilians and intentionally mutilated thousands of others in more than eight years of civil war. In early May, the rebels reignited the war by attacking government and U.N. troops and taking about 500 U.N. peacekeepers hostage; the captives have since been released and Sankoh imprisoned by the government.
In Guatemala, the presence of women in the negotiations that put an end in 1996 to 36 years of civil war was essential, said Luz Mendes of the Guatemala's National Union for Women, who took part in the peace talks.
Mendes said women assured that the agreement included the right of women to have access to land and resources, as well as health and education. The government also agreed to review laws to eradicate discrimination against women and penalize sexual harassment.
"The incorporation of women's issues in the Guatemala peace accord is the result of the direct participation of women in the peace process," Mendes said.
The campaign by the United Nations and grass-roots groups appears to be working: On Tuesday, the U.N. Development Fund for Women announced that it had been invited to take part in the next round of negotiations to end Burundi's civil war.
---
On the Net:
U.N. Development Fund for Women: http://www.unifem.undp.org 
 Load-Date: June 9, 2000

 

End of Document
