

WORLD ON THE MOVE; Northern Guatemala's mountains hide an unlikely U.S. 'suburb'
The Associated Press
October 5, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 697 words
Byline: By WILL WEISSERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN RAFAEL LA INDEPENDENCIA, Guatemala
Body




For years, Juan Miguel Francisco has dreamed of a town in Georgia he has never seen.
"You go to work there, you buy a car, you live with others from here," said the 22-year-old. "It's a new life, a better life than anyone will ever see here."
He is talking about working in a chicken-processing plant in Cornelia, Ga., passing on what he has heard from his father.
Guatemala has long been a bridge on the journey taken by hundreds of thousands of Latin American illegal immigrants in search of a better life in "El Norte," the United States. This chilly mountain town and a dozen or so villages like it are the point of no return.
Just about everyone here has lived in the United States illegally, or has family there.
Francisco's father, 48-year-old Diego Juan Francisco, spent 10 years working at the Georgia chicken factory before returning. "There, at least they pay you," he said. "Here you work for nothing."
In this mostly Indian town of 20,000, dogs fight to the death over piles of garbage strewn in dusty streets and frigid winds and rains howl year-round. The escape is dreaming about the United States.
"Our whole population would go there if they could, and most of them do anyway," said Mayor Carlos Francisco Felix.
Juan Miguel Francisco was one of those who set out for "El Norte." Unlike the vast majority, he failed.
On July 12, a speedboat taking him and 22 others over the Pacific Ocean to Mexico capsized. He was the sole survivor. He had tried three times before, heading overland across the Mexico border, which is 35 miles west of his town. The fourth time he opted for the sea crossing.
But even as he prepared to bury an uncle and five cousins who drowned, Francisco said he might try again.
"I can't say what the future will hold for me," he said. "Things around here are very tough."
He is not alone.
"The next day another group of 15 left," said Francine Fourniar, an official at San Rafael's only Roman Catholic church. "Everyone says, 'It was bad luck, but it won't happen again."'
Immigrants don't just head to Georgia from here. Thousands go to Florida's orange groves, and Los Angeles' restaurants, hotels and clothing factories.
The lure of Oregon's timber industry is so strong there are enough Guatemalans to have formed an Akateco Indian association in Portland, Fourniar said. The group aims to protect the heritage of the Mayan tribe to which most of the population belongs.
"I sent my dictionary of Akateco phrases to a factory owner there because we got a letter in town from him," Fourniar said. "He wanted to know what all of his workers were talking about."
Approximately 1 million Guatemalans - a tenth of the country's population - live in the United States. About 120,000 are said to live in Los Angeles, making it the world's largest Guatemalan city after the capital, Guatemala City.
From the Cuchumatanes mountains, which tower over the clouds below, the nearest U.S. territory is 900 miles away, even farther overland. But Guatemala City, 250 miles south, seems farther yet. Here, traveling just 10 miles can take two hours.
"People never talk about the capital. Nobody here knows what it's like," said Simon Capriel, the region's only Catholic priest.
Guatemalan newspapers arrive weeks late, if at all, and radio and television come from nearby Mexico.
The villages are ringed by mountainsides brimming with cornfields, but unemployment reaches 50 percent because everyone grows corn and no one can find buyers.
One prosperous career is that of a "coyote," charging 9,000 quetzales ($1,170) per head to lead immigrants to the U.S.-Mexico border.
From there, $800 will get you to the West Coast. Florida and Georgia cost $1,400.
This is why, in a town where the electricity goes out for weeks and everyone shares two communal telephones, three banks are on hand to change dollars mailed from the United States.
And the most popular places in town are a half-dozen quasi-post offices offering parcel service between here and the United States.
"We do a good business," said one owner, Samuel Ortiz. "When 100 percent of people have family in the United States, that means a lot of people there whom they want to communicate with."
End Adv for Monday, Oct. 9
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY386-388 of Oct. 5; AP Graphics GUATEMALA NEXT STOP, logo WORLD ON THE MOVE
 Load-Date: October 10, 2000

 

End of Document
