

'Life After Scandal' looks at the people behind the tabloid headlines
The Associated Press
September 26, 2007 Wednesday 8:25 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 735 words
Byline: By JILL LAWLESS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




A disgraced politician, a pair of once-imprisoned lords and a convicted game-show cheat went to the theater in London this week.
All were once the center of scandals sexual, political or financial that made headlines and shattered their lives. They came to watch themselves onstage or at least actors speaking their words, edited from interviews into the play "Life After Scandal," a funny but sobering look at the human cost of our sensation-hungry culture.
From Lindsay Lohan to O.J. Simpson, gossip and scandal provide an endless supply of headlines and punch lines. Scandal sells newspapers, drives Web traffic, keeps journalists and lawyers employed and gives us all something to talk about around the water cooler at work.
We don't often think about the people at the center of the storm.
"The bottom line is, everybody else won with this story," says the onstage Charles Ingram, who was convicted in 2003 of cheating on the game show "Who Wants to be a Millionaire" by using coded coughs from an accomplice in the audience. "Everyone won except us."
Playwright Robin Soans says the people he interviewed described the experience of scandal as a catastrophe that wiped out their existing lives.
"For the rest of their lives they become public property, for people to be judgmental about," Soans said. "They become perennial dustbins for people to pile their rubbish in."
Soans' play lets the subjects of scandal speak for themselves. They range from the elderly, dignified Lord Montagu jailed in the 1950s for what were then homosexual offenses to former Cabinet minister Jonathan Aitken, imprisoned in 1999 for perjury, who says he has found redemption through renewed Christian faith.
Soans used the same "verbatim theater" technique in his last play, "Talking to Terrorists," which has been produced around the world. It tackled political violence through the voices of diplomats, politicians and fighters from as far afield as Belfast and the West Bank.
Soans, who calls his work "political with a small p," says terrorists were more willing to open up to him than the victims of scandal. Many initially refused to talk. Some later tried to impose conditions on their interviews but all ended up speaking openly and movingly of their experiences.
Soans is an old-fashioned moralist who argues the media and political elites use scandal to distract public attention from more important issues. Some might disagree, saying the appetite for gossip and titillation is as old as humanity.
Whatever your opinion, it's hard not to feel sympathy for the play's subjects. Montagu, now 80, clearly still feels the pain of his imprisonment and notoriety. Ingram says he is broke, unemployed and can't go out in public without people coughing at him.
"My plays try to defy judgmentalism," Soans said. "I'm hoping that by the end of the evening one might have a little bit more sympathy and a more liberal attitude, feeling 'There but for the grace of God go I.'"
Much of the play's pleasure lies in the surreal weirdness of the celebrity world. In a very 21st-century turn, some subjects of scandal have thrived by embracing their infamy. Lord Brocket, an aristocrat jailed for insurance fraud in 1996, rebounded with a reality-TV appearance and a series of business ventures capitalizing on his notoriety.
Theatergoers at the play's opening night who included Ingram, Montagu, Brocket and disgraced former lawmaker Neil Hamilton, another of the play's characters were offered bottles of Brocket's Beer, one of a range of products bearing his likeness.
Hamilton and wife Christine were left bankrupt a decade ago when he lost a lawsuit against Harrods owner Mohamed Al Fayed, who had accused him of accepting cash in exchange for political favors.
They battled their way back into the limelight through, Christine says in the play, "luck, hard work, sheer bloody-mindedness and reality TV."
Today the Hamiltons appear on TV shows with titles like "I'm A Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here" and "Destination Lunch," have starred onstage at the Edinburgh Fringe, published several books and recorded novelty singles.
"Cheering the country up that's our job," Neil Hamilton says in the play. They are household names in Britain and many people no longer remember what made them famous in the first place.
"Life After Scandal" is at the Hampstead Theatre in London until Oct. 20, then at the Drum Theatre in Plymouth, England Oct. 24-Nov. 10.
 Load-Date: September 27, 2007

 

End of Document
