

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
February 13, 2009 Friday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1067 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Friday:
LONDON The economy in the countries using the euro contracted by a record 1.5 percent in the last three months of 2008, dropping even more sharply than in the U.S as collapsing world trade hit the region's export-rich economies, figures showed. The drop in output for the fourth quarter compared to the third was the biggest since the euro was created in 1999 and the third quarterly fall in a row. In Europe, Germany's DAX closed up 0.1 percent at 4,413.39 and France's CAC 40 gained 1.1 percent to 2,997.86. But Britain's FTSE 100 fell 0.3 percent to 4,189.59.
ROME The job of the Group of Seven finance ministers meeting on solutions to the financial crisis looked even more difficult as new economic data showed Europe's recession deepening. The German economy, Europe's engine, plunged by 2.1 percent in the fourth quarter compared to the previous quarter in the sharpest downturn since the country reunified in 1990, and fellow Group of Seven members Italy and France also reported sharp downturns of 1.8 percent and 1.2 percent. British Chancellor of the Exchequer Alistair Darling called the current troubles "the severest downturn in generations." The meeting marks new U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner's international debut.
TOKYO Japan's economy likely contracted at an annual pace of more than 10 percent in the fourth quarter, analysts predict, reflecting the collapse in global demand that is battering the world's second-biggest economy. The Cabinet Office is expected to reveal Monday that gross domestic product in the October-December period plunged an annualized 11.7 percent, according to a consensus of market forecasts. That would mark the steepest drop for Japan since the oil shock of 1974 and far outpaces declines of 3.8 percent in the U.S. and an estimated 1.2 percent in the euro-zone. Still, the benchmark Nikkei 225 stock average added 74.04 points, or 1 percent, to 7,779.40. The broader Topic index was up 0.6 percent at 764.59.
CANBERRA, Australia Australia's parliament passed a 42 billion Australian dollars ($28 billion) stimulus package, overcoming opposition objections to a government plan to plunge the economy into record debt. The package comes on top of one launched late last year worth $10AU.4 billion and underscores the threat the downturn poses to Australia's resources-based economy, which has shuddered to a near halt since the worldwide financial turmoil began mid-last year.
WELLINGTON, New Zealand New Zealand's economy showed further signs of slowing as statistics revealed house sales in January dropped to the lowest level in 17 years and retail sales in the December quarter suffered their largest drop since 1997. Quarterly quarter retail sales fell 1.1 percent, driven downward by an 8.4 percent fall in fuel sales and a 5.3 percent decline in the sale of motor vehicles, the official data agency Statistics New Zealand said. That's the biggest drop since the March quarter of 1997.
ISLAMABAD Economic woes complicating Pakistan's struggle against Islamic militants are easing thanks to a tough rescue plan backed by the International Monetary Fund, but the program needs more than a year to succeed, the country's finance chief said. The perilous state of Pakistan's economy which faced trouble even before the global economic crisis is raising concern that unemployment and inflation will destabilize the nuclear-armed nation's pro-Western government and fan Islamist violence.
BERLIN German Chancellor Angela Merkel will host a meeting of key European leaders in Berlin on Feb. 22 to help prepare for an April international summit on combating the financial crisis, a spokesman said. Merkel will welcome the leaders of Britain, France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Luxembourg and the Czech Republic to the chancellery in Berlin, said her spokesman, Ulrich Wilhelm. The Czech Republic currently holds the European Union's rotating presidency, while Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker is president of the euro group, representing the 16 countries that use the currency.
TALLINN, Estonia Estonia's economy contracted 9.4 percent in the fourth quarter from the same period a year earlier, due to a steep decrease in manufacturing output and domestic demand, the state's statistics agency announced. The quarterly result, which is based on preliminary estimates, is the second worst in the 27-member European Union. On Monday Estonia's neighbor Latvia announced that its gross domestic product plummeted 10.5 percent in the fourth quarter.
SHANGHAI Chinese shares rose to a five-month high on investor enthusiasm about higher liquidity in the economy after the central bank confirmed January bank lending hit a record high. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index jumped 3.2 percent, or 72.7 points, to close at 2320.79, ending the week up 6 percent. The Shenzhen Composite Index for China's smaller second exchange climbed 3.6 percent to 749.31.
SINGAPORE Singapore retail sales fell 1.6 percent in December from a year earlier as consumer spending suffered amid the city-state's worst recession in decades. Compared to November, sales rose 20 percent, reflecting the traditional increase in commerce ahead of the Christmas holiday, the statistics department said in a statement. Sales in November fell 3.4 percent from a year earlier.
SAO PAULO, Brazil Latin American stocks closed higher. Argentina's Merval index led gainers, rising 4.6 percent to close at 1,135. Brazil's Ibovespa is rose 2.9 percent to 41,674 and Colombia's IGBC ended up 1.2 percent at 8,054. Mexico's IPC index advanced 0.5 percent to 19,368.
HONG KONG Hong Kong's stock index advanced 2.5 percent on talk that a U.S. government plan to subsidize troubled homeowners' mortgage payments. The blue chip Hang Seng index climbed 326.37 points to 13,554.67, snapping a two-day losing streak.
TAIPEI, Taiwan Taiwan shares rose, acting in concert with rallies in regional bourses and a late turnaround on Wall Street. The Weighted Price Index of the Taiwan Stock Exchange gained 126.08 points, or 2.8 percent, to close at 4592.5 points. Market sentiment improved after officials said that Taiwan's sharp export declines could moderate in a few months, according to dealers. Taiwan reported two straight months of more than 40 percent year-on-year export declines in December and January.
 Load-Date: February 14, 2009

 

End of Document
