

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
November 26, 2008 Wednesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1084 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Wednesday:
BRUSSELS, Belgium The European Commission urged EU governments to jointly combat the economic slowdown with 200 billion euros ($256 billion) in spending and tax cuts to boost growth and consumer and business confidence. If fully enacted, the two-year "European Economic Recovery Plan" would see the 27 EU governments spend 1.5 percent of the bloc's gross domestic product to halt the slowdown that has already pushed some European nations into recession.
BEIJING China cut its main interest rate by 1.08 percentage points the country's biggest interest rate cut in 11 years to spur private borrowing and support a multibillion-dollar stimulus package to help boost slowing economic growth. It is the fourth cut in three months, reflecting the government's urgency about raising private consumption and investment to supplement state spending on the stimulus package. China's shares edged up for the first time in five sessions. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index ended up 0.5 percent, or 9.17 points, to close at 1897.88.
LONDON Leaders of 20 of the world's industrialized and emerging economies will meet in London in April to check their progress on tackling the global financial crisis, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown said. He told the House of Commons that U.S. President-elect Barack Obama expects to travel to the one-day talks among members of the G-20 grouping. The talks will follow up on a summit in Washington earlier this month, which critics said was hampered by having the outgoing President George W. Bush as host. Meanwhile, government officials met with credit-card companies to look for ways to ease the pain for Britons falling behind in payments. Individual credit-card debt is more than eight times higher in Britain than in France, Spain, Germany and Italy. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed down 18.56 points, or 0.4 percent, at 4,152.69.
TOKYO Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average dropped 110.71 points, or 1.3 percent, to 8,213.22 after Fitch Ratings cut Toyota's credit rating two notches to "AA" from "AAA." Fitch blamed the world's auto market slump and a strong yen the latest sign that even a brand like Toyota isn't immune to the global slowdown. Toyota shares dropped 4.6 percent, and Honda Motor lost 1.9 percent.
PARIS The leaders of France and Germany called for quick action within the European Union to halt an economic downturn with measures such as an injection of state funds for small businesses, households and infrastructure projects. President Nicolas Sarkozy and Chancellor Angela Merkel, in a joint newspaper column, insisted the slump will lead some members to surpass the EU's 3 percent limit on national deficits as a percentage of economic output. The CAC-40 closed 29.24 points, or 0.9 points, lower at 3,180.32.
BANGKOK, Thailand Thai stocks ended little changed despite further turmoil in the country. The prime minister refused to step down despite the army chief's call for new elections after thousands of protesters shut down Bangkok's primary airport in an effort to bring down the government. All flights were canceled, stranding tourists and dealing a blow to the country's already-fragile tourism industry at the peak of the Thai tourist season. The SET index closed up 3.37 points, or 0.9 percent, to 395.22.
BERLIN Chancellor Angela Merkel said that Germany faces a "year of bad news" in 2009 but insisted her government will do what is necessary to ensure Europe's biggest economy weathers the financial crisis. Germany fell into recession in the third quarter and the government recently slashed its 2009 growth forecast by one percentage point to 0.2 percent although many economists now expect negative growth. The DAX ended 0.08 points higher at 4,560.50.
SAO PAULO, Brazil Brazil's Ibovespa index rose 4.8 percent to 36,470, while Mexico's IPC index gained 3.8 percent to 20,026. Argentina's Merval index jumped 5.3 percent to 955 and Chile's IPSA added 0.3 percent to 2,421.
SYDNEY, Australia Investors snapped up a number of resource companies after Australia's BHP Billiton Ltd., the world's biggest mining company, abandoned its hostile takeover bid for rival Rio Tinto Ltd. The $68 billion deal had spurred worries among steel makers that the combined company could unfairly influence prices for iron ore, a key ingredient in steel. Australia's main index declined 2.3 percent, with BHP adding 3.9 percent and Rio Tinto plunging more than 34 percent.
DUBLIN, Ireland Battling red ink and recession, Ireland's government unveiled a sweeping plan designed to slash its costs and reverse more than a decade of boom-fueled excess. Finance Minister Brian Lenihan said the government must cut its payroll. He said the number of state employees has grown over the past four years by 11 percent to 318,000, while their total pay has surged 39 percent. Lenihan said he would appoint a four-person expert committee to identify inefficiencies in Ireland's public services and recommend cuts and reforms.
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates Abu Dhabi launched a new home-loan provider in the latest effort by the United Arab Emirates to protect its property boom from the global credit crisis. The company, Abu Dhabi Finance, is backed by a mix of state-controlled and publicly listed companies. Its debut comes just days after the federal government began merging the country's two largest mortgage providers amid a sudden drop in lending and property prices.
WARSAW, Poland Poland's central bank unexpectedly lowered its benchmark interest rate by a quarter point to 5.75 percent amid signs that the booming economy may slow down under the weight of the global financial crisis. The National Bank of Poland announced the cut in its seven-day intervention rate on its Web site, but did not immediately give a reason for the decision.
HONG KONG Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index climbed 3.8 percent, to 13,369.45, and South Korea's Kospi jumped 4.7 percent to 1,029.78. Markets in Singapore, Taiwan and the Philippines also gained.
DHAKA, Bangladesh Bangladesh will likely miss its economic growth target as exports weaken and remittances from workers abroad fall because of the global financial crisis, the World Bank said. Bangladesh's projection for economic growth in the year ending June 2009 is 6.5 percent but in the worst-case scenario it could slump to 4.8 percent, officials of the Washington-based lender said in the South Asian nation's capital, Dhaka.
 Load-Date: November 27, 2008

 

End of Document
