

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
January 22, 2009 Thursday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1168 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock-market activity around the world Thursday:
BEIJING China's economic slump deepened in the fourth quarter, with growth sliding to a seven-year low of 6.8 percent from 9 percent the previous quarter. For the full year, China's economy expanded by 9 percent its slowest yearly growth since 2001. Premier Wen Jiabao, China's top economic official, hopes to reach agreement with European leaders on measures to combat the global slowdown when he visits Europe next week, a senior Chinese official said. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index rose 1 percent, or 19.94 points, to close at 2004.95. The Shenzhen Composite Index for China's second exchange jumped 1.4 percent to 613.16. Hong Kong's Hang Seng closed up 0.6 percent at 12,657.99
TOKYO Asia's biggest economy said exports fell at a record pace of 35 percent in December, surpassing November's 26.7 percent decline. It was the third straight month of decline, the government reported. Japan's central bank, while holding its key interest rate at 0.1 percent, said it would "examine" outright purchases of corporate bonds in the future to help capital-starved companies. In corporate news, Sony Chief Executive Howard Stringer acknowledged he had not gone far enough with cost cuts and efforts to combine entertainment with electronics as his company projected its first annual loss in 14 years. Sony Corp. said it will slash jobs at its movies, music and game businesses. The Nikkei 225 gained 1.9 percent to 8,051.74.
LONDON The head of Britain's financial regulator dismissed suggestions that the lifting of the ban on short selling of financial stocks was behind the collapse in share prices of some of the country's leading banks this week. Adair Turner, the chairman of the Financial Services Authority, said there was no evidence that the removal of the short-selling ban last Friday has played a "significant" role in the slides, but stressed that the ban would be reimposed "without warning and immediately" should abusive trading be found. The FTSE 100 benchmark index closed down 0.19 percent at 4.052.23.
BRUSSELS, Belgium European Union regulators cleared Germany's 6.7 billion euros ($8.65 billion) guarantee for a banking industry program to cover deposits at private banks and at the German branch of collapsed U.S. investment bank Lehman Brothers. The European Commission said that the government subsidy was necessary to keep the banking sector stable and prevent a serious disturbance in the German economy. Meanwhile, the World Steel Association said global steel output fell 1.2 percent last year after climbing for six years, as demand by car makers and construction dropped amid recessions in the U.S. and Europe. Also, Belgium's KBC bank got a 2 billion euros ($2.6 billion) government bailout to cover massive write-downs on complex investments that the company said have led to a loss of about 2.5 billion euros ($3.2 billion) for the full year 2008.
BERLIN The German economy, Europe's biggest, will shrink by 2.5 percent this year as the global downturn decimates its exports, the International Monetary Fund said. The forecast was slightly more pessimistic than the German government's, but both expect the weakest economic performance by far since World War II. On Wednesday, the Germany Economy Ministry said it expected the country's economy to shrink by 2.25 percent this year. The DAX ended the day down 0.98 percent at 4,219.42.
SEOUL, South Korea South Korea's economy shrank 3.4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2008, contracting from the previous year for the first time in a decade, as the country's manufacturing and exports crumpled in the face of slumping global demand. Asia's fourth-largest economy last shrank on a year-on-year basis in the fourth quarter of 1998, when it contracted 6 percent while the country was in the throes of the Asian economic crisis. The Kospi index added 1.1 percent to 1,116.23.
PARIS French economic growth will be "close to zero" this year as the financial crisis takes its toll, the top official for France's economic recovery plan, Patrick Devedjian, said. Private economists said even that was too optimistic. The government's most recent forecast for 2009 is for economic growth of between 0.2 percent and 0.5 percent, while the European Commission expects the French economy to contract by 1.8 percent this year. Devedjian also warned that unemployment in France is likely to worsen in the coming months. The CAC-40 fell 1.24 percent to 2,869.62.
REYKJAVIK, Iceland A senior figure in Iceland's main governing party said that she expects early elections this year, as protesters demanded the government step down over the country's severe economic crisis. Iceland's banks collapsed in the autumn under the weight of huge debts amassed during years of rapid economic growth. The country's currency has plummeted, while inflation and unemployment are soaring. In a series of increasingly violent protests, demonstrators have accused the government of leading their once-prosperous island nation of 320,000 people into economic ruin. Prime Minister Geir Haarde has insisted he will not resign.
MOSCOW Russia's Central Bank will widen the ruble's trading range to allow an effective 10 percent devaluation of the national currency. Analysts said the move would prompt an immediate drop in the currency's value. The bank said the limit of the band, measured against a two currency "basket" of dollars and euros, will be set at 41 rubles as of Friday. The ruble has plunged amid falling oil prices and massive capital outflows.
HELSINKI, Finland World-leading mobile phone maker Nokia Corp. said profits plunged 69 percent in the fourth quarter and warned the economic downturn would batter the handset industry harder than previously thought.
TORONTO The head of Canada's central bank said the country is in a deep recession, but he expects it will be shorter than previous recessions. Bank of Canada Governor Mark Carney said interest rate cuts, a government stimulus package and a weak Canadian dollar could lead to a shorter downturn than recessions in 1981-82 and 1990-92. The bank is predicting three consecutive quarters of contraction for Canadian economic activity. The S&P/TSX index dropped 3.1 percent.
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil Brazil's unemployment rate dropped to 6.8 percent in December, its lowest point in seven years, officials said but analysts warned joblessness is expected to rise as businesses struggling to obtain credit in a global financial crisis begin laying off employees. The government took steps to address those concerns: Finance Minister Guido Mantega announced that the government would pump $42 billion in new funds into Brazil's National Development Bank. Latin American stocks mostly fell. Brazil's Ibovespa stock index fell 1.7 percent to 37,894 and Mexico's IPC index dropped 1 percent to 19,307, while Argentina's Merval index fell less than 1 percent to 1,058. Chile's IPSA index, however, rose 1 percent to 2,494.
 Load-Date: January 23, 2009

 

End of Document
