

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
December 3, 2010 Friday 07:40 PM GMT

 Copyright 2010 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1546 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and activity in major stock markets around the world Friday:
PARIS The European Central Bank's chief says the euro remains "credible" despite the debt crisis that has required the bailouts of Ireland and Greece and raised worries about the future of the shared currency.
A day after the ECB extended its special support measures for banks, Jean-Claude Trichet urged European governments to make a "quantum leap" toward reforming and cleaning up budgets to avoid falling deeper into turmoil.
The ECB, the European Union and the 16 governments that share the euro are struggling to contain a crisis caused by too much state debt in some countries. Trichet would not comment on whether the ECB has increased its purchases of government bonds by highly indebted countries like Ireland or Portugal to ease their borrowing rates.
Asked whether European Union governments should increase their bailout funds, Trichet said, "We are encouraging governments to go as far as possible to being commensurate with the challenges."
BRUSSELS The debt crisis is forcing governments to rewrite some of the eurozone's most fundamental rules.
On Monday and Tuesday, European finance ministers will work on fleshing out a so-called European Stability Mechanism. The new rules will effectively rearrange the eurozone's power structure to protect stronger economies like Germany from paying for the profligacy of `peripheral' countries like Greece or Portugal, threatening to create a two-tier Europe.
At the heart of the stability mechanism chiefly sought by Germany, Europe's paymaster is forcing investors to take part of the losses in debt crises. The most direct consequence, however, has been that investors are asking for higher premiums on fiscally weak governments' debt. That risks pulling Europe in two different directions that of economically strong countries who will keep paying low borrowing rates and those who will pay more because of the perceived risk surrounding their debt.
Olli Rehn, the EU's top economic official, on Friday said he expected the eurozone to go through years of transformation.
LONDON An unexpected increase in the U.S. unemployment rate sent stocks lower but the losses were contained by a strong services sector survey and the easing of tensions in Europe's debt crisis.
In Europe, the FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed down 22.24 points, or 0.4 percent, at 5,737.23 while Germany's DAX fell 9.89 points, or 0.1 percent, to 6,947.72. The CAC-40 in France bucked the trend, closing 3.51 points, or 0.1 percent, higher at 3,750.55.
The euro got a further boost, as the dollar came under renewed pressure. Europe's single currency was trading over a cent higher on the day at $1.3369. That means the euro has spiked around 4 cents over the last couple of days.
Earlier, Asian stocks mostly rose but mainland Chinese shares edged lower after the state news agency said the ruling Communist Party's top body, the Politburo, ordered a switch in monetary policy "from relatively loose to prudent."
The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index shed less than 0.1 percent to 2,842.43 while the Shenzhen Composite Index fell 0.6 percent to 1,302.25.
Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average closed 0.1 percent higher at 10,178.32 and South Korea's Kospi edged up 0.4 percent to 1,957.26. Australia's S&P/ASX 200 added 0.4 percent to 4,694.2. Hong Kong's Hang Seng index finished 0.6 percent lower at 23,320.52.
MADRID The Spanish government approves new austerity measures and a limited economic stimulus package to ease investor fears about its debt and insists it is taking strong steps to right its ailing economy.
The moves include plans to sell off a 30 percent stake in the government-owned national lottery, the partial privatization of airports, cutbacks to a key jobless benefit, tax cuts for small businesses and an increase in the tobacco tax.
In less than three years, Spain has tumbled from being Europe's top job creator to having a eurozone high unemployment rate of nearly 20 percent, with nearly 5 million people out of work. Spain is hoping to slash its deficit from 11.2 percent of GDP in 2009 to within the EU limit of 3 percent by 2013.
MOSCOW The Russian government will have to pump billions of dollars into some of the country's crumbling cities to host the 2018 World Cup, providing a catalyst for the Kremlin's much-hyped but ineffective modernization drive.
Yet financial analysts say the effort to give some credence to authorities' depiction of Russia as a bustling, dynamic member of modern Europe is unlikely to lead to lasting changes in the economy.
Even Moscow and St. Petersburg Russia's most modern cities would have to drastically increase the number of affordable hotels to deal with thousands of visiting World Cup fans. But the other 11 Russian cities slated to host World Cup matches need even more challenging infrastructure overhauls to make them viable sporting destinations.
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin has said Russia would spend $10 billion to prepare for the World Cup, but some put the costs at more than $50 billion.
Sectors that are expected to surge on World Cup spending are steel, construction, hospitality and transportation.
BERLIN Germany's central bank says the country will experience stronger economic growth through 2012 and forecasts growth of 3.6 percent this year, making up for losses from the recession that followed the financial crisis.
Exports are still the German economy's driving force, but domestic consumption is picking up and unemployment will continue to decline, the Bundesbank says.
The central bank also officially raised its 2011 growth forecast from 1.4 percent to 2 percent and expects moderate growth of 1.5 percent in 2012. It said the unemployment rate is likely to fall even further, inching below 7 percent in 2012.
LONDON Retail sales in the 16 countries that use the euro rose by 0.5 percent in October, more than expected, despite weakness in some of the most indebted countries.
The monthly increase reported by Eurostat, the EU's statistics office, was more than double market forecasts for a 0.2 percent increase, and was due largely to buoyant sales in Germany, Europe's biggest economy.
For the recovery to become more self-sustaining, analysts think consumers have to increase their spending at a time when many governments in the single currency area are imposing tough austerity measures in an attempt to get a handle on their massive debts.
The headline figure masks big differences within the eurozone sales have continued to drop in Greece, Spain and Portugal, three of the most highly indebted countries where governments are focusing on spending cuts.
LONDON New construction orders in Britain fell by 4 percent in the third quarter compared to the previous quarter, dropping to the lowest level since the first quarter of last year.
The Office for National Statistics said the decline came despite a big jump in orders for private housing to 2.56 billion pounds ($4 billion) compared to 1.7 billion pounds in the second quarter. It was the largest total for private housing in at least two years.
Total construction orders were nearly 11.7 billion pounds, the lowest since the 10.5 billion pounds recorded in the first quarter of 2009. Total orders were 14 percent lower than a year earlier.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia Malaysia's government said it will cut fuel and sugar subsidies for the second time in five months, leading to savings of 1.18 billion ringgit ($380.7 million) to help trim its budget deficit.
The move comes amid rising global oil prices and a stronger domestic economy, which is expected to grow more than 6 percent this year after contracting 1.7 percent in 2009.
Malaysia's fiscal deficit hit a 20-year high of 7 percent of gross domestic product last year. The government hopes to trim it to 5.3 percent this year and 2.8 percent by 2015 through fuel and other subsidy cuts over the next five years.
BEIJING Beijing is promising new subsidies to develop China's solar power industry policies already under fire from the United States as a possible trade violation.
Beijing has rejected binding emission limits but is pushing to develop solar and wind power technology to reduce reliance on imported oil and gas and to profit from growing global clean power demand. The government wants at least 15 percent of China's power to come from renewable sources by 2020.
Beijing will create 13 industry zones and pay up to half the price of equipment for solar power projects, the Finance Ministry said. It said other costs will be covered by a subsidy of 4 to 6 yuan (60 to 90 U.S. cents) per watt of generating capacity.
BEIJING China's leadership ordered a shift from easy credit to a "prudent monetary policy" as Beijing steps up its fight against inflation and tries to guide rapid growth to a sustainable level.
The announcement reinforces a change in direction charted this year of modest tightening after the government and banks flooded the economy with easy money to effectively ward off the global economic crisis in 2009. The government is trying to cool inflation that spiked to 4.4 percent in October well above the official 3 percent target driven by a 10.1 percent jump in food costs. Analysts say November inflation might rise still higher.
 Load-Date: December 4, 2010

 

End of Document
