

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
March 3, 2009 Tuesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1046 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Tuesday:
LONDON The Bank of England could start buying assets from banks with newly created money as early as this week to boost lending in the economy, Treasury chief Alistair Darling said in an interview with a British newspaper. He strongly hinted that the bank's monetary policy committee could begin so-called quantitative easing later this week when it meets for its monthly meeting to decide the level of interest rates. Meanwhile, the British government pledged funds to rescue 13 billion pounds ($18.4 billion) worth of key public infrastructure projects being built by private companies that are at risk of collapse because of the economic downturn. The deal could cost the government up to 2 billion pounds ($2.8 billion). In markets, the FTSE 100 index closed down 113.74 points, or 3.1 percent, at 3,512.09, its lowest close since March 2003.
TOKYO Toyota's financing unit is in talks with a Japanese government-backed bank on possible lending, the automaker said, underlining the serious woes facing the car industry amid plunging global sales. Toyota Motor Corp. said no details had been decided. Japan's Nikkei flirted with 26-year lows, ending 50.43 points, or 0.7 percent, lower at 7,229.72, while Hong Kong's Hang Seng index closed down 283.58 points, or 2.3 percent, at 12,033.88. Markets in India, Singapore, and Malaysia also lost ground.
BRUSSELS The European Union's top economy official, Joaquin Almunia, said that the 16 euro nations have a solution to rescue any member that risks economic collapse, but it would not be clever to give out details in public. Investors see a risk that euro-zone nations like Ireland, Spain, Portugal, Greece and Italy could default on debt payments and are charging them more to borrow on government bonds. Almunia said this solution would kick in before a member nation needed to approach the International Monetary Fund for a bailout.
TORONTO Canada's central bank cut its interest rate by one-half point to 0.5 percent the lowest in history. The Bank of Canada urged other countries to implement timely and ambitious plans to address toxic assets and recapitalize financial institutions. The central bank said those plans are a precondition for stabilization and recovery. It added that potential delays could mean no recovery until early 2010. The bank previously predicted growth in the second half of 2009. The latest interest rate cut means the bank has cut 4 percentage points off the overnight rate since it began the current easing policy in December 2007.
PARIS The French prime minister warned of a "long, hard crisis" in the economy, which he predicted will shrink as much as 1.5 percent this year as the number of unemployed swells. Francois Fillon also cautioned that the government's budget deficit as a percentage of economic output will soar to slightly more than 5 percent. France is likely to see unemployment rolls jump by 300,000 people this year, while the national deficit grows by 50 billion euros ($63 billion), he said. The CAC-40 ended 26.91 points, or 1 percent, lower at 2,554.55, while Germany's DAX closed down 19.35 points, or 0.5 percent, at 3,690.72.
GUANGZHOU, China A major U.S. business group said an annual survey of its members shows that companies plan to invest 40 percent less this year in southern China a once-booming export region already reeling from a plunge in orders amid the global financial crisis. Although thousands of Chinese factories have collapsed in the region in the past year, the 551 companies polled by the American Chamber of Commerce in South China had no plans to shut down, the group's president, Harley Seyedin, told reporters. Meanwhile, Chinese shares were mixed while investors waited to see whether this week's meeting of the national legislature produces new industrial stimulus plans. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index dropped 22.02 points, or 1.1 percent, to close at 2071.43.
SYDNEY Australia's central bank left its key interest rate unchanged at 3.25 percent after deep cuts in the past few months to help stimulate the rapidly slowing economy. The board of the Reserve Bank of Australia decided to end the run of cuts for now that have slashed the key rate from 7.25 percent at the beginning of September to its lowest level in more than 40 years. Analysts said the bank was leaving itself room to resume slashing rates if the economy did not respond well enough to the earlier cuts and to two big government stimulus packages since October. The S&P/ASX 200 index slid 1 percent to 3,219.20.
YEREVAN, Armenia The financial crisis has forced Armenia to let its currency fall and seek a bailout from the IMF, the Central Bank acknowledged, with an announcement that it will give up its defense of the dram currency and return to a free float policy. The devaluation of the national currency is likely to hurt ordinary Armenians, with prices for imported goods expected to rise sharply. Several hours after the bank announced the move, IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn recommended its executive board to approve the country's request for a $540 million loan.
SEOUL, South Korea South Korea's beleaguered currency reversed course, rising against the dollar amid apparent intervention by foreign exchange authorities and a rebound in stocks. The won came off 11-year lows against the greenback after earlier approaching the 1,600-level for a second day. Currency authorities at the Bank of Korea and the Ministry of Strategy and Finance as a policy neither confirm nor deny intervention. They do, however, acknowledge occasional "smoothing operations" a euphemism for stepping into the market to prevent sharp one-way moves. Finance Minister Yoon Jeung-hyun told reporters that the exchange rate "will not always flow in the same direction," according to the ministry, though he refrained from commenting on possible intervention. South Korea's Kospi gained 0.7 percent to 1,025.57.
MADRID The number of people filing claims for jobless benefits in Spain jumped 154,058 in February to a total of 3.48 million, as companies continued to lay off workers in droves amid the recession, the Labor Ministry said. The figure is a 4.6 percent rise from the previous month.
 Load-Date: March 4, 2009

 

End of Document
