

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
December 9, 2010 Thursday 08:19 PM GMT

 Copyright 2010 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1275 words
Body




A look at economic developments and activity in major stock markets around the world Thursday:
MOSCOW Russia has agreed to scrap duties on oil it supplies to Belarus starting next year, and Minsk will pass on export duties on products made from the Russian oil to Moscow.
Talks broke down on Wednesday, fueling fears of a dispute that might hit energy supplies to Europe. Europe is thought to get around 20 million tons of crude oil through Belarus annually, and has lost out on energy supplies in the past due to Russia's spats with its neighbors.
Russian officials are playing the deal as a $4 billion gift to the Belarusian economy, agreed upon a week before presidential elections in Belarus. The oil deal was inked as Russian, Belarus and Kazakhstan agreed to create a fully fledged common economic space by 2012 after the three nations set up a customs union this year. The agreement will do away with all trade barriers between the countries.
DUBLIN Prime Minister Brian Cowen says Ireland's parliament will be asked next week to approve terms of the (EURO)67.5 billion ($90 billion) international bailout for his debt-crippled country.
The prime minister retains a two-vote majority in parliament. He has won several parliamentary votes this week on tax hikes and welfare cuts contained in Ireland's 2011 budget. Most opposition parties say they will vote to reject the deal with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund.
Separately, ratings agency Fitch dropped Ireland's credit rating three notches, citing the country's massive bailout as an admission that its debt crisis was worse than advertised. Fitch lowered the creditworthiness rating to 'BBB+' from 'A+' with a stable outlook.
This means no further downgrades are expected. S&P last month became the first ratings agency to cut Ireland's grade over the bailout talks.
LONDON British defense and aerospace contractor BAE Systems is planning to shed almost 1,300 jobs due to sharp government spending cuts. BAE said most of the losses are related to the axing of contracts to supply Nimrod spy planes and Harrier fighter jets. Nearly half of the threatened jobs are at BAE's testing and assembly facility at Warton in northwest England.
Both moves are part of the government's drive to cut defense spending by 8 percent. BAE has about 40,000 employees in the United Kingdom.
LONDON The Bank of England holds interest rates steady at a record low of 0.5 percent, ending the year as it began, amid concerns about Britain's economic recovery despite recent stronger than expected data.
The British central bank also kept its 200 billion pound ($315 billion) asset-purchase program on hold. Economists say the nine-strong monetary policy committee is likely waiting to see how the economy progresses in the New Year when government spending cuts and a rise in sales tax are expected to take a tighter grip.
LISBON, Portugal Portugal's government is in talks with trade unions about introducing labor reforms it regards as vital to ease the country's financial crisis. The prime minister and economy minister met late Wednesday with the leaders of the two trade union confederations, which represent more than 1 million workers.
Economy Minister Jose Vieira da Silva said the government wants to reduce the financial and bureaucratic burden on companies reducing their workforce. That may include paying less compensation to fired workers. The proposals, which have not been publicly detailed, are part of Portugal's effort to generate fresh economic growth that will help pay off its potentially crippling debts.
Last year's state budget deficit of 9.6 percent was below Greece's 15.4 percent but was still the fourth-highest in the bloc.
SHANGHAI China's auto sales powered ahead in November, jumping 27 percent to 1.7 million vehicles as car buyers rushed to beat expected increases in license plate fees in some cities.
The rebound after a slowdown during the summer pushed sales for the year to 16.4 million vehicles, up 34 percent from the year before, the government-affiliated China Association of Automobile Manufacturers said. China's strong growth suggests it will retain its status, acquired last year, as the world's biggest market by sales of new vehicles.
Analysts say the expected expiration of subsidies for purchases of small, energy efficient cars next year, and rumors that some cities plan to counter growing traffic problems by raising license plate fees, prompted buyers to head for the showrooms.
Output of 1.75 million new vehicles exceeded sales, however, pushing inventories higher. Demand may slump in coming months since many buyers simply decided to move up purchases that otherwise would have been made next year.
SEOUL, South Korea South Korea's central bank kept its key interest rate on hold after inflation eased sharply in November, but cautioned that the country's strong economy and rising global costs for raw materials would push consumer prices higher again.
The Bank of Korea has decided to leave the benchmark seven-day repurchase rate at 2.5 percent during a monthly monetary policy meeting. The bank last month raised the rate from 2.25 percent, which was the second hike in four months.
South Korea's inflation rate hit 4.1 percent in October. The year-on-year increase in consumer prices was slightly outside the central bank's comfort zone. The bank's inflation target is 3 percent.
Inflation dropped to 3.3 percent in November. The bank's monetary policy committee welcomed the slowdown, but warned the trend is for rising prices to continue.
South Korea, Asia's fourth-largest economy, has recovered strongly from the global financial crisis that began in 2008. The International Monetary Fund expects South Korea to grow 6.1 percent this year after last year's meager 0.2 percent expansion.
ATHENS, Greece Debt-strapped Greece will likely get more time to repay the bailout loans that saved it from defaulting, a top EU official indicated Thursday as the union seeks to keep its government debt crisis from mushrooming.
There are fears Greece will be unable to cope with a spike in debt repayments in 2014 and 2015 as it pays back loans from the three-year EU and International Monetary Fund program that ends in 2013.
The European Commission is following EU governments in considering extending the amount of time Greece has to repay its debts to match the roughly 7 1/2 years that Ireland has for its bailout. In Greece's case, the extension addresses fears that its economy will not be growing sufficiently by 2013 to generate enough revenue to pay back its debts if it had to pay back the full IMF/eurozone loan in 2014 and 2015.
Greece must lower its budget deficit from the 15.4 percent of gross domestic product it stood at in 2009, to below the eurozone limit of 3 percent of GDP by 2014. Its finances are under strict supervision by the IMF and EU, and the quarterly disbursement of bailout loans depends on Athens meeting financial targets.
PARIS President Nicolas Sarkozy's office says France believes the eurozone's (EURO)750 billion ($1 trillion) bailout fund doesn't need to be increased for now. A top Sarkozy adviser, speaking on condition that he not be named because of office policy, also said that France doesn't favor the creation of pan-European bonds to support governments with shaky finances.
That puts Paris in line with Germany in opposing the proposal made Monday by Italy and euro bloc president Jean-Claude Juncker. Eurozone governments and the International Monetary Fund in May set up the bailout fund as a financial backstop, though high public debt and weak growth prospects have continued to fuel debt market jitters.
 Load-Date: December 10, 2010

 

End of Document
