

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
December 19, 2008 Friday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1374 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock-market activity around the world Friday:
TOKYO Japan's central bank cut its key interest rate to 0.1 percent from 0.3 percent, joining the U.S. Federal Reserve in lowering borrowing rates to nearly zero amid an ever-worsening outlook for the global economy. The cut was widely expected and the bank's second in less than two months. The Bank of Japan also offered a dismal outlook for the world's second-largest economy and introduced steps to thaw a growing credit crunch for companies, such as buying commercial paper and stepping up its purchases of government bonds to 1.4 trillion yen ($15.7 billion) per month. Since the Fed's rate cut on Tuesday, the yen has hit 13-year highs against the dollar, heightening concerns about the strengthening yen, which erodes exporters' foreign income. Bank of Japan Gov. Shirakawa said recent foreign exchange fluctuations factored into the near-unanimous rate cut decision. The Nikkei 225 stock average dropped 0.9 percent to 8,588.52. In afternoon trading in New York, the dollar edged up to 89.55 Japanese yen from 89.42 late Thursday.
LONDON British Prime Minister Gordon Brown warned that a failure to tackle volatility in oil prices could cost the global economy trillions of dollars and hurt both producers and consumers. Brown told an energy summit in London that the wild variation in crude prices was the "most pressing challenge" facing the international community and called for improved regulation of oil markets to stabilize prices and pushed for greater investment in clean energy technology. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed down 43.73 points, or 1 percent, at 4,286.93.
FRANKFURT, Germany The European Central Bank said it had agreed with other central banks in the U.S., Europe and Japan to keep offering dollars to banks in the first quarter of 2009. The ECB said the decision by itself, the U.S. Federal Reserve and the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan and the Swiss National Bank, would extend the practice providing dollar loans with durations of seven, 28 and 84 days. Those operations will be like the ones carried out this year when credit markets all but froze up and banks were reluctant to lend to anyone, including themselves. The operations will be carried out as fixed-rate tenders with full allotments. The DAX closed 59.70 points, or 1.3 percent, lower at 4,696.70.
BEIJING China promised to help Hong Kong weather the global economic crisis by further opening mainland service industries to its companies and encouraging Chinese tourist travel to the territory. Premier Wen Jiabao told visiting Hong Kong Chief Executive Donald Tsang that such steps are among 14 measures approved by Beijing "to support Hong Kong's financial stability and economic development." Hong Kong has been battered by the slump in demand for Chinese exports, a large share of which pass through the former British colony. The benchmark Shanghai Composite index rose 0.1 percent to close at 2018.46, while Hong Kong's Hang Seng lost 2.4 percent to 15,127.51.
PARIS The French finance minister said she would consider more economic stimulus measures after the national statistics agency predicted the economy will sink into recession early next year. Christine Lagarde also said six European Union countries are working on extra measures to be announced in January, and said she's sticking to the government's projection of razor-thin growth next year despite the forecast by statistics agency Insee. A €26 billion ($38 billion) stimulus package to boost construction and help small companies is already planned for France. Meanwhile, Natixis SA, France's fourth largest investment bank, said it plans to cut 15 percent of its investment banking staff in what it called a 'radical' transformation aimed at stemming losses and reducing risk. Natixis said the planned 840 job cuts would come in "the more complex capital market activities" such as credit and structured credit proprietary trading, a €19 billion ($27 billion) business that the bank said it is simply shutting down. The CAC-40 index fell 0.3 percent to 3,225.90.
BRUSSELS, Belgium Belgian Prime Minister Yves Leterme offered the resignation of his entire government over the handling of the Fortis bank bailout. The offer came after his justice minister, Jo Vandeurzen, resigned following allegations by Belgium's highest court that the government had tried last week to influence a court case on the bailout and sale of the troubled bank. Belgian King Albert II was to decide later in the day whether to refuse or accept the resignation. The alleged attempts by the government to influence the course of judicial process have infuriated partners in a coalition government that was already shaky and raised huge questions about the government's handling of the financial meltdown. The future of Fortis, once the country's largest bank, is now in question as the government tries to proceed with the sale of most of the business to France's BNP Paribas. Thousands of jobs are at risk and many Belgian shareholders have seen their stakes become nearly worthless.
SEOUL, South Korea South Korean President Lee Myung-bak warned that the global economic slowdown is choking off his country's exports and told workers they must sacrifice to keep their jobs. South Korea's exports fell 18.3 percent in November from a year earlier, helping fan fears that Asia's fourth-largest economy could contract next year on an annual basis for the first time since 1997. Unemployment at 3.1 percent so far remains low. Lee, who was visiting a factory run by GM Daewoo Auto & Technology Co., the South Korean arm of General Motors Corp., said labor and management must work together to save jobs, while workers must increase productivity. The Kospi benchmark index closed up 0.4 percent at 1,180.97.
MOSCOW Russia would come under crippling financial pressure and may need to raise money externally if oil languishes at an average of $30 a barrel over the next two years, the World Bank predicted. The bleak scenario would mark a rapid unraveling of Russia's oil-fueled economic gains over the past eight years, during which time the government has paid down most of its foreign debt and built up a vast stockpile of international reserves. Oil prices took a sharp turn downward this week, with the February light sweet crude contract trading just over $42 a barrel more than $100 lower than its July peak despite a large output cut pledged this week by oil producers' cartel OPEC. Meanwhile, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin urged Russians to shun imported foreign cars in favor of locally produced ones which the government even offered to help ship to remote regions in an effort to help a troubled auto industry.
OSLO, Norway Norway will spend more of its vast oil wealth next year to fight the economic crisis, part of a package of new stimulus measures to be revealed on Jan. 26, Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg said. Norway is a major oil exporter and has put aside more than 2 trillion kroner ($300 billion) in a fund for foreign investment. Normally, the government limits spending of oil wealth to 4 percent of the fund's total value. But Stoltenberg said it can spend more in troubled economic times and pledged new economic stimulus measures.
BELGRADE, Serbia The Serbia subsidiary of Pittsburgh-based U.S. Steel Corp. will substantially reduce production early next year due to the global economic crisis. The company will put its two blast furnaces in Smederevo, about 40 kilometers (24 miles) southeast of Belgrade, on standby in January, said spokesman Nemanja Brkovic. Brkovic said the decision was made because of falling demand caused by the global crisis. He said the company is not planning layoffs for now.
MADRID, Spain Grappling with rising unemployment and a moribund economy, the Spanish government proposed new immigration rules to limit the influx of immigrants. The measures, which need Parliamentary approval, would let police hold undocumented aliens longer pending expulsion and make it harder for foreign-born residents to bring relatives over. They are yet another reflection of the dramatic turnabout in Spain's economy. The IBEX 35 index rose 0.1 percent to 9,268.4.
 Load-Date: December 20, 2008

 

End of Document
