

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
February 11, 2009 Wednesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 998 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Wednesday:
LONDON The head of the Bank of England said that Britain was in a "deep recession" that would require further easing of monetary policy, including the possible expansion of the money supply. While confirming that the British economy would contract this year by its largest amount since the early 1980s, Bank of England governor Mervyn King gave his clearest sign yet that the Bank of England was ready to in effect print money to get the economy going again. Britain's FTSE 100 closed up 0.5 percent at 4,234.26.
FRANKFURT German consumer prices rose by less than 1 percent in January, a sign the global financial crisis has worn down demand for everything from washing machines to automobiles, the government's Federal Statistical Office said. The Wiesbaden-based agency said the consumer price index rose only 0.9 percent in January compared to last year, and that the index has steadily fallen since August 2008. In January, the year-on-year rate of price increase was below 1 percent for the first time since February 2004. Compared with December 2008, January consumer prices fell by half a percent. Meanwhile, an Ifo institute survey showed confidence in the economies of the 16 countries using the euro currency worsened for the sixth consecutive quarter and is now the lowest since the survey began in 1993. The Munich-based institute's survey of international and national organizations showed the economic climate in the first quarter of 2009 fell to 45.8 points, from 50.8 points in the last quarter of 2008. The economic climate average is 90.4 points. Germany's DAX added 0.5 percent at 4,530.09.
MOSCOW Russia's budget deficit could swell to 8 percent of national output in 2009, costing the country about $70 billion, the Kremlin's top economic adviser said. The figure given by Arkady Dvorkovich in a speech to a business forum was higher than previous forecasts. Last week, he said the deficit would likely be around 6 percent of gross domestic product.
PARIS Finance Minister Christine Lagarde confirmed that French banks will accept guidelines for paying out bonuses to traders in order to limit risks. Banks are to commit to the guidelines by the end of April in exchange for financial guarantees that have been offered by the state. The French Banking Federation presented the guidelines, which had been worked out earlier, to Lagarde, who saluted the initiative as a way to help protect against a repeat of the financial crisis. France's CAC 40 rose 0.2 percent at 3,027.72.
BRUSSELS, Belgium The European Union's top two officials warned countries not to shield their economies with protectionist measures, which would only worsen the financial crisis and risk unraveling the EU project. Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek, who holds the EU presidency, also announced two additional summits of the 27 government leaders over the next three months. Leaders from the bloc's 27 nations will meet March 1 in Brussels to discuss ways for pulling their economies out of the slump. A regular EU economic summit is scheduled for March 19-20 in Brussels, and another employment summit will be held in Prague in May.
HONG KONG Hong Kong's stock index retreated over 2 percent, snapping a five-day win streak amid skepticism over the latest U.S. financial bailout plan. The blue-chip Hang Seng Index tumbled 341.43 points, or 2.5 percent, to 13,539.21.
BEIJING China's trade plunged in January as the global economic crisis drove down demand for its exports, adding to the threat of job losses and unrest and dampening hopes an economic recovery might be taking shape. Exports fell 17.5 percent in January from a year earlier, according to customs data. Imports fell even faster, plummeting 43 percent as Chinese factories bought less foreign raw materials and consumer demand weakened. The declines exceeded forecasts and were likely to dim hopes China's slump might be ending after data last week showed manufacturing improving and higher bank lending. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index closed down 0.2 percent, or 4.34 points, at 2260.82. The Shenzhen Composite Index for China's smaller second exchange added 0.2 percent to 716.4.
CARACAS, Venezuela Venezuela said it will use cash from two development funds to preserve social spending and boost growth as oil income plummets. Oil accounts for 94 percent of Venezuela's exports and nearly half its federal budget, and world crude prices have dropped 75 percent from July's record of more than $147 a barrel. Analysts suggest that after five straight years of growth Venezuela's economy could contract this year by 4.1 percent, according to Barclays Plc.
DUBLIN Ireland unveiled painstakingly negotiated plans to invest €7 billion ($9 billion) in its two largest banks, Allied Irish and the Bank of Ireland, in hopes of easing international fears that Ireland's financial system could be headed for collapse. After weeks of back-room negotiations, Finance Minister Brian Lenihan was forced to increase Ireland's original plan to invest just €2 billion in each bank after his hopes that the banks could attract matching capital from foreign investors were dashed. Lenihan's announcement came against a backdrop of deepening scandal involving Ireland's No. 3 and 4 banks, Anglo Irish and Irish Life & Permanent, which has fanned market skepticism about Ireland's ability to police its banks and manage its ballooning national debt.
KIEV, Ukraine A top banker warned that Ukraine's failure to receive the second part of an emergency loan from the International Monetary Fund may lead to "devastating" consequences for Europe's economy. Last week the IMF postponed the second $1.9 billion tranche of the loan after the country fell behind on stabilization measures needed to receive the aid, which is to total $16.4 billion. Petro Poroshenko, the head of the National Bank Council, said it was crucial that Ukraine continues receiving the funding.
 Load-Date: February 12, 2009

 

End of Document
