

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
March 12, 2009 Thursday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 2508 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Thursday:
GENEVA Swiss pharmaceutical giant Roche said it has agreed to buy California-based Genentech for $46.8 billion in a takeover described as the largest in Swiss corporate history. The deal, approved and recommended by Genentech's board, offers $95 per share for the 44 percent of Genentech Inc. that Roche Holding AG doesn't already own. The agreement ends a long corporate struggle between the Basel, Switzerland-based drug maker and its cancer drug partner headquartered in South San Francisco.
VADUZ, Liechtenstein The tiny principality of Liechtenstein bowed to outside pressure by agreeing to adopt international standards on cross-border tax cooperation in an effort to shed its "tax haven" label as a place for evaders to hide money. In a joint news conference, Liechtenstein's government and its ruling prince committed the tiny Alpine country to starting bilateral talks with other countries that would see it drop its long-held distinction between tax fraud and tax evasion. Talks with Germany would begin Friday, followed by Britain in early April, Prime Minister Otmar Hasler said. Liechtenstein had so far resisted identifying clients accused by other countries of tax evasion considered a minor offense under its laws invoking its tradition of banking secrecy. Pressure has been growing on Liechtenstein and other secretive banking strongholds to adopt rules drawn up by the 30-country Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, which largely represents developed countries. An OECD official said Wednesday that Liechtenstein was on a list of "uncooperative tax havens" prepared in the run-up to next month's summit of the Group of 20 advanced and developing nations. Several holdout tax havens including Bermuda and the islands of Jersey and Guernsey in the English Channel have signaled over the past month that they would open their books to foreign tax inspectors.
MADRID The leader of Andorra has pledged to lift the tiny European principality's bank secrecy law, moving to end its reputation as a tax haven. The tiny country's government Web site said that Chief Minister Albert Pintat has signed a commitment to this effect in Paris with French government officials. The Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development lists Andorra as an "uncooperative tax haven." It is expected to propose at the G-20 summit of leading industrial nations on April 2 a range of sanctions that states can take against such tax havens. Andorra's declaration, signed Tuesday by Pintat, commits to having Andorra's Parliament approve the reform by Nov. 15 of this year, the Web site says.
Spain's Ibex rose 1.9 percent to 7,340.5.
VIENNA The head of the European Central Bank confirmed that he did not rule out further interest rate cuts to underpin the continent's shaky economy, but said there were not yet any plans to create new money the way Britain has started doing. The ECB cut interest rates by a half point a week ago to 1.5 percent, a 10-year low in the 16-country euro-zone. Bank president Jean-Claude Trichet hinted at that time that further reductions were possible, as well as suggesting the ECB could consider pumping extra money into the system to stimulate lending and boost the continent's economy.
SHANGHAI China's massive economic stimulus helped boost factory output and bank lending in February but figures also showed a slowdown in consumer spending an area vital for economic recovery. The National Statistics Bureau reported that retail spending rose 15.2 percent to 2 trillion yuan ($293 billion) in January-February, a marked slowdown from 21.6 percent for all of 2008. Industrial production rose 11 percent in February, driven by a big jump in concrete production due to the government's planned $4 trillion yuan ($586 billion) of stimulus spending. China's largely state-owned banks boosted lending by 300 percent to 1.1 trillion yuan ($161 billion) in February as state companies and government agencies borrowed to finance stimulus projects. The mixed signals highlight the challenge Beijing faces in ensuring its stimulus measures will fill the void left by plunging Chinese exports.
Meanwhile, China announced plans to assist millions of unemployed migrant workers with increases in grain subsidies and rural infrastructure projects, a top Agriculture Ministry official said. The collapse in global demand for Chinese toys, shoes and other goods has forced 20 million migrants out of work and back to their rural villages. Communist leaders worry that more layoffs could spark unrest and are promising to spend heavily to create jobs.
The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index dropped 5.14 points, or 0.2 percent, to close at 2133.88, while the Shenzhen Composite Index for China's smaller second exchange added 0.2 percent to 696.98. Hong Kong's Hang Seng recovered early losses to gain 0.6 percent to 12,001.53.
FRANKFURT German carmaker Volkswagen AG said the company's sales fell 15 percent during the first two months of the year and 2009 sales and profits won't match record levels in 2008. Europe's largest carmaker by sales reported record sales and profits for 2008 earlier this month. But it said the global economic crisis wouldn't pass it by, and that it wouldn't be able to match last year's results in 2009.
Another carmaker, BMW AG, said its net profit fell 90 percent in 2008 as the global economic crisis cut into demand for its sports and luxury cars. BMW didn't provide an outlook for the full year.
German industrial production fell 7.5 percent during January, the Economics Ministry said, as the global economic crisis continued to take its toll on Europe's largest economy. The building sector and capital goods manufacturers were hardest hit.
In other news, Germany's Institute for World Economy said it expects the global economy to shrink 0.8 percent this year, the worst rate since the Great Depression, with the German economy contracting 3.7 percent.
Germany's DAX fell 42.71 points, or 1.1 percent, to 3,871.39.
TOKYO Japan's economy shrank a bit less than first estimated in the fourth quarter, falling at a 12.1 percent annual rate in the October-December quarter, slightly better than the Cabinet Office's preliminary reading of a 12.7 percent contraction. The contraction is the severest for Japan since the oil shock of 1974 and is double the pace of the decline in the U.S. The benchmark Nikkei 225 index lost 177.87 points, or 2.4 percent, to 7,198.25 after vaulting more than 4 percent a day earlier. The broader Topix index dropped 3 percent to 700.93, the lowest since Dec. 14, 1983 when it closed at 696.19.
OTTAWA A top Chrysler official issued a grim threat to Canadian lawmakers, warning the struggling U.S. automaker may shut down its plants in Canada if it doesn't get significant labor concessions and government aid. Chrysler's labor costs in Canada work out to about 20 dollars an hour more than automakers like Toyota and Honda, Chrysler President Tom LaSorda told a Parliamentary committee Wednesday night. The automaker also asked for roughly $2.3 billion from the Canadian and Ontario governments and demanded relief in a tax dispute with Ottawa.
The S&P/TSX index rose 3.4 percent to 8,282.27 in Thursday trading.
ZURICH The Swiss National Bank cut its key interest rate by a quarter point to a record low 0.25 percent to fight the recession triggered by the global economic crisis, and said the Swiss economy would shrink this year by more than previously thought. It is the fifth rate cut by the Swiss bank since October, and comes a week after the European Central Bank cut its main rate to a record low 1.5 percent. The central bank said it expects Switzerland's economic output will fall between 2.5 percent and 3 percent this year, with nearly all sectors of the Swiss economy negatively affected by the economic downturn. The bank also said it would act to loosen monetary policy and prevent the Swiss franc from appreciating too much in value.
The Swiss franc slumped by a record amount against the euro Thursday after the country's central bank confirmed it was intervening to stem the currency's sharp appreciation due to its status as a safe haven.
The benchmark Swiss index rose 1.5 percent to 4,645.78.
PARIS The new CEO of Carrefour SA said he plans to increase discounting to win cash-strapped customers and gain market share in France after the company reported a 45 percent slide in 2008 net profit. Lars Olofsson, appointed last year to improve performance at the world's No. 2 retailer, said he will spend 600 million euros ($763 million) on promotions and other discounting to improve the company's image on price. Second only to U.S.-based Wal-Mart Stores Inc. among the world's biggest retailers, Carrefour said 2008 net profit fell to 1.27 billion euros ($1.62 billion) from 2.30 billion euros ($2.93 billion) a year earlier.
The CAC-40 in France fell 46.83 points, or 1.8 percent, at 2,627.37.
CAIRO A top Saudi official says the world biggest combined power generation-desalination plant will be launched next year in the kingdom. Prince Saud bin Thunayyan, head of the Royal Commission for Jubail and Yanbu, was quoted by the Saudi El-Ektisadiyah newspaper Wednesday as saying the $3.36 billion combined plant is set to begin operating in the Jubail Industrial City by the middle of 2010.
ATHENS, Greece A Greek militant group threatened in a statement to continue its bombing campaign, saying recent attacks against Citibank were in response to the international financial crisis. The Pontiki weekly newspaper published a statement from the Revolutionary Struggle group, which claimed responsibility for a failed car-bomb attack Feb. 18 on Citibank offices in Athens and a bomb attack Monday on a suburban Citibank branch that caused damage but no injuries.
SYDNEY Unemployment in Australia rose to its highest level in nearly four years in February, showing the global downturn continues to bite despite big interest rate cuts and the government pumping billions of dollars into the economy. The Australian Bureau of Statistics said Thursday that unemployment rose to 5.2 percent from 4.8 percent in January. Australian shares dipped 0.3 percent.
SEOUL, South Korea South Korea's central bank halted a string of interest rate cuts, deciding to keep borrowing costs at a record low 2 percent amid efforts to lift Asia's fourth-largest economy out of recession. In a brief statement, the Bank of Korea's seven-member monetary policy committee painted a bleak picture of South Korea's slumping economy. The Kospi index inched up 0.1 percent.
STOCKHOLM Car makers Saab and Volvo announced new cost cuts as the Detroit-owned units struggle for survival amid the global crisis in the auto industry. Saab, which is owned by General Motors Corp., gave notice to 750 employees at its main production plant in Sweden, while Ford-owned Volvo said it would cut staff salaries to save 500 million kronor ($57 million) in 2009. Saab went into bankruptcy protection on Feb. 20 in an effort by GM to spin off or sell the unit. The danger of a collapse still hovers over the ailing brand because neither GM nor the Swedish government appears ready to provide enough money to keep it going as a freestanding entity. While Volvo is better off, it too is struggling against a weak U.S. dollar and declining demand. Ford last year said it intends to spin off or sell the company.
LONDON The number of home mortgages completed in Britain was more than halved in January from a year earlier, the Council of Mortgage Lenders said, new evidence that the credit crunch is ravaging the property market.
In other news, a recent poll of 3,900 people by the Bank of England found that 21 percent of respondents thought U.K. interest rates should go up and 32 percent that they should stay put. Only 17 percent wanted a further cut. Thirty percent thought it made no difference or said they had no opinion. The Bank of England's base lending rate was cut to a record low of half a percent last week, but the poll was done before that decision, when rates were at 1 percent.
The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares was down 14.27 points, or 0.4 percent, at 3,679.54.
BELGRADE, Serbia An International Monetary Fund mission will arrive in Serbia next week for talks on a new $2 billion loan sought by the country to weather the global financial crisis, the National Bank governor said. Radovan Jelasic said the new standby loan deal is crucial for Serbia's hopes of getting additional funds from other international creditors such as the World Bank and the European Union.
RIGA, Latvia Latvia's Parliament approved the country's new center-right government as the economic crisis in the Baltic state deepens. Lawmakers voted 67-21 in support of Prime Minister Valdis Dombrovskis' new five-party coalition government two weeks after the government of Ivars Godmanis resigned amid squabbling as ministers struggled with the economic crisis.
DUBLIN Consumer prices in Ireland fell 1.7 percent in February over the past year the biggest rate of deflation in 49 years, the government Central Statistics Office reported. Ireland last suffered from deflation in 1960. Price falls last exceeded a 1.7 percent rate in February of that year. On Wednesday, Prime Minister Brian Cowen said Ireland's economy appeared on course to contract by 6.5 percent in 2009. The government previously had forecast a 4 percent decline in GDP this year.
BRUSSELS European Union businesses said that some 4.5 million workers may lose their jobs this year as company profits plunge. BusinessEurope, which represents more than 20 million European companies, said access to finance was the key issue for companies. It said many face bankruptcy as banks cut back credit, the number of late payments increase and credit insurance becomes harder to get. BusinessEurope forecasts the economy in the 27-nation EU shrinking 2.2 percent this year, with growth in the 16 nations that use the euro falling 2.1 percent.
In other developments, the European Investment Bank approved some 3 billion euros ($3.8 billion) in loans to car manufacturers to help them develop more fuel-efficient vehicles. It said the loan package would be paid to BMW AG, Daimler AG, Fiat Spa, PSA Peugeot-Citroen, Renault SA, Volvo Cars, Scania and Volvo Trucks and others. An additional 2.8 billion euros should be doled out in April and May, it said, which would bring its loans to car makers to 6.3 billion euros ($8 billion) since December. It said more loan applications likely to be approved in June would raise that to more than 7 billion euros.
WELLINGTON, New Zealand New Zealand's central bank cut half a percentage point from the nation's key interest rate, dropping it to a record low of 3 percent from 3.5 percent in a further bid to halt the economy's slide into deeper negative growth. The country's current recession is expected to last until mid-2009, making it the worst since the 1970s oil shock, Bank governor Alan Bollard said.
 Load-Date: March 13, 2009

 

End of Document
