

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
November 5, 2009 Thursday 07:06 PM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1045 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and activity in major stock markets around the world Thursday:
FRANKFURT The head of the European Central Bank hinted it could begin withdrawing some of its crisis measures soon, while the Bank of England pumped more money into the economy in an attempt to get Britain out of recession. Neither bank touched interest rates, already at record lows of 1 percent for the eurozone and 0.5 percent in Britain. ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet said that the 16 euro countries face an uncertain recovery. But he broadly hinted the ECB was getting ready to take back some of its added lending measures that have provided banks with ready cash during the financial crisis and promised to say more at next month's meeting.
LONDON British industrial production and new car registrations rose in recent months, data showed, as the Bank of England announced it would increase the size of its monetary stimulus. With the economy still mired in recession, the central bank said it would spend another 25 billion pounds ($41 billion) to buy assets from banks to expand the money supply. The Bank, which held its key lending rate at an all-time low of 0.5 percent, reiterated its view that recovery would be slow.
LONDON European stock markets recouped early losses and closed higher as more optimistic economic assessments from the European Central Bank and the Bank of England helped recoup earlier losses. In Europe, the FTSE 100 index of leading closed up 17.75 points, or 0.4 percent, at 5,125.64 while Germany's DAX rose 36.69 points, or 0.7 percent, to 5,480.92. The CAC-40 in France was up 38.40 points, or 1.1 percent, at 3,708.73.
MEXICO CITY Mexico's president says the country has emerged from a deep recession and the economy is already growing. President Felipe Calderon says the economy likely expanded 2.7 percent in the third quarter from the second quarter, although third-quarter gross domestic product figures are forecast to contract 6.4 percent in annual terms. Officials have yet to release that data. The finance department predicts Mexico's economy will contract by 6.8 percent in 2009. Calderon expects the economy will grow by 3 percent in 2010.
BERLIN German government tax revenue is expected to fall about 3 billion euros ($4.4 billion) short of previous estimates this year, the Finance Ministry said, but the new governing coalition vowed to press ahead with tax-cutting plans. Germany's economy, Europe's biggest, is expected to shrink by 5 percent this year and grow by 1.2 percent in 2010. The slowdown has weighed on tax revenue. A regular meeting of tax experts this week estimated that this year's total tax revenue will be 524.1 billion euros ($779.18 billion) 2.9 billion euros ($4.31 billion) less than was forecast in May, and largely a result of changes in tax regulations, the Finance Ministry said. That would mean a 6.5 percent decline compared with the previous year, a post-World War II record, said Andreas Rees, an economist at UniCredit in Munich.
WARSAW, Poland Poland's unemployment rate inched up to 11 percent in October due largely to layoffs and the end of seasonal summer jobs in farming and forestry, the Labor Ministry said. The jobless rate rose from 10.9 percent in September, according to the preliminary figures. Some 1.74 million people were registered as unemployed at the end of October. The Central Statistical Office will release official jobless figures later this month, but those numbers are unlikely to differ from the ministry's data by more than one-tenth of a percentage point. Poland's jobless rate peaked at 20.7 percent in February 2003, as a result of its shift from a communist to market economy. Unemployment dropped sharply after Poland joined the EU in 2004, to as low as 8.8 percent last October before the global economic crisis hit.
LONDON Iceland's central bank lowered its official interest rate by a full point to 11 percent as the country tries to get back on its feet after the credit crisis toppled its overweight banking system last year. The official rate had peaked at 18 percent between October 2008 and mid-March of this year, and had been left at 12 percent since June. Annual inflation has declined to 9.7 percent in October, and is expected to fall sharply next year, the central bank's monetary policy committee (MPC) said.
BRUSSELS Retail sales in the 16 countries that use the euro dropped by 0.7 percent in September, European Union statistics showed, evidence the economic recovery will be slow and bumpy. The drop from August comes as high and rising unemployment and financial uncertainty continue to weigh on consumer confidence. The EU's statistics agency Eurostat said sales of food, drinks and tobacco dropped by 0.9 percent in September, while sales of other goods fell by 0.6 percent. Overall, retail sales fell by 3.6 percent in September from the same month a year ago. Sales in the EU's largest economy, Germany, fell by 0.5 percent.
TOKYO Japanese stocks retreated ahead of U.S. jobs data, sending the country's benchmark index to its lowest close in a month. The benchmark Nikkei 225 stock average fell 126.87 points, or 1.3 percent, to 9,717.44 in thin trading. The broader Topix index closed down 0.7 percent at 874.96. With the U.S. government's employment report due out Friday, investors in Japan held to the sidelines or sold individual issues to lock in profits. Japanese companies are in the midst of releasing first-half earnings, which have generally met expectations. The results, however, have not been good enough to lift stock prices, said Naoki Kamiyama, chief strategist at Deutsche Securities Inc. in Tokyo.
SHANGHAI Chinese shares rose for a fifth day to a 12-week high, extending gains on optimism about the country's economic recovery. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index edged up 26.52 points, or 0.9 percent, to close at 3,155.05. The Shenzhen Composite Index for China's smaller second exchange added 0.4 percent to 1,117.23. The U.S. Federal Reserve's decision to leave a key interest rate unchanged had little impact on Chinese markets, analysts said. The World Bank on Wednesday raised its forecast for China's economic growth this year from 7.2 percent to 8.4 percent, reflecting the country's massive stimulus measures.
 Load-Date: November 6, 2009

 

End of Document
