

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
June 17, 2009 Wednesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 956 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Wednesday:
BEIJING China has imposed a requirement for its stimulus projects to use domestically made goods a move that could strain ties with trading partners after Beijing criticized Washington's "Buy American" stimulus provisions. Projects must obtain official permission to use imported goods, said an order issued by China's main planning agency and eight other government bodies.
Separately, Premier Wen Jiabao said the economy is showing "positive changes" but the basis of a recovery is not solid and the country should prepare for long-term difficulties.
Shanghai's stock measure recovered from earlier losses to close up 1.2 percent, as investors found encouragement in comments from President Hu Jintao. Hu said Tuesday that Beijing's stimulus is showing results and China is determined to take the lead in emerging from the global economic crisis.
LONDON Unemployment in the United Kingdom rose to 7.2 percent in the three months ended in April as the recession pushed the number of people out of work to a 12-year high. The rate compared to unemployment of 6.5 percent in the previous three-month period, the Office for National Statistics said. The upward trend continued in May as the number of people claiming unemployment benefits rose to 1.54 million, up 39,300 from April and more than double the number of a year earlier.
Meanwhile, British Treasury chief Alistair Darling demanded a change in culture in banking management, blaming executives' lack of judgment for the depth of the financial crisis. Darling acknowledged that regulation of the banking sector needs to be improved, but put the onus firmly on bank boardrooms to avoid a repeat of the current crisis.
Separately, minutes from the Bank of England's June 4 meeting showed the central bank's rate-setters sounding a relatively optimistic tone at their most recent meeting as they noted a number of encouraging signs that the British economy may have seen off the worst of the recession. The minutes showed the nine-member Monetary Policy Committee voted unanimously to keep its main interest rate at a record low of 0.5 percent and to continue with its policy of buying 125 billion pounds ($204 billion) worth of financial assets from the banks using its own reserves.
The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed down 50.11 points, or 1.2 percent, at 4,278.46, while elsewhere in Europe Germany's DAX fell 1.9 percent to 4,799.98 and France's CAC-40 ended down 52.81 points, or 1.6 percent, at 3,161.14.
TOKYO Japan recouped much of the public money it pumped into banks during the country's financial crisis last decade, when toxic loans totaled as much as $1 trillion, a top regulator said. Japan endured an economic and financial malaise in the 1990s known as the "lost decade" after a real estate bubble, built on excessive lending, burst. Insolvent lenders propped up by government bailouts became known as "zombie" banks, and cast a long shadow over the world's second-largest economy. Banks have repaid 8.45 trillion yen of the 9.6 trillion yen of public money injected into the financial system during the troubled decade, said Financial Services Agency Commissioner Takafumi Sato.
Japan's Nikkei index rose 0.9 percent to 9,840.85. Elsewhere in Asia, Hong Kong's Hang Seng index dropped 0.5 percent to 18,084.60, while South Korea's Kospi shed 0.6 percent to 1,391.17 and Australia's benchmark fell 1.5 percent.
PARIS A new OECD report says prices for agricultural commodities are likely to remain higher than they were on average over the past decade due to the biofuel industry's growing use of feedstock and renewed food demand in developing nations. The Agricultural Outlook for 2009-18 also says it believes that prices, while not expected to remain at the current levels near last year's record highs, will possibly be more volatile than they have been over the past decade as a result of oil and energy costs and erratic weather conditions.
BRUSSELS Exports from the 16 nations that use the euro dropped by more than a fifth in the first three months of the year as global demand for European machinery and cars waned, the EU statistics agency Eurostat said.
SINGAPORE The slump in Singapore's non-oil exports eased in May, suggesting the most important sector of the city-state's economy is stabilizing. Exports fell 12 percent last month from the same month of 2008 to 10.9 billion Singapore dollars ($7.5 billion). In April, exports dropped 19 percent from the year before. Compared to April, exports rose a seasonally adjusted 5.6 percent in May.
DOHA, Qatar Qatar's prime minister said the country's sovereign wealth fund realized $7 billion or $8 billion in profits from its investments in the first quarter of 2009. Sheik Hamad Bin Jassem Al Thani also stressed his country remains committed to its investment in Barclays, offering another vote of confidence in the British bank after Qatar holding the main investment arm for sovereign wealth fund Qatar Investment Authority in April reduced its stake in Barclays to 5.8 percent through the sale of 35 million shares.
WELLINGTON, New Zealand New Zealand's economy is on track to begin growing before year's end but the recovery from recession is likely to be slow, the nation's central bank chief said. The slump is near its low point with economic stimulus bolstering the domestic economy, and the global economy appearing more stable as growth forecasts for major nations stop falling, Reserve Bank Governor Alan Bollard said.
WINDHOEK, Namibia Namibia's central bank governor said the diamond-rich southern African nation's economy will shrink by 0.6 percent in 2009 as mining slows in the global economic crisis.
 Load-Date: June 18, 2009

 

End of Document
