

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
April 22, 2009 Wednesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1041 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Wednesday:
WASHINGTON The world economy is likely to shrink this year for the first time in six decades. The International Monetary Fund projected the 1.3 percent drop. That could leave at least 10 million more people around the world jobless, some private economists said.
LONDON The British government unveiled massive borrowing in its annual budget, confirming that limited tax revenue and higher welfare spending have left little room for new spending to tackle the worst economic slump since World War II. Treasury chief Alistair Darling said in introducing the budget that the British economy would shrink by 3.5 percent this year but would return to growth by the end the year.
Meanwhile, unemployment in the United Kingdom rose to 6.7 percent in the three months ending in February. The Treasury said the British government may lose up to 50 billion pounds ($72.6 billion) through its efforts to save banks from collapsing in the credit crunch.
Britain's FTSE 100 closed up 1.1 percent to 4,030.66, while elsewhere in Europe, Germany's DAX rose 2.1 percent to 4,594.42, and France's CAC 40 jumped 1.7 percent to 3,025.24.
BERLIN German carmaker Volkswagen AG said net profit plummeted 74 percent as the world economic crisis cut into demand for its cars and trucks, especially in the U.S. market.
Germany's economy minister said there is wide agreement that the country needs no new stimulus package now, even as forecasts for this year's economic outlook darken. The German government has put together two stimulus packages worth some €80 billion ($104 billion), featuring programs such as infrastructure spending and a popular car-scrapping bonus.
Meanwhile, the International Monetary Fund predicted that the 16 countries that share the euro will see their economy shrink 4.2 percent this year and warned of more distress if the European Union does not move quickly to fix financial problems in Eastern Europe. The latest IMF estimate says recovery should start sometime in 2010 but that overall output will still drop by 0.4 percent during the year.
BEIJING China's central government will invest 65 billion yuan ($9.5 billion) on infrastructure and services in the vast and poor countryside to help farmers cope with the economic downturn, the Cabinet said.
Meanwhile, the International Monetary Fund said Asian economies could see a modest recovery next year, boosted by stronger export demand and stimulus spending. Trade-driven Asia has been hit harder than expected by the worst global downturn since the 1930s, though many economies are stronger than they were during the region's 1997 financial crisis, the Washington-based IMF said.
Tokyo's Nikkei 225 stock average rose 0.2 percent to 8,727.30, while South Korea's Kospi added 1.4 percent to 1,356.02. Hong Kong's Hang Seng lost 2.7 percent to 14,878.45, while Shanghai's benchmark fell 2.9 percent to 2,461.35 its sharpest one-day drop in two weeks. Shares in Chinese firms were hurt by unease about rapid growth in lending by China's banks and an easing of optimism about an economic revival, analysts said.
India's Sensex fell 1.1 percent and Australia's market slipped 0.3 percent. Taiwan's benchmark was little changed.
MEXICO CITY Latin America's economy will shrink by 1.5 percent in 2009, ending six years of strong growth as the world economic crisis slashes financing and demand for exports, the International Monetary Fund said.
PARIS French retailer Carrefour SA, the world's No. 2 retailer, said is launching a new low-cost range of products to attract cost-conscious consumers hurt by the recession and to win market share on its home turf.
Meanwhile, an auto parts factory in northern France was closed after employees angry over job losses ransacked offices and prompted new concern about increasingly violent French worker protests. There have been a wave of employee actions to fight layoffs and cutbacks prompted by France's worst economic performance in 30 years. Workers have held managers hostage and blocked production at sites around the country.
CAIRO The world economic crisis is curbing growth in the nations of the Middle East, with falling commodity prices severely straining economies and wealthy oil producers digging deep into savings to sustain spending. The International Monetary Fund said Mideast nations's economic growth will be about 2.5 percent this year, down from 6 percent in 2008.
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates Dubai's economy grew about 1 percent in the first quarter of 2009 thanks to government intervention, a top financial official said, in a statement that could bolster confidence in the Gulf's financial hub.
MOSCOW Russia's economy will contract by as much as 6 percent this year, the International Monetary Fund said, but would grow 0.5 percent in 2010. The IMF view is more pessimistic than that of the World Bank, which indicated earlier this month that there would be no signs of recovery this year and the economy would contract by 4.5 percent.
Meanwhile, Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin announced measures to encourage more lending to companies and shore up the troubled banking sector as lenders grapple with bad debts. He urged the Central Bank to lower interest rates now that the threat of soaring inflation has receded. He also called on officials to make it easier for banks to recover money from the state in cases where state guarantees back the loans of struggling enterprises.
Another official, Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin, predicted Russia will use up almost its entire 4.1 trillion ruble ($120.5 billion) "rainy day" reserve fund by the end of next year.
TALLINN, Estonia Estonia's economy will shrink by over 12 percent this year as the country and its trading partners are hit hard by the global economic downturn, the central bank predicted.
MANILA, Philippines Asia faces the risk of a prolonged labor market recession and social crisis that could take much longer to shake off than the current economic downturn, the International Labor Organization said.
BRUSSELS Somalia's foreign minister urged the international community to help its fledgling government set up a coast guard service to fight piracy along the country's lawless coastline.
 Load-Date: April 23, 2009

 

End of Document
