

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
October 28, 2009 Wednesday 05:39 PM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1143 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and activity in major stock markets around the world Wednesday:
LONDON European stocks slid after data showed the number of new home sales in the world's largest economy unexpectedly dropped last month, stoking fears about the pace of a potential economic recovery. Meanwhile, house prices in England and Wales rose 0.9 percent in September, a government agency said, amid improving demand and a tight supply of homes on the market. Still, the Land Registry said the September gain left the average price 5.6 percent lower than a year ago. The survey was based on all housing transactions in the regions. Britain's FTSE 100 closed down 2.3 percent at 5,080.42, Germany's DAX shed 2.5 percent to 5,496.27 and France's CAC 40 lost 2.1 percent at 3,663.78.
FRANKFURT German import prices fell 11 percent in September compared with the same month a year ago, as fuel prices in particular declined, the Federal Statistical Office said. Import prices fell 0.9 percent compared with August, the office said. The statistical office, based in Wiesbaden, said export prices decreased 3.2 percent compared with September 2008, while prices for exports fell 1 percent compared with August. The office said import prices were most affected by the 38 percent fall in energy prices during September. Metals, metal products and ores also showed steep declines, as did the import prices for most foods.
CANBERRA, Australia Australian interest rates are expected to rise again next week with new figures showing inflation was higher than expected for the September quarter. Australia became the first major economy to boost rates since the onset of the global economic crisis when the central bank board increased its cash rate in a surprise move earlier this month. The board's next rate meeting is on Tuesday. At its Oct. 6 meeting, the Reserve Bank of Australia boosted the official cash rate by a quarter percentage point to 3.25 from a 50-year low.
OSLO Norway's central bank raised its key interest rate by a quarter percentage point to 1.5 percent, making the oil-rich country the first European economy to boost rates since the height of the global financial crisis. Norges Bank said in a statement that its decision was due to a sharper-than-expected rise in inflation and lower unemployment. The Nordic country of 4.8 million, which is not a member of the European Union, escaped the financial crisis largely unscathed thanks to its vast oil revenues, which it invests in a sovereign wealth fund worth $420 billion. Its unemployment rate of 2.7 percent is among the lowest in Europe. Still, Norway's economy is predicted to shrink 1 percent this year.
SHANGHAI Chinese shares rebounded from their biggest one-day fall in a month and brokerage stocks rose on expectations of more business as a new small-companies board prepared to start trading. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index edged up 9.87 points, or 0.3 percent, to close at 3,031.33 after a 2.8 percent decline a day earlier. The Shenzhen Composite Index for China's smaller second exchange jumped 1.1 percent to 1,067.14. The market was choppy amid uncertainty about the impact of the new Growth Enterprises Board, analysts said.
TOKYO Japanese shares tumbled, hit by an unexpected fall in U.S. consumer confidence ahead of the crucial Christmas shopping season. The benchmark Nikkei 225 index lost 137.41 points, or 1.4 percent, to 10,075.05. The broader Topix index fell 0.8 percent to 888.80. Meanwhile, Japanese automakers are experiencing a production boom in China with Toyota, Honda and Nissan setting records for September the latest signs of an emerging recovery for Japan's auto industry. Honda Motor Co.'s production set a record for the company in both China and Asia overall for September, although total overseas production has been declining for a year. Japan's No. 2 automaker produced 60,741 vehicles in China, up 20 percent from the same month a year earlier. Honda's global production fell 16.6 percent to 300,742 in September, it said in a statement. Toyota Motor Corp. produced 64,880 vehicles in China in September, up 37 percent from the same month last year and the best results for September.
BERN, Switzerland The Swiss government said that Italian authorities acted in "discriminatory" fashion when conducting unannounced inspections of Swiss banks and their affiliates in Italy. Foreign Minister Micheline Calmy-Rey summoned Italy's ambassador in Bern to explain why financial police largely targeted Italian branches of Swiss banks Tuesday as part of their crackdown on cross-border tax evasion. Interior Minister Pascal Couchepin said Calmy-Rey's summons came after the Swiss cabinet met Wednesday to discuss the issue. The Italian police and the country's tax authority said the effort was part of their efforts to recover million in taxes from income held illegally abroad.
MOSCOW Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin said Russia is considering selling gold on world markets to cash in on high prices as the government faces its first budget deficit in a decade. Kudrin's remarks follow a report last week that the Gokhran precious metals depository was planning to sell up to 50 metric tons, or 1.6 million ounces, of gold in London by the end of the year. With gold prices reaching record highs of over $1,000 per ounce, the sale could bring Russia some $1.7 billion. The finance minister gave no details Wednesday in remarks to journalists carried by state news agencies.
CEBU, Philippines A drought in India and typhoons in the Philippines have damaged large tracts of rice paddies, threatening to upset the fragile food market amid fears of shortages and riots, experts said. Agriculture Secretary Arthur Yap of the Philippines, the world's biggest rice importer, told an international rice conference the impact of the next "perfect storm" will be greatest on vulnerable countries like his, and the world's poor. He proposed an international food reserve that will safeguard against wild fluctuations in food prices. When prices are down, producers can build stocks to halt further decreases, while consumers can turn to the reserves when prices are rocketing, Yap said.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia Malaysia unveiled plans to open up its auto sector, allowing 100 percent foreign ownership and offering a 10-year tax break for production of green vehicles as it seeks to catch up with Thailand as a regional auto hub. The trade ministry said it will also end a three-year freeze on manufacturing licenses for luxury cars with engine capacity of 1.8 liters and above and priced at no less than 150,000 ringgit ($44,155) as well as for hybrid, electric and commercial vehicles. It also scrapped rules requiring part of the equity to be allocated to ethnic Malays in these areas, allowing foreigners to now hold 100 percent ownership in a move to lure investors.
 Load-Date: October 29, 2009

 

End of Document
