

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
August 7, 2009 Friday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 874 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Friday:
LONDON A downbeat report from the Royal Bank of Scotland PLC clouded a week of earnings updates that started with suggestions that the country's lenders were over the worst of the financial crisis almost exactly two years after the credit squeeze took hold.
While HSBC and Barclays shrugged off the near-collapse of the system to report substantial profits and fuel talk of financial recovery at the start of the week, losses and bad debt write-downs at part-nationalized RBS and Lloyds have tempered the optimism in London's financial district.
RBS, which is 70 percent owned by the taxpayer after being bailed out by the government last year, spooked investors by reporting that bad debts jumped to 7.5 billion pounds ($12.7 billion) and declining to speculate whether that would be the peak on impairment charges.
Separately, the Insolvency Service said personal insolvencies rose to more than 33,000 in the second quarter of the year, the highest since 1960 when records began. The total of 33,073 was up 9 percent from the first quarter and 27 percent higher than a year earlier.
In markets, Germany's DAX closed up 1.7 percent, France's CAC-40 jumped 1.3 percent and Britain's FTSE 100 added 0.9 percent.
BEIJING China's sovereign wealth fund said it lost 2.1 percent last year on its global portfolio and defended its performance as being better than other such funds amid worldwide financial turmoil.
The China Investment Corp., launched in 2007 with $200 billion in assets, was the target of criticism at home after early investments in U.S. assets sank in value in the bear market.
Meanwhile, a planning official said China's investment-driven economic rebound still depends on stimulus spending, and he promised easy credit will continue despite concerns its $1 trillion lending boom might cause financial problems.
"Our national economy is experiencing a rebound that is mainly driven by policies, and internal forces to support economic expansion are not strong," the deputy chairman of the Cabinet's National Development and Reform Commission, Zhu Zhixin, said at a nationally televised news conference.
Zhu said Beijing will stick to its "relatively easy credit policy" and a "proactive fiscal policy" a reference to the 4 trillion yuan ($586 billion) stimulus for the world's third-largest economy.
DUBLIN Unemployment in recession-hit Ireland has risen to a 14-year high of 12.2 percent, the country's Central Statistics Office said. When the unemployment rate last stood at 12.2 percent, in April 1995, Ireland's work force and jobs market were much smaller.
The report said the number of job hunters signing up for welfare benefits has surged 83 percent over the past year to an unprecedented 435,735 in a country of 4.2 million.
TOKYO Japan's benchmark stock index inched up to a new 10-month high. The Nikkei 225 stock average added 24 points, or 0.2 percent, to 10,412.09, the highest close since Oct. 6. During the week, the key index gained 0.5 percent.
In other Asian markets, South Korea's Kospi gained 0.7 percent, while Hong Kong's Hang Seng index fell 1.4 percent, Australia's benchmark declined 0.6 percent, China's benchmark Shanghai Composite Index lost 2.9 percent and Singapore's benchmark was down 2 percent.
BERLIN German exports were up 7 percent on the month in June, their biggest rise since September 2006 the latest signal that prospects are improving for Europe's biggest economy.
Germany's total exports came to 68.5 billion euros ($98.6 billion) in June, the Federal Statistical Office said. In year-on-year terms, exports were still down a hefty 22.3 percent in June.
MOSCOW The Russian ruble dropped sharply against the dollar as an influential banker fueled speculation about a possible sharp devaluation of the currency and the central bank slashed the main interest rate.
The ruble is traded in a managed float within a range established by the Central Bank to avoid large fluctuations. The Central Bank sets the benchmark exchange rate for the following day before currency trading on the market is over.
The ruble decline came after the central bank cut its refinancing rate from 11 percent to 10.75 percent. That was the fifth reduction in four months as the government strives to stimulate lending and push the national economy out of recession.
TORONTO The government said 45,000 Canadian jobs were lost in July, while the unemployment rate stayed at 8.6 percent. The 45,000 job loss figure is well above the previous month's 7,400 retreat.
The U.S.-equivalent based on labor market size would be 450,000 jobs lost. The U.S. labor market is about 10 times the size of Canada's.
PARIS French President Nicolas Sarkozy summoned French banking chiefs for a meeting after a report that BNP Paribas SA had earmarked 1 billion euros ($1.44 billion) in extra compensation sparked populist anger.
Sarkozy wants to meet with leading French financial executives Aug. 25, the day of the first Cabinet meeting after the summer break, his office said in a statement.
The bankers already met at the prime minister's office as the government sought assurances that compensation packages will meet guidelines agreed upon at the G-20 summit in London.
 Load-Date: August 8, 2009

 

End of Document
