

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
January 30, 2009 Friday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1036 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock-market activity around the world Thursday:
LONDON Thousands of energy workers across Britain walked off the job, joining a growing campaign of protests against foreign citizens being hired for an oil industry construction project in England. The protests reflect concern about Britain's rising unemployment, now at 6.1 percent, and fears of more layoffs as the global economic slump bites hard in Britain. Britain's FTSE 100 closed 2.5 percent down at 4,190.11.
FRANKFURT, Germany Germany's unemployment rate jumped by nearly a percentage point to 8.3 percent in January, official figures showed a trend experts expect to continue as the deepening global economic crisis continues to hurt Europe's largest economy. The unadjusted unemployment rate rose from 7.4 percent in December, the Nuremberg-based Federal Labor Agency said. The DAX slumped 2.0 percent to 4,428.11.
BRUSSELS, Belgium Business and consumer confidence in both the European Union and the euro currency zone fell to a new low in January, the European Commission said. The monthly survey of how companies and households see the economy is now running at its lowest level in both regions since it started in January 1985, adding pressure on European governments to do more to stoke growth in their recession-hit economies. It fell by 1.5 points in the 16 nations that share the euro to 68.9 and by 3.3 points to 64.9 across the entire EU.
HONG KONG Hong Kong's key stock index climbed in its first trading session of the Lunar New Year, after the U.S. House of Representatives approved an $819 billion stimulus plan that investors hope will revive the world's largest economy. Catching up after a three-day break to celebrate the Year of the Ox, the blue chip Hang Seng index surged more than 7 percent at the open, then pared some gains. The benchmark index finished 575.83 points, or 4.6 percent, higher at 13,154.43.
PARIS Franco-Belgian lender Dexia said it expects a €2.3 billion ($3 billion) loss for the fourth quarter, due to big losses on its U.S. insurance business, and announced it will cut jobs and eliminate both dividends and executive bonuses. Dexia the world's biggest lender to local authorities said the estimated fourth quarter loss would result in a €3 billion shortfall for the whole of 2008. The company, which was bailed out last year, is due to officially report its annual earnings on Feb. 26. The CAC-40 index fell 2.2 percent to 3,009.75.
TOKYO Japanese shares rose, led by financials on hopes for new U.S. efforts to trim bad debt and spur lending. The benchmark Nikkei 225 stock index advanced 144.95 points, or 1.8 percent, to 8,251.24. The broader Topix index gained 1.8 percent to 818.47. The optimism spilled over to Tokyo, where Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group Inc. was the Nikkei's biggest gainer of the day. The issue soared more than 13 percent to 3,810 yen, pushed higher after it reported better-than-expected earnings the previous day.
DUBLIN, Ireland The Irish Central Bank forecast that the country's economy will shrink 4 percent this year and unemployment will jump to a 13-year high as the collapse of the housing market hurts the wider economy. The dour economic outlook is driving government-mediated negotiations this week between labor unions and employers on a plan to cut 2 billion euros ($2.6 billion) from public spending in 2009, chiefly by slashing or freezing the salaries of state-paid employees including police, teachers and nurses. The goal is to keep Ireland's swelling budget deficit under 10 percent of its gross domestic product.
MEXICO CITY Mexico's peso dropped to a record low against the U.S. dollar. The dollar peaked at 14.4444 peso that is the Mexican currency's lowest point since the government introduced the new peso in 1993. Mexico's central bank offered $400 million in foreign reserves to try to bolster the battered currency, but no there were no bidders. Since last year, Mexico has auctioned off $15 billion in foreign reserves to prop up the peso its biggest sell-off in a decade. Meanwhile, the IPC stock index dropped 3 percent to 19,537.
MANILA, Philippines The Philippine economy grew at its slowest pace in seven years in 2008 as the global financial crisis took a toll on services and industry while agriculture wilted from typhoon damage. Growth in gross domestic product slowed to 4.6 percent last year from a three decade high of 7.2 percent in 2007, the government said.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia Malaysia's budget deficit will exceed the official forecast of 4.8 percent of gross domestic product this year because of a new stimulus package to prop up growth, the finance minister said. The government will raise its fiscal deficit projection when it introduces the stimulus package soon and hopes to ensure the shortfall is not "too high," Finance Minister Najib Razak was quoted as saying by the national news agency, Bernama.
WARSAW, Poland The global economic crisis has finally hit Poland. A string of dreary statistics this week shows that the once-booming economy has started to sputter: manufacturing fell significantly at the end of last year, unemployment shot up and officials are finally admitting that Poland is hurting.
SAO PAULO, Brazil Brazil's Ibovespa index dropped 1.5 percent to 39,638, as investors bet a severe U.S. recession would slash demand for Brazilian exports. The losses ended four days of gains that had seen the Ibovespa rise 6.2 percent. Brazil's central bank suggested that slowing inflation could free it to further slash its lending rate in coming months, driving some investors to buy bonds instead of stocks ahead of a cut. Brazil's currency strengthened slightly to 2.29 reals to the U.S. dollar.
ATHENS, Greece The Economy Ministry scaled down Greece's 2009 growth forecast to 1.1 percent from 2.7 percent as a result of the global crisis, and said budget deficits would exceed EU limits for the next two years. A ministry statement said the government would cut spending and slash hirings in most of the public sector apart from health and education in an effort to restrain the deficit, which is expected to have reached 3.7 percent in 2008 compared with the budget forecast of 2.5 percent.
 Load-Date: January 31, 2009

 

End of Document
