

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
May 28, 2009 Thursday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1183 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Thursday:
BERLIN Germany's foreign minister sought support from U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton in securing the future of General Motors Corp.'s Opel unit after talks stalled over new financing complications. Germany had hoped to secure an agreement in talks that dragged through Wednesday night to shield Opel which employs 25,000 people in Germany from a looming GM bankruptcy. The government wants to make it legally independent under a trustee, then provide bridge financing while Opel looks for a new, permanent owner. More talks were expected Friday.
In markets, European stocks closed lower amid concerns about higher long-term interest rates. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed down 28.69 points, or 0.7 percent, at 4,387.54 while Germany's DAX was 67.89 points, or 1.4 percent, lower at 4,932.88. The CAC-40 in France fell 31.16 points, or 1 percent, to 3,263.70.
VIENNA OPEC oil ministers decided to keep oil production quotas at present levels, noting that worldwide oil inventories at the end of last month were at a 20-year high. The 12-nation oil producing cartel could have opted to tighten the spigots to try to spark demand, but instead opted to sit back and wait, in a decision driven by the belief that the U.S. the world's largest oil consumer is gradually emerging from a severe recession and that demand there will support oil prices.
TOKYO Global production at Japan's top automakers continued to decline in April amid few signs of relief for the beleaguered industry. Like their overseas rivals, Japanese automakers have been hammered by the global slump in auto demand, tightening credit in the key North American market and the strong yen, which erodes overseas profits.
Separately, Japan's retail sales fell 2.9 percent in April, falling for the eighth straight month, as consumers stayed cautious amid growing jitters about jobs and wages.
In markets, the Nikkei 225 stock average in Japan rose 12.62 points, or 0.1 percent, to 9,451.39, while South Korea's Kospi rose 2.2 percent to 1,392.17 amid rising tensions with North Korea. Singapore's Straits Times index fell 1 percent, Australia's key benchmark declined 1.2 percent and Malaysia's lost 0.9 percent.
BRUSSELS Confidence in the economy in the 16 countries that use the euro picked up for the second month running in May, stoking further hopes that the worst of the recession has passed. The European Union's statistics office Eurostat found that its euro zone economic sentiment indicator, or ESI a broad cross-sector indicator of confidence in the economy advanced a further 2.1 points to 69.3.
LONDON Britain's financial services regulator revealed some of the parameters it used in the recent stress tests of British banks. The Financial Services Authority said the tests which are used to estimate the health of banks in case of a sharper economic downturn employ a model that assumes a fall in overall GDP of more than 6 percent. It also assumes Britain's recession will last until 2011, unemployment to hit 12 percent, as well as a 50 percent peak-to-trough fall in house prices and a 60 percent fall in commercial property prices.
Separately, Man Group, the world's largest publicly traded hedge fund, posted an 86 percent fall in full-year profit and warned that its funds under management had continued to sink. Defecting institutional clients means Man will garner lower management fees this year.
MINSK, Belarus Russia and Belarus failed to agree on the last $500 million installment of a $2 billion Russian loan that aimed to help its struggling neighbor avoid bankruptcy, Russian Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin said. He told reporters that Belarus which spent $2 billion to prop up its national currency in the first quarter of 2009 will run out of hard currency reserves by the end of third quarter if it keeps up that level of spending.
"We may see insolvency of the Belarusian government and the Belarusian economy as a whole due to the hard currency shortage at the end of this year or next year," he said.
GENEVA The ranks of unemployed could swell by 50.4 million worldwide this year because of the global downturn, the U.N. labor agency said. The agency urged governments to make job creation part of their stimulus packages to avoid the worst-case scenario. It said 29 million jobs could be saved if companies are given an incentive to retain their workers.
PARIS Christian Lacroix SNC said it has launched insolvency proceedings after the 22-year old French fashion house fell victim to the global recession. The high-fashion brand founded by French designer Christian Lacroix told the Paris commercial court that it can't pay creditors because of the financial crisis-driven decline of the luxury goods industry. The company, which employs 125 people, said it is seeking protection from creditors in order to continue operations.
SCHAFFHAUSEN, Switzerland Swiss engineering firm Georg Fischer said it is cutting 2,300 jobs worldwide or 16 percent of its work force as part of a drive to cut costs and return to profitability. The firm said almost 1,000 of those cuts were already made in the first four months of the year.
MUMBAI, India Tata Motors launched a new line of trucks to take on rivals Volvo and Mercedes and bring higher-quality trucks to India. Tata also plans to export the line of trucks to South Africa, the Middle East and Russia, company officials said. The new trucks are the latest bid by India's largest commercial vehicle maker to transform itself into a global auto power. So far, Tata's efforts to expand its global footprint have met with difficulty.
MANILA, Philippines The Philippine central bank cut interest rates after the government said the economy shrank 2.3 percent in the first quarter from the previous quarter, its worst contraction in 10 years. The central bank's Monetary Board reduced the overnight borrowing rate a quarter point to 4.5 percent the lowest since May 15, 1992 and the overnight lending rate by the same amount to 6.25 percent. It was the fifth rate cut since December that has lowered rates a total of 1.75 percentage points.
WELLINGTON, New Zealand The government lifted infrastructure spending by nearly 8 billion New Zealand dollars ($5 billion) to support jobs over five years in its annual budget as it more than doubles borrowing to steer the economy through the global recession. In an unprecedented move, it shelved two rounds of personal tax cuts due in 2010 and 2011, suspended government cash injections into state retirement funds and slowed some areas of government spending to avert an even bigger debt blowout in the next decade. Even with these measures, figures showed the government's deficit for the budget year ending June 30, 2009, is likely to reach $2.9 billion New Zealand dollars the nation's first deficit in nine years and swell to $7.7 billion New Zealand dollars the following year. The government's gross debt will peak at 43 percent of gross domestic product in 2017, from 20 percent now, and then begin to decline.
 Load-Date: May 29, 2009

 

End of Document
