

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
July 30, 2009 Thursday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1123 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Thursday:
LONDON House prices in the United Kingdom rose by 1.3 percent in July, and may finish the year with a slight gain, a major mortgage lender said. The Nationwide Building Society said July's gain left the average price 6.2 percent lower than a year ago, at 158,871 pounds ($261,200).
The report chimed with other recent data pointing to a stabilization, or even a subdued recovery, in the housing market.
In markets, better-than-expected corporate earnings fueled buying. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares ended up 1.9 percent, at 4,631.61, just below its 2009 high. Elsewhere in Europe, Germany's DAX rose 1.7 percent to 5,360.66, its highest close since last October, while the CAC-40 in France ended 2.1 percent higher at 3,435.49, its best finish this year.
BEIJING Chinese shares rebounded from a heavy loss the previous day after the central bank said relaxed monetary policy would continue, trying to allay fears that attempts to control a credit boom might reduce liquidity.
The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index rose 55.13 points, or 1.7 percent, to close at 3,321.56 in a partial recovery from the day-ago 5 percent drop.
Investors were spooked this week after the central bank told Chinese lenders to be sure loans were used for investment, not market speculation. Money from China's stimulus is believed to have flowed into the market, helping to push up the Shanghai index by more than 80 percent this year. But the central bank reassured investors its "appropriately relaxed monetary policy" would continue.
TOKYO Japan's factory output rose for the fourth straight month in June as hopeful manufacturers boosted production to meet an uptick in global demand from depressed levels.
Industrial production in the world's second-biggest economy climbed 2.4 percent from the previous month and "continues to show an upward movement," the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry said in a closely watched monthly report.
For the April-June period, factory output surged 8.3 percent the biggest quarterly increase in more than five decades though production was nearly one quarter lower than a year earlier, reflecting the severity of the slump in previous months.
Separately, production at Japan's automakers plunged 45 percent in the first half, marking the first such fall in eight years, an industry group said. Japanese auto production totaled 3.32 million vehicles for the January-June period.
In Asian markets, Hong Kong's Hang Seng edged up 0.5 percent to 20,234.08, while Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average rose 0.5 percent to 10,165.21. Elsewhere in Asia, South Korea's Kospi gained 0.7 percent, Australia's index advanced 1.2 percent and Singapore's market was up 0.5 percent.
LONDON The 16 countries that use the euro are unlikely to start growing again until some time in 2010 and must do more to shore up their banks if they want to keep the downturn from lasting longer, the International Monetary Fund said.
In its latest update for Europe, the IMF's staff forecast that the euro zone will shrink by 4.8 percent this year alone and by 0.3 percent in 2010 despite the anticipated recovery some time in the year.
DUBLIN Ireland's government published its plan for establishing a "bad bank" that would buy, at a discount, 90 billion euros ($135 billion) in dud loans to property developers.
Lawmakers eagerly snapped up copies of the long-awaited bill to form a National Assets Management Agency, or NAMA. Finance Minister Brian Lenihan said he was confident that the measure would repair international confidence in the nation's debt-crippled banks and avoid the need to nationalize any more of them.
Lenihan told a Dublin news conference that Ireland's banks, which long scored easy record profits on the back of a property bubble, courted collapse with their "excessive lending during the property boom" a bonanza that came crashing down last year with the international credit crisis.
Many of the country's fat-cat developers now face financial ruin as they hold portfolios of land, office blocks and residences they cannot rent or sell. But Lenihan said if the debtors default en masse, some banks might go bankrupt, leaving Ireland without a viable financial system.
BERLIN Germany's unemployment rate rose by 0.1 percentage point to 8.2 percent in July over the previous month as the recession continued to hurt the job market, the Federal Labor Agency said. There were a total of 3.462 million jobless in July, a 52,000 increase.
On a seasonally adjusted basis, however, the number of unemployed dropped slightly by 6,000 over the previous month, leaving the adjusted rate stable at 8.3 percent, the agency said.
MEXICO CITY Mexico, the No. 3 U.S. trading partner behind Canada and China, will see its economy contract between 6.5 and 7.5 percent this year as exports fall and migrants abroad send less money home, the country's central bank said.
That's worse than previous projections from the Bank of Mexico and includes a first-quarter decline of 8.2 percent and an estimated contraction of up to 11 percent in the second quarter.
The country sends 80 percent of exports to the U.S. and has been severely hurt by the American slowdown.
BRUSSELS Business and consumer confidence in the 16 nations that use the euro surged in July to the most optimistic levels since November, the EU statistics agency Eurostat said.
The level of the survey at 76 in July from 73.2 in June is still far below the long-term average and industrial activity remains weak as factories lie idle, the agency warned. But the news suggests the region is slowly recovering from recession.
MOSCOW Russia will next year run a budget deficit equivalent to 7.5 percent of annual economic output, or 3.2 trillion rubles ($101 billion) the highest deficit the country can afford without hurting economic stability, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin said.
Russia is facing its biggest economic test in a decade and is this year running a budget deficit of 9.4 percent of gross domestic product its first deficit in a decade.
GDP dropped 10.1 percent in the first six months of the year, although some analysts believe Russia is now past the worst part of its recession.
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates Cargo handler DP World says business at ports it runs dropped 10 percent in the first half of 2009 as the shipping industry struggles through a sharp downturn caused by the global recession.
The Dubai-based port operator said it moved the equivalent of 12.3 million 20-foot (6-meter) shipping containers through the 26 terminals it owns or has operational control of around the world between January and June.
That's down from 13.6 million containers in the same period a year earlier.
 Load-Date: July 31, 2009

 

End of Document
