

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
December 4, 2008 Thursday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1118 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock-market activity around the world Thursday:
BRUSSELS, Belgium The European Central Bank meeting away from Frankfurt as it does twice a year lowered its rate to 2.5 percent from 3.25 percent, putting it at levels last seen in March 2006. The cut was the most aggressive in its 10-year history as central bank to the 15 euro zone countries, a bloc of some 320 million people that accounts for more than 15 percent of the world's gross domestic product. Meanwhile, a sharp drop in investment forced the euro-zone economy to contract 0.2 in the third quarter, the EU statistics agency Eurostat said. The quarter-on-quarter figures indicate that tight financing is the major factor behind the recession in the 15 nations that use the euro. Exports rose during the quarter and household spending was unchanged.
LONDON The Bank of England cut its base interest rate a full percentage point to 2 percent, a month after chopping it by 1.5 points, to cushion the impact of a domestic recession. The rate is now at its lowest since 1951 and many economists are predicting it will fall further in coming months. It has never been below 2 percent since 1694, when the central bank was founded. Bad economic news mounted just hours ahead of the central bank's monthly rate-setting announcement with the country's biggest mortgage lender reporting that house prices in Britain fell at their fastest monthly rate in 16 years during November and a car industry update showing that new car sales fell 37 percent from a year earlier. The British pound fell to an all-time low against the euro and its weakest in more than six years against the U.S. dollar ahead of the announcement as traders hedged against the possibility of a bigger cut. Meanwhile, Britain's public service union said government plans to close Revenue and Customs offices will cost 3,400 jobs. The government says it plans to avoid layoffs when relocating staff and accuses the union of scaremongering. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed down 0.2 percent, at 4,163.61.
DOUAI, France French President Nicolas Sarkozy unveiled a 26 billion euro ($33 billion) stimulus plan to ward off recession and shore up automakers and construction. The measures include around 1.3 billion euros ($1.65 billion) to help carmakers avoid more layoffs as sales tumble. The measures form part of a 200 billion euros ($253.6 billion) package proposed by the European Commission to boost the European Union's economy through spending and tax cuts. National governments are to provide 170 billion euros ($215.5 billion) 1.2 percent of the EU's GDP according to EU commission plans. France's package represents 1.3 percent of its GDP. The French plan is designed to add 0.6 percentage points to economic growth in 2009. Combined with other measures already announced and the knock-on effects of increased welfare spending, the government is counting on a 1 point overall boost to economic growth. The CAC-40 stock index ended almost flat, slipping 0.2 percent to 3,161.16. In nearby Germany, the DAX benchmark index was also almost unchanged, closing down 3.01 points at 4,564.23.
BEIJING China promised more currency reform to ease trade tensions but told Washington to get its own economy in order as the two sides opened high-level economic talks amid a global financial crisis. The unusual Chinese appeal highlighted the close links between the world's largest and fourth-largest economies and the global importance of their ability to keep relations smooth. China's envoy, Vice Premier Wang Qishan, said Beijing was contributing to global stability by keeping its own economy growing strongly. The chief U.S. envoy, Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson, said engagement between China and the United States has helped in managing the crisis. Officials said both sides stressed the importance of cooperation to combat a potential rise in trade protectionism. But in unusually pointed language, China's central bank governor, Zhou Xiaochuan, blamed the crisis on U.S. financial excesses and said they should be fixed. China's Shanghai Composite index rose 1.8 percent to 2,001.5 on news that a government fund had bought shares in a major bank, while Hong Kong's Hang Seng index dipped 0.6 percent to 13,509 points.
GENEVA Credit Suisse Group said it is cutting 5,300 jobs about 11 percent of its global work force in a bid to reduce costs and take its business back into the black as Switzerland's second-biggest bank predicted another loss-making quarter, saying it was 3 billion francs ($2.5 billion) in the red by the end of November because of adverse market conditions and expenses associated with the job cuts. About two-thirds of the cuts will be made in investment banking, said Chief Executive Brady Dougan, with "a higher concentration in the U.S." A fourth-quarter loss would be the third this year, following losses totaling over $3 billion in the first and third quarter.
STOCKHOLM, Sweden Sweden's central bank cut its key interest rate by a record 1.75 percentage points to 2 percent to soften the fall in the economy triggered by the global financial crisis. The cut was the largest ever since the Riksbank started using the repo rate as its key interest rate in June 1994. Previous cuts have never exceeded half a percentage point at a time. The bank said it expects the rate to remain at this level for the coming year and that the substantial cut was needed to dampen the fall in employment and meet the Riksbank's inflation target of 2 percent. It also said the large cut was necessary because monetary policy has recently not had as large an impact on the economy as it normally does.
COPENHAGEN, Denmark Denmark's central bank lowered its key interest rate by 0.75 percentage point to 4.25 percent, mirroring a cut by the European Central Bank. The Nationalbank said the decision was a consequence of the ECB's lowering of its rate to 2.5 percent from 3.25 percent. European Union member Denmark is not part of the 15-country euro zone, but closely follows the moves of the ECB and raises or lowers its rates accordingly.
TOKYO Japan's Nikkei 225 average closed down 79.86 points, or 1 percent, to 7,924.24, as automakers continued to slide amid signs of slumping demand for new vehicles in the United States. Toyota, Japan's biggest automaker, said it was briefly suspending production at three plants in Japan later this month, while Honda said it was cutting 18 percent of its domestic temporary work force in Japan and offering an early retirement package for workers at its plant in Britain. Meanwhile, markets in India, Singapore and Indonesia rose, but those in Taiwan, the Philippines and Malaysia fell.
 Load-Date: December 5, 2008

 

End of Document
