

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
January 23, 2009 Friday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1026 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock-market activity around the world Friday:
LONDON The British economy officially sunk into recession, government statistics showed, with output falling 1.5 percent in the fourth quarter of last year as the financial crisis ravaged banks, retail and manufacturing. It was the biggest decline since the early days of Margaret Thatcher's government nearly 30 years ago. British services and manufacturing output are sharply down in the wake of the banking crisis, the seizing up of lending and already-confirmed recessions around the world, from the U.S. to Germany and Japan. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares fell 0.4 percent to close at 4,035.21. The pound hit a new 23 1/2 year low against the dollar.
TOKYO Toyota Motor Corp. is considering cutting more than 1,000 full-time jobs in North America and the United Kingdom to cope with faltering global demand, a news report said. The details of the job cuts will likely be finalized by the end of the month, said the Nikkei, Japan's top business daily, citing an unnamed senior company official. Japan's top automaker could slash more jobs in other regions if global auto sales continue to slump, the daily said. Toyota spokesman Yuta Kaga declined to confirm the report, saying nothing had been decided. Meanwhile, Nippon Steel Corp. said it is cutting production by a record amount in its four-decade history as auto demand gets squelched by the global slowdown. Nippon Steel, Japan's biggest steelmaker, is reducing steel production for the fiscal year through March by more than 4 million tons, down 12 percent from 33 million tons the previous year. In markets, Japanese stocks slumped to a two-month low as dire earnings from global technology companies and an endless stream of bleak economic data unnerved investors. Shares of Sony tumbled 7 percent to their lowest level in a month, while the benchmark Nikkei 225 stock average lost 306.49 points, or 3.8 percent to 7,745.25 marking a 6.4 percent loss for the week and its lowest closing level since Nov. 20.
SEOUL, South Korea Samsung Electronics, the world's largest manufacturer of flat screen televisions, memory chips and liquid crystal displays, posted its first ever quarterly loss Friday as the global economic slump hit prices and demand for mainstay products. The Kospi sank 2.1 percent to 1,093.40 points.
BERLIN German memory-chip maker Qimonda AG declared bankruptcy, saying a rescue package of loans agreed to last month was insufficient to keep it viable. Qimonda said a massive drop in prices of the dynamic random access memory chips it produces and decreased access to financing on the capital markets had led to the deterioration of its financial position. The company in December had secured a rescue package of 325 million euros ($421.98 million) in loans from the government of Saxony, parent company Infineon and a Portuguese state bank in order to try and stave off collapse. The DAX closed down 0.96 percent at 4,178.94.
REYKJAVIK, Iceland Prime Minister Geir Haarde, buffeted by an economic crisis and severe health problems, announced that he plans to call early national elections on May 9 and that he will not seek re-election as the nation's leader. His government becomes the first to fall as a result of the global economic downturn, which has hit Iceland particularly hard. Iceland's banks collapsed in the autumn under the weight of huge debts, soaring inflation and unemployment, and a plummeting currency, the krona. The government has responded by nationalizing a major bank, seeking help from the International Monetary Fund, slashing interest rates, and taking other measures. Haarde, prime minister for less than two years, has faced mounting anti-government protests in the last week, with the country's small parliament building the focus of sometimes violent confrontations.
BEIJING Guangdong province, China's biggest manufacturing base, reported a sharp drop in economic growth in 2008 as global financial woes hammered the region often called the "world's factory floor." The gross domestic product for Guangdong grew by 10.1 percent last year a decline of 4.6 percentage points compared to 2007. Chinese shares retreated on thin trading in the last session before markets close for the weeklong Lunar New Year Holiday. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index closed down 0.7 percent, or 14.29 points, at 1990.66. Hong Kong's blue-chip Hang Seng Index lost 79.39. or 0.6 percent, to 12,578.60 in thin trade ahead of the Chinese New Year. Elswehere in Asia, Australia's main index dived more than 4 percent, while Singapore's stock measure lost 0.6 percent.
OTTAWA The cost of living in Canada in December fell to the lowest level in two years as falling energy prices continued to drive annual inflation closer to zero. Statistics Canada said annual inflation dipped to 1.2 percent in December, a level not seen since January 2007, and almost a full point below November's two percent rate. But the big story is that gas prices are coming down at a record pace, diving another 25.8 percent last month after falling 14.4 percent in November, on an annual basis. Last month's plunge was the steepest since the government statistical agency began the gas price index in 1949.
WASHINGTON Treasury Secretary-designate Timothy Geithner said President Barack Obama believes China is "manipulating" its currency, a declaration that American manufacturers have long sought in their efforts to combat America's soaring trade deficit with China. However, Geithner also suggested that now might not be the right time to brand China as a currency manipulator under U.S. trade law, a designation that would trigger negotiations between the two countries and could result in U.S. economic sanctions against China.
PARIS The French state is to help provide free newspaper subscriptions to teenagers for their 18th birthdays, President Nicolas Sarkozy said. He also announced a ninefold rise in the state's support for newspaper deliveries and a doubling of its annual print advertising outlay amid a swelling industry crisis. The CAC 40 shed 0.71 percent to close at 2,849.14.
 Load-Date: January 24, 2009

 

End of Document
