

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
March 11, 2009 Wednesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1459 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Wednesday:
LONDON The Bank of England began creating new money, buying 2 billion pounds of government bonds from financial institutions as it attempts to pull the economy out of recession and ward off deflation. The auction is the first tranche in the central bank's so-called "quantitative easing" program, which opens a new front in its fight against the downturn after policy makers almost ran out of room to lower interest rates further. Early signs were encouraging.
Meanwhile, British Treasury chief Alistair Darling issued a rallying call to world leaders to form a consensus on dealing with the global economic crisis, amid growing fears that coming meetings of the Group of 20 nations in Britain will fail to find common ground. Darling, who is hosting a meeting of G-20 finance ministers and central bankers this weekend, also dismissed comments by Britain's top civil servant that the country was finding it difficult to work with the new U.S. administration. Darling said that both advanced and emerging and developing countries need to agree on plans for monetary and fiscal stimulus.
Britain's FTSE 100 index closed down 21.42 points, or 0.6 percent, at 3,693.81. The index was dragged down by banking company HSBC PLC, whose shares slid over 7 percent on the last day investors could buy into the bank's $18 billion discounted share issue. And ongoing concerns about whether Lloyds Banking Group PLC will end up having to be nationalized by the government saw its share price tumble another 14 percent.
BEIJING The record decline in China's exports accelerated in February, but the bleak picture was tempered by other news of a jump in Chinese auto sales. Chinese trade figures highlighted again the region's dependence on Western consumers. Exports in February plunged 25.7 percent from a year earlier, according to customs data the sharpest decline reported by the government since it began keeping records in the 1990s. That adds pressure on Beijing to move quickly to carry out a multibillion-dollar stimulus package aimed at pumping up the world's third-largest economy.
Meanwhile, Chinese auto sales surged 25 percent in February from a year earlier, as a tax cut for small cars and other measures helped revive the market. February's sales totaled 827,600 units, up 12 percent from the 735,000 sold in January, the China Association of Automobile Manufacturers said in a report posted on its Web site. That's the second month in a row that Chinese vehicle sales beat U.S. sales, which totaled 688,909 cars and trucks in February. In January, Chinese monthly auto sales overtook those in the U.S. for the first time largely because of a plunge in American car sales.
Mainland China's main market in Shanghai ended 0.9 percent lower at 2,139.03.
FRANKFURT German auto parts and tire company Continental AG said it would stop producing tires at its plant in Clairoix, France and reduce capacity at other sites in Europe, laying off workers as a result. The Hanover-based company said that due to a steep drop in car sales it would end tire production in Clairoix by the end of March in 2010. The move would affect some 1,120 employees that make passenger car tires. Continental said it would also stop making commercial vehicle tires at its plant in Hanover, Germany on December 31, prompting some 780 job cuts, and plans to reduce its commercial vehicle tire capacity by 20 percent at its Puchov, Slovakia site. The measures in Germany and Slovakia will lower commercial vehicle tire production in Europe by more than a quarter.
In markets, Germany's DAX, which jumped around 6 percent on Tuesday, closed up another 27.12 points, or 0.7 percent, to 3,914.10.
PARIS An international economic group has put Switzerland, Austria and Luxembourg on a new blacklist of uncooperative tax centers that should be discussed by world leaders at the upcoming G-20 summit in London, an official who has seen the list said. In preparation for the meeting of world leaders, France and Germany asked the Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to produce a list of countries deemed uncooperative in exchanging banking information, and to propose a range of sanctions. The 30-country economic forum is recommending levying a withholding tax on transactions destined for tax havens or imposing onerous reporting and auditing requirements on people doing business with those countries, the official said. He declined to be identified because the list is still subject to discussion by G-20 leaders. The list, which includes around 30 countries, may increase pressure on countries to end banking secrecy.
In markets, meanwhile, the CAC-40 in France ended 10.52 points, or 0.4 percent, higher at 2,674.20.
TOKYO Japanese machinery orders, an indicator of how much the country's companies are spending, fell 3.2 percent in January from a month earlier, but beating analysts' expectations. The Cabinet Office said core private sector machinery orders, which excludes orders from electric power firms and shipbuilders due to their volatility, fell for the fourth straight month to 718.3 billion yen ($7.33 billion). The result was better than the 5.3 percent decline predicted in a Kyodo News survey of economists, but was steeper than the 1.7 percent fall in December.
In markets, Japan's Nikkei index led the day's rally in Asian stocks after falling to a 26-year low in the Tuesday trading session. It closed 321.14 points, or 4.6 percent, higher at 7,376.12. Hong Kong's Hang Seng index gained 2 percent to 11,930.66, while South Korea's Kospi rose 3.2 percent to 1,127.51. Benchmarks in Australia and Taiwan were up 1.9 percent; Singapore's added 1.3 percent.
RIGA, Latvia Latvia's troubled economy shrank 4.6 percent last year, the government statistics agency said, a sharp reversal after three years of double-digit growth in the Baltic state. The agency also said that Latvia's economy, the worst in the 27-member European Union, contracted 10.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2008, slightly revised from an earlier estimate of 10.5 percent. Meanwhile, Latvia's neighbor Estonia announced that its economy shrank 3.6 percent last year and 9.7 percent in the fourth quarter, giving it the second worst economy in the EU.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia Malaysia's larger-than-expected 60 billion ringgit ($16 billion) stimulus package brought cheers to businesses but some economists said it lacked steps to give an immediate jolt to the slowing economy. Consumers and opposition lawmakers also expressed disappointment that the mini-budget unveiled Tuesday was lopsided in favor of businesses and little done to improve overall income of the people. The unprecedented massive spending to spur growth over two years is aimed at avoiding what could be Malaysia's first recession in a decade this year.
TEHRAN, Iran Iran's president blamed the West for the global economic meltdown, saying capitalism has failed and U.S. efforts to bail out companies prove its collapse. Hard-liner Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has repeatedly lashed out at the West for the current financial crisis, a tactic that many analysts say is meant to deflect criticism from the president's mismanagement of Iran's economy. But his rhetoric has also gotten him in trouble back home from those who believe he has spent too much time slamming the West and not enough trying to fix Iran's domestic problems.
WASHINGTON Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner says the global recession is deepening and urged strong actions by all major nations to combat the downturn. Geithner says the Obama administration believes it is essential for other major countries to commit to substantial and sustained efforts to bolster their economies. His comments highlighted a growing rift with European nations who are balking at the administration's call for increased stimulus efforts. European officials argue they do not want to pile up more debt to fight the downturn.
BERN, Switzerland UBS AG revised its annual loss for 2008 upward by 1.19 billion Swiss francs Wednesday because of legal settlements and write-downs. The Swiss bank said a previously announced $780 million fine and restitution package agreed with U.S. authorities to settle a massive tax evasion probe, together with write-downs on toxic assets, pushed its losses to 20.89 billion francs ($19.79 billion) last year. The bank's previously published full-year loss was 19.7 billion francs already a record for a Swiss company.
OSLO (AP) Norway's vast fund for oil wealth posted a 23 percent loss on investment for 2008 its worst ever but continued growing in size because of record transfers of surplus capital from the government, the central bank said Wednesday.
 Load-Date: March 12, 2009

 

End of Document
