

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
March 30, 2009 Monday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1035 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Monday:
LONDON Nationwide Building Society took over key assets of Scotland's largest mortgage company, Dunfermline Building Society, in a rescue deal engineered by the Bank of England and backed by 1.6 billion pounds ($2.3 billion) from the Treasury. Managers at Dunfermline and some Scottish politicians said the lender could have remained independent if it had simply been granted a loan, a claim Prime Minister Gordon Brown rejected.
Meanwhile, the number of mortgages approved for house purchases rose by 19 percent in February to the highest amount since last May, the Bank of England said.
The FTSE 100 of leading British shares closed down 3.5 percent at 3,762.91.
TOKYO Japan's industrial production fell for the fifth straight month in February. Factory output tumbled 9.4 percent versus a month earlier, with especially steep cutbacks among makers of motor vehicles and general machinery, the government said.
Meanwhile, Japanese automakers reacted with anxiety to news that ailing U.S. automakers General Motors and Chrysler had failed to submit acceptable plans to receive more government money, increasing the odds they may have to file for bankruptcy protection. Toyota Motor Co., the world's largest automaker, fell 3.7 percent, Honda Motor Co. shed 6.7 percent, and Nissan Motor Co. sank 7.7 percent. In Europe, Germany's BMW AG and Daimler AG both fell around 8 percent, while France's Renault SA and PSA Peugeot-Citroen SA dropped nearly 10 percent.
The news also weighed on Asian stock markets. Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average sank 4.5 percent to 8,236.08, and Hong Kong's Hang Seng slid 4.7 percent to 13,456.33. South Korea's benchmark fell 3.2 percent while markets in Singapore, Taiwan and India fell 3 percent or more.
PARIS France's prime minister announced a decree banning stock option awards and limiting executive bonuses at companies that receive government bailouts. Union leaders, however, said the measures don't go far enough.
Prime Minister Francois Fillon said the decree, which take effect Tuesday, would ban stock options for executives for this year and next, and limit executive bonuses at companies that have won government aid. It would apply primarily to banks, automakers and state companies.
Shares in PSA Peugeot-Citroen tumbled nearly 10 percent Monday after the unprofitable French car maker abruptly ousted its CEO and named a long-time steel industry executive to replace him. Peugeot-Citroen cited "exceptional difficulties" in the auto industry as the reason for the change.
The CAC-40 in France fell 4.3 percent to 2,719.34, while Germany's DAX slumped 3.6 percent to 3,689.23.
BRUSSELS Business and consumer confidence dropped in March to the lowest level in 24 years, the European Commission said. The survey of how companies and shoppers see the economy fell more slowly than in the first two months of the year, the EU executive said. It is now at the lowest level since statistics started in January 1985 for both the 16 nations that use the euro and the entire 27-nation European Union.
Meanwhile, European Central Bank president Jean-Claude Trichet said that he sees no immediate risk of corrosive deflation in the 16 nations that use the euro.
MOSCOW Russia's economy will shrink by 4.5 percent this year, plunging the country into a severe recession in the first part of the year and derailing efforts to tackle poverty and unemployment, the World Bank said. The Russian government's own forecasts are for a 2.2 percent contraction this year after nine straight years of oil-fueled growth. The government has suggested Russia could see a recovery toward the end of the year. The World Bank sees no cause for such optimism.
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin announced nearly $1 billion in government loans for AvtoVAZ, Russia's largest automaker a move designed keep the manufacturing giant and employer of tens of thousands in business.
JERUSALEM Israel's banking watchdog has blocked the appointment of a new chief executive at the country's largest bank an extraordinary intervention reflecting the turmoil roiling the global financial industry. Bank Hapoalim said that the Bank of Israel's supervisor of banks ordered the appointment be held up so he could assess the decision-making process.
MADRID Spain's first bank bailout since 1993 is an isolated case and no other bank is in trouble, Economy Minister Pedro Solbes said. But shares in bank stocks dropped sharply.
Solbes told Cadena SER radio that "inadequate management" at a small regional savings bank, Caja Castilla-La Mancha, forced the Bank of Spain to take control of it Sunday, replacing the board of directors and making available up to €9 billion ($12 billion) in government funds to bolster its liquidity.
Meanwhile, Spanish consumer prices fell 0.1 percent in March from a year earlier, making it the first euro-zone economy to post annual deflation since the international financial crisis began. The year-on-year decline is the first in Spain in records dating to 1961.
MILAN Sales of luxury goods in the United States could fall by as much as 15 percent this year, according to new research by Altagamma, an association of Italian luxury fashion producers. Earnings worldwide could drop by as much as 21 percent this year. The biggest hit is expected in the first half of the year. Sales are forecast to drop 9 percent in Europe, 12 percent in Japan and 2.3 percent in Asia.
KUWAIT CITY Qatar's oil minister said he was "OK" with crude oil at $50 per barrel for this year, reflecting a measure of pragmatism by OPEC as the producer bloc struggles to buoy oil prices hammered by the global economic meltdown.
SAO PAULO Brazil's government is extending a tax break on auto sales and cutting taxes on building materials to help stimulate the economy. Finance Minister Guido Mantega also says the government is increasing taxes on cigarettes to bring in more revenue, and will exempt companies in the paper and pulp industry from paying income taxes. The Ibovespa index was down 3.3 percent in afternoon trading. Elsewhere in Latin America, Mexican shares lost 3.7 percent while Argentina's Merval sank 4.3 percent.
 Load-Date: March 31, 2009

 

End of Document
