

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
September 24, 2009 Thursday 07:11 PM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1453 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and activity in major stock markets around the world Thursday:
PITTSBURGH Leaders of the world's major economies began gathering for a two-day "checkup" summit aimed at making sure a fledgling global recovery remains on track while laying down tougher rules for global financial institutions.
The heads of the Group of 20 nations were meeting to review strategy for the third time since the worst global recession since the Great Depression struck with force a year ago.
The situation is not as dire as at the previous meetings last November in Washington and last April in London. But the global recovery remains fragile, with many big financial institutions still under strain.
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown said he would push to have the G-20 replace the Group of Eight economic summit as the board of directors for the global economy. The G-8 includes the United States and all the other traditional economic powers, while the G-20 also covers major emerging markets such as China, Brazil and India.
TOKYO Japan's exports tumbled 36 percent in August with car shipments falling by half and imports also contracted sharply, showing the world's No. 2 economy remains mired in a deep slump.
Declines in automobile and steel exports were especially pronounced, the Ministry of Finance said. Exports fell for the 11th straight month to 4.5 trillion yen ($49 billion).
Imports, meanwhile, dropped 41.3 percent from a year earlier to 4.3 trillion yen, reflecting weak consumption within Japan, where the jobless rate is at a record high as companies shed workers. Consumer finance company Aiful Corp. said Thursday it will cut 2,000 jobs, or about 44 percent of its work force.
Meanwhile, in Asian markets, Hong Kong's Hang Seng index was the biggest loser, falling 2.5 percent. South Korea's Kospi declined 1 percent, Australia's benchmark fell 0.7 percent and India's Sensex was off 0.8 percent. Markets in the Philippines, New Zealand and Singapore also fell.
China's Shanghai index gained 0.4 percent, and Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average, closed for the first three days of this week due to a string of national holidays, gained 1.7 percent.
FRANKFURT German business confidence improved for a sixth consecutive month in September as Europe's largest economy showed signs of recovery from its deep downturn, said the closely-watched Ifo Business Climate Survey.
Its reading of German business sentiment rose to 91.3 points in September from 90.5 points in August. That's the highest reading since September 2008 when sentiment reached 92.5 points.
Participants' expectations for the economy also improved in September to 95.7 points from 95 points in August.
In European markets, Germany's DAX closed down 1.7 percent, Britain's FTSE 100 lost 1.1 percent and France's CAC 40 fell 1.7 percent.
TOKYO The president of Japan Airlines said the money-losing carrier is applying for public funds to help turn around the company after it was pummeled by the downturn in global air travel, but it quickly received a reluctant response from the transport minister.
JAL President Haruka Nishimatsu said he told Land and Transport Minister Seiji Maehara that the airline is seeking emergency government aid under an industrial revitalization law that is intended to help struggling companies.
If approved, JAL would be the second company to receive emergency aid under a new government program designed to help companies ride out the global slump. The government approved aid for chip maker Elpida Memory Inc. in June.
BEIJING A U.S. labor union and three paper companies have filed a new trade complaint over imports of Chinese paper, possibly fueling tensions between Washington and Beijing amid disputes over tires and other goods.
The complaint was announced as U.S. President Barack Obama and his Chinese counterpart, Hu Jintao, were attending a summit of leaders of the Group of 20 major economies in Pittsburgh.
The case accuses China, along with Indonesia, of improperly subsidizing exports of some types of coated paper that it says have flooded the U.S. market, wiping out thousands of American jobs.
FRANKFURT The European Central Bank said that given limited demand and improved financial conditions, it will stop offering 84-day loans after Oct. 6. It will continue to offer seven-day repurchase operations. The Bank of England and Swiss National Bank had made similar moves, the ECB said.
MOSCOW Russia's largest car maker AvtoVAZ will lay off more than a quarter of its employees 27,600 workers to battle spiraling losses.
AvtoVAZ is 25 percent owned by France's Renault and has been losing money for years. Demand for its Lada sedans has fallen sharply in the economic downturn. AvtoVAZ's sales dropped by 44 percent in the first six months of the year, according to the Association of European Businesses in Russia.
In June, it reported a 14.2 billion ruble ($458 million) loss in June against a profit of 1.5 billion rubles a year earlier.
LONDON Two major British banks were just hours away from collapsing in October 2008, an event which would have threatened the country's entire economy, Bank of England Governor Mervyn King told the BBC.
King said the credit freeze that paralyzed financial markets in the wake of the Lehman Brothers collapse 12 months ago pushed Royal Bank of Scotland PLC and HBOS to the brink on Oct. 6 and 7.
"Two of our major banks which had had difficulty in obtaining funding could raise money only for one week then only for one day and then on that Monday and Tuesday it was not possible even for those two banks really to be confident they could get to the end of the day," King was quoted as saying.
REYKJAVIK, Iceland Iceland's central bank kept its official loan rate at 12 percent, unchanged for the third consecutive month, and said it detected encouraging signs as the economy recovers from a banking crisis.
The North Atlantic island nation is still struggling to get back on its feet after the credit crisis crippled its overweight banking system, damaging the rest of its economy, in October.
LONDON A British government minister called on companies to disclose the names and remuneration of up to 20 of their highest-paid employees in an interview published in The Guardian newspaper.
Treasury Minister Paul Myners said companies should disclose the full range of pay bands, to permit comparison between the pay of top earners and that of ordinary employees.
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates Credit rating firm Fitch Ratings cut its ratings on two Dubai state-linked companies over concerns about the city-state's ability to repay its lenders.
The latest round of downgrades, which also extends to seven Emirati banks, puts further pressure on the Middle Eastern financial hub as it struggles to pay back at least $80 billion of debt amassed during its frenzied building boom in recent years.
MUMBAI, India India's inflation index rose for the seventh week in a row, the government said.
While still low in absolute terms, the rising inflation trend has some economists worried that the central bank will reverse its loose monetary policy and dampen India's economic rebound. The benchmark Wholesale Price Index rose a bigger-than-expected 0.4 percent over last year for the week ending September 12.
Since the beginning of the fiscal year, in April, the WPI has gone up 6.1 percent. Food prices surged 14.8 percent during the period, partly due to weak rainfall.
COPENHAGEN Denmark's central bank trimmed its key lending rate by 0.1 percent to 1.25 percent. The reduction was a consequence of purchases of foreign exchange in the market, the central bank said.
BUDAPEST, Hungary Visa Europe, MasterCard and seven local banks have been fined a total of 1.9 billion forints ($10.4 million) by Hungary's competition watchdog for illegally fixing credit card fees.
A 1996 deal between the banks resulted in equal fees being paid by retailers on transactions with the two credit cards, limiting competition, the Hungarian Competition Authority said.
Visa Europe and MasterCard were aware of the secret deal and even helped the banks reach the agreement, the authority said.
CARACAS, Venezuela President Hugo Chavez's government will sell domestic debt bonds of up to 12.15 billion bolivars, or $5.7 billion, to finance public spending.
The bonds will be sold in the local currency in two separate issues: One of 10 billion bolivars ($4.7 billion) and a second of 2.15 billion bolivars ($1 billion). Both issues will mature between 2010 and 2016.
Chavez has said Venezuela will sell an additional $10.2 billion in bonds locally this year to cope with a sharp decline in oil income and the slowing economy, raising the government's plan for new bond sales this year to $15.8 billion.
 Load-Date: September 25, 2009

 

End of Document
