

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
December 9, 2008 Tuesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1472 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock-market activity around the world Monday:
BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet, speaking to the European Parliament's economy committee, said the global slowdown is mostly due to the financial markets crisis, but was inevitable after high growth in recent years and a spike in oil prices that sent inflation soaring and braked business activity and household spending.
STUTTGART, Germany German automaker Daimler AG will cut work hours at its largest domestic plant for at least 2 1/2 months amid flagging demand for its cars, Daimler's works council chief Erich Klemm said. In addition to the cuts at the Mercedes plant in Sindelfingen, Daimler will shorten the workweek to four days and at times three days and will lengthen holiday downtime from Jan. 12 until at least March 31, Klemm said. The hours reduction is a result of the world's economic situation, which caused the company's global car sales to fall 25 percent in November compared to a year ago. The DAX closed 334.41 points, or 7.6 percent, higher at 4,715.88.
LONDON British and French leaders met with European business executives to discuss plans for major government spending on infrastructure and energy projects aimed at helping Europe to beat the downturn. Both British Prime Minister Gordon Brown and French President Nicolas Sarkozy have been advocates of using public spending or tax cuts to ward off recession and planned to endorse proposals for a package of new Europe-wide public works. Brown's office said that the talks, which will also include European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso, will focus on overhauling Europe's infrastructure.
Meanwhile, British car parts maker Wagon PLC said it planned to file for a form of bankruptcy protection after a global slump in demand for cars crippled its business. Wagon, which employs 6,300 people around the world making parts for Honda, Ford, General Motors, Land Rover and Nissan, hopes to keep some of its overseas operations running, but its collapse in Britain sends a warning about the state of the international auto industry. In other corporate news, HSBC Holdings PLC, Britain's largest bank, said it planned to increase the amount of money it lends to Britons for mortgages by 20 percent next year to 15 billion pounds ($22 billion). The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed up 250.69 points, or 6.2 percent, at 4,300.06.
BEIJING Chinese leaders began weighing plans to expand a massive stimulus package with higher spending on health and social programs amid signs an economic slowdown is worsening. The meeting of top planners also might consider proposals to boost exports, cut income taxes and to inject government money into slumping Chinese stock markets. The meeting comes as Beijing tries to figure out how to get the most out of a 4 trillion yuan ($586 billion) package announced Nov. 9 that is meant to shield China from a global slowdown with spending on construction and other projects. Meanwhile, China's passenger car sales fell 10.3 percent in November from a year earlier as stalling economic growth sapped consumer confidence. It was the third month out of four that car sales have contracted on an annual basis in the world's second-largest auto market. Still, optimism that the government meeting will produce more steps to bolster the economy lifted stock markets in Hong Kong and Shanghai. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index jumped 3.6 percent, or 72.11 points, to close at 2090.77. The Shenzhen Composite Index for China's smaller second exchange rose 3.7 percent to 622.9. Hong Kong stocks soared 8.7 percent, or 1,198.8 points, to a seven-week closing high of 15044.9 as financials, property and shipping stocks rallied.
MOSCOW (AP) Credit ratings agency Standard & Poor's lowered Russia's foreign currency sovereign credit rating a notch, citing heavy outflows of capital amid the global financial turmoil. Analysts said the drop was largely psychological and was unlikely to make borrowing more expensive for Russian companies because costs are already relatively high. S&P cited the decline in Russia's international reserves, from $583 billion to $455 billion since August, in lowering the country's rating. The government has spent billions to prop up the ruble and the country's oil-reliant economy has been pinched by plunging prices for crude. Russian stocks, meanwhile, appeared to shrug off the downgrade, instead rising on stronger oil prices with the MICEX index rising almost 10 percent and some blue chips adding 20 percent. Meanwhile, Ford Motor Co. said it would halt production at its sole Russian Russian assembly plant for one month as the financial crisis dents consumers' demand for cars. It is the second foreign auto maker to announce a cutback in production.
PARIS EU regulators in Brussels, Belgium cleared France's multibillion euro (dollar) fund to shore up banks and ease lending and set out new rules requiring banks with riskier investments to pay higher fees for government cash bailouts. EU Competition Commissioner Neelie Kroes said she also expected Germany to toughen the terms of a financial rescue plan for Commerzbank before the EU could clear it. The CAC-40 in France closed up 259.47 points, or 8.7 percent, to 3,247.48.
MUMBAI, India The Sensex index closed up 4.6 percent. Investors welcomed government moves to spend an additional $4 billion, mostly on infrastructure projects, cut some taxes and take other steps to stimulate growth. The Prime Minister's Office said last night that a state-run financing firm will be allowed to issue $2 billion worth of tax-free bonds to finance infrastructure projects and that government spending would be reprioritized to boost troubled sectors, like autos. Elsewhere in Asia, Thailand's key index advanced 2.8 percent, taking a cue from gains around the region and also lifted by signs the business-friendly opposition Democrat Party will have the numbers to form a coalition government in the aftermath of Thailand's ruling party being dissolved for vote buying.
TOKYO Japanese stocks surged, spurred by hopes that major governments will step up efforts to bolster their economies. The benchmark Nikkei 225 stock average closed up 411.54 points, or 5.2 percent, at 8,329.05 after buying accelerated in the afternoon. The broader Topix index added 3.3 percent to 812.08.
SAO PAULO, Brazil Brazilian and Mexican stocks soared. Brazil's Ibovespa index spiked 8.3 percent to close at 38,285, while Mexico's IPC jumped 5.4 percent to close at 21,169. The gains for shares of large Brazilian companies follow reports that Chinese officials will meet this week to discuss possible expansion of the $586 billion stimulus package already planned. Brazilian companies are major exporters, and have been hit hard by declining global demand for the country's products. Argentine, Chilean and Colombian markets were closed Monday for a national holiday.
CANBERRA, Australia Prime Minister Kevin Rudd has urged Australians to go on a taxpayer-subsidized Christmas spending spree as multibillion dollar bonuses in welfare payments begin to flow. The 8.7 billion Australian dollars ($5.6 billion) will be paid to 8 million pensioners and low-income families more than a third of Australia's 21 million population over 10 days starting today in a bid to stave off an Australian recession. Australia's benchmark index shot up more than 4 percent, led by banks and the nation's biggest retailers.
PRAGUE, Czech Republic Inflation dropped sharply in the Czech Republic in November and unemployment grew to 5.3 percent amid first signs of global recession affecting the country's labor market, officials said. Annual inflation dropped to 4.4 percent from 6.0 percent in November this year's lowest level, the Czech Statistics Office said. The office said falling prices for fuel and food as well as new cars contributed to the result. The Czech export-oriented economy is expected to keep slowing down in the coming months, as its major trading partners, including Germany, slide into recession.
POZNAN, Poland The head of the International Energy Agency, speaking at U.N. climate talks here, said the global demand for oil could shrink next year if the economies of China, India or the Middle East slow down fast, while slight growth in oil demand in 2009 would occur if current economic conditions continue.
BUDAPEST, Hungary The National Bank of Hungary cut its key interest rate to 10.5 percent from 11 percent, its second half-percentage point cut in two weeks. The central bank said its decision was in line with similar steps made recently by other European banks to boost the economy amid the world financial and economic crisis. The European Central Bank and the Bank of England both cut interest rates last week.
 Load-Date: December 9, 2008

 

End of Document
