

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
April 7, 2009 Tuesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1225 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Tuesday:
BEIJING China is likely to emerge from its economic slump this year, helping the rest of Asia stabilize and possibly rebound, the World Bank said. China's economy, the world's third-largest, should expand by 6.5 percent this year, though exports will shrink as Western markets contract, the bank said in a report on Asian economies. That's slower than China's 9 percent growth last year, but still the strongest of any major economy in the world.
The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index climbed 19.4 points, or 0.8 percent, to close at 2439.18. Hong Kong's Hang Seng fell 162.09 points, or 1.1 percent, to 14,835.95. Taiwan's market also gained.
TOKYO Japan's central bank kept its benchmark interest rate steady but introduced new steps to spur lending and ease the strains of an increasingly painful recession. The Bank of Japan's eight-member policy board voted unanimously to leave the key overnight call rate target unchanged at 0.1 percent, as widely expected. With interest rates close to zero, the central bank has little room to tweak regular monetary policy and has instead focused on less conventional measures to boost corporate financing.
Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average dipped 25.08 points, or 0.3 percent, to 8,832.85 even as the Bank of Japan announced new steps to spur lending and corporate financing amid a painful recession.
BRUSSELS Economic activity in the countries using the euro currency shrank by 1.6 percent in the final three months of 2008 compared with the previous quarter. Eurostat said the gross domestic product of the then 15 nations Slovakia joined in January fell sharper than the 1.5 percent it had previously estimated. Eurostat said GDP across the entire 27-nation European Union was down 1.5 percent in the last quarter of 2008.
The hardest-hit countries were Ireland, which saw a 7.1 percent drop in the last quarter of 2008 compared to the third quarter. Germany saw its economy shrink by 2.1 percent, France by 1.1 percent and non-euro member Britain by 1.5 percent.
SYDNEY The government launched an ambitious plan to make Australia one of the world's most wired countries, shunning private bids and announcing that a new state-controlled company would build a 43 billion Australian dollar ($30 billion) network from scratch.
Meanwhile, Australia's central bank cut its key interest rate to the lowest level in almost 50 years, reinforcing fears the global financial crisis has dragged the country into recession. The cash rate was lowered by a quarter percentage point to 3 percent and since September has been slashed a total of four and a quarter percentage points.
Australia's key index dropped 1.3 percent.
MOSCOW Italian oil and gas company Eni SpA signed a deal to sell its 20 percent stake in Russian oil producer Gazprom Neft to parent company Gazprom, Russian news agencies reported. Russia's state-controlled natural gas monopoly, will pay $4.2 billion for the stake. It already holds about 73 percent of the oil company's shares. The deal comes at a difficult time for Gazprom, which has been hit by falling oil prices and plummeting energy demand across Europe. Last week, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin offered state aid to Gazprom to help it through the downturn, something that Gazprom's chief executive Alexei Miller promptly declined.
Meanwhile, Russian drilling company Siberian Services Co. defaulted on $100 million in foreign debt, raising fears of more widespread defaults to foreign bondholders and lenders. The company confirmed it had missed the payment on its dollar-denominated bonds.
PARIS Angel Gurria, head of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, said that the Philippines, Uruguay, Costa Rica and Malaysia will no longer be blacklisted as uncooperative tax havens after they bowed to pressure from world leaders and agreed to new rules on financial openness.
Meanwhile, global wine consumption contracted by 0.8 percent last year, according to the International Organization of Vine and Wine's first estimate. That is the first drop since records began in 2004. Wine drinkers in France, Italy and across Europe uncorked fewer bottles last year as the global economy slowed dramatically, leaving the United States as the world's largest consumer.
France's CAC 40 dropped 0.9 percent to 2,902.31.
LONDON Manufacturing output in Britain declined in February for the 12th consecutive month, although at the slowest rate in half a year, the government said. A separate report from the British Chambers of Commerce, meanwhile, showed gloom among manufacturers reached record levels in the first quarter but detected an improvement in confidence in the services sector.
Meanwhile, the Royal Bank of Scotland PLC said it has begun talks with unions over cutting up to 9,000 jobs globally over two years in a restructuring of its back-office operations. RBS which is majority-owned by the British government after accepting a 20 billion pound state bailout said that around half the positions that could be affected are in Britain. The company is trying to reduce annual costs by 2.5 billion pounds ($3.7 billion) over next three years.
Britain's FTSE 100 closed down 1.6 percent to 3,930.52.
SINGAPORE Economic growth in developing East Asia this year will slow to less than half its rate in 2007 amid sinking export demand from rich nations, but China is likely to start recovering later this year, the World Bank said. Collectively, the once high-flying region which also includes Thailand, Malaysia, Vietnam, Indonesia, the Philippines will likely grow 5.3 percent this year, down from 8 percent last year and 11.4 percent in 2007, the bank said in its semiannual report. Plunging exports the region's lifeblood are causing widespread factory closures, rising unemployment and wage cuts across the region, it said. A sustainable recovery in the region will ultimately depend on a recovery in developed economies, the bank said.
Singapore's index shed 2.5 percent, while South Korea's Kospi added 0.2 percent to 1,300.10 in back-and-forth trade. Stocks in Thailand also lost ground.
BERLIN German steel production dropped by half in the year to March, the sharpest decline since the country's reunification nearly two decades ago, according to government figures.
Meanwhile, German automakers Daimler and BMW said a reluctance by consumers to spend on luxury autos trimmed first quarter sales but Porsche reported an increase in Germany.
Germany's DAX slipped 0.6 percent to 4,322.50.
DUBLIN Finance Minister Brian Lenihan unveiled hefty hikes in income tax and spending cuts in an emergency budget designed to restore international confidence in the shaky finances of debt-struck Ireland. Lenihan told the Irish parliament that the government's painstakingly negotiated plan would trim €3.25 billion ($4.65 billion) this year from Ireland's ballooning deficit the worst in the 16-nation euro zone and a further €2.7 billion in 2010.
KIEV, Ukraine Ukraine's faltering economy will plunge into a deep recession and shrink by 9 percent this year, far worse than previously expected, the World Bank said.
BELGRADE, Serbia Serbia will slash budget spending and introduce additional taxes to meet demands by the International Monetary Fund in exchange for a €3 billion bailout loan, the prime minister said.
 Load-Date: April 8, 2009

 

End of Document
