

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
December 2, 2010 Thursday 07:26 PM GMT

 Copyright 2010 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1002 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and activity in major stock markets around the world Thursday:
LONDON The European Central Bank steps up efforts to contain the continent's government debt crisis, as bank president Jean-Claude Trichet announces it will prolong measures to provide ready cash to banks and steady the financial system.
Additionally, the ten-year bonds of both Ireland and Portugal suddenly rose. For the Portuguese government, that's a big relief as it struggles to keep borrowing costs from climbing out of reach and having to follow Greece and Ireland in seeking a bailout.
The ECB, the European Union and the 16 governments that share the euro are struggling to contain a crisis caused by too much state debt in some countries. Trichet has clearly changed course from last month's meeting, when he indicated Europe was doing well enough for the bank to gradually phase out its emergency liquidity measures. Last weekend's crisis bailout of Ireland changed all that however.
Unlike the Federal Reserve, the ECB's bond purchases are not considered to expand the supply of money in the economy because the central bank "sterilizes" its bond purchases. As well as putting money back into the financial system through its bond buys, the ECB takes money out elsewhere.
BERLIN The European Central Bank keeps its benchmark interest rate unchanged at the record low of 1 percent for the 19th straight month.
The decision was widely anticipated as European economies are still emerging from the global financial crisis.
LONDON World stocks and the euro climbed as the European Central Bank decided to keep special liquidity measures it had previously indicated would soon be withdrawn and amid speculation that it had entered the market to buy up Portuguese bonds.
In Europe, the FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed up 125.06 points, or 2.2 percent, at 5,767.56 while Germany's DAX rose 90.98 points, or 1.3 percent, to 6,957.61. The CAC-40 in France ended 77.75 points, or 2.1 percent, higher at 3,747.04.
By late-afternoon London time, the euro was trading 0.8 percent higher on the day at $1.3236.
Sentiment has been buoyed by confirmation from the European Central Bank that it will continue to offer whatever banks need at a super-low rate through the first half of next year.
In Asia, Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average surged 1.8 percent to close at 10,168.52, at one point hitting its highest intraday level in more than five months. The dollar's climb over the 84-yen line bolstered Japanese exporters like automakers and electronics companies. Camera giant Canon Inc. rose 2.5 percent, and Sony Corp. rose 0.8 percent.
Hong Kong's Hang Seng index climbed 0.9 percent to 23,448.78 and the Shanghai Composite index advanced 0.7 percent to 2,843.61. South Korea's Kospi rose 1.1 percent to 1,950.26. Australia's S&P/ASX 200 jumped 2 percent to 4,676.20 as investors snapped up mining shares.
LISBON, Portugal Portugal's finance ministry has agreed with Portugal Telecom to transfer the company's ?2.8 billion ($3.7 billion) pension fund to the state treasury a key step towards lowering the national budget deficit as the country tries to overcome a financial crisis.
The pension fund is equivalent to around 1.6 percent of Portugal's gross domestic product, and officials say the transfer will allow the government to meets its target of reducing the deficit to 7.3 percent of GDP.
Last year's deficit of 9.6 percent was the fourth-highest among the 16 countries using the euro currency, deepening market concerns that low-growth Portugal was racking up bigger debts than it could pay off. Even though it has had no difficulty raising money on financial markets Portugal is viewed as a likely candidate for a bailout like those provided for Ireland and Greece.
ANTWERP, Belgium It was an unlikely accolade: the first ever mention for a pita-and-falafel joint in one of Europe's leading culinary guides.
The GaultMillau, whose influence is on par with Michelin or Zagat, only granted Finjan restaurant 13 out of 20 points. But the fact it was tapped at all drives home a new phenomenon on the culinary scene: frugal is fashionable in Europe's bleak economic times.
The continent's recession has been cutting into pocketbooks and expense accounts, hitting exorbitant Michelin-starred restaurants hard. Europeans are turning to humbler fare to tickle their finicky palates: call it gourmet grunge. The growing attraction of homely brasseries and gastropubs is another a sign of how lean wallets are feeding a back-to-basics approach to food.
MADRID Spain's sale of ?2.5 billion ($3.28 billion) in three-year bonds attracted strong investor demand but resulted in a sharply higher coupon, reflecting worries about its debt load.
The Central Bank said the treasury had to pay an average interest rate of 3.7 percent, up from 2.5 percent in the last such sale on Oct. 7. Demand was double the amount on offer, however. The treasury was aiming to sell between ?1.75 billion and ?2.75 billion.
Spain has been forced to pay increasingly high interest rates at recent bond sales due to market speculation that it and neighboring Portugal might eventually need financial help from the European Union, like Ireland and Greece. The latest sale, however, seemed to bolster market sentiment. Spain, like Portugal, insists it can manage alone and has implemented reform packages in a bid to assuage investor fears.
AMSTERDAM Aegon NV, the Dutch insurer, says it will cut 400-500 jobs in the U.S. over the coming two years, or around 5 percent of its U.S. work force, to wind down businesses it no longer considers part of its core operations.
The heaviest cuts will come at a branch in Dallas. The businesses affected are executive benefit plans and bank or company-owned life insurance.
Last month Aegon, which survived the 2008 financial crisis with support from the Dutch state, reported third-quarter net profit of ?657 million ($907 million). Around two-thirds of its operations are in the U.S., where it owns Transamerica.
 Load-Date: December 3, 2010

 

End of Document
