

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
March 4, 2009 Wednesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1551 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Wednesday:
BEIJING Mounting expectations that the Chinese government will unveil additions to its $586 billion stimulus soon to boost the economy kicked off a rally Asia, with Shanghai's index jumping more than 6 percent to close at 2,198.11. Hong Kong's Hang Seng added 2.5 percent to 12,331.15. South Korea's Kospi climbed 3.3 percent to 1,059.26, and markets in Singapore, Taiwan and New Zealand also gained.
Separately, an elite group of Chinese communist elders wrote to the Beijing leadership voicing support for its huge economic stimulus package, but warning that without transparency it could be frittered away by corrupt officials. The plan, announced in November, aims to boost domestic consumption to help cushion the impact of the global slowdown.
GENEVA Ailing auto maker General Motors Corp. could slash up to 3,500 jobs at its German subsidiary Adam Opel GmbH as part of a restructuring plan, the company said. GM Europe President Carl-Peter Forster said Tuesday that the company could be forced to close three factories as it seeks to achieve $1.2 billion (952 million euros) in cost cuts through restructuring. He said they were considering other measures to protect the jobs, including salary cuts, voluntary resignations and other employee concessions. GM would like to spin off Opel as a separate company as part of a plan to return to profitability by 2011. GM Europe is also seeking 3.3 billion euros ($4.2 billion) from Germany and other countries where it operates, saying it could face insolvency if it doesn't get the injection by the second quarter. Forster has confirmed talks with Britain and Spain, beyond the well-publicized discussions with the German government.
BRUSSELS The European Union could penalize any nation that refuses to share information on tax evasion and money laundering as part of a wider push to tighten financial supervision, the EU Commission President said. This includes the possibility of new fines against anyone breaking financial market rules within Europe. The EU said it would call on a G-20 meeting of the world's leading economies on April 1 and 2 to draw up a list of "uncooperative jurisdictions" and lay out what could be done to curb them. Barroso said the EU would also call on other nations to bolster international oversight of banks and reform financial institutions to include emerging nations and strengthen the powers and the funding of the International Monetary Fund.
SYDNEY Australia's economy shrank 0.5 percent in the last quarter of 2008, the government said in an unexpected announcement that suggested the country may be entering a recession. The news of the economy's first contraction in eight years surprised economists who had expected the Australian Bureau of Statistics to report a slight increase in gross domestic product. Australia is not yet in a recession using a definition of two consecutive quarters of contraction because a narrow rise of 0.1 percent was reported in the third quarter. Growth slowed to just 0.3 percent for the year. Australia's index shed 1.6 percent.
PRAGUE Five Eastern European central banks again issued a joint statement Wednesday in defense of their financial systems, saying reports the region's banks were in danger were "misleading" speculation and only increased the risk to stability. The central banks of the Czech Republic, Bulgaria, Poland, Romania and Slovakia said talk of troubles in the financial sector was "often simplified and misleading and could have negative implications for banks operating in these countries." Warnings that several Western banks are exposed to the financial crisis in Eastern Europe and could be hit hard by losses posed "a high reputational risk" to the countries' financial systems, the statement said. It did not say whom the banks blame.
TOKYO Japan's government unveiled new steps this week to funnel funds to cash-depleted companies, expanding the country's arsenal in the fight against a stubborn credit crunch. Tokyo plans to tap into its foreign reserve funds to lend to Japanese firms with overseas operations in need of dollar loans, Finance Minister Kaoru Yosano announced. Both Toyota and Honda have said they may take advantage of the program. Yosano also said the government would increase an existing emergency low-cost loan program for companies. Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average rose 0.9 percent to 7,290.96.
BERN, Switzerland UBS AG said that former Swiss President Kaspar Villiger will replace Peter Kurer as chairman of the board next month in an attempt to bring the bank back to profitability and deal with a major U.S. tax evasion probe. Kurer will leave April 15 after one year on the job, during which Switzerland's largest bank reported record losses and was faced with U.S. allegations that it helped Americans evade taxes.
PARIS France's deficit will swell to 5.6 percent of gross domestic product in 2009, almost double initial projections, according to a revised budget bill. The supplementary bill presented to the Cabinet by Finance Minister Christine Lagarde takes account of the worsening economic outlook as well as the cost of stimulus plans designed to support the automotive and construction industries, hardest hit by the crisis. The CAC-40 in France was 121.13 points higher, or 4.7 percent, at 2,675.68.
MEXICO CITY Mexican billionaire Carlos Slim said Tuesday that his companies would create 34,000 new jobs this year. Slim, one of the world's richest men, said he would continue investing in infrastructure and real estate projects in Mexico despite an economic downturn, but gave no specifics on where the new jobs would open. Mexico's IPC index rose 4.3 percent to 17,825, while the dollar declined to 15.2 pesos, off this week's record of 15.5. Elsewhere in Latin America, Brazil's benchmark Ibovespa index jumped 5.3 percent to 38,402 and Argentina's Merval index soared 6 percent to 986.3, while Chile's IPSA gained 1.4 percent to 2,436 and Peru's IGBVL climbed 3.3 percent to 6,825.
LONDON The Bank of England began its two-day rate setting meeting amid speculation it is on the verge of increasing the domestic money supply a development that would overshadow an anticipated cut in official interest rates. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares recovered from six-year lows to close up 133.78 points, or 3.8 percent, to 3,645.87.
DUBLIN Ireland's unemployment rate has more than doubled over the past year to 10.4 percent, a level last seen 12 years ago, the government Central Statistics Office reported. The latest, unexpectedly strong rise has shattered the government's expressed hope of keeping joblessness below 10 percent this year. It reflects an accelerating wave of cutbacks in most employment sectors, starting last year in construction when a decade-long property boom went bust.
MUMBAI, India India's central bank cut key interest rates by half a percentage point in a surprise move, citing deteriorating global economic conditions and growing signs of a slowdown at home. The Reserve Bank of India said that it was cutting the benchmark repurchase rate the rate at which it makes short term loans to commercial banks to 5 percent from 5.5 percent, effective immediately. It also cut the reverse repurchase rate the rate it pays commercial banks on their deposits to 3.5 percent from 4 percent. The cuts are intended to get commercial banks to lower interest rates on loans and mobilize their cash to fuel India's flagging economy. The Sensex index closed up 0.2 percent at 8,446.
JAKARTA, Indonesia Indonesia's central bank cut its key interest rate by half a percentage point to 7.75 percent, hoping to bolster the economy as the global downturn deepens and exports tumble. Bank Indonesia said in a statement the economic slump was "taking a steeper turn" and developing countries were being hit by a fall in exports and negative market sentiment.
OSLO The value of the Norwegian government's domestic pension fund declined 25 percent in 2008 to 87.8 billion kroner ($12.2 billion) due to collapsing stock prices during global financial turmoil, the national welfare administration Folketrygdfondet announced. Oil-rich Norway divides its wealth into two pension funds. The domestic fund invests in Norway and other Nordic countries, while the vastly larger global fund, formerly called the oil fund, invests outside Norway.
FRANKFURT Germany's economy continued to suffer in January, industry reports showed, with orders for machinery and factory equipment falling 42 percent during the month and 25,000 job cuts expected this year. The Frankfurt-based VDMA industry group said domestic orders fell 31 percent in January, while orders from other countries slumped 47 percent. Germany's DAX ended up 200.22 points, or 5.4 percent, at 3,890.94.
COLOMBO, Sri Lanka Sri Lanka became the latest nation to seek help from the International Monetary Fund to soften the impact of the global economic downturn. The Sri Lankan central bank said the government had entered talks with the IMF about an emergency loan worth $1.9 billion. The bank said the loan would help the country weather the global financial crunch and pay for reconstruction in the north and east, where the army says it is close to defeating Tamil Tiger rebels.
 Load-Date: March 5, 2009

 

End of Document
