

A look at financial developments around the world
The Associated Press
October 28, 2008 Tuesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 973 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at what happened in some stock markets around the world Tuesday:
WARSAW, Poland Poland's government approved a plan under which it would offer loan guarantees to any bank suffering from a shortage of credit. The plan follows western European nations' approval earlier this month of wider-ranging plans to shore up the financial sector, which have included governments providing fresh capital to banks by taking stakes in them. Under the Polish plan, which requires the approval of parliament and President Lech Kaczynski, the government would guarantee interbank loans.
KIEV, Ukraine Ukraine's efforts to receive an emergency loan from the International Monetary Fund were stalled Tuesday as a political standoff among ruling politicians blocked legislation to accept the rescue.
LONDON The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed up 73.79 points, or 1.9 percent, at 3,926.38. The FTSE was helped by a 5.4 percent rise in BP PLC's share price after the oil giant said profit rose 83 percent to $8.05 billion for the July-to-September period.
PARIS The CAC-40 index of leading French shares was up 47.57 points, or 1.6 percent, at 3,114.92. Also, French President Nicolas Sarkozy said Tuesday he will propose the EU raise its cap on funds that the bloc can make available to some member states, amid concerns that Eastern European nations could be swept up by the global financial crisis.
BRUSSELS, Belgium The European Commission approved a 500 billion euro ($623 billion) German government rescue plan to stabilize the country's financial institutions. German lawmakers passed the rescue plan earlier this month.
BERLIN Germany's DAX was the biggest gainer in Europe, up 488.81 points, or 11.3 percent, to end at 4,823.45. The DAX has been lifted disproportionately by another 66 percent rise in Volkswagen AG shares, which came on top of Monday's near 150 percent increase.
LONDON Crisis-hit Iceland raised its key interest rate by a massive 6 percentage points, carrying out a rapid policy U-turn to meet the requirements of a $2 billion rescue loan from the International Monetary Fund. As the central bank announced the increase in rates to a record 18 percent more than reversing a 3.5 percentage-point cut just two weeks ago Prime Minister Geir H. Haarde confirmed the tiny Nordic nation is seeking a further $4 billion to pull it out of the financial black hole created by the collapse of its banking system.
BRUSSELS, Belgium The European Commission said it is ready to give financial aid to Hungary as its economy teeters on the brink as a result of the financial crisis. Over the past few weeks, Hungary's currency the forint has lost 25 to 40 percent of its value against the euro and the U.S. dollar while the Budapest Stock Exchange's benchmark BUX reached its lowest point in four years.
LONDON With Iceland, Pakistan, Hungary and Ukraine already clamoring for mountains of cash aid, the $250 billion set aside by the International Monetary Fund to help struggling nations through the economic crisis is beginning to look puny. China and oil-rich Persian Gulf states should fund the bulk of a major boost in the IMF's bailout pot, said Gordon Brown, the British prime minister who has burnished his reputation by taking the lead on the financial meltdown.
MOSCOW Russia's battered stock exchanges recovered some of their losses when trading resumed after a one-day suspension. The benchmark RTS index advanced 4.8 percent to close at 575.6 points, while the MICEX gained 4.1 percent to end the day at 534.9 points.
HONG KONG Hong Kong's stock market soared more than 14 percent, rebounding from sharp falls in the past five sessions to post its biggest single-day percentage gain since the Asian financial crisis more than a decade ago. The blue-chip Hang Seng Index rocketed 1,580.45 points, or 14.4 percent, to close at 12,596.29, marking its largest percentage rise since October 1997.
SHANGHAI, China Chinese stocks rebounded after falling to their lowest level in more than two years. The rally followed surges in regional markets as governments around Asia pledged market-boosting measures. Banks and brokerages led the advance. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index climbed 2.8 percent, or 48.47 points, to close at 1,771.82. The smaller Shenzhen Composite Index added 2.17 percent to 483.27.
TOKYO Japan's benchmark stock index rebounded more than 6 percent as a weaker yen and recoveries in other Asian stocks spurred investors to buy shares after the market had fallen to a 26-year low. The Nikkei 225 index soared 459.02 points, or 6.41 percent, to 7,621.92, ending higher for the first time since last Tuesday. The dollar leaped to 97.68 Japanese yen in late New York trading Tuesday from 93.93 yen late Monday rising by as much as 4.7 percent earlier in the session. The yen's broad drop came amid market speculation that the Bank of Japan could cut interest rates by a quarter point.
SANTIAGO, Chile Brazil and Mexico led a firm recovery of Latin American markets, mirroring gains on Wall Street and boosted by positive results from major commodities companies. Even Argentina's Merval index rebounded impressively to close up 6.58 percent at 895.06. Brazil's Ibovespa index jumped a steep 13.42 percent to 33,386.65. The nation's currency, the real, rose against the U.S. dollar. The Mexican stock's IPC index market closed up 10.5 percent.
WASHINGTON The Federal Reserve said it will supply New Zealand's central bank with up to $15 billion, part of an ongoing effort by the Fed to break through a global credit clog. Under the new "swap" arrangement, the Fed will provide dollars to the Reserve Bank of New Zealand in exchange for that country's currency. The Fed has set up similar arrangements with the European Central Bank and with central banks in other countries, including Australia, Canada, and Japan.
 Load-Date: October 29, 2008

 

End of Document
