

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
December 17, 2008 Wednesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1386 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock-market activity around the world Wednesday:
ORAN, Algeria OPEC says it is cutting 2.2 million barrels a day from its output the largest ever at one time to stem crude prices that have plummeted over 70 percent from summer highs of nearly $150. An OPEC statement says its latest announcement means it is taking 4.2 million barrels a day off the market compared to September levels. The 4.2 million figure includes more than 500,000 barrels of overproduction OPEC said in September it would eliminate and a formal cut of 1.5 million barrels a day that it agreed on last month. That amounts to a new reduction of 2.2 million barrels.
LONDON The number of jobless in Britain rose by 137,000 to a nine-year high of 1.86 million in the three months to October as the economy continues to slow at a dramatic pace, official figures showed. The rise took the unemployment rate up to 6.0 percent for the first time since mid-1999. Meanwhile, the Confederation of British Industry reported that only 13 percent of retail firms said sales volumes were up in the first half of December compared with a year ago, while 67 percent said they were lower. The ensuing balance of -55 percent was the weakest since the survey began in 1983. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed up 15.11 points, or 0.4 percent, at 4,324.19
FRANKFURT, Germany The Federal Statistical Office said that the consumer-price index for November rose 1.4 percent from the same month a year ago, down sharply from an annual rate of 2.4 percent in October. November prices fell 0.5 percent from a month earlier. The annual inflation rate has slowed for the fourth month in a row and has fallen below the 2 percent threshold for the first time since June of 2007, the statistical office said. The DAX was 21.53 points, or 0.5 percent, lower at 4,708.38.
BEIJING China unveiled a stimulus package to boost its slumping real-estate market, cutting taxes for second-hand apartment sales. It will now be easier for people to sell their homes without paying taxes. Now anyone who has owned a home for at least two years can sell it without having to pay a tax, rather than waiting five years. The policy changes are an interim measure valid for one year, the statement said. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index closed up 0.1 percent, or 1.81 points, at 1,976.82. Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index rose 2.2 percent to 15,460.52.
TORONTO Canada's potential $2.8 billion rescue package for the U.S.-based automakers is just the first of what could be several payments, Ontario Premier Dalton McGuinty said. McGuinty said the 3.4 billion Canadian dollars promised jointly by Ottawa and Ontario to the Detroit Three is simply a lifeline to sustain the industry. General Motors Corp., Chrysler LLC and Ford Motor Co. all have large operations in Ontario. McGuinty warns it's too early to speculate on how high the aid could go because the province is still assessing documents and plans.
STRASBOURG, France The European Parliament has won a battle in its standoff with EU governments over maximum working hours in the European Union. The EU assembly overwhelmingly backs the idea that all EU governments abide by a 1993 law that sets a maximum workweek of 48 hours. Britain now has an opt-out from that law. But on Wednesday, the European Parliament voted to keep the debate alive, insisting a workweek of 60 or more hours is a step back in time. In corporate news, Baltimore-based Constellation Energy said it will sell half of its nuclear-power business to French state-controlled nuclear-power company EDF for $4.5 billion, scuttling a $4.7 billion offer from a unit of Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway for all of the company. The CAC-40 index fell 9.74 points, or 0.3 percent, to close at 3,241.92.
SEOUL, South Korea The South Korean won rose to a six-week high as local stocks gained modestly. The won has been one of the world's worst-performing units this year, falling as much as 38 percent as foreign investors have dumped South Korean shares. Confidence in the government's ability to fight the effects of the global financial crisis were also questioned as concerns grew that its stash of foreign-currency reserves might not be enough to weather the storm. On Nov. 24, the won closed at 1,513 to the U.S. dollar, its lowest finish since March 13, 1998, when South Korea was in the throes of the Asian financial crisis. But the unit has since clawed back, ending Wednesday at 1,325, its best close since Nov. 5, according to central bank data. The Kospi index rose 0.7 percent to 1,169.75.
BRUSSELS, Belgium Tumbling oil prices helped inflation in the 15 nations that use the euro ease to a 14-month low of 2.1 percent in November, the EU statistics agency Eurostat said. Inflation is now close to the bank's guideline of just under 2 percent and is well under that at 1.4 percent in the euro-zone's largest economy Germany, which is the lowest in the currency area, Eurostat said. Meanwhile, EU regulators said they would loosen rules on state subsidies to allow governments to pump more money into cash-strapped companies unable to get bank funding during the credit crisis. The European Commission said governments for the next two years can help companies during current difficulties by giving most payments of up to €500,000 ($684,500) without checking with regulators. This is more than double the current threshold of €200,000. Larger payments often trigger an EU investigation that can take months to ensure the payment is justified.
TOKYO The U.S. Federal Reserve's interest-rate cut to new lows has intensified speculation that Japan's central bank will follow suit this week and also slash its key rate to nearly zero. The key Japanese rate now stands at 0.3 percent. The Fed's cut sent the dollar to a new 13-year low against the yen, touching 88.15 yen and inflicting more pain on the nation's vital exporters, whose foreign income is eroded when the dollar weakens for example, Honda Motor Co. announced it was slashing its annual earnings forecast to less than a third of last year's profit. Other major manufacturers like Toyota Motor Corp. and Sony Corp. have already downgraded profit projections, cut jobs and scaled back production. The Nikkei 225 stock average rose 44.50 points, or 0.5 percent, to 8,612.52 after initially rising 1.1 percent.
MOSCOW The Russian ruble suffered its largest drop in three months after the Central Bank signaled it would accelerate the devaluation of the national currency. The ruble dropped roughly 1.2 percent against a basket of currencies including the euro and dollar. That is sharper than the 1 percent drops it has suffered in recent weeks and marks the seventh depreciation since Nov. 11, the second in three days.
SINGAPORE Singapore's non-oil exports, which account for 70 percent of the city-state's gross domestic product, plummeted in November as the economy likely contracted for a third consecutive quarter. Exports in November fell 17.5 percent from a year earlier to 12.0 billion Singapore dollars ($8.1 billion) as consumer demand from Europe, China and the U.S. plunged, according to Trade and Industry Ministry figures. Exports fell 2.8 percent in November from the previous month.
OSLO, Norway Norway's central bank cut key interest rates by 1.75 percentage points to 3.0 percent on to ward off a sharp downturn in the Nordic country's oil-fired economy. It was the biggest cut in more than 22 years and brought rates to the lowest level since August 2006. Norway cut rates twice in October, reversing a more than three-year trend starting in June 2005 of slowly and steadily raising rates to keep Norway's economy from overheating on vast revenues from its offshore oil fields.
LISBON, Portugal Portugal's finance minister has warned his country's banks he may take away credit guarantees worth €20 billion ($28 billion) if they don't resume normal lending. The government provided the guarantee last month but business associations have complained the credit tap is still dry. Finance Minister Fernando Teixeira dos Santos reminded bankers the guarantee came with a proviso that they help out struggling businesses. Teixeira dos Santos added in his comments late Tuesday that banks won't survive the crisis if they stop making money from lending.
 Load-Date: December 18, 2008

 

End of Document
