

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
March 17, 2009 Tuesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1046 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Tuesday:
LONDON British Prime Minister Gordon Brown acknowledged that he should have pushed for tougher financial regulations following the 1997 Asian economic crisis but stopped short of an outright apology for the present turmoil in an interview with a British newspaper.
Meanwhile, Britain's tax office said it is investigating claims by a whistleblower that Barclays PLC, the country's third largest bank, has allegedly been planning to dodge taxes.
Britain's FTSE 100 closed down 0.2 percent to 3,857.10.
FRANKFURT Germany's economy may have reached a low point and be poised to start a recovery this summer, a key indicator of investor sentiment suggested. The ZEW survey, released in part by the University of Mannheim's ZEW Institute, said that Germany's business outlook improved in March, with its indicator for economic sentiment rising by 2.3 points to minus 3.5 points from minus 5.8 points in February. While still well below the historic average of 26.2 points, the figure has risen for the fifth consecutive month and reached the highest level since July 2007. The narrow increase drew surprise and a sense of relief that the economic malaise that has gripped Europe's biggest economy since last year may be set to finally improve. Germany fell into recession last year.
Germany's DAX dropped 1.4 percent to 3,987.77, while elsewhere in Europe France's CAC 40 slumped 0.9 percent to 2,767.28.
TOKYO Japan's central bank said it was considering offering up to one trillion yen ($10 billion) in loans to banks to boost their capital and revive lending amid a deepening economic downturn. The announcement comes as the Bank of Japan started a two-day policy board meeting to study ways to maintain corporate financing. The central bank said the capital strength of Japanese financial institutions might be hurt due to a prolonged slump in the world's second-largest economy and massive losses on securities. The central bank said the loan measure will help financial institutions shore up their depleted capital and ensure financial stability.
The Nikkei 225 stock average jumped 3.2 percent to 7,949.13 on hopes that the Japanese government will take the further steps to reinvigorate the economy. Prime Minister Taro Aso has called for a new, massive stimulus package that media reports say could reach at least 20 trillion yen ($200 billion). This month, Japan has been doling out about $120 to every resident as part of an earlier stimulus package.
HONG KONG British bank Standard Chartered PLC has started the year "very strongly" but faces more challenges ahead as the world economy struggles through its worst downturn in decades, the company's chief executive said. Standard Chartered is the latest Western-based bank to reassure investors about its earnings amid the global financial turmoil. Citigroup Inc., Britain's Barclays PLC and others have offered similar upbeat assessments in recent days. But Hong Kong's Hang Seng index erased afternoon gains to end down 0.8 percent.
Elsewhere in Asia, South Korea's Kospi surged 3.4 percent, while China's benchmark Shanghai Composite Index came up 65.03 points, or 3 percent, to close at 2,218.33. Markets in Australia and Taiwan also rose, while shares in India and Singapore declined.
BRUSSELS Nobel laureate Paul Krugman said the European Union needs to drastically increase its efforts to spend its way out of recession, fearing the Continent could otherwise sleepwalk into a lost decade. He raised the specter of the Japanese economic crisis during the 1990s when the world's second largest economy spent a "lost decade" because the government's tardy and piecemeal efforts failed to stimulate the economy after an asset bubble burst. While Krugman called for a total stimulus package of some 500 billion euros ($650 billion), some estimates of what actually is being implemented in the EU go as low as 200 billion euros ($250 billion).
ISTANBUL The global economic crisis threatens to shrink investment in water infrastructure, an already underfunded sector vital to growth and public health, the World Bank said. The first global economic contraction since World War II threatens to overshadow the scarcity of clean water in many poor regions, where inadequate sanitation is a major cause of deadly disease and a drag on economic development. The United Nations says the total cost of replacing aging water supply and sanitation infrastructure in industrial countries could be as high as $200 billion per year.
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates Standard & Poor's cut the credit ratings of six Dubai government-backed entities and a leading property developer, citing the global economic meltdown's sharper-than-expected impact on the Mideast's one-time boomtown. The move comes despite a recent promise by the United Arab Emirates federal government to inject at least $10 billion into the ailing city-state, one of seven members of the UAE federation. The funds are meant to prop up the debt-ridden emirate and its many state-controlled enterprises.
MADRID Telecommunications giant Telefonica announced phone bill discounts of up to 20 euros ($26) for unemployed owners of mobile and fixed phones in Spain to help them cope with the economic crisis. Spain has the highest unemployment rate nearly 14 percent in the European Union with an estimated 3.5 million people out of work. Announcing the measure, Telefonica chairman Guillermo Ansaldo said unemployed phone owners could obtain up to 50 percent discounts in their monthly landline and mobile bills although there would be a 20 euros ceiling on both discounts.
MANILA, Philippines The Philippines' jobless rate jumped to 7.7 percent in January, the government said, the latest sign of slowing economic growth amid the global financial crisis. The jobless rate rose from 6.8 percent in October. Philippine unemployment data is calculated every quarter.
HELSINKI Nokia Corp. said it will lay off 1,700 people worldwide to cut costs, as the global economic downturn strikes deeper into the mobile phone sector. The world's top mobile phone maker said the job cuts will affect several sectors, including its devices and markets units, the corporate development office and global support functions.
 Load-Date: March 18, 2009

 

End of Document
