

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
February 18, 2009 Wednesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1215 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Wednesday:
LONDON British Prime Minister Gordon Brown set out a plan for world leaders ahead of the upcoming G-20 summit in London, calling for a boost to the International Monetary Fund's resources and for countries to renounce protectionism. After meeting with World Bank head Robert Zoellick and IMF chief Dominique Strauss-Khan to plan the talks, Brown said that the world needed to work together to improve global financial regulation to prevent a repeat of the current financial crisis. Meanwhile, the Bank of England revealed that it has sought approval from the government to create new money in a bid to kick-start the economy as historically low interest rates leave the bank with limited scope for further rate cuts. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed down 27.30 points, or 0.7 percent, to 4,006.83
BERLIN Chancellor Angela Merkel's Cabinet agreed on a new law that will allow the German government to take over private banks hit by the financial crisis by expropriating shareholders if necessary. Merkel acknowledged that the change may be used to take over Hypo Real Estate Holding AG, a commercial property lender that has been ravaged by the financial crisis and has received some 87 billion euros ($110 billion) in government loan guarantees since September. Germany's DAX declined 11.64 points, or 0.3 percent, to 4,204.96.
BRUSSELS Public spending by European Union governments to ease the recession is knocking big holes in many national budgets, the European Commission said. But mindful of the extraordinary economic slowdown, it said it will cut countries both in and out of the 16-nation euro zone some slack in complying again with the bloc's sound finances rules. In the euro zone, France and Germany will see their budget deficits go way above the ceiling of 3 percent of gross domestic product a maximum fixed by rules designed to boost the stability of the single currency, the European Commission reported. It confirmed France's budget gap will shoot to 4.4 percent of GDP in 2009 up from 3.2 percent in 2008. It will unlikely return to under 3 percent until at least 2011, it added.
RIGA, Latvia Latvia's Finance Ministry announced that the economy will shrink 12 percent this year, the bleakest forecast yet for the troubled Baltic state. The revised forecast is considerably worse than the 5 percent decline written into this year's budget, a number that Latvia's center-right government had agreed on with the International Monetary Fund late last year while arranging a 7.5 billion euros bailout loan. Finance Minister Atis Slakteris said in a statement that the revised number was necessary given the bleaker world economic outlook, which was hurtin Latvia's potential to export. He added that consumption and investment numbers also needed to be recalculated.
TAIPEI, Taiwan Taiwan's government slashed its economic forecast, predicting the island's economy will shrink 3 percent this year amid plunging exports. To spur growth, the central bank moved quickly to cut interest rates for the seventh time since September. The revision in the annual gross domestic product forecast came after a sharp drop in exports down 40 percent in both January and December alarmed officials. Previously, the government had projected the economy would grow 2 percent this year.
BEIJING China promised to keep its exchange rate stable and said it would use part of its $1.95 trillion in foreign currency reserves to boost imports and consumer spending to combat the global financial crisis. Chinese exporters that face plunging sales want the yuan devalued, which would make their goods cheaper abroad. But economists say they see no sign Beijing will take such a step, which could fuel tensions with its trading partners. Chinese shares tumbled 4.7 percent, their biggest one-day loss of 2009, as investors took profits following Wall Street's overnight losses. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index sank 109.58 points, or 4.7 percent, to close at 2209.86. The Shenzhen Composite Index for China's smaller second exchange dropped 4.1 percent to 707.03.
MOSCOW The Russian currency and stock markets were turbulent as oil prices dipped to a new low and confidence in the economy weakened further. Stocks at the MICEX where most of Russia's trading takes place were spiralling down so fast in the afternoon that the exchange had to suspend trading for one hour. They managed to regain some of today's losses later in the day. By 6 p.m. (1500 GMT), the MICEX index was down 3 percent. The other exchange, RTS, shed nearly 5 percent. Market analysts said that the trading volatility was very high as there are very few buyers or sellers on the market. Many international funds sold out of Russia after September 2008 when the domestic market began to crumble. Meanwhile, the ruble closed at 40.8 against a basket of dollars and euros edging closer to the trading limit of 41 rubles the Central Bank announced in January.
TOKYO Japanese stocks extended losses, succumbing to global pessimism that governments may be waging a futile battle against a deepening economic slump. The benchmark Nikkei 225 stock average fell 111.25 points, or 1.5 percent, to 7,534.26, its lowest closing level since Oct. 27. The broader Topix index lost 1 percent to 749.26. Investors brushed off the political drama of the previous day, when Shoichi Nakagawa abruptly resigned as finance minister amid allegations that he was drunk at last weekend's G-7 summit. Instead, the bearish sentiment stemmed from growing uncertainties in Europe and the U.S., said Nobuhiro Higashine, an analyst at Toyo Securities in Tokyo.
SAO PAULO, Brazil Brazilian stocks slipped amid concerns about the global economy adding to sharp losses during the previous session. Brazil's Ibovespa index closed down 0.4 percent to 39,674. The declines added to a 4.8 percent loss for the Ibovespa a day earlier that was brought on by renewed fears over the state of the global economy and the health of European banks. Meanwhile, Mexico's IPC index slipped 0.6 percent to 18.741, while the Merval in Argentina closed down 1.7 percent at 1,055.
HONG KONG Hong Kong's stock market recovered its early losses to close higher, snapping three straight days of losses. The blue-chip Hang Seng index added 70.60 points, 0.6 percent, to 13,016.00, but was down almost 2 percent at one point. The upward trade came despite heavy selling in China and other regional markets amid waning confidence in government rescue measures.
PARIS French President Nicolas Sarkozy pledged to spend up to 2.65 billion euros ($3.34 billion) to soften the blow of the global financial crisis on France's most vulnerable citizens. The conservative French leader laid out a range of proposals from tax breaks for low income families to new benefits for unemployed youth after holding talks earlier in the day with France's top unions and employers' groups. The summit took place amid the worst economic conditions France has seen in decades and a growing public backlash over Sarkozy's handling of the crisis. Despite Sarkozy's moves, unions reiterated their call for a general strike and nationwide protests on March 19. The CAC-40 in France fell marginally to 2,874.07.
 Load-Date: February 19, 2009

 

End of Document
