

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
July 31, 2009 Friday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1068 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Friday:
BRUSSELS Euro-zone consumer prices fell for a second month in July as the June jobless rate rose to a 10-year high to 9.4 percent, the EU statistics agency Eurostat said.
Unemployment lines grew by 158,000 from May to June in the euro zone, it said, as companies make cutbacks to cope with falling demand for goods and services at home and abroad. Some 3.17 million more people are out of work compared to June last year.
Lower demand for energy and other goods has caused prices to plunge 0.6 percent in the year to July. That means there was disinflation in the euro zone for a second month in a row after the year-on-year rate fell to minus 0.1 percent in June and hit zero in May.
Meanwhile, under pressure from the European Union, banks in Europe will start processing complex financial contracts known as credit default swaps through a central clearing house by the end of July, EU regulators said.
Swaps offer insurance against securities for lenders worried about a borrower's ability to pay them back. The unregulated $60 trillion market lost its main central clearing house to handle the deals with the September collapse of U.S. investment bank Lehman Brothers.
Separately, Germany won European Union approval for a program that purchases troubled assets from banks to encourage them to keep lending.
LONDON An influential committee of cross-party lawmakers called for clearer responsibilities among Britain's financial regulator, the government and central bank to strengthen supervision of the banking sector and prevent a repeat of the current crisis.
The Treasury Committee, which flagged problems with the supervisory system when mortgage lender Northern Rock ran into trouble two years ago, said that there is still a lack of clarity regarding who is responsible for oversight and who has executive authority in a crisis.
BEIJING Chinese shares rose again after the central bank affirmed its easy credit policy, ending July up 15.3 percent. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index jumped 90.5 points, or 2.7 percent, to close at 3,412.06.
The market's rise faltered temporarily this week after the bank regulator issued a reminder to lenders not to finance speculation. But the central bank responded with a statement that its "relaxed monetary policy" would continue, allaying fears liquidity might be reduced.
TOKYO Japan's biggest bank Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Inc. posted a jump in quarterly profit, driven by a stock market rally, while its rival Mizuho stayed in the red on mounting derivative losses and bad loans.
Meanwhile, the country's unemployment rate hit a six-year high in June as mounting job losses and sharply falling prices threaten to stall a recovery in the world's second-biggest economy.
The unemployment rate worsened to 5.4 percent in June from 5.2 percent in May, the government said, and the total number of jobless jumped 31 percent from a year earlier to 3.48 million.
Economists predict more record-high unemployment numbers in the months to come.
In equities, every major Asian market turned higher. Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average gained 1.9 percent, while Hong Kong's Hang Seng added 1.7 percent. Indian shares climbed 2.2 percent, and markets in Taiwan and Singapore were also higher.
LONDON Ukraine won a thumbs up from leading credit ratings agency Standard & Poor's for its efforts to get its battered economy in shape for a loan from the International Monetary Fund. S&P said it was revising its outlook on Ukraine's long-term ratings to positive from negative in the wake of budgetary and financial sector reforms in compliance with the $16 billion IMF standby arrangement.
This led to the approval of the third lending installment of $3.3 billion by the IMF earlier this week.
FRANKFURT German wholesale revenues fell 11 percent in the second quarter from a year earlier as the economic downturn hurt demand, the Federal Statistical Office said.
In markets, the FTSE 100 index of leading British shares and Germany's DAX both closed down 0.5 percent. The CAC-40 in France was 0.3 percent lower.
PARIS Laid-off workers at an auto parts factory in central France abandoned a threat to blow up their workplace after the government promised to top up their severance pay.
The New Fabris workers agreed to the terms offered by French Industry Minister Christian Estrosi an extra severance package of 12,000 euros ($16,900) per worker.
A few days after last month's announcement that 366 New Fabris employees were being laid off, workers had placed gas canisters around the building, threatening to blow up the car parts maker if they didn't receive more generous severance packages. They blamed Renault and PSA Peugeot-Citroen for their plight and requested that the automakers give each worker 30,000 euros ($42,200).
HAVANA Cuba suspended plans for a Communist Party congress and dropped economic growth projections in 2009 to 1.7 percent from 2.5 percent as the island's economy struggles through a "very serious" crisis.
The Communist Party Central Committee also announced that it was suspending plans for the first Communist Party congress in 12 years in order to deal with the financial crisis.
Meanwhile, the country has ordered austere energy savings this summer to cope with rising budget deficits and plummeting export profits. Air conditioners are shut off in the dead heat. Factories close at peak hours, and workers go without their government-subsidized lunches.
REYKJAVIK, Iceland Iceland's government said the International Monetary Fund has postponed a decision on releasing additional funds for the nation's economic recovery program.
Iceland was hoping for a decision before the IMF executive board begins a two-week vacation on Aug. 7 to release the second tranche of the $2.1 billion loan from the IMF and the first quarter of the $2.5 billion loan from Nordic countries. They money is intended to beef up the country's foreign reserves.
MEXICO CITY Mexico's Treasury department says the country has lost 596,200 jobs since June 2008, a 4.1 percent decline as of June of this year.
Many Mexicans who lose formal jobs turn to unregistered activities like street vending.
The department's report on second-quarter economic activity says GDP shrank by 10.4 percent on an annualized basis in the period, similar to the central bank estimate released earlier this week of 11 percent.
 Load-Date: August 1, 2009

 

End of Document
