

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
October 6, 2010 Wednesday 08:47 PM GMT

 Copyright 2010 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1066 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and activity in major stock markets around the world Tuesday:
WASHINGTON China and other emerging nations are lifting the global economy, but their strength threatens to come at the expense of the United States and Europe.
The emerging countries are benefiting from low-priced exports fueled by artificially low currencies. That's raising the prospect of trade frictions for years to come.
In its latest economic forecast, the International Monetary Fund predicts the world economy will expand 4.8 percent this year and 4.2 percent next year. That would far surpass last year's 0.6 percent decline, the worst performance since World War II.
Growth in China is forecast to be 10.5 percent this year and 9.6 percent next year. Brazil's economy is expected to grow 7.5 percent this year before slowing to 4.1 percent next year.
But the IMF forecast, released Wednesday, points to lingering weakness in the United States and Europe after the worst recession in decades.
The agency said that the global economy will require a balancing act: Countries with huge trade and budget deficits such as the United States will need to boost exports. And countries with big trade surpluses such as China must reduce their dependency on exports and boost domestic demand.
WASHINGTON The risk of a destabilizing bout of deflation has grown as the United States and other countries struggle with weak economic recoveries and lingering financial problems.
That assessment, contained in a new International Monetary Fund report, comes as the Federal Reserve gears up to pump more money into the U.S. economy to strengthen the recovery and prevent any deflationary forces from taking hold. Japan flooded its stagnant economy with money Tuesday in a bid to fight deflation.
BRUSSELS Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao dismissed criticism from European officials of his country's economic and financial policies, ending a day of talks at the EU headquarters on a sour note.
The mood began to darken on Tuesday at the EU-China business leaders meeting when Olli Rehn, the EU's monetary affairs chief, warned that a recent rise in the value of the euro against the yuan could hamper Europe's modest economic recovery. A strong local currency makes exports more expensive and less competitive on the global market.
The EU urges Beijing to let its currency fall against the dollar and the euro and to open China to foreign business. Rehn's comments echoed officials in the U.S., where Congress is threatening to impose trade sanctions if Beijing doesn't loosen its firm grip on the yuan.
WASHINGTON Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner stepped up pressure on China to make more progress in moving toward flexible exchange rates.
Geithner said, in a speech in advance of global finance meetings this weekend, that it is particularly important to see appreciation in countries where the currency is significantly undervalued. Geithner never mentioned China, but the speech was clearly aimed at the world's second-largest economy.
Geithner said the problem was that when large economies kept their currency undervalued, it encouraged other nations to do the same.
SINGAPORE The IMF urged China to lead other Asian countries in a coordinated strengthening of the region's currencies to boost consumer spending and reduce reliance on overseas markets for growth.
LONDON Europe needs to do more to wean its banks off crisis support measures or risk more financial turmoil and a prolonged period of weak growth, the International Monetary Fund said.
KOLONTAR, Hungary Hungary opened a criminal probe into the toxic sludge flood and the European Union urged emergency authorities to do everything they can to keep the contaminated slurry from reaching the Danube and affecting half a dozen other nations.
NEW YORK U.S. Treasury rates fell to record lows after a report showed private employers shed jobs last month.
The two-year Treasury yield slipped to 0.39 percent, and the five-year yield sank to 1.13 percent. Both are the lowest yields on record, traders said.
LONDON In Europe, the FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed up 0.8 percent, Germany's DAX rose 0.9 percent and the CAC-40 in France ended 0.9 percent higher.
Earlier in Asia, Japan's benchmark Nikkei 225 stock average closed up 1.8 percent, South Korea's Kospi rose 1.3 percent, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 was up 1.7 percent at 4,686.8 and Hong Kong's Hang Seng jumped 1 percent to 22,880.41.
PARIS Ex-trader Jerome Kerviel, speaking for the first time about his tough sentencing in history's biggest rogue trading scandal, insisted he is a scapegoat for his former bank and compared the penalty to getting "hit on the head with a club."
The 33-year-old was convicted Tuesday, sentenced to three years in prison and ordered to pay his former employer damages of (EURO)4.9 billion ($6.7 billion).
LONDON Prime Minister David Cameron appealed for a wartime spirit from the British public, urging them to show restraint amid the hardship of sharp spending cuts and respond with new ideas to spur the economy to future prosperity.
In a major address to his Conservative Party's annual convention, Cameron insisted that record national debts racked up during the financial crisis and costly bank bailouts mean his government has no option but to ax expensive programs, trim welfare payments and hold down departmental budgets.
CAIRO The Middle East and North Africa's economic growth following the global financial crisis remains strong, the IMF said, while stressing that the region's reliance on oil revenues leaves it vulnerable should crude prices again collapse.
BERLIN German industrial orders returned to stronger-than-expected growth in August, powered by a surge in demand from other countries in the 16-nation eurozone. Orders had dropped in July.
DUBLIN Ratings agency Fitch cut Ireland's credit worthiness another notch, citing the country's long fight to emerge from record deficits, the toughest bank-bailout effort in Europe and a lagging economy.
ATHENS, Greece Greek civil servants will walk off the job on Thursday in a 24-hour strike expected to affect all state services, including schools and hospitals, in protest against government austerity measures.
BRUSSELS The European Union and South Korea signed a free trade pact, cutting billions of dollars in industrial and agricultural duties despite EU carmakers' fears of a surge in cheap imports.
 Load-Date: October 7, 2010

 

End of Document
