

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
January 8, 2009 Thursday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1501 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock-market activity around the world Thursday:
KIEV, Ukraine The European Union said that gas supplies should restart after it struck a deal with Russia on supervising the flow of gas through Ukraine. But officials could not say when many homes and businesses across Europe could turn on their heating again after two days without gas during freezing winter weather. Russia cut off the natural gas it sends to Europe through the Ukraine on Wednesday when a payment dispute escalated. Russia claims Ukraine siphoned off gas for its own use. Ukraine denies this. Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek, whose country holds the EU presidency, said a deal brokered with Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and German Chancellor Angela Merkel had agreed on how monitors should check the amount of Russian gas entering and leaving Ukraine.
LONDON The Bank of England cut interest rates by a half percentage point to 1.5 percent, the lowest level in its 315-year history, taking the bank into uncharted territory as it attempts to ward off a prolonged recession. The central bank is nearing the limits of conventional monetary policy after trims totaling 3.5 percentage points since the beginning of October amid Britain's bleakest year since the early 1990s recession. Meanwhile, administrators for Waterford Wedgwood PLC, the collapsed maker of classic china and crystal, said they had reached a tentative agreement with U.S. private equity firm KPS Capital Partners over the sale of many of the company's assets. The company filed for bankruptcy protection earlier this week after failed attempts at a restructure or a sale. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed 2.14 points lower at 4,505,37.
TOKYO Japanese electronics component maker TDK Corp. said it would cut 8,000 workers and post its biggest net loss ever this fiscal year, due to falling orders and a stronger yen. The company known to consumers for its DVDs, audio tapes and other recording media will cut the jobs as it closes four factories outside of Japan. Meanwhile, media reports said Mitsubishi Motors Corp. will slash more than 2,000 temporary jobs in Japan by the end of March as the country's fourth largest automaker struggles in the face of a severe slump in sales worldwide. The Nikkei 225 stock average lost 362.82, or 3.9 percent, to 8,876.42, snapping a seven-day winning streak as the yen traded higher.
BERLIN Commerzbank AG said it will get 10 billion euros ($13.5 billion) in fresh capital from a German government rescue fund, leaving the government with a 25 percent stake. The German government put together its rescue fund, worth up to 500 billion euros, last fall. Meanwhile, official statistics showed that in November, German exports declined 10.6 percent from October and 11.8 percent from the previous year the sharpest month-on-month drop since the country's reunification in 1990. Exported goods and services were worth 77.1 billion euros ($104.7 billion) in November. Germany is one of the world's top exporters, and foreign trade has been a key driver of its economy over recent years. The DAX was 57.56 points, or 1.2 percent, lower at 4,879.91.
BRUSSELS, Belgium Confidence in the EU economy sank to a record low in December, the European Commission said, while official data confirmed the 15-nation euro zone officially slipped into recession in the third quarter. The Commission reported that its economic sentiment indicator (ESI) slumped sharply in December for both the EU and the euro zone to the lowest levels since the series was launched in January 1985. The Commission also said its euro zone business climate indicator fell to minus 3.17 in December, again its lowest level since January 1985. Separately, the statistics office Eurostat confirmed that the euro zone economy slipped into a recession in the third quarter of 2008, while unemployment rose for the fourth month running during November.
SEOUL, South Korea South Korea is moving closer to recession, the government said, as key indicators worsen amid a shrinking global economy. South Korea's economy grew 3.8 percent in the third quarter compared with the same period last year and the Bank of Korea predicts growth will slow to 0.7 percent in the fourth quarter. Economists say that year-on-year growth of anything less than 2-3 percent is considered a cause for alarm in South Korea and signifies that the economy is in deep trouble. The Kospi index shed 1.8 percent
NEW DELHI Top executives of beleaguered Indian outsourcing company Satyam Computer struggled to reassure investors, employees and clients after its chairman resigned Wednesday following an admission he cooked accounts and inflated profits for years. The scandal has shaken investor confidence and prompted Indian business leaders to urge authorities to beef up corporate governance. It comes at a delicate time for India's information technology companies, which are struggling against a global slowdown and waning economic growth at home. India's IT firms derive 40 percent of their global revenues from financial services clients.
BEJING The number of travelers to China dropped by 2 million in 2008 which was supposed to be a banner year for tourism, but became one dampened by Olympics-related security measures and the global economic crunch. It was the first decline in visitor numbers since the deadly SARS outbreak in 2003. In corporate news, shares of Lenovo Group tumbled after the world's fourth-largest computer maker warned it expects a loss for its latest quarter and will lay off 11 percent of its work force and cut executive pay. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index declined 2.3 percent, or 45.83 points, to close at 1878.18.
HONG KONG Bank of China shares tumbled after Hong Kong billionaire Li Ka-shing's foundation sold more than $500 million worth of shares in the lender, becoming the latest investor to cut its investment in China's banking sector. Meanwhile, struggling investment firm Royal Bank of Scotland said it may also sell its own stake in the Chinese lender. Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index fell 571.55 points, or 3.8 percent, to 14,415.91. Elsewhere in Asia, Australia's benchmark dropped 2.3 percent and Taiwan's key index lost 5.3 percent.
PARIS The French government is planning to inject a second tranche of 10.5 billion euros ($14.38 billion) into some of the nation's largest banks in an effort to spur lending. Finance Minister Christine Lagarde said the aid would be distributed by the end of the first quarter. Late last year, the government injected six of France's largest banks with a first tranche of 10.5 billion euros ($14.38 billion), part of a 360 billion euros bailout package for French financial institutions announced last year, and is aimed at getting banks to continue lending despite the financial crisis. Meanwhile, at a conference here on the future of capitalism, German Chancellor Angela Merkel singled out the American budget deficit and China's current account surplus as problems upsetting the global economy, while French President Nicolas Sarkozy, leading the two-day conference with former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, blamed financial speculators for encouraging a system fueled on debt. The CAC-40 was 21.76, or 0.7 percent, down at 3,324.33.
MEXICO CITY Mexican consumer prices rose at their fastest pace since 2001 last year. Annual inflation quickened to 6.5 percent in December, nearly double the gains seen in 2007 and above the 6 percent forecast, the central bank said. The rise was fueled by high food and energy costs. Meanwhile, growth dropped to 1.6 percent at the end of the third quarter, its lowest rate since 2003. That combination of price gains and a slowing economy has put Mexico's central bank in a bind: Policy makers can't raise interest rates to combat inflation without risking a further blow to growth. Mexico's stocks traded down 0.7 percent to 21,955.
BRASILIA, Brazil Brazil's government will spend $152 billion to build housing for poor families in the next 15 years. Finance Minister Guido Mantega said the measure aims to help poor Brazilians and also stimulate the economy by creating construction jobs. The housing will be made available to families earning up to $870 a month, or five times the minimum wage. Meanwhile, the Agriculture Ministry said coffee output in Brazil is expected to drop by as much as 20 percent this year because of adverse weather and weak investment amid a tough world financial climate. The Ibovespa stock index closed up 2.9 percent at 41,991.
VANCOUVER, British Columbia Canadian metals miner Teck Cominco Ltd. is cutting 1,400 jobs around the world, or 13 percent of its work force, to help it deal with a global sell-off in commodities. The Vancouver-based company, the world's largest producer of zinc and metallurgical coal, said the cuts will also help eliminate redundancies after its acquisition of Fording Canadian Coal last year. The S&P/TSX index rose 1.1 percent to settle at 9,221.58.
 Load-Date: January 9, 2009

 

End of Document
