

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
January 14, 2010 Thursday 06:24 PM GMT

 Copyright 2010 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1146 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and activity in major stock markets around the world Thursday:
FRANKFURT European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet indicated interest rates in the 16-country euro area would not be rising soon amid an uneven economic recovery, and dismissed speculation that Greece might leave the euro zone over its budget crisis.
The bank, which sets policy for single currency zone and its 330 million people, kept its main refinancing rate at a historic low of 1 percent for the eighth consecutive month.
Trichet said at a news conference that a tentative recovery that started at the end of last year is likely to be "uneven" and that growth would only be "moderate."
He also said he did not comment on "absurd hypotheses" when asked at his news conference about the possibility that Greece could leave or be kicked out of the euro zone.
European markets ended higher. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares finished up 0.5 percent, Germany's DAX rose 0.4 percent and the CAC-40 in France was 0.4 percent higher.
ATHENS, Greece Greece's cabinet approved an economic recovery plan promising to drastically reduce its huge budget deficit to 2 percent of annual output in 2013, and warned it could hit Greeks with additional taxes and spending cuts if needed.
Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou said the blueprint, meant to calm increasingly jittery European Union partners, will be submitted to the EU and the European Central Bank Friday.
Papaconstantinou said a back-up plan for further spending cuts and tax hikes was requested by the European Union, and follows visits to Athens by EU financial officials and ongoing talks with IMF experts.
Greece's budget crisis, with a deficit of 12 percent of gross domestic product, has shocked markets and shaken the European Union.
Industrial production in the 16 countries that use the euro rose by a monthly rate of 1 percent in November, said the EU statistics office Eurostat.
The figure was double market expectations and more than reversed the 0.3 percent decline reported in October.
TOKYO Japanese machinery orders, a closely watched indicator of corporate capital spending, slumped to a record low in November as anemic domestic demand kept companies cautious.
Core machinery orders tumbled 11.3 percent in November from a month earlier to 625.3 billion yen ($6.8 billion), the government said. The figure, which excludes often volatile numbers from shipbuilders and electric power companies, was the lowest since the government began releasing comparable data in April 1987.
Asian markets still closed higher. Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average led Asia's gains, jumping 1.6 percent, South Korea's Kospi added 0.9 percent, Australia's market rose 0.6 percent, Singapore's benchmark was up 0.7 percent and China's Shanghai index rose 1.4 percent. Hong Kong's Hang Seng gave up early gains to close down 0.2 percent.
BERLIN German consumer prices rose 0.4 percent in 2009, the slowest annual inflation rate since German reunification in 1990, the Federal Statistics Office said.
The agency said inflation was pulled down by price decreases for mineral oil products and food.
BUCHAREST, Romania Romania's Parliament passed this year's budget, which will help the country get an International Monetary Fund bailout loan suspended last year due to political instability.
Earlier, Finance Minister Sebastian Vladescu said 100,000 public sector jobs would be cut as the country met the IMF requirements.
Former Finance Minister Varujan Vosganian criticized the new budget, saying small and medium-sized businesses would be harmed by a 16 percent tax on profits.
But Prime Minister Emil Boc said the budget would help Romania recover from recession.
MANILA, Philippines Asia's economic growth is set to quicken to 6.6 percent this year from 4.5 percent in 2009, but the recovery remains fragile, the Asian Development Bank said.
Calibrated policy shifts and closer ties between economies will be needed to sustain growth and cushion Asia against future shocks, the ADB's study said, and the region's recovery was still overly dependent on developed countries boosting their economies with monetary and fiscal stimulus.
China, India and Indonesia and some smaller economies are doing well while others are still struggling, ADB President Haruhiko Kuroda said.
PARIS France's expected economic rebound this year is likely to be close to 1.5 percent, nearly double the government's current forecast, the country's prime minister said.
The government budget was built on estimated growth this year of 0.75 percent, after shrinking 2.3 percent in 2009 the French economy's worst performance since 1949.
MUMBAI, India India's wholesale inflation accelerated in December, intensifying pressure on the government to reduce fast-rising food prices and on the central bank to tighten monetary policy.
The Ministry of Commerce said India's wholesale price index rose 7.3 percent in December over the previous year, jumping from November's 4.8 percent rise and October's revised 1.5 percent rise.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia Sea attacks worldwide surged 39 percent to 406 cases, the highest in six years, with Somali pirates' raids on vessels accounting for more than half of the piracy, a maritime watchdog said.
It marked the fourth straight year of increases in attacks, the International Maritime Bureau said.
Analysts blame Somalia's nearly 20 years of lawlessness for fueling piracy's rise. The IMB said the attacks were opportunistic in nature, with pirates sometimes paid multi-million-dollar ransoms.
SYDNEY Australia's jobless rate unexpectedly fell in December, raising the prospect of further interest rate hikes as the country's economic recovery gathers pace.
The jobless rate fell to a seasonally adjusted 5.5 percent from 5.6 percent in November with 27,900 new part-time jobs and 7,300 full-time positions created during the month, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said. The total number of people employed in December was 10.91 million.
DUBLIN Ireland's average cost of goods and services fell 5 percent in 2009, the government's Central Statistics Office said.
Ireland last year suffered its greatest price drops since the Great Depression of the 1930s. Economists said they expect overall prices to remain slightly lower this year as Ireland battles crippling private debt, government deficits and double-digit unemployment.
MOSCOW Russian car sales fell by half in 2009, the sharpest decline of any major market, and are expected to remain flat this year, a leading business association said.
Russia's car market had been on track to become Europe's largest in 2008 before sales crashed that autumn as the global recession made lending largely unavailable.
COPENHAGEN Denmark's central bank trimmed its key lending rate by 0.10 percentage points to 1.05 percent, an effort to keep the national currency stable against the euro.
 Load-Date: January 15, 2010

 

End of Document
