

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
March 16, 2009 Monday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1139 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Monday:
VIENNA OPEC's secretary general blamed the U.S. and other leading industrialized countries for the global economic mess and challenged them to clean it up, saying his organization has already done its share. Abdalla el Badri also warned non-OPEC oil producers not to "take advantage" of his organization, an apparent jab at Russia, which has resisted calls from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries to formally coordinate production policies. His unusally outspoken comments came a day after oil ministers of his 12-nation crude producers' club decided to maintain current production levels unchanged while focusing on eliminating overproduction by some members.
LONDON European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso insisted that European nations are doing enough to boost their economies in the face of the global downturn despite a push by the United States for them to spend more. Barroso defended Europe's position after the weekend Group of 20 summit of finance officials, which backed away from endorsing more concrete, coordinated government spending plans pushed by the U.S. U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner called on European nations to do more to match Washington's $787 billion package of spending and tax cuts.
Meanwhile, Barclays PLC said it has had a good start to 2009 and confirmed it has been in talks with several parties about selling iShares, its San Francisco-based asset management unit.
The company gave no specific details on its performance. It also confirmed it was considering divestments to boost its capital reserves as well as possibly joining the government's insurance plan for bad assets.
Britain's FTSE 100 closed up 2.9 percent to 3,863.99.
SHANGHAI China will reimburse up to 5,000 yuan (about $730) on farmers' purchases of light trucks and minivans, according to a plan aimed at boosting vehicle sales in the countryside to help counter an economic slowdown, the Finance Ministry said.
Meanwhile, foreign direct investment in China fell in February as companies were battered by the global financial crisis but the decline was less severe than in previous months, the Commerce Ministry said.
Shanghai's main index clawed back from earlier losses to rise about 1 percent.
FRANKFURT Germany's trade surplus, the difference between goods exported and goods imported, fell 10 percent to €176.2 billion ($229 billion) in 2008 from a record high set in 2007, with a further drop expected this year as the economic crisis slashes demand.
Investors were encouraged somewhat by promises from the "G-20" weekend summit from the finance ministers of leading industrialized countries to do more to fight the global recession, and Germany's DAX climbed 2.3 percent to 4,044.54, while elsewhere in Europe, France's CAC 40 jumped 3.2 percent to 2,791.66.
TOKYO Japanese financial stocks surged on reports the country's central bank may buy their subordinated loans and bonds to bolster their capital. Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average rose 1.8 percent to 7,704.15, after vaulting more than 5 percent on Friday. Hong Kong's Hang Seng climbed about 3.6 percent to 12,976.71. Stock measures in Taiwan, India, Australia and Singapore also rose. But South Korea's benchmark was flat, while the Philippines' stock measure tumbled 4.7 percent.
BRUSSELS European Union nations have failed to agree whether to use €5 billion ($6.45 billion) of unspent EU budget funds to spur economic growth or give the sum back to member states, officials said. Diplomats and envoys said foreign ministers were deadlocked on the plan.
Meanwhile, the inflation rate in euro zone countries edged up to 1.2 percent in February while employment dropped in the final quarter of 2008 as economic conditions worsened, the European Union announced. The annual inflation rate in the 16 nations that use the euro rose slightly from 1.1 percent in January, the EU's statistical office Eurostat said. Employment declined 0.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2008 after a loss of 0.1 percent in the third quarter. The first quarter of 2008 had seen a 0.4 percent rise.
In other news, European airport operators said air passenger and cargo traffic is falling across the region. Airports Council International Europe said the number of air passengers in January fell 10.7 percent from a year ago, while freight traffic dropped by 23.6 percent. The group monitors traffic at 101 European airports.
BELGRADE, Serbia Serbia said it needed even more help from the International Monetary Fund to counter the global financial crisis, raising the amount it hopes to get and asking to run a bigger budget deficit. Serbia will seek $3 billion, Economy Minister Mladjan Dinkic said as the Balkan country's talks on an emergency loan started. Earlier, officials had said they would need $2.5 billion. The total sum is believed to include $530 million granted by the IMF in January, when the government hadn't been expecting the crisis to hit so hard.
SINGAPORE Singapore analysts slashed forecasts for 2009 economic growth and now expect a severe recession as the global slowdown hurts demand for the city-state's exports. The country's gross domestic product will likely shrink 4.9 percent this year, according to the median forecast of 20 economists in a quarterly survey released by the central bank. But they expect a recovery by 2010, when the economy is seen expanding 3.3 percent.
MOSCOW Russia will stop handing out easy bailouts to companies unless they can present concrete restructuring plans to deal with the economic crisis, officials said. Late last year Russia listed 295 companies as vital for the country and eligible for financial aid and guarantees against their loans. But the state is not going to "give away guarantees", President Dmitry Medvedev said, according to Russian news agencies.
ZURICH UBS AG announced it will replace three board members, including billionaire Ernesto Bertarelli, as part of a wave of changes at Switzerland's largest bank. Nominated to join the board at the April 15 shareholders meeting are Michael Demare, finance chief of engineering company ABB Ltd.; Axel Lehmann, group chief risk officer of Zurich Financial Services; and Ann Godbehere, who served as chief financial officer of Northern Rock under the initial phase of the British government's ownership of the mortgage lender.
SYDNEY Australia will cut its annual skilled worker migrant intake by 14 percent in an effort to preserve jobs for Australians after a spike in unemployment, the government announced. Immigration Minister Chris Evans said the skilled migration visa program, under which people can immigrate to Australia to fill certain occupations, will be reduced from 133,500 to 115,000 in 2009-10. The list of occupations will also be cut, Evans said.
 Load-Date: March 17, 2009

 

End of Document
