

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
November 10, 2008 Monday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 936 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Monday:
LONDON Britain's manufacturers saw raw material costs fall by a record amount during October, fueling market expectations that the Bank of England could cut interest rates to their lowest level in more than 300 years without igniting inflation. Britain's statistics office said input prices fell 5.6 percent in October from the previous month, the biggest fall since records began in 1986, pushing the annual rate of increase down to 13.8 percent from 24.0 percent. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares finished up 38.96 points at 4,403.92.
FRANKFURT, Germany The chief executive of HSH Nordbank, Hans Berger, resigned in the wake of the heavy losses incurred by the state-owned bank from the financial crisis. Berger said he was stepping down because the bank's operating business had been affected by unforeseen write-downs from the financial crisis since the third quarter. The DAX closed up 87.07 points, or 1.8 percent, higher at 5,025.53.
STOCKHOLM, Sweden The Swedish state will take control of troubled investment bank Carnegie and sell it off after the country's financial regulator revoked its banking license due to illegal trading activities. The Financial Supervisory Authority said Carnegie took "exceptional risks" and broke the law.
SYDNEY, Australia The Reserve Bank of Australia slashed its growth forecasts for this year and next and left the door open for further interest-rate cuts to prop up the slowing economy. The central bank now expects gross domestic product to grow 1.5 percent this year, compared with an earlier forecast of 2 percent. The bank estimates growth of 1.75 percent in 2009, down from its previous forecast of 2.5 percent. Meanwhile, the country's largest lender by assets, said it raised 3 billion Australian dollars ($2.05 billion) by selling shares to institutional investors.
PARIS The euro zone countries are working to coordinate efforts to help Europe's auto industry along the lines of expected U.S. aid for its car sector, Luxembourg Prime Minster Jean-Claude Juncker said. France's CAC-40 gained 36.63 points, or 1.1 percent, to close at 3,505.75.
TOKYO The Nikkei 225 stock average ended up 5.8 percent, or 498.43 points, at 9,081.43, ending a two-session skid, as investors shrugged off gloomy economic data and focused instead on the weaker yen, China's new economic stimulus package and last week's late gains on Wall Street. Meanwhile, fresh data suggested a major decline in corporate spending. Japan's core machinery orders dropped 10.4 percent in the July-September quarter from the previous three months, matching the biggest plunge on record.
BEIJING China unveiled a $586 billion stimulus package Sunday in its biggest move to inoculate the world's fourth-largest economy against the global financial crisis. The Cabinet approved the plan to invest money in infrastructure and social welfare by the end of 2010. Some of the money will come from the private sector. Investors welcomed the announcement, and the benchmark Shanghai Composite Index surged 7.3 percent to 1,874.80. The Shenzhen Composite Index of China's smaller, second market gained 6.5 percent to 497.56.
MOSCOW Russia's finance minister, Alexei Kudrin, reiterated Moscow's call for reforming global financial institutions, saying in comments televised Monday that the International Monetary Fund was inadequate as a crisis manager.
HONG KONG The blue-chip Hang Seng Index gained 501.20, or 3.5 percent to 14,744.63 after China unveiled a $586 billion aid package.
SEOUL, South Korea Credit ratings agency Fitch Ratings lowered the sovereign credit rating outlooks for six emerging market economies: South Korea, Mexico, Russia, South Africa, Chile and Malaysia, to reflect higher risks to creditworthiness stemming from the global financial crisis and economic slowdown. South Korea's benchmark Kospi index rose 1.6 percent to 1,152.46 as Asian markets soared.
MUMBAI, India Sales of passenger vehicles in India fell by 9.1 percent in October, as high interest rates and tight consumer credit took their toll on what had been one of the world's fastest growing automobile markets, according to the Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, an industry group. The Sensex closed up 5.7 percent.
MADRID, Spain Banco Santander SA, the euro zone's largest bank by market capitalization, said it would raise 7.2 billion euros ($9.2 billion) in a share issue designed to protect it from the international financial turmoil. The bank insisted it is healthy, but its shares fell sharply on the news, down 5.17 percent at 7.93 euros ($10.12) in midday European trading. Spain's Ibex closed down 49.7 points at 9,293.8.
SAO PAULO, Brazil Big emerging nations should be allowed to join the powerful Group of Seven forum that has a large say in global economic policy, French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde said to French and Brazilian business executives. In market news, the Ibovespa stock index rose 0.3 percent to 36,776.27.
TAIPEI, Taiwan Taiwan's central bank cut the island's key lending rate for the fourth time in less than two months. Central Bank Governor Perng Fai-nan said the latest rate cut by a quarter of a percentage point to 3.125 percent was aimed at cushioning the effect of the global economic slowdown.
RIGA, Latvia Latvia's inflation in October decreased to an annual rate of 13.8 percent, the fifth straight month the indicator has fallen as economic growth is hurt by the global financial crisis. Despite the drop, Latvia continues to have the highest inflation in the 27-member European Union.
 Load-Date: November 11, 2008

 

End of Document
