

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
December 12, 2008 Friday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1759 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock-market activity around the world Friday:
BRUSSELS, Belgium EU leaders backed a 200 billion euros ($267 billion) economic-stimulus package to ward off recession in the region's 27 nations. British Prime Minister Gordon Brown said the EU had agreed unanimously to spend "1.5 percent of gross domestic product or around €200 billion" to brake shrinking growth that will shed jobs across the region. Several European nations are sliding into a recession and the 15 nations that share the euro have already seen two quarters of negative growth since the spring's second quarter. The final three months of the year aren't looking any better, according to industrial production figures published by EU statistics agency Eurostat on Friday. Meanwhile, European leaders agreed to stick to an ambitious plan to fight global warming through emissions cuts and renewable energy, and on ways to share the hefty costs of setting a global example. The plan, agreed to at an EU summit, lays out how the 27 member countries will cut carbon emissions by 20 percent by 2020.
TOKYO Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso announced a 23 trillion yen ($255 billion) stimulus package to shore up his country's economy, with measures to spur employment, encourage lending and inject capital into financial markets. The new package includes 10 trillion yen ($111 billion) in tax breaks and public financing, and provides for up to 13 trillion yen ($144 billion) to address the credit crunch, including capital injections for lenders and other financial institutions. The announcement comes on the heels of a 27 trillion yen in measures announced in October, which included expanded credits for small businesses and a cash payout to every household to spur spending. Aso is under pressure to show he can lead the country back to fiscal health. Before the announcement, the yen surged to a 13-year high against the dollar. The U.S. currency sank to 88.16 yen in afternoon trading in Tokyo, its lowest level since Aug. 2, 1995. A strong yen is especially painful for Japan's export-driven economy as it cuts into profits made abroad, even as slowing demand drags down sales. The benchmark Nikkei 225 stock average slid 5.6 percent to 8,235.87.
LONDON The British pound edged closer toward parity with the euro on Friday, hitting a record low for the fifth consecutive day on expectations of a deep and prolonged recession. The pound has slumped around 25 percent against the common European currency this year and touched 1.118 euros on Friday. Meanwhile, a British savings organization said Britons have been putting away less savings from their paychecks every autumn since 2005, and nearly half are planning to save even less this winter, according to its quarterly savings survey. In financial news, shares of Scottish bank HBOS PLC plunged 23 percent after the bank said its impairment charges on bad consumer and corporate loans had swelled to 5 billion pounds ($7.5 billion) for the year even as HBOS PLC shareholders voted overwhelmingly in favor of a takeover by British rival Lloyds TSB Group PLC. The FTSE 100 of leading British shares closed down 2.5 percent at 4,280.35
SEOUL, South Korea South Korea's central bank announced expanded currency-swap agreements with Japan and China. The move should further alleviate concerns about South Korea's banks, which have had a tough time rolling over international debts because of difficulty obtaining dollars amid the global credit crisis. The South Korean and Japanese central banks increased a bilateral swap facility to the equivalent of $20 billion. The Bank of Korea also said the country's economic growth is set to slow sharply in 2009, revising growth estimates down to 2 percent. It grew 5 percent in 2007. South Korea's export-oriented economy has been hit by the global slowdown, with exports falling sharply in November and domestic consumer spending weakening. South Korea's Kospi fell 4.4 percent to 1,103.82.
BEIJING China is rolling out new measures to reverse a worsening economic slump with interest-free loans to companies and possible steps to boost plunging auto sales and aid steelmakers, industry minister Li Yizhong said. The government will spend 15 billion yuan ($2.2 billion) to subsidize loans to companies to improve technology and cut energy use. Beijing might buy surplus steel to help producers as demand plummets and cut taxes to spur auto and real-estate sales, he said. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index dropped 3.8 percent, or 77.47 points, to close at 1,954.21, down 3.2 percent for the week. The Shenzhen Composite Index for China's smaller, second exchange lost 3.95 percent to 584.74. Hong Kong's Hang Seng index slid 5.5 percent to 14,758.39, while shares in Taiwan dropped 174.30 points, or 3.7 percent, to close at 4,481.27.
CANBERRA, Australia The government will pour 4.7 billion Australian dollars ($3.1 billion) into new infrastructure including road and rail works plus school expansions in a bid to create 32,000 jobs in a slowing economy. Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said the government's coffers would remain in surplus despite the spending over two years. He declined to say how large the surplus would be for the current fiscal year, which ends on June 30, 2009. The government remains hopeful that Australia will remain one of the few countries that avoids recession despite worsening global economic conditions. The S&P/ASX 200 index fell 2.4 percent to 3,510.4.
MOSCOW Russian news agencies quote a senior economic official as saying that Russia faces at least two quarters of economic decline and is therefore in recession. Deputy Economics Minister Andrei Klepach also reportedly said the economy will expand by less than the projected 6.8 percent this year. Not so fast, the Kremlin quickly countered.
MUMBAI, India India's industrial production contracted for the first time in 15 years in October. The index of industrial production shrank 0.4 percent, due in part to falling production of consumer goods. The weaker-than-expected data adds to growing skepticism that the government stimulus package announced over the weekend will prove effective.
BERLIN German Chancellor Angela Merkel will hold weekend talks with some 30 key ministers and financial experts on an economic strategy for 2009 in view of the global financial crisis. While no decisions are expected to come out of the talks, they aim to set the stage for further discussions scheduled for Jan. 5, when Merkel's grand coalition will consider further measures to help the economy. She has come under fire at home and abroad for failing to do enough to revive Europe's largest economy in the wake of the global financial crisis, despite presenting a 23 billion euros ($30.7 billion) government stimulus package. The DAX fell 2.2 percent to 4,663.37, while France's CAC-40 ended 2.8 percent lower at 3,213.60.
RIGA, Latvia After a marathon session that lasted nearly 20 hours and was accompanied by a large protest outside parliament, Latvian lawmakers approved an overhaul of next year's budget to qualify for a multibillion dollar bailout package from the International Monetary Fund and other lenders. Bureaucrats' salaries will be cut 15 percent and the value-added tax the cornerstone of national revenues raised from 18 percent to 21 percent. Critics slammed the measures as a death-knell to business and lower-income part of the population, while supporters said the austerity budget was unavoidable if Latvia is to remain solvent and meet its external obligations. Latvia, which for years boasted the EU's fastest growing economy, is likely to seek approximately 5 billion euros ($6.68 billion), and possibly more, when talks begin with international lenders.
POZNAN, Poland Negotiators at a U.N. climate conference broke through red tape and freed up millions of dollars to help poor countries adapt to increasingly severe droughts, floods and other effects of global warming. The decision in the final hours of the two-week conference could begin to release some $60 million (€45 million) within months, according to delegates and environmentalists following the closed-door talks.
BAGHDAD Iraq's finance minister urged government departments to cut down on expenses to offset the effects of the drop in world oil prices. Finance Minister Bayan Jabr said the Finance Ministry will review the $68.6 billion budget in early 2009 and order austerity measures if necessary to make up for the revenue shortfall. Revenues, more than 90 percent of which come from crude sales, are based on an oil price of $62.50 per barrel Oil is currently trading below $45 a barrel.
KIEV, Ukraine Ukraine is on the right track in implementing policies it had committed to when accepting an emergency loan to survive its worst economic crisis in a decade, said International Monetary Fund official Ceyla Pazarbasioglu. Ukraine has so far received more than a quarter of a $16.4 billion IMF rescue loan. The daily Kommersant Ukraine quoted her backing the central bank's policies to let the market determine exchange rates and to recapitalize major banks. Pazarbasioglu also countered speculation that financial regulators were misusing the IMF funds.
ULAN BATOR, Mongolia Mongolia launched an effort to stabilize its banks with injections of government money after jittery depositors staged a series of small bank runs and regulators seized one troubled institution. Parliament enacted a law Thursday authorizing the central bank to inject 455.1 billion tugrik ($362 million) into banks. It took effect today. Regulators were reviewing which of the country's 16 commercial banks need money.
MANILA, Philippines The largest mall in the Philippines and third biggest in the world opened in Manila, following completion of a six-floor expansion, amid hopes that domestic spending will cushion the effects of a global economic slowdown. The new floors make the existing complex, SM City North Edsa, the third largest globally with 4.5 million square feet under one roof. Domestic spending, fueled by billions of dollars sent back home by millions of overseas Filipino workers, accounts for about 70 percent of the Philippines' annual gross domestic product.
SOFIA, Bulgaria Bulgaria's annual inflation rate slowed to 8.8 percent in November, down from 11.2 percent in October, mainly due to a drop in oil prices. According to the harmonized index of consumer prices, used by the European Central Bank, prices dropped 0.1 percent on the month in November after a 0.4 percent increase in October.
 Load-Date: December 13, 2008

 

End of Document
