

A look at economic developments around the world
The Associated Press
November 14, 2008 Friday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1146 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Friday:
BRUSSELS, Belgium The 15 countries that use the euro are officially in a recession, the European Union said, as their economies shrank for a second straight quarter because of the global financial crisis and sinking demand. The euro zone shrank by 0.2 percent sequentially in both the second and third quarters; two successive quarters of negative growth is a common definition of a recession. Year-over-year, the euro-zone grew 0.8 percent in the third quarter and 1.4 percent in the second. As a whole, the 27-nation EU has so far escaped recession thanks to growth in eastern Europe. But it shrank 0.2 percent sequentially in the third quarter after zero growth in the second quarter. Year-over-year, third-quarter growth totaled 1.7 percent and second-quarter growth was 0.8 percent.
LONDON The number of Brits petitioning for bankruptcy jumped 7 percent in the third quarter, while company failures rose 13 percent, as the financial crisis hiked the cost of loans, Britain's Ministry of Justice reported. The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed only 63.76 points, or 1.5 percent, higher at 4,232.97. Earlier it had been some 170 points higher.
MOSCOW Russian stocks closed mixed, with one major exchange recovering some of the recent days' massive losses. The RTS jumped 3.9 percent to 644 points while the benchmark MICEX closed down 1 percent at 592.1 points.
WIESBADEN, Germany Car maker Adam Opel GmbH, a unit of General Motors Corp., said it will seek loan guarantees from German authorities as the financial crisis grips the European auto industry. The Economy Ministry in Berlin said it was already in contact with Opel, which employs approximately 25,000 workers in Germany. Meanwhile, the benchmark DAX ended up 60.72, or 1.3 percent, at 4,710.24. It had been up some 190 points before Wall Street's open.
PARIS Surprisingly, Finance Minister Christine Lagarde said France's gross domestic product grew by 0.14 percent in the third quarter, avoiding the technical definition of a recession. Meanwhile, the CAC-40 in France was up only 22.01 points, or 0.7 percent, at 3,291.47, way below the 90 point advance it had posted before the release of U.S. retail sales data.
TOKYO Japan's prime minister said the country is ready to lend up to $100 billion to the International Monetary Fund to support nations reeling from the global financial crisis. The pledge was among proposals outlined in a statement released ahead of a two-day Group of 20 meeting in Washington, during which Japan hopes to raise its clout as a global leader. Meanwhile, Japanese stocks sprang back to life, lifted by Wall Street's gains, a cheaper yen and hopes that the G-20 meeting will lead to progress in taming the global financial crisis. The benchmark Nikkei 225 stock average advanced 223.75 points, or 2.7 percent, to 8,462.39 for its first gain in four days.
SHANGHAI, China Chinese shares advanced on expectations of an economic boost from a government stimulus package, ending the week up nearly 14 percent. The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index rose 3.1 percent, or 58.82 points, to close at 1986.44. The Shenzhen Composite Index for China's smaller second market rose 4.4 percent to 545.34.
HONG KONG Hong Kong's economy slid into recession for the first time in five years. The territory's economic growth contracted by 0.5 percent in the July-September quarter, the second consecutive quarter of contraction after the economy shrank 1.4 percent in the second quarter. Still, the Hang Seng index advanced 321.31, or 2.4 percent, to 13,542.66.
MINSK, Belarus Cash-strapped Belarus will receive a $2 billion loan from Russia to help stabilize its struggling, Soviet-style economy, the government said. The deal was signed Thursday in Moscow by the two countries' finance ministers. Belarus has also asked the International Monetary Fund for a $2 billion loan.
MILAN, Italy Government data shows the Italian economy is officially in recession. Europe's fourth-largest economy recorded negative growth for the second consecutive quarter.
VIENNA, Austria OPEC plans to meet in a special session Nov. 29 to consult on the rapid erosion of the price of crude, said officials of the 13-member producer's cartel. The cartel will convene in Cairo on the sidelines of a previously planned meeting of Arab members of the group just weeks ahead of a Dec. 17 gathering in Oran, Algeria.
SOFIA, Bulgaria Bulgaria's economic growth slowed to a 5.6 percent rate in the third quarter of 2008 compared with a year earlier, and down from a 7.1 percent rate in the second quarter, the statistics service said.
SYDNEY, Australia Buoyed by a Wall Street rebound, Australia's stock market rose, led by energy companies. The benchmark S&P/ASX200 index closed up 1.37 percent, or 50.8 points, to 3,748.1. The move higher came after the market fell to a four-year low Thursday.
HELSINKI, Finland Nokia Corp., the world's largest cell phone maker, downgraded its outlook for industrywide mobile device volumes for the fourth quarter, citing pressure from the economic crisis and currency volatility.
GENEVA The money that immigrants send back home to their relatives could decline by up to 6 percent next year because of the global financial crisis, the U.N.'s trade chief said. He also said rich countries will reduce their investment in the developing world because of the global downturn.
SAO PAULO, Brazil The Ibovespa index fell 0.6 percent to close at 35,789, while Argentina's Merval rose 0.7 percent to 1,023.
WASHINGTON Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke pledged from a conference in Germany to work closely with other central banks to fix global financial problems and left open the door to a fresh interest rate cut to help brace the sinking U.S. economy. He warned that financial markets remain under "severe strain." Meanwhile, President George W. Bush, in a run-up to the Group of 20 international summit on the economic crisis this weekend, said Friday that reforms to improve oversight and transparency of the financial system were essential, but warned against too much government intervention in the markets. The Dow Jones industrials fell 337.93, or 3.82 percent, to 8,497.31, swamped by grim retail sales data.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia Malaysia will remove import duties on raw materials and intermediate goods for manufacturing and ease licensing requirements to help businesses cope with the global economic slowdown.
QUITO, Ecuador Bond markets are seeing Ecuador as increasingly risky now that the government plans to delay a $30.6 million interest payment on its foreign debt. The money is due Saturday. Finance minister Maria Elsa Viteri says Ecuador will opt for a 30-day grace period on the debt while it reviews the results of a presidential commission that found signs of lawbreaking in the contracts.
 Load-Date: November 15, 2008

 

End of Document
