

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
January 20, 2010 Wednesday 08:19 PM GMT

 Copyright 2010 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1322 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and activity in major stock markets around the world Wednesday:
HONG KONG China will slow its massive lending spree and step up monitoring of banks as it tries to prevent speculative bubbles in real estate and other assets while keeping the country's economic recovery on track, a top regulator said.
China's banking system is healthy despite last year's explosive growth in credit, and regulators can manage the risks, said Liu Mingkang, chairman of the Chinese Banking Regulatory Commission.
While China was also hit by the worldwide downturn, it has bounced back faster than economies elsewhere. Beijing hopes cooling the pace of lending will keep its economy growing without creating inflation and overheating. Other nations are counting on that growth and a healthy demand for their goods for their own recoveries.
Record bank lending in 2009 to support government spending on infrastructure and other projects under Beijing's stimulus package has led to fears of asset bubbles and huge bank losses if too many loans sour.
After handing out some 9.5 trillion yuan ($1.39 trillion) in loans last year, banks were expected to scale back lending to roughly 7.5 trillion ($1.09 trillion) in 2010, Liu said.
The total amount of loans will grow by as much as 18 percent in 2010 year over year, compared to nearly 32 percent in 2009, he said.
Worries over tightening drove markets lower across the globe. In Europe, the FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed down 1.7 percent, Germany's DAX slid 1.7 percent and the CAC-40 finished 2.1 percent lower.
Asian shares also slid. China's main Shanghai Composite Index dropped 2.9 percent, Hong Kong's Hang Seng index fell 1.8 percent, Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average lost 0.3 percent, Singapore's market was off 0.7 percent, Taiwan retreated 0.3 percent and Thailand's stock measure lost 0.8 percent.
South Korea's Kospi shrugged off the regional fall, advancing 0.2 percent and Australia's stock measure crept higher by 0.1 percent.
ATHENS, Greece Greece is starting to win over its European Union partners on its ability to tackle its debt crisis, but improving market sentiment will take time, Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou said.
Papaconstantinou said his EU colleagues "showed understanding" that Greece was aware of the severity of the situation and would implement austerity measures to slash the budget deficit by 2013.
With a debt at 113 percent of annual output in 2009 and a deficit more than four times the EU limit coupled with statistics the EU says have been repeatedly falsified the Greek crisis has undermined the euro and could have a knock-on effect on other weak European economies.
Furthermore, Greece now has to borrow from international markets at considerably higher rates than other eurozone members.
MIAMI Cash transfers worth nearly $1.9 billion annually to Haitians from relatives living in the U.S. and elsewhere have slowed to a trickle as companies struggle for access to currency and scramble to open locations damaged by the earthquake.
Money transfer firms said their businesses are now operating on a limited basis in Haiti, mostly outside of the capital of Port-au-Prince where damage was heaviest.
MUMBAI, India India's top three outsourcing companies are ramping up hiring and increasing pay as global corporations, mainly from the U.S., send more work offshore to cut costs as they emerge from the downturn.
Tata Consultancy Services, Infosys, and Wipro expanded their global workforces by an average of 5.1 percent last quarter, together adding 16,701 employees, company documents show an early sign that the Great Recession may ultimately benefit India as cost-conscious companies outsource more work, just as they did after the dot-com bust.
WASHINGTON The gap in productivity growth between the United States and Europe widened sharply as U.S. businesses were more aggressive in laying off workers and pushing their remaining employees to be more efficient, according to a business research group. Growth in productivity is the key factor in rising living standards.
In a new report, the Conference Board estimated that productivity the amount of output per hour of work rose in the United States by 2.5 percent in 2009 while productivity was falling by 1 percent on average in the euro area, the 16 European nations that use the euro currency.
LONDON Unemployment in the United Kingdom fell to 7.8 percent in the three months ending in November, down from 7.9 percent in the quarter through October as more people got part-time work but full-time employment fell in a sign of continued economic weakness.
The continuing high unemployment rate, combined with Tuesday's report of a record one-month jump in inflation, underline the fragility of an economy struggling to emerge from the deepest recession since 1921.
FRANKFURT The eurozone will see a gradual, bumpy recovery over the coming quarters and shouldn't subside into a so-called double dip, a senior official at the European Central Bank said.
Juergen Stark, a member of the ECB's executive board, said in a speech in Leipzig that the first half of the year probably will see more modest growth than the second half of 2009.
However, he said the 16-nation eurozone is unlikely to experience a new contraction, or double dip predicting instead "a gradual and bumpy economic recovery in the coming quarters."
Stark said there are no identifiable risks to price stability at present, but said growth in the global economy and commodity prices in particular must be closely watched.
UNITED NATIONS The United Nations forecast a fragile and uneven economic recovery in 2010 from the worst recession since World War II, with a global growth rate of 2.4 percent.
"The world economy is on the mend," the U.N. said in its annual economic forecast, with an increasing number of countries registering positive quarterly growth since the second quarter of 2009.
The organization warned, however, that conditions for sustained growth remained fragile and that a too-quick exit from government stimulus measures could cause a "double-dip" recession.
BRUSSELS The European Union's future economy commissioner complained about the high value of the Chinese currency against the euro, saying it was not acceptable that it should risk Europe's economic recovery.
Olli Rehn was the latest in a string of EU officials to try and pressure Beijing to allow the renminbi to rise against other currencies which would help foreigners export more to China and possibly cut the cost and reduce China's massive export flow to the rest of the world.
China shrugged off a November plea to let its currency appreciate in talks with policy makers from the 16-nation eurozone including European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet.
SINGAPORE Singapore's first casino-resort partially opened, a key part of a government plan to reduce reliance on manufacturing and brand the tightly controlled city-state as a cosmopolitan Asian capital.
DUBLIN More than 120 flights in and out of Ireland were canceled when air traffic controllers staged a four-hour walkout in a bid for higher pay a protest that elicited little support outside the trade-union movement.
Government and business leaders condemned the controllers' protest as selfish at a time when Ireland is battling record debts, cutting pay and slashing jobs.
GENEVA The list of heads of state or government will be thinner this year at the World Economic Forum in the Swiss Alpine resort of Davos, where 2,500 leading figures in business and politics will gather to chart a way forward amid rising global unemployment and a sluggish recovery from recession.
Organizers said over 30 presidents and prime ministers will attend the five-day meeting in Davos that starts next week.
But the forum will have only a scant presence from the administration of President Barack Obama, who is involved in a political battle over health care reform at home.
 Load-Date: January 21, 2010

 

End of Document
