

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
March 26, 2009 Thursday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1118 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Thursday:
PARIS France will limit or ban bonuses and stock options for executives at companies bailed out with taxpayer money, an official announced, as the government scrambled to calm public outrage at what some see as the greed that caused the global financial crisis. The measures are a response to rising discontent at executives cashing in bonus checks even as their companies are rescued with billions of euros (dollars) in public funds.
In one example, the top executives at natural gas and electricity company GdF Suez decided to give up their stock options, after the payouts prompted a strike by port workers that disrupted activity at the company's two liquefied natural gas terminals in France. In the country's latest sign of public anger at company bosses and the management of the financial crisis, terminal workers from the powerful CGT union called the strike to protest the payout of 1.13 million stock options to the company's two top executives.
Meanwhile, French workers released a manager of U.S. manufacturer 3M who had been held hostage for two days in a labor dispute over layoffs, the company said. Yet rising French unemployment and public outrage at employers and executives with high bonuses remained unabated.
In markets, France's CAC 40 slipped 0.2 percent to 2,887.68
BELGRADE, Serbia Serbia will get a €3 billion ($4.1 billion) bailout loan from the International Monetary Fund as its economy struggles to stay afloat in the global financial turmoil. The two-year standby deal was reached during "difficult" talks that started March 18, said Albert Jaeger, the IMF's mission chief for Serbia. He said Serbia has a few weeks to revise its 2009 budget and adopt legislative changes to implement a series of agreed fiscal measures before the proposed loan could be presented to the Fund's Executive Board in May for the final approval.
TOKYO Morgan Stanley and Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group laid a major cornerstone for their nascent global partnership, unveiling plans to merge their Japanese brokerage units into a new securities company gunning for industry dominance. Japan's biggest banking group, known as MUFG, will control the combined entity with a 60 percent stake. New York-based Morgan Stanley will own the rest of the yet-unnamed firm, expected to be the country's second-largest brokerage by non-consolidated net revenue. Since MUFG gave Morgan Stanley a $9 billion lifeline in October in the wake of Lehman Brothers' collapse, the two companies have been examining ways to propel their alliance forward even as the world economy fell on hard times. Japan may be mired in its deepest recession since the end of World War II, but clients still need sound investment banking services, MUFG President Nobuo Kuroyanagi said.
Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average rose 156.34 points, or 1.8 percent, to 8,636.33.
BEIJING The decline in China's growth has slowed and signs point to recovery following Beijing's rapid response to the global crisis, the country's chief central banker said. The comments, in an essay on the bank's Web site, reflected official Chinese confidence ahead of a April 2 meeting of world leaders in London where Beijing is expected to demand more influence in global financial institutions. Gov. Zhou Xiaochuan didn't specify which economic indicators were improving.
In markets, Shanghai's index jumped 3.1 percent, while Hong Kong's market led Asia higher, with the Hang Seng vaulting 486.87 points, or 3.6 percent, to 14,108.98.
Elsewhere in Asia, South Korea's Kospi climbed 1.2 percent to 1,243.80, Australia's benchmark added 1 percent and Singapore's key stock measure advanced 4 percent. India's Sensex rose 3.5 percent to 10,003.10.
BRASILIA, Brazil The Brazilian government says unemployment rose to 8.5 percent in February amid the global crisis, its highest rate in 10 months. Analysts have been expecting unemployment to rise in Latin America's largest nation as companies lay off employees because of the financial crisis.
Meanwhile, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, visiting Brazil as part of a three-continent tour to drum up support for a coordinated global economic plan, said the world's top economies need to create a $100 billion fund to stimulate global trade. Brown said the world's richest nations, along with multilateral lenders and the private sector, must act immediately to turn back the global crisis.
In markets, Brazil's Ibovespa index gained 1.4 percent to 42,400 in afternoon trading. Elsewhere in Latin America, Mexico's shares were up 1.8 percent at 20,636, while Argentina's Merval jumped 3 percent to 1,166.
BRUSSELS European Central Bank vice president Lucas Papademos said that the 16 countries that use the euro may briefly see deflation this year. Euro-zone inflation was 1.2 percent in February, well below the ECB's guideline of just under 2 percent.
KUWAIT CITY Kuwait's Cabinet has approved a $5.15 billion economic stimulus bill to help the oil-rich country weather the global crisis, the finance minister said. The move bypassed Kuwait's parliament, which the ruler dissolved last week, citing abuse of democracy and stalling development. The plan aims to help struggling investment companies and offer bank loan guarantees.
FRANKFURT German consumer confidence fell for the first time since October, but remained relatively robust, as worries about unemployment amid the economic crisis offset optimism about government stimulus plans. The Nuremberg-based GfK research group said its forward-looking indicator for consumer confidence in April is forecasting a value of 2.4 points, down slightly from a revised value of 2.5 points in March. That is the first drop since right after the collapse of U.S. investment bank Lehman Brothers, when the financial crisis took a turn for the worst. However, the overall level of the index remains relatively strong despite the recession, the GfK said.
Germany's DAX rose 0.9 percent to 4,259.37.
LONDON Retail sales in Britain fell 1.9 percent from January to February, pushing the annual gain to its lowest in nearly 14 years, official data showed.
Britain's FTSE 100 closed up 0.6 percent to 3,925.20.
MOSCOW A senior official said that Russia may decide to borrow abroad to cover its $87 billion budget deficit, rather than tapping its rainy-day fund.
VIENNA Austria's Volksbank AG said it would sign up for a state capital injection worth €1 billion ($1.36 billion). Volksbank is not the first Austrian bank to take advantage of a government stability package. Others that have sought similar capital injections include the Erste Group Bank AG and Hypo Alpe Adria. More are expected to follow suit.
 Load-Date: March 27, 2009

 

End of Document
