

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
September 23, 2009 Wednesday 04:54 PM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1081 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and activity in major stock markets around the world Wednesday:
BEIJING A deputy governor of China's central bank proposed the creation of a multinational sovereign wealth fund to help developing countries, in a report released ahead of this week's Group of 20 summit.
"Considerations can be (given) to setting up a 'supra-sovereign wealth investment fund' to help channel capital inflow into developing world so that these countries can serve as new engines in global recovery," said the official, Hu Xiaolian, in a paper on the G-20's Web site.
The paper gave no details of how such a fund might work. But Beijing has called repeatedly for a more diverse global financial structure, with a greater voice for developing countries, and a new global currency to reduce reliance on the dominant U.S. dollar.
Meanwhile, China is pressing for a bigger voice in the International Monetary Fund and says Group of 20 leaders at their Pittsburgh summit should start making good on promises to give developing countries more IMF votes.
The G-20 has agreed in principle but could face an obstacle: European governments, which hold a big share of the IMF board seats and are reluctant to accept changes that might reduce their own status in the IMF.
In markets, Chinese shares fell on investor concern that planned initial public offerings might reduce market liquidity.
The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index lost 54.83 points, or 1.9 percent, to close at 2,842.72. The Shenzhen Composite Index for China's smaller second exchange dropped by 2.9 percent to 987.66.
BRUSSELS The European Union's new economic watchdog plans to use "moral pressure" instead of regulatory authority to crack down on countries posing major risks to Europe's economy, the European Commission said.
The EU's executive body laid out a new financial oversight structure that it wants EU governments to back to prevent a repeat of last year's banking crisis. Still, it is shying away from creating forceful new regulators who could unilaterally overrule member states.
The commission says it wants risks in the financial system to be identified and resolved at an earlier stage. It also wants EU countries to cooperate better in emergency situations and clearer rules set out for solving disputes between financial supervisors in different countries.
LONDON Britain's economy may be emerging from recession, but with bank lending still weak and unemployment rising "there could be false dawns," the Bank of England said in the minutes to a meeting earlier this month.
Increases in house and stock market prices and improved economic confidence could "mark the start of a virtuous upward spiral for the economy," the rate-setters said at their Sept. 10 policy meeting, when they unanimously left interest rates at a record low of 0.5 percent and decided to continue a program boosting money supply.
But while the short-term prospects had improved the economy may have emerged from recession in the third quarter the bank said it was still too early to predict a full recovery.
In markets, Britain's FTSE 100, Germany's DAX and France's CAC 40 all closed down 0.1 percent.
PITTSBURGH Bolstering a wobbly global economy, restraining greedy bankers and plotting a future course for sustainable growth the leaders of the world's major economies have no shortage of items on their to-do list when they meet Thursday and Friday.
The problem is that with the global economy on the mend, they could encounter waning enthusiasm to launch bold initiatives, especially if those efforts would limit their political maneuvering room back home.
President Barack Obama is already facing the likelihood that one of his major goals will be watered down. He wants the G-20 to agree to a new global compact to avoid the dangerous imbalances that many believe played a major contributing role in pushing the world into a severe and prolonged recession that has cost millions of lost jobs and wiped out trillions of dollars in wealth.
WELLINGTON, New Zealand New Zealand's economy grew slightly in the quarter ending in June, the first expansion in a year and a half and a possible sign that the country's longest recession in decades is bottoming out, the government said.
The economy posted growth of less than 0.1 percent in the three months ending June 30, surprising economists who had predicted a 0.2 percent contraction. The economy contracted for the previous five quarters.
NEW DELHI India urged the G-20 summit to come out strongly against protectionism in trade while continuing reform of international financial institutions to give greater voice to developing countries.
The summit should also support an increase in the capital of multilateral development banks to finance the massive infrastructure needs of emerging economies, said Prime Minister Manmohan Singh before leaving for the United States to participate in the meeting this weekend.
WARSAW, Poland Poland's jobless rate stood at 10.8 percent in August, unchanged from the previous month.
The Central Statistical Office said nearly 1.69 million people in the nation of 38 million were registered as unemployed at the end of August.
HONG KONG World stock markets sought direction as a monthslong rally sputtered and investors waited for clues from the U.S. Federal Reserve about the global recovery's strength. Hong Kong's Hang Seng index fell 0.5 percent; South Korea's Kospi dropped 0.4 percent; Australia's benchmark gained 1.5 percent; New Zealand's market rose 0.2; Taiwan fell 1.9 percent; India's Sensex was down 0.1 percent; Singapore's index was fractionally higher.
BRATISLAVA, Slovakia The Slovak economy will contract by 5.7 percent this year due to the effects of the global economic crisis on its crucial export sector, the finance ministry said in a report.
The figures from its latest estimate were, however, less pessimistic than previous estimates of a 6.2 percent decline.
STOCKHOLM Sweden's agriculture minister has scheduled an extra meeting with his European Union counterparts on Oct. 5 to discuss the crisis in the European milk market.
While the EU strongly subsidizes agriculture, milk farmers say world prices have sunk so low they are having to sell their milk at about half its production cost.
The crisis has driven many EU farmers into a "milk strike," with thousands refusing to deliver milk to factories. But because cows have to be milked every day anyway, some farmers in the 27-nation bloc have been dumping the overflow in protest.
 Load-Date: September 24, 2009

 

End of Document
