

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
April 21, 2009 Tuesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1020 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Tuesday:
LONDON Tesco PLC, Britain's largest retailer, reported that full-year profit rose 2 percent as revenue climbed despite the global economic slump. Still, the company reported losses at its fledgling U.S. venture.
Meanwhile, the Bank of England's target measure of inflation fell to a one-year low in March but remained higher than the bank had anticipated as recently as February.
In other news, Britain won European Union regulatory approval to guarantee up to 50 billion pounds ($73 billion) of banks' bad assets, part of the government's program urging banks to step up lending.
The FTSE 100 of leading British shares closed down 0.1 percent at 3,987.46.
HONG KONG Well-known economist Nouriel Roubini, one of the few experts to foresee the current global crisis, said a "suckers rally" in stock markets would fade as the U.S. economy continues to wither and the financial system suffers unexpected shocks. Roubini, a professor at New York University's business school and former adviser at the U.S Treasury Department, also said he expected China's economy to grow up to 5.5 percent this year, missing the government's 8 percent target.
Hopes the world economy will stage a faster recovery this year have fueled a six-week rise in global markets. But Roubini was doubtful and predicted markets would test the lows seen in March.
The Hang Seng shed 465.02 points, or 3 percent, to 15,285.89.
Elsewhere in Asia, Shanghai's stock measure retreated 0.9 percent and South Korea's Kospi ended almost flat.
TOKYO Japan will submit a record extra budget to finance its massive stimulus package aimed at lifting the world's second-largest economy out of the deepest recession since World War II. Finance Minister Kaoru Yosano said the government plans to issue bonds worth 10.82 trillion ($110 billion) yen to help finance the spending.
Japan is grappling with an unprecedented collapse in global demand. Its economy shrank an alarming annual 12.1 percent in the October-December quarter, marking the severest contraction since the oil shock of 1974.
Meanwhile, the country's biggest auto maker, Toyota Motor Corp. expects its vehicle production in Japan to fall to the lowest in more than three decades this fiscal year, and below the level needed to maintain its full-time work force, a media report said.
Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average lost 213.42 points, or 2.4 percent, to 8,711.33.
TORONTO Canada's central bank cut its trendsetting interest rate by a quarter point to a record-low 0.25 percent and says it will likely stay there through June 2010. The Bank of Canada said global recession has intensified and they expect the recession in Canada will be deeper than anticipated.
SYDNEY Australia has followed the rest of the world into a recession, the central bank chief said. But Reserve Bank of Australia Governor Glenn Stevens emphasized that "sensible" policies remained in place and that the government had not been forced to bailout the banking sector.
Australia's main index fell 2.4 percent.
MUMBAI, India India's central bank cut key interest rates and downgraded its growth forecast as the global financial crisis takes a bigger-than-expected toll on Asia's third-largest economy.
The Sensex fell 0.7 percent to 10,898.11.
FRANKFURT German investor confidence rose to its highest level in nearly two years in April, reflecting cautious expectations that the economy may recover this year with the help of government stimulus packages, said the closely watched ZEW survey. The monthly index rose for a sixth consecutive month to 13 points in April from minus 3.5 points in March.
Meanwhile, the German government plans to put legislation in place soon that would allow banks to rid their balance sheets of assets that have turned sour in the financial crisis, officials said. The government has been pondering for weeks how to go about moving the assets off balance sheets, most likely into a series of so-called "bad banks."
Germany's DAX rose 0.3 percent, to 4,501.63, while elsewhere in Europe, France's CAC-40 rose a miniscule 0.26 point to 2,969.66.
ZURICH Credit Suisse said it will pay some 50 million Swiss francs ($43 million) to about 1,700 clients whose money was invested with the failed U.S. investment bank Lehman Brothers.
CAIRO Saudi Basic Industries Corp., one of the world's largest chemical makers, posted its first quarterly loss since 2001, a global recession-driven plunge the company attributed to slumping demand for petrochemicals and plastics.
Meanwhile, Kingdom Holding Co., the global investment company headed by Saudi billionaire Prince AlWaleed bin Talal said its net profits fell 83.4 percent in the first quarter of 2009. The company attributed the results to a decline in profits from its international and local investments as well as a downturn in the hotel industry.
STOCKHOLM Sweden's central bank slashed its key interest rate by half a percentage point to a historic low of 0.5 percent in a bid to support production and employment through the global financial crisis.
BOGOTA Colombia is seeking a one-year, $10.4 billion credit line from the International Monetary Fund, becoming the third country this month to tap the new offer in a bid to boost confidence in its slowing economy. Colombia's Finance Ministry indicated it would not likely draw on the line, but considers it prudent to have the resources on hand should the global economic crisis make them necessary.
The IMF approved a similar $47 billion flexible credit line for Mexico last week and is now reviewing a $20.5 billion request from Poland.
DUBLIN Ratings agency Moody's warned it soon could cut its credit grades on the government-insured debts of all six locally-owned banks in Ireland, citing growing concerns about the country's ability to keep funding its own debts. The action came on a day when Ireland's debt managers successfully sold two new bond issues worth 1 billion euros ($1.3 billion) the latest effort to keep drumming up enough funds on international markets to overcome the nation's rapid descent into deep deficit spending.
 Load-Date: April 22, 2009

 

End of Document
