

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
May 12, 2009 Tuesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1093 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Tuesday:
SHANGHAI China's exports slumped for the sixth straight month amid warnings that weak overseas demand was hindering a recovery, even as government spending helped boost factory investment. The 22.6 percent drop in exports in April from a year earlier, to $91.9 billion, was bigger than March's 17 percent drop and larger than forecasts. It suggests China's trade sector has seen scant relief from the prolonged drought in demand brought on by the global downturn.
In stocks, Hong Kong's Hang Seng edged up 65.69 percent, or 0.4 percent, to 17,153.64 and Shanghai's benchmark added 1.5 percent to 2,618.17. Many investors looked past the export decline figures and focused on other data pointing to huge increases in investments in property, factories and other fixed assets, helped by a flood of government-directed stimulus.
Elsewhere in Asia, Taiwan stocks lost 3.2 percent and South Korea's Kospi ended 0.8 percent lower at 1,403.51.
LONDON A flurry of economic data has raised hopes that the worst of the recession could be over in Britain, showing a jump in retail sales, a strong rise in new homebuyer inquiries, a smaller than expected rise in jobless claims and a slowing rate of decline in manufacturing output. The raft of positive news was bolstered by a favorable survey from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, although that agency and some analysts warned against celebrating too early.
Separately, the International Monetary Fund said Europe's severe economic downturn is likely to last until the second half of 2010 and could persist for longer if governments across the continent don't do more to shore up fragile financial institutions and coordinate their response to the recession. In its latest update for Europe, the IMF continues to forecast that the 16 nations that use the euro currency will shrink by 4.2 percent this year alone. The IMF said Europe's emerging economies primarily those of the former Soviet bloc will likely shrink by 4.9 percent this year with a return to growth of 0.7 percent in 2010.
The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed down 9.96 points, or 0.2 percent, at 4,425.54, with banking stocks giving up some of their recent gains in line with their counterparts in the U.S.
TOKYO Japanese electronics makers booked big losses in the past fiscal year. Hitachi posted the biggest ever annual loss by a Japanese manufacturer, and warning of more red ink, said it doesn't expect the global economy to recover until next year at the earliest. Rival NEC Corp. also booked big losses for the 12 months through March but vowed to return to profitability as soon as this year.
Meanwhile, auto maker Toyota Motor Corp. said it will suspend several production lines at an engine factory in central Japan to adjust its output to slowing demand, while Nissan Motor Co., Japan's No. 3 automaker, reported a 233.7 billion yen ($2.4 billion) annual net loss, its first yearly loss in a decade but expects the red ink to lessen in the current fiscal year. Mazda, Japan's fifth biggest automaker, also reported a 71.5 billion yen ($733 million) loss for the fiscal year ended March 31, as sales plunged 27 percent.
Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average closed down 153.37 points, or 1.6 percent, to 9,298.61.
LUXEMBOURG Steel workers attacked ArcelorMittal's Luxembourg headquarters Tuesday during the company's annual shareholders meeting, setting off smoke bombs and breaking through the front door to protest temporary layoffs during the economic slump.
Some of the 1,000 workers from Belgium and France hurled cobblestones and steel fencing at the building, smashing windows and tearing off a steel molding from the ornate 1920s exterior.
Riot police lined up to protect the head office of the world's biggest steel maker. One protester broke into the building and was immediately captured by police. Between 20 and 30 others fought police at the entrance, waiting several hours for him to be released.
BRUSSELS Europe's aviation agency, Eurocontrol, said the decline in air traffic across the continent will continue in 2009 and a recovery cannot be expected before next year. The global economic crisis caused an 8 percent fall in European air traffic during the first three months of this year compared to the same period in 2008, it said.
Meanwhile, the European Union ordered a major restructuring of some of Germany's most powerful state-owned banks, forcing WestLB to shrink its business by half and opening a probe into BayernLB that could require it to slim its operations. The EU is seeking to wean the banks off repeated state aid injections and direct their activities away from the high-risk ventures that put them into trouble from the outset of the financial meltdown.
PARIS EADS, the parent company of planemaker Airbus, said that first quarter profit fell 40 percent as airlines delayed orders and deliveries.
Meanwhile, France's CAC-40 fell 17.57 points, or 0.5 percent, to 3,231.1 and Germany's DAX declined 12.80 points, or 0.3 percent, to 4,854.11.
MADRID Spain's prime minister unveiled new rescue measures to help the economy out of recession, including tax cuts for small businesses, aid to encourage car purchases and a plan to reduce a huge stock of unsold new homes. But the package faced hostile opposition parties, with some lawmakers questioning the measures' benefits as well as premier Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero's credibility.
CANBERRA, Australia The government released a plan to shield jobs from the global downturn through wide-ranging infrastructure spending, which would plunge Australia into record debt.
Australia's benchmark index lost 1.2 percent.
CAIRO The roughly $700 billion Islamic finance market is expected to "resume its rapid growth" after taking a drubbing last year because of the global financial meltdown, credit rating agency Standard & Poor's said. While global sukuk issuances fell by over 50 percent in 2008, to $14.9 billion, the outlook for Islamic finance remains strong and the market is expected to rebound, S&P said. Sukuk are bonds structured to avoid paying interest, in line with Islamic law.
MUMBAI, India India's industrial production fell an unexpected 2.3 percent in March, the largest drop in at least 16 years, the government said.
BASEL, Switzerland Swiss pharmaceuticals company Roche Holding AG said Tuesday it is donating 5.65 million packets of Tamiflu, one of two anti-viral drugs known to be effective against swine flu, to the World Health Organization.
 Load-Date: May 13, 2009

 

End of Document
