

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
May 15, 2009 Friday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1544 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Friday:
BERLIN The economy in the 16 countries that use the euro shrank by a massive 2.5 percent in the first quarter as a global recession sapped the industrial exports that Europe relies on for growth and jobs. Output in Germany, the euro zone's biggest economy, plunged 3.8 percent as demand for its cars and factory machinery collapsed. It is the country's biggest economic contraction since at least 1970.
Separately, embattled German retailer Arcandor AG said Friday that it will seek government loan guarantees to the tune of €650 million ($883 million).
Germany's DAX closed down a bare 0.02 percent at 4,737.50.
TOKYO Panasonic Corp. swung deep into the red last fiscal year, joining the expanding club of big Japanese brands shellshocked by their rapid descent from cash cow to money loser. The world's biggest plasma TV maker reported a 378.96 billion yen ($4 billion) loss for the fiscal year ended March its first loss in seven years and expects to stay in the red in the current year. It is the latest among a score of bellwether brands in Japan releasing grim results as the world's second-biggest economy gets battered by the unprecedented slump in global demand.
Top Japanese banks are also struggling. Mizuho Financial Group Inc., Japan's second-largest bank, and its smaller rival Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group Inc., or SMFG, stumbled to steep annual losses. The two have been hit by bad loans and plunging share prices, but said they expect to turn a profit this fiscal year.
Meanwhile, Japanese machinery orders turned lower again in March, suggesting that companies remain wary of spending even amid emerging signs that the world's second-largest economy has bottomed.
Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average gained 171.29 points, or 1.9 percent, to 9,265.02.
BEIJING China urged its banks to be careful about how they dole out a flood of credit, while promising new help for exporters and other companies hamstrung by the economic slowdown. The central bank appealed to banks to "ensure the loans go into the real economy to meet needs for real economic development." The notice came as China's Commerce Ministry and other government agencies promised fresh help for exporters suffering from a collapse in overseas demand. China's foreign direct investment fell in April for a seventh month, dropping 22.5 percent to $5.89 billion as companies cut back amid the global financial crisis.
The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index added 5.38 points, or 0.2 percent, to 2,645.26. It ended the week up 0.7 percent, the third straight week of gains. Taiwan's market rose 2 percent.
PARIS France is suffering its longest recession since 1949 as manufacturing and exports continue to be hit hard by the global economic slowdown, the national statistics agency said. The euro zone's second largest economy contracted by 1.2 percent in the first three months of the year compared to the previous quarter, the INSEE statistics agency said. The agency also slashed its estimate for the third quarter of last year, saying the economy shrank rather than grew during the period, putting the country in a technical recession.
The CAC-40 in France rose 12.76 points, or 0.4 percent, to 3,169.05.
MEXICO CITY Investors were pessimistic in Latin America, sending shares down on most of the region's stock markets. The IPC index in Mexico decreased 0.3 percent to close at 23,342. The dip came after Mexico's central bank cut its key lending rate by three-quarters of a point, seeking to spur business activity in an economy already in a recession from a drop in exports to the U.S. and the national shutdown to curb swine flu. Brazil's benchmark Ibovespa index fell 0.9 percent to 39,007, Colombia's IGBC index decreased 0.3 percent to 8,965, and Argentina's Merval index was down 0.7 percent to 1,439. Chile's IPSA index bucked the trend, rising 1.5 percent to 2,963.
RIGA, Latvia Previously high-flying economies in Eastern Europe are sinking fast during the recession, with Latvia and Slovakia suffering particularly badly with the collapse in world trade and the end of the era of cheap credit. European Union statistics showed the two countries contracted by a massive 11.2 percent in the first quarter of 2009 from the previous three month period. If that rate continues for the rest of the year, the pair would see the value of their respective economies nearly halve.
LONDON An influential committee of lawmakers urged regulators to rein in a bonus culture in Britain's banks which encouraged excessive risk-taking, and scolded compensation committees as "cozy cartels" that approved fat pay for less than stellar work. The report from the Treasury Committee on reform of governance and pay in the financial sector concluded that regulators are still not tackling the issue of bankers' pay as a priority.
Separately, data said Britain's economy shrank by 1.9 percent in the first quarter.
Meanwhile, Barclays PLC said it has received several expressions of interest in buying all or part of its Global Investment business, potentially derailing an earlier agreement to sell its iShares business. Media reports had said the bank was negotiating a potential $10 billion sale of Global Investors to New York-based BlackRock Inc., which manages $1.28 trillion in assets. Last month, Barclays agreed to sell iShares, a part of Barclays Global Investors, to CVC Capital Partners for $4.4 billion.
The FTSE 100 index of leading British shares closed 0.3 percent lower at 4,348.11.
SINGAPORE Singapore state investment company Temasek sold its entire stake in Bank of America Corp., a move that likely added to large losses last year from its investments in U.S. and European banks. Temasek held 188.8 million Bank of America shares in January, worth about $2.6 billion, after it converted a 13.7 percent stake in Merrill Lynch & Co. Bank of America bought Merrill Lynch in January.
Separately, the fall in Singapore retail sales worsened in March as shoppers cut back on spending amid a deep recession. The statistics department said retail sales fell 7.3 percent from a year earlier following a 5.5 percent fall in February.
HONG KONG Hong Kong's economy shrank 7.8 percent in the first quarter, its largest decline since the Asian financial crisis a decade ago, the government said, as it forecast a deeper downturn. With the economy slammed by a plunge in global demand, the territory's government more than doubled its forecast for the severity of the recession this year.
Hong Kong's Hang Seng added 249.01, or 1.5 percent, to 16,790.70.
MOSCOW Russia's economy shrank by a staggering 23.2 percent in the first three months of the year compared with the previous quarter, as the country's industry buckled under the pressures of the global economic crisis, government figures showed. Russia's economic output declined by 9.5 percent compared with a year earlier.
Meanwhile, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev harshly criticized senior ministers for failing to diversify the country's economy away from oil and gas production. Medvedev said that Russian companies spend "shockingly low" amount on modernizing their aging production facilities, adding that productivity of labor at Russian plants is just a quarter of that in the United States.
Separately, about 100 workers of a Russian Ford Motor Co. assembly plant protested the introduction of a four-day working week amid the slumping demand for cars.
OSLO Norway will spend more of its oil wealth this year to help stimulate the economy and create jobs in what the finance minister called the most expansive national budget in 30 years.
ANKARA, Turkey Unemployment in Turkey climbed to 16.1 percent in February. The country now has about 3.8 million unemployed, the Turkish Statistics Institute said.
CARACAS, Venezuela President Hugo Chavez's government seized temporary control of a Venezuelan pasta-processing plant owned by U.S. food giant Cargill Inc., arguing the company broke regulations on food items subject to price controls.
SEOUL, South Korea South Korea's economy is showing encouraging signs of recovery but prospects for a full-fledged revival remain cloudy, the country's financial regulator said.
South Korea's Kospi edged up 0.8 percent.
MANILA, Philippines Filipino workers sent home a record $1.5 billion in March, up 3.1 percent from a year ago, as demand for overseas labor remained steady despite the global economic crisis, the central bank said. Nearly 10 percent of the country's 90 million people work abroad many as nurses, maids, engineers, construction workers and seamen.
SYDNEY Debt-laden miner Rio Tinto Ltd. said it remains committed to a $19.5 billion deal with China's Chinalco, pouring cold water on market speculation it might be backing away from the tie-up. The comments came in response to a request from the Australian Securities Exchange to try to explain a plunge in the company's share price this week as rumors swirled that the Chinalco deal might be off.
Australia's index gained 1.3 percent.
JAKARTA, Indonesia Indonesia's economy clocked its weakest performance in five years in the first quarter of 2009, slowing to annual growth of 4.4 percent as the global financial crisis hit exports, the statistics bureau said.
 Load-Date: May 16, 2009

 

End of Document
