

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
June 4, 2009 Thursday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1146 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and stock market activity around the world Thursday:
FRANKFURT The European Central Bank kept its main interest rate unchanged at a historic low of 1 percent amid a deeper than anticipated recession. The move was in line with expectations. ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet stressed that the current economic picture remains difficult and the ECB lowered its growth forecast for next year. The ECB also provided more details on its plans to pump some 60 euros billion into the banking system through purchases of covered bonds.
Germany's DAX closed up 0.2 percent, at 5,064.80.
BERLIN GM Europe's president hopes that carmaker Opel will make a profit before 2013, the target that its prospective new investor has set, according to an interview. Magna International Inc. Chairman Frank Stronach predicted General Motors Corp.'s main European unit would break even in three years and turn a profit in four years. Magna hopes to complete by September a deal under which it and state-controlled Russian lender Sberbank will take a majority stake in Opel.
LONDON The Bank of England kept official interest rates at a record low of 0.5 percent and said it would press on with its policy of increasing the money supply but did not expand that program further. The bank's decision at the end of its monthly two-day rate-setting meeting represents a cautious stance, with early but tentative signs of an economic recovery on the horizon.
House prices in Britain rose 2.6 percent in May, the biggest jump in more than two years, the nation's biggest mortgage lender said, boosting hopes that the recession may have bottomed out.
Britain's FTSE 100 index ended 0.1 percent higher at 4,386.94 despite ongoing uncertainty about the future of Prime Minister Gordon Brown.
Separately, Rio Tinto PLC said it is "pursuing a range of options" to shore up its debt-laden balance sheet amid growing speculation that the Anglo-Australian mining company is going to walk away from a $19.5 billion deal with China's Chinalco. Shares in Rio Tinto dropped 7 percent in London trade on the reports that Rio Tinto could instead launch a multibillion dollar rights issue to solve its debt problems and potentially restart talks with rival and former suitor BHP Billiton.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia The International Air Transport Association called for more liberalization to bolster the global airline industry, which is expected to lose more than $4.7 billion this year because of falling cargo and passenger traffic. IATA Director-General Giovanni Bisignani said airlines are facing an "emergency situation" and should be given greater commercial freedom to serve global markets and consolidate. He said 50 major airlines reported $3.3 billion in net losses in the first quarter of 2009 alone.
TORONTO Canada's central bank kept its key interest rate unchanged at a historic low of 0.25 percent and said the rapid rise of the Canadian dollar is threatening the country's economic recovery.
TOKYO Japanese companies slashed spending at a record pace in the first quarter, hurt by a severe slump in global demand that drained corporate pocketbooks. Investment in plants and equipment excluding software tumbled 25.4 percent from a year earlier, the Ministry of Finance said. The figure was better than expected but surpassed the previous record decline of 23 percent posted in late 1962.
Japan's benchmark Nikkei 225 stock average, green over the last six sessions, lost 0.8 percent to 9,668.96. Elsewhere in Asia, Hong Kong's Hang Seng shed 0.4 percent to 18,502.77. Shanghai's benchmark index fell after four days of gains, giving up 0.4 percent to 2,767.24. South Korea's Kospi swooned 2.6 percent to 1,378.14. Benchmarks in Australia and Taiwan were off about 2 percent, while India's Sensex rose 0.5 percent.
AMSTERDAM ING Groep NV, the Dutch bank and insurer, said it will exit 10 of the 48 countries where it operates and confirmed plans to raise at least 6 billion euros ($8.5 billion) within five years by selling assets. Like many big financial services companies, ING has been cutting costs, jobs and selling businesses since its share price plummeted amid solvency worries last year.
MOSCOW Russia's Central Bank cut its key interest rate by half a percentage point to 11.5 percent the third time since April it has slashed borrowing costs to help its economy through recession. Deputy Chairman Alexei Ulyukayev said further rate cuts were possible this year, according to Russian news agencies. But he also sounded positive about prospects of the economy picking up.
Separately, a senior EU official said Russia could complete talks with the European Union on joining the World Trade Organization by the end of 2009, potentially paving the way for official entry next year.
PARIS Unemployment in mainland France rose sharply in the first quarter, reaching 8.7 percent of the active population as the euro zone's second-largest economy suffers through its longest recession since the 1940s.
France's CAC-40 index was 0.1 percent higher at 3,312.03.
REYKJAVIK, Iceland Iceland's central bank cut official interest rates by 1 percentage point to 12 percent on Thursday, defying warnings against further trims from the International Monetary Fund. The cut was the fourth in as many months. The decision goes against the advice of the IMF, which had forced Sedlabanki to raise rates by a massive 6 percentage points in October to meet the terms of a $10 billion bailout of the crippled Icelandic banking system.
RIGA, Latvia Latvia's central bank and prime minister urged the Baltic nation's leaders to watch what they say about the national currency as jitters spread about a possible devaluation that could hit other economies in the region. The calls highlighted Latvia's efforts to defend its currency peg to the euro amid mounting speculation that a painful devaluation is inevitable as the country's economy nosedives.
KIEV, Ukraine Ukraine's economy slumped 21 percent in the first quarter, the latest in a series of figures highlighting the dizzying dive that the country's economy has taken. The government also said unemployment has risen to 879,000 people since last year.
VADUZ, Liechtenstein Liechtenstein's banking industry suffered a 60 percent drop in profits last year due to the global economic downturn and doubts about the tiny principality's future as a tax haven, according to a report by financial regulators. Profit at the country's 15 banks fell to 336.8 million Swiss francs ($316 million) from over 840 million francs in 2007.
ATHENS, Greece Greece's economy shrank by 1.2 percent during the first three months of the year compared with the previous quarter, the National Statistics Service said. The provisional figure heightened fears that the euro zone member could slip into a technical recession typically defined as two consecutive quarters of negative growth.
 Load-Date: June 5, 2009

 

End of Document
