

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
January 10, 2008 Thursday 6:17 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1703 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CARIBBEAN: Earthquake triggers disaster insurance pool for first time in Caribbean
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) A powerful earthquake that rocked the eastern Caribbean in November has for the first time triggered use of an insurance pool that provides emergency cash to regional islands after a significant natural disaster.
The magnitude-7.4 quake, which was centered beneath the channel that separates the small islands of Dominica and Martinique when it hit on Nov. 29, resulted in a nearly $1US million (€689,000) catastrophe payout from the disaster pool, fund supervisor Simon Young said.
The strong undersea temblor, which damaged homes and water pipes but led to no serious injuries in the two island nations, surpassed policy thresholds to issue payments of $528US,000 (€363,740) for Dominica and $419US,00 (€289,000) for St. Lucia.
The countries received the lump sum payments from the disaster fund shortly before the U.S. Geological Survey issued its final report on the powerful Caribbean quake in mid-December.
"It was a small enough amount that we could activate the payment before the holidays," Young said from the Washington office of Caribbean Risk Managers Ltd., which oversees the fund.
The insurance program, which the World Bank says is unique, lets small Caribbean countries pool their risk to natural disasters, slashing individual premiums by 40 percent. Nations pay annual premiums from $200US,000 to $2US million (€137,779 to €1.38 million) and in return are eligible for disaster payouts of $10US million to $50US million (€7.4 million to €37 million).
The French overseas department of Martinique, which sustained the brunt of the November quake, is not a member of the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility. Claims there will be covered by the French state-owned reinsurance company Caisse Centrale de Reassurance.
GRENADA: British developer vows to help Grenada lure airline to replace carrier LIAT
ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada (AP) A British resort developer says he'll put up bond money to help Grenada attract an alternative to LIAT, a regional air carrier that islanders complain is plagued by tardy service, canceled flights and high ticket prices.
"We are willing to put up hundreds of thousands of U.S. dollars in the form of bonds to the airlines to guarantee the airlines that they don't lose any money if they bring the planes to Grenada," Peter de Savary told reporters during a conference call.
De Savary, whose Skibo Castle in Scotland was chosen as the spot of Madonna's 2000 wedding to filmmaker Guy Ritchie, owns resorts and marinas that have helped Grenada's tourism-based economy recover from devastating hurricanes in 2004 and 2005.
Grenada's prime minister, Keith Mitchell, has said Grenada may partner with other Caribbean islands to provide a substitute for LIAT, which is owned by several regional governments including Barbados, Antigua, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.
Representatives of LIAT, which merged last year with the struggling Caribbean Star carrier, did not immediately return calls to its headquarters in Antigua or to its commercial office in Barbados.
LIAT flight attendants stranded hundreds of passengers throughout the region last month by staging a one-day sickout to press pension-fund demands. Grenadian Tourism Minister Clarice Modeste-Curwen has called for LIAT to apologize to passengers for poor service.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Industry leader forecasts significant drop in banana exports
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Dominican banana producers will lose millions of dollars (euros) as they struggle to restore cultivated fields razed by tropical storms last year, an industry leader says.
Roughly half of the country's 10,000 hectares (24,710 acres) of banana plantations were destroyed during the 2007 hurricane season, causing $27US million (€18 million) in losses, Eddy Cabrera, president of the Dominican Association of Banana Producers said.
He criticized the Dominican government for failing to deliver about $12US million (€8.17 million) in aid it promised after Tropical Storm Olga barreled through the Caribbean nation in December, killing at least 33 people and displacing 62,000. The storm also left 8,000 banana workers jobless, he said.
"It's a grave situation," Cabrera said. "We await immediate, fair and correct action from the government to compensate us for the losses and help the northwest recover its economic backbone."
Banana exports had been expected to top 179 million pounds (81 million kilograms) in 2008, but are now likely to reach just 110 million pounds (50 million kilograms) handing farmers an $80US million (€54.5 million) loss.
About 35 percent of Dominican farm exports are bananas, according to the country's Center for Exports and Investments. Their top buyer is the United Kingdom, followed by Belgium, Sweden and Germany.
CUBA: Cuba-China trade increased 23 percent to more than $2US.2B in '07
HAVANA (AP) Trade between Cuba and China grew by 23 percent to more than $2US billion (€1.4 billion) in 2007, solidifying China's place as the communist-run island's second-largest economic benefactor behind oil-rich Venezuela.
China is Cuba's second-largest trading partner and the top importer of Cuban products, especially nickel and sugar, Cuba's official news agency Prensa Latina reported from Beijing, without giving exact figures.
In 2006, trade between the two countries totaled $1US.8 billion (€1.2 billion) double that of 2005, China's ambassador to Havana said in March.
Chinese consumer goods are increasingly common on the island, and hundreds of Chinese-made buses and trains have helped ease chronic transportation problems, especially on long-distance routes.
The Cuban government has also distributed new Chinese appliances on credit to families, in an effort to reduce the amount of energy consumed by the hulking, decades-old Russian-made refrigerators and stoves once commonplace here.
Cuba-China trade figures also include billions of dollars (euros) in favorable credits Beijing has extended Havana in recent years, which has seen the island's debt levels soar.
Trade between Venezuela and Cuba has reached $7US billion (€4.7 billion) a year, much of it in the form of the 92,000 barrels of oil a day Venezuela provides the island for Cuban doctors providing medical care and other social services.
GUYANA: Government awards US company large logging concession
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) A U.S. logging company has won the rights to harvest trees in a large portion of Guyana's Amazon rain forest, the company has said.
The timber concession awarded to Simon & Shock International is one of Guyana's five largest, covering 400,000 hectares (988,400 acres) near the Brazilian border.
The South Haven, Michigan-based company will invest at least $26US million (€18 million) to develop the area, in a deal negotiated over three years, chief executive Kelly Simon said.
A harvesting license will be granted once the company completes an environmental impact study and inventories trees in the area, Agriculture and Forestry Minister Robert Persaud said.
Guyana, a former British and Dutch colony, has offered to ban commercial development of its rain forest if compensated by the international community, and has already preserved some areas.
TRINIDAD: Technip wins contract from national gas company for 2 offshore pipelines
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) Trinidad and Tobago's national gas company has awarded a French oil services firm a contract to install two offshore pipelines in the Caribbean Sea.
The National Gas Company of Trinidad and Tobago Ltd. in December signed a deal with the U.S. subsidiary of Paris-based Technip SA to install two undersea pipelines by the end of 2009, according to a statement from Technip.
The additions to the Trinidadian company's existing pipeline network will boost its ability to transport gas from new production fields off the country's northern coast, a statement from the national gas company said.
Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed by either side.
Trinidad and Tobago is the largest supplier of liquid natural gas to the United States.
GRENADA: PM says government will consult public as it considers lifting casino ban
ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada (AP) Grenada's government will consult with church and business leaders and other interest groups before deciding whether to approve a proposal to open the first casino on the Caribbean island, the prime minister has announced.
Prime Minister Keith Mitchell denied in his annual new year message said that his government had already granted a license to a developer to operate a casino at a cruise ship port and shopping center in the capital.
"I wish to make it perfectly clear that contrary to rumors in certain quarters, government has not taken any position on casino gambling," Mitchell said. "Any such decision will only be made after full and exhaustive national consultations with all of the relevant stakeholders in Grenada."
The chief executive of the development firm, Zublin Grenada Ltd., has said the country should permit a casino to make the island more attractive to tourists and investment.
But religious leaders and others say they don't want to see gambling legalized on the island.
"We can see a situation where young people, especially young men, are encouraged to spend their days in a casino to make the easy dollars instead of working," said the Rev. Stanford Simon of St. George's Baptist Church.
CARIBBEAN: Regional leaders eye reduction in food import taxes to counter rising prices
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Caribbean leaders could slash import taxes on meat, milk and other products to maintain food supplies and lower soaring supermarket prices, a Caribbean Community official has said.
A regional panel is reviewing an import tax cut and other proposals to control food prices ahead of a three-day meeting of the 15-nation Caribbean Community later this month, said group spokesman Leonard Robertson.
Beef, milk, cooking oil and rice can fetch import duties of up to 40 percent, Robertson said. The high levy is driving inflation across the region, including in Barbados and the twin-island nation of Trinidad and Tobago.
The Caribbean spends roughly $3US billion (€2 billion) a year on imported food.
 Load-Date: January 11, 2008

 

End of Document
