

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
November 2, 2006 Thursday 6:50 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1759 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Foreign Minister: Meetings with U.S. to jump-start free trade deal
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Upcoming talks between Dominican President Leonel Fernandez and U.S. President George W. Bush, among other U.S. officials, will likely jump-start a delayed free-trade agreement between the two countries, the foreign minister has said.
The three days of meetings, which begin Tuesday and include talks with the U.S. Treasury Department and the World Bank, "will smooth the road" toward implementing the Central American Free Trade Agreement, Foreign Minister Carlos Morales Troncoso said in a statement.
"I believe the accord will be in force in very short order," he said.
The Dominican Republic is one of six Latin American signatories to the CAFTA-DR, the U.S. free trade agreement approved in 2005. The pact was supposed to take effect in the Caribbean nation on Jan. 1, but the country has not passed legislation needed to implement parts of the deal.
Some of the delays stem from conflicts between U.S. and Dominican intellectual property law, including issues related to pharmaceutical manufacturing. Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and El Salvador entered the pact this year after delays. Costa Rica has yet to ratify it.
Fernandez's meetings will also focus on his country's participation in Venezuela's regional oil program, Petrocaribe, and programs to increase the use of alternative and renewable fuels.
It will be Fernandez's third visit to the United States this year.
GUYANA: Thousands of Guyanese workers strike in pay dispute with national sugar industry
GEORGETOWN. Guyana (AP) Thousands of workers on Guyana's sugar cane estates went on strike to press the state-owned industry for pay increases, a union leader has said.
Roughly 14,000 sugar workers belonging to Guyana's most powerful labor union have vacated cane fields and factories to demand automatic wage hikes to compensate for cost of living increases when a value-added tax of 16 percent begins in January, said Komal Chand, general-secretary of the Guyana Agricultural Workers Union.
Industry spokesman Jairam Petam said there has never been an agreement for the automatic wage hikes the union is asking for to compensate for new tax structures. He would not comment on negotiations.
Guyana's revenue authority said it will eliminate a 10 percent hotel levy, a 15 percent charge on travel tickets, and all consumption taxes on imported items to compensate for the flat VAT tax of 16 percent for all goods and services starting Jan 1.
The strike comes amid hard times for the region's sugar industry. Earlier this year, in response to pressure from the World Trade Organization, the European Union imposed a 36-percent cut in its sugar subsidy system, which had artificially kept prices higher than world market levels.
Earnings from sugar exports supply a significant portion of the foreign exchange for Guyana, a nation of 767,000 on the north shoulder of South America. The sugar industry is the former British colony's largest employer.
CUBA: Communist-run island calls international trade fair 'proof' of failed U.S. embargo
HAVANA (AP) Cuban authorities are citing the island's international trade fair as proof that the U.S. embargo has failed to fully isolate the communist-run nation.
About 800 companies from 48 countries have exhibits at the International Fair of Havana, Cuba's most important trade event.
"This is proof that the economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed by the United States for 45 years has failed to achieve its objective of isolating us from other nations," Foreign Trade Minister Raul de la Nuez said at the fair's opening ceremony also attended by Vice President Carlos Lage.
De la Nuez said Cuba's trade with the world has grown 27 percent so far this year compared to the same period in 2005. He expects 2006 to end with trade totaling US$10 billion (€7.9 billion) "the highest figure in the last 15 years," he said. Figures for total trade during 2005 were not available.
Cuban exports have increased and diversified, with traditional products like sugar and nickel expanding their sales by 15 percent and generic medicine and biotechnology products by 23 percent year-to-date, he said. Dollar (euro) figures for the sales were not provided.
Forty-five percent of Cuba's total trade is with countries in North, Central and South America particularly Venezuela, Cuba's top trading partner.
Europe makes up 31 percent of the market, with Asia and the Middle East accounting for 21 percent.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Economy grew 11.3 percent in first 9 months of year, central bank says
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) The Dominican Republic's economy increased by 11.3 percent in the first nine months of the year, the Central Bank announced.
The economic growth marked the first time real gross domestic product expanded by double-digits for five straight periods, Central Bank Governor Hector Valdez Albizu told reporters.
Agriculture, construction and telecommunications were the nation's dominant sectors, he said. Inflation fell to 6 percent from 7.4 percent last year.
The results showed the Caribbean country was continuing to rebound from a 2003 economic crisis caused by the collapse of its second-largest bank, which triggered a bailout that cost the treasury about US$2.2 billion (€1.75 billion). Inflation soared as high as 62 percent and the peso devalued sharply.
The Dominican Republic signed agreements with the International Monetary Fund and voters ousted then-President Hipolito Mejia in favor of Leonel Fernandez, a former president with a reputation for fiscal responsibility.
Fernandez's center-right party won control of the legislature in May, which supporters hope will bolster reforms including implementation of the delayed Central American Free Trade Agreement.
Fernandez is scheduled to meet with U.S. President George W. Bush at the White House on Wednesday to discuss the accord, which was supposed to take effect on Jan. 1.
BERMUDA: Dutch tycoon returns to Netherlands with investigators in fraud probe
HAMILTON, Bermuda (AP) A Dutch oil tycoon returned voluntarily from Bermuda to the Netherlands for questioning about a tax scam linked to one of his banks, where traders allegedly stashed hundreds of millions of dollars (euros) in illicit gains.
John Deuss, a prominent oil trader, returned on a commercial flight, accompanied by Dutch authorities probing a "carousel fraud" scheme linked to his First Curacao International Bank, where European authorities have frozen suspect accounts.
Deuss denies any wrongdoing and he has not been charged in the alleged scam. Carousel fraud, which costs governments billions of dollars (euros) a year, involves traders repeatedly importing and exporting goods across national borders, and siphoning value-added tax payments into private accounts instead of making the payments to governments.
A judge at the Hague District Court ordered that Deuss be held for 14 days, said Dutch national prosecution spokeswoman Valentine Hoen.
Hoen said Deuss has not been formally charged with any crime.
Last month, the Bermuda Commercial Bank announced without explanation that Deuss was resigning as its chairman, along with board member Tineke Deuss, his sister, and the bank president. All three are directors of First Curacao International Bank, which is the largest shareholder of Bermuda Commercial Bank.
DOMINICA: Caribbean island begins construction of plant to hold Petrocaribe fuel shipments
ROSEAU, Dominica (AP) Workers have started construction of a fuel storage plant in Dominica under a fuel pact bringing Venezuelan oil to Caribbean countries, a government statement said.
Ground was broken Wednesday to construct a plant with five tanks to store gasoline, diesel and jet fuel under Venezuela's Petrocaribe oil initiative. A tank to store liquefied petroleum gas will also be built on the 7 acres (3 hectares) of undeveloped land just north of the capital of Roseau, the government announced.
Venezuela shipped the components of the fuel tanks to the small island months ago, but the tanks sat in pieces on the docks because Dominica had not found a suitable place to build the plant.
Construction of the storage facility, which is to be completed next year, was expected to provide jobs for hundreds of islanders.
Under the Petrocaribe agreement, Dominica and 13 other Caribbean countries pay only part of the bill for Venezuelan fuel up front and can finance the rest over 25 years at low interest. The government of Hugo Chavez provides tanks, docking facilities and other infrastructure and has said they will accept goods such as rice or bananas as partial payments.
Dominica, which hasn't received any fuel under Petrocaribe, signed an agreement with Venezuela's state oil company in late June to form a joint company to oversee the fuel shipments.
PUERTO RICO: Report: Pfizer to lay off 200 workers
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Pfizer Inc., the world's largest drugmaker, will lay off 210 of its workers in Puerto Rico, a newspaper reported.
The layoffs at the company's various plants in the U.S. Caribbean territory were due to patents losses for some of its most important drugs, injectable antibiotic Zithromax and antidepressant Zoloft, Carlos del Rio, Pfizer's vice president of operations and manufacturing in Puerto Rico, told the online edition of El Nuevo Dia.
Two telephone calls placed to Pfizer representatives were not immediately returned.
It's not clear which plants will be affected in Puerto Rico. The New York-based company announced last year that it would close its plant in the northern city of Arecibo and reduce its staff at its plant in the nearby town of Barceloneta.
Boris Jaskille, head of the government's business development agency, said they have an agreement with Pfizer to identify a buyer for the Arecibo plant in a bid to keep it open and retain the jobs.
PUERTO RICO: Eli Lilly opens plant in U.S. territory, creating 550 jobs
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly and Co. has opened a biotechnology plant in the island's north, creating 550 jobs, the governor has said.
The facility, built with a US$850 million (€676 million) investment, will be the Indianapolis-based drug maker's manufacturing center for the insulin product Humalog, Gov. Anibal Acevedo Vila said in a statement.
The company has five manufacturing plants and a sales office in the U.S. Caribbean territory. Some 1,700 Puerto Ricans are employed by the company. A call placed to a company spokeswoman seeking comment was not immediately returned.
 Load-Date: November 3, 2006

 

End of Document
