

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
September 14, 2006 Thursday 7:39 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1337 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CARIBBEAN: Region's foreign ministers to discuss potential trade deals with U.S., Europe
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Foreign ministers from the 15-nation Caribbean Community are taking a hard look at how to forge new trade deals with the United States and Europe.
The secretariat of the group, known as Caricom, said the gathering will focus on finding a way to start negotiations for a free trade agreement with the United States and a new trade and aid package with the European Union.
An arm of the regional group that pursues trade deals, the Caribbean Regional Negotiating Machinery, said it will brief the ministers on a study assessing the possibility of a trade pact like the one Washington signed last year with Central American countries and the Dominican Republic.
The meeting comes days after Trinidadian Prime Minister Patrick Manning said the United States had not been working hard enough to renew the Caribbean Basin Initiative, a preferential trade deal for 24 countries set to expire in 2008.
At a July summit in St. Kitts, Caribbean leaders said they wanted formal talks with Washington regarding a free trade agreement, noting the current pact must be renewed every year by unanimous decision of the 148-nation World Trade Organization.
GUYANA: Russian aluminum giant plans to expand stake in Guyana's bauxite mines, PM says
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) A Russian aluminum conglomerate that owns extensive bauxite deposits in eastern Guyana has started talks with Montreal-based Cambior Inc. and the government to buy out their stakes in the country's southern mines, Prime Minister Samuel Hinds has said.
OAO Rusal, the world's third-largest aluminum producer, plans to continue its expansion by buying out Cambior's 70-percent stake in Omai Bauxite Mining Inc., a private company that owns or controls several bauxite deposits in the Linden region of Guyana, Hinds said. Guyana owns the remaining 30 percent.
In June, Cambior announced it was prepared to sell its stake in the company and asked for offers. Cambior said it wanted to focus on its core gold business rather than make significant new investments in mining bauxite.
Hinds said Rusal, which has invested more than US$20 million (€15.7 million) in reviving the country's ailing state-owned bauxite mines in the last 18 months, sent a 19-person team to Guyana in recent days to move negotiations forward.
Cambior was forced to halt production for two months because cheaper Chinese products were flooding the international market. Mining restarted this month, said company spokesman Norman McLean, adding that he was "hopeful" that negotiations with Rusal would be productive.
TRINIDAD: Fishermen, farmers protest Alcoa's testing of proposed smelter site
CAP-DE-VILLE, Trinidad (AP) Fishermen and farmers blocked access to the site where U.S.-based Alcoa hopes to build an aluminum smelter, reciting Bible verses and lighting candles before Trinidadian police removed them.
The 50 protesters, some toting children, held police at a standoff for three hours until authorities escorted in a tractor that will perform soil tests on the proposed site of the US$1.5 billion (€1.2 billion) smelter.
At least five people were detained and released later without charge.
"The government doesn't have the sole right to decide what happens to a community. That community must have a say," said Sherif Mohammed, 64, a retired farmer.
Pennsylvania-based Alcoa has signed a preliminary deal with the government to own and operate the smelter in southwestern Trinidad for 30 years. The smelter would produce 375,00 tons (341,000 metric tons) of aluminum a year and employ up to 800 workers, company spokesman Wade Hughes said.
Demonstrators say the smelter will poison their water supply for generations and have set up a protest camp at the site, which is near small farms and a fishing village.
Alcoa and Trinidadian Prime Minister Patrick Manning have said the smelter will be environmentally safe and boost the economy.
The soil sample tests, which begin Wednesday, involve digging scores of holes to a depth of nearly 100 feet (30 meters) as part of a required environmental impact assessment.
PUERTO RICO: Top court won't take up disputed beach development case; opponents to challenge
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Opponents of a planned resort on an undeveloped beach in Puerto Rico's northeast have said they will ask the island's top court to reconsider its decision not to hear an appeal challenging an environmental study approving construction.
The U.S. territory's Supreme Court said Wednesday that it would not review the study for the Marriott International Inc. resort, which said the project would not harm the environment. Opponents said the study was faulty and that the coastal land near Fajardo should be declared a natural reserve.
Environmental activist Luis Jorge Rivera Herrera said they will ask the court to reconsider: "This is not the end of the road," he said.
Marriott and Four Seasons Hotels Inc. have plans to build resorts on the 3,200 acres (1,295 hectares) of coastal land. They have said the projects were planned to minimize the damage to the environment, and their supporters have said the businesses would generate thousands of jobs for the economically depressed area.
Environmental groups and other opponents have been trying to block the project in the island's courts and before the planning and environmental quality boards. They say the beach, which is ringed by forested mountains, is a prime nesting spot for endangered leatherback sea turtles.
TRINIDAD: Production suspended at state-owned oil refinery amid worker absences
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) Production at Trinidad's only oil refinery was temporarily suspended for two days due to a high level of worker absences.
Arnold Corneal, a spokesman for state-owned Petrotrin, said he could not say whether the absences were related to a nine-month salary dispute. Work was stopped for days in July in what the refinery called a coordinated union protest over contract negotiations.
"It's been off-line for 48 hours," Corneal said by telephone. "Production is zero."
He said he did not know how many employees were out, but there were "enough so we couldn't function safely if we were running."
Negotiations between the refinery and the Oilfields Workers Trade Union have stalled, with the union seeking wage increases of up to 35 percent and the company offering 10 percent increases over three years.
Union officials could not immediately be reached for comment.
The plant, located at Petrotrin's Pointe-a-Pierre site on Trinidad's southwest coast, produces some 160,000 barrels of refined gasoline, diesel and oil a day for domestic use and export to other Caribbean nations and the United States.
CUBA: Communist-run island denies developing biological or chemical weapons
HAVANA (AP) Cuban scientists at the Nonaligned Movement summit denied any effort to develop biological or chemical weapons, dismissing U.S. allegations that Cuba's biotechnology center doubles as an undercover weapons factory.
"We have no ties to anything related to biological weapons, it has nothing to do with what we focus on," said Luis Herrera Martinez, director of the Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology.
For years, U.S. officials have raised suspicions about the center. John Bolton, now the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, alleged in 2002 the communist state had "at least a limited offensive biological warfare."
But Herrera said his scientists would have to be "stupid" to develop biological or chemical weapons.
"We don't have the money to be dedicated to that, and and we are not interested," Herrera said. "We would have to be stupid to be doing what these accusations imply, we wouldn't even be able to do anything like that."
Herrera said the center makes 91 products, including 33 drugs developed to fight infectious diseases, and that Cuba has 12,000 registered scientists, impressive for a relatively poor nation, reflecting the importance the Cuban government places on medicine and science.
 Load-Date: September 15, 2006

 

End of Document
