

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
October 5, 2006 Thursday 5:36 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 2856 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CARIBBEAN: Region's tourism industry criticizes changes in U.S. passport rules
NASSAU, Bahamas (AP) The Caribbean tourist industry has reacted sharply to changes in U.S. rules extending the time that American cruise passengers can travel without their passports but not those who journey by air.
The changes signed into law Wednesday by U.S. President George W. Bush allow U.S. citizens to return from visits to Canada and Mexico, or from cruises throughout the Caribbean, without a passport until June 1, 2009. But the law maintains that air travelers to those areas must carry a passport starting Jan. 8, 2007.
"This action demonstrates an incredible insensitivity to our economies," Earle Bethell, president of the Bahamas Hotel Association, said in a statement.
Despite the partial deadline extension, Caribbean tourism officials worry about revenue loss because cruise travelers tend to spend less money in a single port than a visitor who traveled to the country by air.
Prior U.S. travel requirements allowed American citizens to go to Canada, Mexico or most Caribbean countries and re-enter the U.S. using a driver's license and birth certificate.
The new requirements will not affect travel between the U.S., Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
About 27 percent of Americans have current, valid passports. But the State Department is experiencing unprecedented demand for passports, due in part to this new regulation.
DOMINICA: Island nation names minister to revive offshore banking
ROUSEAU, Dominica (AP) Dominica's premier has sworn in a new minister tasked with boosting the economy by reviving offshore banking, a sector that closed three years ago after the Caribbean island was blacklisted by an international group.
Julius Timothy, who became minister of planning and economic development, vowed to secure a share of the Caribbean's lucrative offshore business for Dominica.
Timothy will also encourage investors to fund Dominican business projects in exchange for citizenship, government spokesman Sean Douglas said. He declined to say how much an investment was needed for someone to gain citizenship.
More than 50 offshore banks were registered in Dominica in the 1990s, but most never operated and were struck from the registry for not paying license fees.
In 2000, a task force of the Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development put Dominica on a list of countries considered uncooperative in the fight against money laundering and international financial crimes.
The former British colony of 69,000 people was removed from the list in October 2002 after introducing laws to better enforce the sector, but Dominica's last offshore bank closed.
GRENADA: Country working on building storage tanks to receive Petrocaribe oil
ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada (AP) Grenada is working with Venezuela's state oil company to build storage tanks needed to store fuel bought under the Petrocaribe deal a key issue holding up delivery of oil to the Caribbean island, officials have said.
Soil tests have been completed on a site proposed to house the tanks, which will hold up to 20 days of Grenada's fuel needs more than the current maximum of a 10-day supply, said John Ogiste, Grenada's chief energy officer.
Under the Petrocaribe plan signed in late June 2005, Caribbean countries pay market price for Venezuelan fuel but are only required to hand over part of the cost and can finance the rest over 25 years at low interest. Governments can also pay partly with services or goods, such as rice and bananas, while Venezuela helps provide storage tanks and docking facilities.
Like many of its Caribbean neighbors, Grenada's Petrocaribe program has gotten bogged down because it lacks the infrastructure to receive and distribute oil. Grenada has not received any oil under the agreement because of the storage problem, said Energy Minister Gregory Bowen.
Fourteen countries in the region have signed up for Petrocaribe, which was widely seen as a bid by Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez long at odds with the U.S. to make inroads in the Caribbean, where the U.S. is a major trading partner. Chavez calls his pact an alternative to U.S.-backed free trade deals.
CARIBBEAN: Officials call for united front at future world trade talks
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) Caribbean nations must focus on regional integration to strengthen their economies so they can form a united front at future world trade talks, regional officials have said.
The breakdown in July of World Trade Organization talks mostly due to the unwillingness of countries like the U.S., the European Union and Japan to offer deeper cuts on agricultural subsidies provided the Caribbean a chance to focus on economic integration, Trinidad's trade minister, Ken Valley, said at a regional business conference.
"The current environment provides us with an opportunity to concentrate on the integration of the greater Caribbean," which includes Mexico, Venezuela and 25 other countries in Central America and the Caribbean, Valley said at the conference organized by Trinidad and the Association of Caribbean States, a trade and policy group.
There has been some regional integration in recent years. The Caribbean Single Market allows for the free movement of goods, services and certain workers throughout 12 Caribbean countries with more than 6 million people.
"We get lost in the wave of globalization trying to compete with the big boys on our own," said Paul Quesnel, president of the Trinidad and Tobago Manufacturer's Association. "We need to be united so we can leverage better agreements with the U.S. and other countries."
CUBA: International Transport Fair aims to improve island's ailing transport sector
HAVANA (AP) Cuba's International Transport Fair has opened with the goal of improving the island's ailing transport sector with the purchase of buses from Belarus and China and a new railroad deal with Venezuela, state-run media reported.
Representatives from 40 countries have exhibitions at the event, which runs through Saturday. Venezuela, China and Russia rented out entire pavilions, and Iran is attending for the first time, according to Transportation Minister Carlos Manuel Pazo.
Pazo told the government's business weekly Opciones that the event will try to ease transportation woes on the island but warned Cubans not to have "false hopes."
Cuba's internal transport system steadily deteriorated after the crushing economic crisis of the early to mid-1990s caused by the collapse of the Soviet Union, Cuba's longtime backer. Cubans often spend hours waiting for buses that never come, or are already full when they arrive.
The government stepped up recovery efforts early last year, importing 80 buses from China. It also repaired some 60 locomotives and 1,800 railway cars for transport across the island.
The transportation minister said Cuba will sign an agreement with Venezuela this week to form a joint-enterprise company to deal with railway development.
TRINIDAD: Corruption threatens Trinidad's future economic growth, business leaders warn
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) Oil-and-gas-rich Trinidad is set to post its 13th straight year of economic expansion, but business leaders say that corruption and bribery in the Caribbean nation could threaten future economic growth.
Robert Riley, CEO of BP Trinidad and Tobago, said countries that rely on petroleum profits had to maintain high ethical standards to ensure their economies survive inevitable slowdowns and that they were vulnerable to corruption when profits are high.
"Not many countries make it through the heady days when the money flows," Riley told some 150 business leaders at a national conference on corporate integrity.
Trinidad's economy grew by 7 percent in 2005 and is set to grow by that amount or more this year, according to the Central Bank. Still, business leaders worry that the country's multibillion dollar development projects could be threatened by corrupt business practices.
Over the last six months, Trinidad's government has announced plans to build seven petrochemical plants and has proposed constructing two aluminum smelters all totaling more than $6US billion (€4.7 billion) in investments. Riley said future projects could be threatened unless local and international companies institute stringent ethics codes.
Suzanne Cote-Freeman, of the anti-corruption group Transparency International, said talking about ethics wasn't enough companies must implement guidelines.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Gas stations run dry in Caribbean nation
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Gas shortages across the Dominican Republic have forced drivers to form long lines and roam cities in search of fuel.
Pumps went dry at hundreds of gas stations because of delayed shipments from Venezuela and Houston, Texas, said Ruben Montas, president of the Dominican Petroleum Refinery. Tankers were expected to arrive Thursday, he said.
Venezuela had warned the Caribbean country in early September about a possible shipping delay, said Francisco Javier Garcia, secretary of industry and commerce. He did not comment on shipments from the United States.
A spokesman for Venezuelan state oil company Petroleos de Venezuela SA, or PDVSA, did not immediately return a phone call seeking comment.
Officials were rationing available reserves, said Juan Ignacio Espaillat, president of the national gasoline distributors association.
Motorists in long fuel lines complained of disruptions caused by the shortage.
"I had to take a taxi to my office because there wasn't enough gas," said Jose Martes, a 36-year-old Santo Domingo man, as he waited to fill his car's tank.
Other Dominicans turned to the crowded vans and public cars that serve as public transportation in the capital.
PUERTO RICO: Sofscape Caribe to manufacture rubber tiles from used tires
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) A Puerto Rican manufacturer plans to produce rubber tiles made from used tires that it hopes to sell in the Caribbean and the United States.
Sofscape Caribe will recycle about 1,000 tires a day to manufacture the tiles, which are primarily targeted for playgrounds and the equestrian market, Gov. Anibal Acevedo Vila said at the company's launch in Vega Baja in northern Puerto Rico.
The company estimates that it will sell $7US.7 million (€6 million) in products every year. It aims to expand its market outside the Caribbean and the United States.
The U.S. territory's Solid Waste Authority said Sofscape Caribe's use of the tires counts as a recycling activity. Puerto Rico generates about 5 million used tires annually and faces a shortage of space to dump its garbage.
Last month, U.S. environmental regulators granted a permit to a division of Mexican cement company Cemex to burn used tires for fuel at a plant in the southern Puerto Rican city of Ponce.
TRINIDAD: Trinidad and Mexico sign investment treaty to enhance trade and resolve disputes
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) Trinidad and Mexico have signed a treaty setting up a framework for resolving disputes between investors in the two countries.
The pact aimed at boosting trade says differences that cannot be settled through negotiation should go to an independent arbitrator or the courts, according to Clarence Walker, spokesman for Trinidad's trade ministry.
"It will make it easier to resolve any problems or disagreements that could come up following investments," Walker said. "That will hopefully encourage investment between the countries since people will feel protected."
Trinidad's trade minister Ken Valley signed the treaty Tuesday in Port-of-Spain with Alejandro Gomez Strozzi, a Mexican minister for foreign investment.
Trinidad and Tobago, a country of 1.3 million people, imports a variety of goods from Mexico, including plastics and food products.
BARBADOS: Fuel costs lowered due to drop in world oil price
BRIDGETOWN, Barbados (AP) Barbados has lowered fuel costs due to the recent fall in crude prices.
The cost of gasoline on this Caribbean island will decrease from $9US.31 (€7.34) to $8US.36 (€6.59) per gallon and diesel will go from $6US.32 (€4.98) to $5US.98 (€4.71) per gallon, government officials announced after a Cabinet meeting. The increase took effect Monday.
World oil prices have dropped to six-month lows recently as demand slackens with the end of summer travel in major oil consuming regions.
DOMINICA: Dominica to cut 100 government jobs in bid to further economic recovery
ROSEAU, Dominica (AP) Dominica will cut about 100 government road maintenance positions in a bid to further its economic recovery, officials have said.
The workers will be laid off by Oct. 1, according to letters sent in early September by the government and seen by The Associated Press. The jobs were expected to be outsourced to private companies in the Caribbean island, Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit has said.
Dominica started laying off government workers earlier this year to strengthen its economy after successive years of negative growth. Some 100 security and maintenance workers were let go between January and May.
Dominica one of the poorest nations in the Caribbean has cut government jobs after showing strong signs of recovery from an economic austerity program designed by the International Monetary Fund in 2003 to reduce the deficit and reverse a recession.
Thomas Letang, head of the Public Services Union, criticized the government for slashing public sector jobs "despite calls and petitions to suspend" the part of the IMF program that calls for outsourcing of government jobs.
The IMF-backed economic reforms called for cutting public spending by 15 percent and committed the government to cut its 4,000-employee work force by about 10 percent. The program began amid the decline of the island's two main industries, tourism and agriculture.
PUERTO RICO: Puerto Rico's small airports record losses due to rising costs
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Puerto Rico's small airports have lost millions of dollars (euros) over the past year due to rising operational and fuel costs, the port authority chief has said.
The U.S. territory's 10 regional airports have lost up to $8US million (€6.3 million), said Port Authority Executive Director Fernando Bonilla.
Reduced traffic also was a factor in the financial setbacks at most of the facilities, though two airports Ponce in the south and Aguadilla in the northeast have reported an increase in customers, Bonilla said.
The island's main airport Luis Munoz Marin International Airport reported a record number of arrivals in a 12-month period from October 2004 to October 2005 with 10.6 million passengers. The airport in San Juan, a major Caribbean hub, also experienced a slight increase in cargo traffic.
TRINIDAD: Trinidad looks to Cuba to help boost agriculture and counter inflation
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) Cuban farmers will help Trinidad revive its anemic agriculture sector, Trinidad's prime minister announced.
Trinidad, hoping to curb inflation fueled by high-priced food imports, will set up 10 large farms, two of which will be run with the assistance of Cuban agricultural experts, Prime Minister Patrick Manning said as he introduced his 2007 budget in Parliament.
Each farm will be at least 100 acres (40.5 hectares), Manning said.
Year-on-year inflation for food has reached nearly 25 percent in the Caribbean nation. The only way to counter the trend is to rejuvenate the farm sector, Manning said. In comparison, overall inflation was nine percent.
There have been several protests in recent weeks by Trinidadians calling on the government to take action against high food prices.
Manning's nearly $6US billion (€4.7 billion) budget would increase agricultural spending by 25 percent from last year to more than $12US.5 million (€9.85 million).
Debate on the budget, which covers spending for the fiscal year 2007 that began on October 1, will begin in Parliament on Monday.
PUERTO RICO: Doral Financial shares dive on downgrade
NEW YORK (AP) Shares of Puerto Rico-based bank Doral Financial Corp. dived in trading after an analyst downgraded the stock, saying the company's share of the mortgage market is shrinking.
Cohen & Co. analyst Joe Gladue downgraded Doral to "Sell" from "Hold" and lowered his price target to $4US.20 (€3.3) from $8US (€6.3). In a research note citing "several unofficial sources," Gladue said Doral's loan production in September was in the range of $25US million (€19.65 million) to $35US million (€27.5 million), indicating an acute drop in market share.
"Competitors say that Doral has virtually disappeared from the mortgage market," Gladue said. "The sharp drop in mortgage lending and loss of market share takes away much of the franchise value the company had."
Gladue said he expects the company to unveil a radically different business strategy at the annual shareholder meeting Oct. 24. Because he doesn't know what direction the company will take, Gladue said he lowered his price target to the bank's tangible book value.
Shares of Doral Financial fell 72 cents, or 11.3 percent to $5US.72 (€4.5) in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange. The company's shares have traded in a range of $4US.32 (€3.4) to $12US.85 (€10) in the past year.
 Load-Date: October 6, 2006

 

End of Document
