

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
March 23, 2007 Friday 10:29 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1375 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CUBA: Minister: Island open to American investment in oil ventures, but blocked by U.S.
HAVANA (AP) Cuba is open to American companies that want to join the communist country's new oil-drilling ventures but any such deals are being blocked by Washington, the minister overseeing energy matters says.
Basic Industry Minister Yadira Garcia said exploratory drilling in the Gulf of Mexico should start to yield profits by 2011.
"A lot of American companies have been coming, they know about our studies ... but we are not the ones limiting them," Garcia told reporters at an international gathering on earth sciences.
Garcia said it was "a good moment" for Washington to let American oil companies invest in the Cuban market. Currently, a long-standing U.S. trade embargo prohibits most American trade and investment with the communist-run island.
In effect for more than four decades, the U.S. embargo bans virtually all trade between the two countries except for the sales of American food and medicine to the island.
Companies from Norway, India, Malaysia, Spain and Venezuela are among those that have already reserved blocks for petroleum exploration under production-sharing agreements with Cuba.
The U.S. Geological Survey has reported that the North Cuba Basin off the island's coast holds a substantial quantity of oil 4.6 billion to 9.3 billion barrels of crude and 9.8 trillion to 21.8 trillion cubic feet of natural gas.
CARIBBEAN: 4 sugar-producing nations to split quota surrendered by St. Kitts
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Four Caribbean nations will divide a sugar trade quota surrendered by St. Kitts when it shuttered its operations following deep subsidy cuts by the European Union, the industry's regional spokesman says.
St. Kitts' production quota of 14,145 metric tons (15,590 tons) will be split among Guyana, Jamaica, Belize and Barbados, Guyana's Foreign Trade Minister Henry Jeffrey said. The exact ratio has yet to be determined.
Jeffrey said the decision was made at an African, Caribbean and Pacific trade group conference, known as ACP, earlier this month in Belgium, during which the EU and its former colonies were expected to discuss how to meet a World Trade Organization deadline to complete regional free trade pacts.
"I am elated at the agreement," Jeffrey said, calling the support the region received from African and Pacific nations "a significant act of solidarity."
The Caribbean had lobbied African and Pacific member nations to allow St. Kitts' quota to be shared among regional producers ever since that island nation's sugar operations closed in 2005 after nearly 400 years of production.
St. Kitts said high production costs and EU subsidy reductions of 36 percent made it impossible for their sugar industry to survive. The EU imposed the cuts following a complaint to the WTO by rival sugar producers over the ACP nations' preferential access to markets.
The Caribbean exports more than half of its annual production of roughly 589,670 metric tons (650,000 tons) of sugar to the EU market.
ST. LUCIA: Island announces trade talks with Taiwan, prompting protests from China
CASTRIES, St. Lucia (AP) St. Lucia one of the world's smaller countries has irritated vast China by announcing trade talks with a high-level delegation from Taiwan.
St. Lucia's foreign ministry said it has agreed to meet soon with a delegation led by Taiwan's Foreign Minister James Huang to discuss "cooperation and mutual interests," prompting a formal protest from Chinese Ambassador Gu Huaming.
"This is totally unacceptable to the Chinese government and people," the ambassador told The Associated Press. "The Chinese side hereby expresses its concern over this."
Although Taiwan is self-governing, communist Beijing insists the island that broke away amid civil war in 1949 is part of China. China and Taiwan both engage in "dollar diplomacy" to win diplomatic alliances with other nations by offering aid and assistance.
China recently pledged more money and technical assistance to St. Lucia, a country of some 170,000 people, amid speculation that rival Taiwan was seeking to re-establish diplomatic ties with the southern Caribbean island.
St. Lucia's External Affairs Minister Rufus Bousquet said Beijing's new aid package was under review by St. Lucia's Cabinet, but he did not disclose any details. Bousquet recently announced that he has accepted an invitation from Beijing to visit China.
Shortly after his December election, Prime Minister John Compton said his government would maintain ties with China and Bousquet has since reiterated this intention in a letter to Chinese Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Electricity investors say nation ignored warnings of lost revenue
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Foreign energy investors say that they warned the Dominican Republic it had to mend its crippled power sector months before filing a $680US million (€510.2 million) lawsuit against the country for lost electricity revenue.
Los Angeles-based TCW Group Inc. advised Dominican officials last May that it would sue if immediate steps were not taken to curb rampant electricity theft and raise customers' rates, according to Blair Thomas, head of the firm's infrastructure and energy business.
"We're a business where half of our users steal from us ... and the government watches it happen," Thomas told The Associated Press by phone from Australia, where he was traveling. He said the Caribbean nation's government was "well briefed" before the suit was filed.
TCW, which is owned by France's Societe Generale, filed for arbitration at the close of business Thursday under a Dominican-French bilateral investment treaty.
The claim for lost revenue dates back to 2004, when TCW bought half the distribution company that powers six southeastern Dominican provinces and much of the capital of Santo Domingo. The other half is owned by the state-run electric company.
The lawsuit adds to the problems of the power sector that the Dominican government has been trying to rescue from a decades-old cycle of blackouts and bankruptcies. Analysts have estimated that fraud and theft drain half the electricity generated nationwide.
JAMAICA: Jockey to close plant, leaving some 500 jobless
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) Underwear maker Jockey International Inc. announced it will close a factory in Jamaica, dealing another blow to the Caribbean nation's struggling garment sector and leaving some 500 people without jobs.
Jockey's Sandy Bay plant in the western Hanover parish will close in September and relocate to an unspecified country in Central America, plant manager Fayann Evans said on KOOL-FM radio.
Another factory in Hanover will remain open, Evans told The Associated Press. Jockey's corporate headquarters in Kenosha, Wisconsin, could not be reached Thursday evening for comment.
Jockey, which has been in Jamaica for more than 20 years, is the latest garment company to close operations in the island in favor of cheaper labor and production costs in regions such as Asia and Mexico. In the past three years, Hanesbrands Inc. and China's ARH Enterprises have also shuttered facilities in the island nation.
Once a thriving sector with more than 25,000 employees in the mid-1990s, Jamaica's garment industry has declined considerably in the last decade with the loss of some 20,000 jobs.
CAYMAN ISLANDS: Cayman Airways to offer direct service to New York
GEORGE TOWN, Cayman Islands (AP) Cayman Airways will begin offering direct service between Grand Cayman Island and New York City in June, the British dependency's top tourism official said Wednesday.
The national airline will fly the new nonstop route three times a week starting June 23 and will be using the carrier's Boeing 737 planes, Tourism Minister Charles Clifford said. The price of the flights to John F. Kennedy International Airport were not disclosed.
Clifford said the U.S. Northeast is the single largest source market for the Cayman's tourism industry, with more than 30 percent of all American air visitors coming from the New York tri-state area.
Cayman Airways currently has nonstop service between Boston, Chicago, Houston, Ft. Lauderdale, Orlando, Miami, Tampa and Grand Cayman, and jet service to Havana and Cayman Brac, Kingston and Montego Bay in Jamaica.
 Load-Date: March 24, 2007

 

End of Document
