

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
February 14, 2008 Thursday 7:10 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1267 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




PUERTO RICO: R&G Financial Corporation settles financial fraud charges
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) One of Puerto Rico's largest lenders has settled fraud charges alleging that it inflated revenue by millions of dollars (euros), according to documents filed by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
R&G Financial Corporation was accused of overstating its income by US$180 million (€123 million) from 2002 through 2004 a period when it was the second-largest mortgage-loan originator for single-family homes in Puerto Rico.
Under the settlement disclosed in a Wednesday filing at a New York federal court, the lender did not admit or deny any wrongdoing and agreed to not violate federal securities laws. The government did not impose a financial penalty, the company said in a news release.
The SEC said the company misclaimed borrowed funds as gains and overstated the value of some mortgage holdings.
When the allegations surfaced in 2005, the company's stock price dropped from about US$40 (€27) to US$10 (€6) per share, reducing its equity market value by roughly US$900 (€615) million, the filing stated. The company has since changed its management and restated its earnings, according to the filing.
DOMINICA: Dominica halts plans for oil refinery funded by Chavez government
ROSEAU, Dominica (AP) Plans to build a new oil refinery funded by the Venezuelan government on the Caribbean island of Dominica have been put on hold, the island's prime minister says.
Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit said the country needs more time to consider the project, which some in Dominica say conflicts with efforts to promote ecotourism on the "nature island" of the Caribbean.
"Construction plans have been put on hold pending further discussion with the population," Skerrit said.
The proposed US$76 million (€52 million) refinery, which would produce 10,000 barrels of oil a day, was to be funded by the government of President Hugo Chavez as part of his Petrocaribe program, which allows Caribbean nations to purchase Venezuelan oil under preferential financing.
Skerrit has supported the project, but said the government should consider other economic options for the island, one of the poorest and least developed in the Caribbean. Meetings are planned with political parties, hotel associations and other civic groups, he said.
William Riviere, leader of the opposing People's Democratic Movement, has said Venezuela should finance a cement plant instead of an oil refinery.
The Barbados-based Caribbean Conservation Association urged Dominica to reject the refinery proposal last year.
ARUBA: Valero's island refinery processes at reduced rates after fire
ORANJESTAD, Aruba (AP) Processing units at Valero Energy Corp.'s refinery on this southern Caribbean island are operating at reduced rates since a key unit caught fire late last month.
A spokesman for the San Antonio-based refiner said that the 275,000-barrels-a-day plant on the southern tip of Aruba would process at reduced rates pending the restart of the vacuum unit damaged by the Jan. 25.
"We expect that unit back up in around two months," spokesman Bill Day said by e-mail. He did not provide further details.
The Aruba plant processes heavy, sour crude which is cheaper than the light, sweet variety to produce a high yield of finished distillate products and feedstock.
Valero, the largest independent oil refiner in the United States, bought the Aruba plant in 2004.
JAMAICA: PM says gov't must divest all holdings in struggling national airline
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) Prime Minister Bruce Golding said the Jamaican government must divest all financial holdings in the state-owned airline because the ailing carrier is a drain on the cash-strapped island's budget.
Golding said Air Jamaica has cost the country more than US$100 million (€67 million) since 2004, when the government took over the airline and began a restructuring. But the struggling carrier has continued to eliminate routes and lay off workers as it attempts to turn a profit.
"The money we are spending to keep Air Jamaica going, we can spend that to improve our education and try and improve our hospitals and try and fix some roads," Golding said in a statement.
Golding said he has instructed the Ministry of Finance and Public Service to launch negotiations with private companies to get the national carrier off the government's books.
Sen. Don Wehby, who holds a senior position in the ministry, has said he hoped to divest all holdings in Air Jamaica by March 2009 at the latest.
Golding's comments come more than three months after Air Jamaica's chief executive, Mike Conway, abruptly resigned after two years at the helm of the Caribbean nation's carrier, which has been operating for 37 years and employs some 2,500 people.
Calls made Air Jamaica's corporate offices in Kingston went unanswered Sunday.
CAYMAN ISLANDS: Cayman Islands pension board reports 17 percent hike in assets
GEORGE TOWN, Cayman Islands (AP) The Cayman Islands' pension board registered a nearly 17 percent increase in assets last fiscal year, boosting its books by some US$66 million (€45.2 million) after successful investments in global real estate securities.
The British dependency's government has reported that the Public Service Pensions Board, which invests the assets of public pension funds, raised its net assets to US$273 million (€187 million) by June 2007 from US$207 million (€141.9 million) the year before aided by success in the real estate market.
"The board is pleased with these recent performance results, considering that three years ago the pension funds were below average when compared to results obtained by other pension funds," Financial Secretary Kenneth Jefferson said in a statement.
Although the board's one-year performance had risen by 16.7 percent, its three-year annual rate of return for pension funds was at 10.2 percent, which is above the level needed to cover all liabilities, according to government statistics.
The Cayman Islands, a three-island Caribbean chain with about 45,000 inhabitants, is one of the world's largest banking centers.
JAMAICA: Sugar estate tries harvesting cane without burning to boost yield, quality
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) A Jamaican sugar estate has started harvesting green cane to improve the quality of the crop and cut environmental damage from the old practice of burning fields during harvest, a government statement said.
Roughly 100 cutters at the government-run Frome Sugar Factory in rural Westmoreland parish are now reaping fresh, green cane instead of the traditional burned cane. Under the old system, farmers burned cut cane lying in the fields to destroy the sugarless leaves and to fertilize the soil with ash.
But there now is increased global demand for green cane, which costs the Sugar Company of Jamaica less energy to process and stays fresher longer. Environmentally, there is no air pollution from burning and less need for chemicals to kill weeds that sprout in the burned fields.
"Within three to four days, the burned cane starts to spoil," said Lucius Jackson, a Westmoreland farmer who provides cane to the factory. "The green cane will last up to six days, and the juice stands up just the same."
The European Union, the chief market for Jamaica' struggling sugar industry, has called for all imports to be derived from green cane by 2010, said Aston Smith, vice president of operations for the Frome plant.
Jamaica's state-owned sugar company has been squeezed by deep cuts in EU subsidies for producers in the Caribbean, Africa and the Pacific and will be privatized later this year after years of amassing debt.
 Load-Date: February 15, 2008

 

End of Document
