

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
August 17, 2006 Thursday 11:50 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1058 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CARIBBEAN: Region experiments with more mobile workers, sparking competition fears
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) With construction stagnant in her native Jamaica, architect Mandilee Newton left one island for another taking a design job in oil- and gas-rich Trinidad.
By finding a position across the Caribbean, the bespectacled Newton, 27, said she managed to boost her career without migrating to Europe or North America like so many skilled workers from the region.
Workers seeking better jobs have island-hopped for generations, but a regional integration project is now making it easier for professionals. Thousands have lined up to move under recently eased restrictions a migration boost critics say will worsen economic disparities.
Before, professionals seeking to work in another island had to be hired in advance by a company that would help them apply for a work permit a complicated and lengthy process.
Now, under the new rules for the Caribbean Single Market and Economy an evolving economic union that groups together more than 6 million people in 12 nations workers with university degrees or other special skills can register for a certificate that allows them to move before they secure a job.
Some on small islands have expressed concern they will be overrun by better-educated professionals from their larger neighbors.
It's too soon, however, to know whether the concerns have any basis, said Esteban Perez, a United Nations economist based in Trinidad who has studied the Caribbean Single Market.
JAMAICA: Venezuela to boost preferential oil shipments to island nation
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) Venezuela will ship more oil to Jamaica under a preferential trade deal, President Hugo Chavez said during a visit to the Caribbean nation.
Fresh from his bedside visit with an ailing Fidel Castro, Chavez said he and Jamaican Prime Minister Portia Simpson Miller would sign an agreement to boost Venezuelan shipments of crude and other oil products from 21,000 barrels a day to 23,500 per day under the Petrocaribe program.
Chavez and Simpson Miller, in a joint news conference in the resort city of Montego Bay, also announced that Venezuela will help Jamaica expand capacity at a refinery and complete a highway project.
The government of Venezuela will also help Jamaica with construction of a civic center in Port Maria, the renovation of a sports center in Montego Bay and the development of low-cost housing, the leaders announced after a private meeting.
Speaking to reporters afterward, Simpson Miller said she and Chavez had a "friendly exchange" that will lead to further cooperation.
"We agreed that the interests of the poor and disadvantaged must be at the forefront of our international trade negotiations," she said.
Under the Petrocaribe oil supply agreement, Venezuela sells fuel to Jamaica and 13 other Caribbean nations at market price but requires only partial payment up front, with the rest financed over 25 years at low interest.
PUERTO RICO: U.S. grants permit to cement plant to burn used tires as fuel
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) U.S. environmental regulators have granted a permit to a division of Mexican cement company Cemex to burn used tires for fuel at a plant in the southern Puerto Rican city of Ponce, officials and the company have said.
The cement plant would be the first to burn tires for fuel in the U.S. island territory, which generates about 5 million used tires annually and faces a shortage of space to dump its garbage.
Cemex de Puerto Rico would replace about 20 percent of the imported coal it now uses to power the plant by incinerating 1.5 million to 2 million tires per year in its cement kiln, said Juan Colon, the company's environmental manager.
The Ponce plant produces cement and clinker, a principal raw material of cement, for export and the Puerto Rican market.
Before burning the tires, the company must install new pollution filters to contain emissions, said Carl-Axel Soderberg, director of the regional office of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, which granted the permit.
Puerto Rican environmental groups have previously opposed waste incineration proposals but Soderberg said the Cemex plant would produce less emissions because of the additional filters.
Cemex still requires a permit from the Environmental Quality Board in Puerto Rico but the company hopes to begin burning the tires in early 2007, Colon said.
GUYANA: Digicel to launch cell phone service in South
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Cell phone provider Digicel said it will provide service in Guyana as it expands into South America after quickly spreading throughout the Caribbean.
The government has signed a provisional agreement with Digicel to obtain an operating license by mid-September, officials said.
Digicel plans to improve and expand the digital cellular network in Guyana, a nation of about 770,000 people, where the existing network reaches only 22 percent of the country, Digicel CEO Colm Delves said.
The move will put Jamaica-based Digicel, which operates in about 20 countries, in competition with the U.S.-owned Guyana Telephone and Telegraph Company.
PUERTO RICO: Robert F. Kennedy Jr. urges island to block hotel projects on undeveloped beach
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Robert F. Kennedy Jr. has urged Puerto Rican legislators to block the construction of resorts on an undeveloped beach on the island's northeast coast.
In a letter to the U.S. territory's House of Representatives, the environmental lawyer said he welcomed local legislation that would declare the area a natural reserve and warned the resorts would destroy the environment and ruin drinking water.
"These proposed developments would involve the filling of wetlands, channelization of rivers, and clearance of coastal vegetation, thus destroying the natural integrity" of the area, he said.
Marriott International Inc. and Four Seasons Hotels Inc. have plans to build resorts on the beach near the town of Fajardo. Ringed by forested mountains, it is favored by surfers and fishermen and is a prime nesting spot for endangered leatherback sea turtles.
Environmental groups are pushing to protect the 3,200-acre (1,295-hectare) area.
Backers of the resorts have said the businesses would generate thousands of jobs for the economically depressed area. The developers have also said the projects were planned to minimize the damage to the environment.
 Load-Date: August 18, 2006

 

End of Document
