

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
July 21, 2006 Friday 6:54 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1322 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




PUERTO RICO: Standard & Poor's removes island's credit rating from alert status
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) A major credit rating agency has removed Puerto Rico from its watch list, making it easier for the U.S. territory to borrow money as it seeks to resolve the fiscal crunch that led to a partial government shutdown in May.
Standard & Poor's said it took Puerto Rico off the credit watch because the island had finally adopted a budget after two years of bickering and the adoption of spending cuts and its first-ever sales tax.
The U.S. Caribbean territory welcomed the move, which covers $17US.5 billion (€13.8 billion) in government debt.
"With this decision, Standard & Poor's has begun to recover its confidence in the credit of the island," said Alfredo Salazar, president of the island's Government Development Bank.
With the legislature and governor unable to resolve a budget standoff, the New York-based agency downgraded Puerto Rico's credit rating last May from A-Minus to BBB, two notches above junk status.
Puerto Rico has a total debt of about $US40 billion (€31.6 billion), according to Moody's Investors Service, which cut the island's credit rating to one level above junk status right after the damaging shutdown in May, when the government shut down schools and furloughed 100,000 public workers for two weeks.
Standard & Poor's said Puerto Rico's economic outlook remained negative based on its track record of lax expenditure and budget controls that could offset the new sales tax.
The 7 percent sales tax is scheduled to start Nov. 15.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Royal Dutch Shell considers selling assets in Caribbean nation
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Royal Dutch Shell PLC will consider selling its Dominican assets, including a 50 percent stake in the Caribbean nation's sole oil refinery, the company says.
The Anglo-Dutch company administers 137 service stations and maintains fuel distribution equipment and facilities in the Caribbean nation of about 9 million, in which it has operated for nearly 80 years.
"Shell will initiate a process of evaluation and revision of its complete business portfolio in order to determine if the interest shown will add value for the company's shareholders," said Rafael Maradiaga, Dominican representative for the company, in a statement.
He said "no final decision has been made."
Shell did not name any potential buyers, but said it had received interest. It announced the sale of some assets in the United States and several countries in the south Pacific in recent days, saying the company is, "focusing its portfolio toward fewer, larger-scale businesses."
French oil distributor Rubis SA also said this week it is in talks to buy Shell's marketing business interests in the North Atlantic island of Bermuda.
ANTIGUA: Venezuelan aid to upgrade airport, assist struggling carrier LIAT
ST. JOHN'S, Antigua (AP) Venezuela will provide nearly $28US million (€22 million) in aid for renovations to Antigua's airport and to help a struggling airline, the Caribbean nation's premier has announced.
Some $7US.5 million (€6 million) will go to upgrades to the V.C. Bird International Airport before the 2007 cricket World Cup, Antiguan Prime Minister Baldwin Spencer said Friday.
Spencer also said Venezuelan leader Hugo Chavez agreed to lend the Antiguan government $20US million (€16 million) to assist the struggling regional air carrier LIAT.
The governments of Antigua, Barbados, St. Vincent, and Trinidad share ownership of the Antigua-based airline, which received a $16US million (€13 million) bailout from the islands in October.
"This is a historic day in the relationship between Venezuela and Antigua and Barbuda," Spencer said during a news conference in the capital of St. John's.
Antigua and eight other nations will host matches for the cricket World Cup, which will be held in the Caribbean for the first time next year.
Under Chavez, oil-rich Venezuela has inked deals with 13 Caribbean nations since last year to sell fuel at preferential prices. Critics say the Venezuelan leader, a frequent critic of U.S. foreign policy, is using "oil diplomacy" to build anti-Washington political alliances.
Venezuela is lobbying for a rotating seat on the U.N. Security Council; Washington has urged Latin American and Caribbean nations to support a rival bid for the seat by Guatemala.
TRINIDAD: IMF official: Nation's economy robust but public spending must decrease
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) Oil- and gas-rich Trinidad's economy is strong but could overheat unless the Caribbean nation's government slashes public spending, a senior official from the International Monetary Fund says.
Caroline Atkinson, the IMF's deputy director of the western hemisphere, said Trinidad's economy was set to accelerate in 2006, with growth projected to exceed 12 percent, but the government should reduce public spending to curb inflation and take pressure off the labor market.
Atkinson, who made the comments in the capital of Port-of-Spain at the end of a two-week fact-finding mission, said the country had a historic opportunity to use energy profits to set itself on a path toward a higher living standards for its citizens.
Trinidad, with a 20 percent trade surplus, has experienced 12 years of continuous economic growth, according to the Ministry of Finance. Unemployment was 6.7 percent as of December and the annual inflation rate was approaching 8 percent in May.
The IMF official lauded Trinidad for its creation of a stabilization fund, in which the country was depositing excess energy profits for use when oil and gas prices decline.
The fund, which was started over three years ago with some $25US,000 (€19,716) has grown to reach $900US million (€709 million) in deposits.
PUERTO RICO: Government to sell shares in Puerto Rico Telephone to America Movil
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) This U.S. territory's government will sell its 28 percent holding in Puerto Rico Telephone to Mexican company America Movil SA in a bid to help the island's pension department overcome its deficit, officials say.
The sale, valued at about $500US million (€394 million) will allow the pension department to invest the funds in areas where it will get better returns, said Alfredo Salazar, president of the board of directors for the government's telephone authority.
Verizon Communications PRT's majority shareholder announced in April that it would sell its 52 percent stake in Telecomunicaciones de Puerto Rico Inc., PRT's parent company.
The government will sell its shares for $72US (€57) each, though that price could change at the end of the transaction. It was not clear when the sale would take place.
The money raised from investing the sale proceeds could represent $35US million (€27.7 million) a year, which will help alleviate the pension department's actual deficit, Salazar said.
Wireless communications provider America Movil is Latin America's largest cell phone company.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Tax dispute delays sale of Verizon's Dominican operations to Mexican firm
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Verizon Communications Inc. and the Dominican government were trying to solve a tax dispute delaying the sale of the company's operations to a Mexican company, the president's office says.
Verizon announced in April the sale of its three Caribbean and Latin American telecommunications operations for $3US.7 billion (€2.9 billion). Its Dominican and Puerto Rican operations are to be sold to America Movil SA, Latin America's largest wireless carrier.
But the government has asked Verizon to pay $500US million (€394 million) in taxes before the sale can be made, the newspaper Listin Diario reported.
President Leonel Fernandez met with the head of Verizon's Dominican operations on Thursday to discuss the issue, the president's office said in an official statement. No further details on the meeting were available.
Verizon is the largest telecommunications company in the Caribbean nation.
 Load-Date: July 22, 2006

 

End of Document
