

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
December 7, 2006 Thursday 7:54 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1085 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CAYMAN ISLANDS: Financial regulators report 7 percent growth of offshore business
GEORGETOWN, Cayman Islands (AP) The number of financial institutions setting up shop in the Cayman Islands' thriving offshore sector rose 7 percent last fiscal year, according to the Caribbean tax haven's financial regulator.
There were 570 banks and trusts and most of the world's top banks had branches or subsidiaries in the British dependency, according to a Cayman Islands Monetary Authority report on the 2005 fiscal year.
Licenses for the offshore business rose 7 percent to 709 from 663 and mutual funds increased to 6,527 in 2005 from 5,399 in 2004, the latest figures offered by regulators in the wealthy enclave. The insurance and mutual fund sectors had the most growth.
International assets booked through banks in the Cayman Islands stood at $1US.26 billion (€952 million), a statement said.
Lenient regulation and strict confidentiality laws had helped make the Cayman Islands one of the world's largest banking centers. But the territory has increasingly strengthened its financial laws since it landed on an international blacklist of 15 alleged money laundering havens in 2000.
BERMUDA: Fitch ups Rating Watch on Scottish Re
CHICAGO (AP) Fitch Ratings has revised its Rating Watch on Scottish Re Group Ltd., a Bermuda-based reinsurance company, to "Evolving" from "Negative."
The ratings agency said the change follows Scottish Re amending its bank agreement, which allows the transfer of funds from its affiliate Scottish Annuity & Life Insurance (Cayman) Ltd. to the company.
Fitch said funds are expected to be transferred to the trustee to repay $115US million (€86.64 million) of the company's senior convertible notes.
"This notification satisfies our most immediate near-term concern," Fitch said in a statement.
Shares of Scottish Re closed up 5 cents at $6US (€4.5) on the New York Stock Exchange.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Verizon resolves tax dispute with Caribbean nation
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Dominican officials have resolved a tax dispute with Verizon Communications Inc., clearing the way for the company to sell its Dominican operations to Mexican company America Movil SA, the president's office says.
President Leonel Fernandez and Verizon officials were expected to sign a compromise agreement, according to a statement by Fernandez's office. Details of the agreement were not released.
Verizon announced plans in April to sell its three Caribbean and Latin American divisions for a total $3US.7 billion (€2.9 billion), but the sale was held up by the dispute over $520US million (€392.63 million) in taxes.
Both its Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico operations were to be sold to the Mexico City-based wireless giant.
FRENCH GUIANA: Internet, TV satellites represent Arianespace's final launch for 2006
CAYENNE, French Guiana (AP) A satellite to provide broadband Internet services to rural America and another to offer TV programming to viewers in part of the Western Hemisphere will be the last spacecraft launched from French Guiana this year, officials say.
WildBlue Communications' WildBlue-1 and SES Americom's Americom-18 will be shuttled into space Friday night by an Ariane-5 launcher, according to Arianespace, the commercial arm of the 13-country European Space Agency.
"Our spacecraft has been fully loaded ... and is ready to go," said Monica Morgan, a SES Americom spokeswoman, on Wednesday. "Our team has been there over the last several weeks, putting the spacecraft through its final tests."
The launch has been given the "go-ahead" following Wednesday's launch readiness review, Arianespace said in a statement.
It will be the fifth takeoff from the Kourou launch pad this year in the French South American department, and its 174th launch since the European space consortium was created in 1980. Other launches this year have included those of Australian, French, Japanese, Mexican, Thai and American satellites.
ARUBA: Union workers at Valero's refinery ratify contract, end strike
SEROE COLORADO, Aruba (AP) Union workers who went on a weeklong strike at the Valero Energy Corp. oil refinery in Aruba have returned to work after ratifying a new five-year contract.
The contract was approved by 95 percent of union employees on Monday, the company said.
About 385 union workers, roughly half the work force at the 275,000-barrel-a-day refinery, went on strike Nov. 28, seeking higher pay and benefits. Valero, based in San Antonio, Texas, and the Independent Oil Workers Union of Aruba had been negotiating a new contract since September.
Valero, the largest independent oil refiner in the United States, said workers would receive a 47 percent increase in salary and benefits over the five-year contract period.
Francis Croes, a union secretary, said the package was one of the best contracts on the Dutch Caribbean island. "We're very happy with it," Croes said.
Valero said the weeklong walkout did not affect the refinery's output because nonunion employees did not join the strike.
The refinery is on the southern tip of Aruba, an island some 30 kilometers (20 miles) northeast of Venezuela. Valero bought the plant in 2004.
U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS: Lenders ask bankruptcy court to enforce payment by company
CHARLOTTE AMALIE, U.S. Virgin Islands (AP) The Rural Telephone Finance Cooperative has asked a bankruptcy court to enforce judgments of $520US million (€390 million) against an ailing U.S. Virgin Islands telecommunications company, officials say.
St. Croix-based Innovative Communication Corporation filed for bankruptcy on July 31 after defaulting on loans from Rural Telephone Finance Cooperative, a nonprofit lending cooperative for the rural telecommunications industry based in Virginia.
RTFC asked U.S. District Court in St. Thomas to force the company to turn over the money they were awarded by a judge in June.
"RTFC is sensitive to the significant role that telecommunications plays in the U.S. Virgin Islands economy and the lives of its residents," Steven L. Lilly, Rural Telephone Finance Cooperative's senior vice president and chief financial officer, said in a statement.
Worried that Innovative's more than 500 employees might lose their jobs in the bankruptcy, the U.S. Caribbean territory's Gov. Charles Turnbull called legislators into special session this week to discuss buying the company.
The legislators declined to consider the purchase because of concerns about the physical condition of the company's phone lines and the pension liabilities for its work force.
 Load-Date: December 8, 2006

 

End of Document
