

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
April 5, 2007 Thursday 8:28 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1299 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS: Oil refinery to shut several units next month for maintenance
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Crews have erected scaffolding at the Hovensa refinery in the U.S. Virgin Islands to prepare for a scheduled round of maintenance and inspection that will require the shutdown of several processing units at the Western Hemisphere's second-largest oil refinery.
The cleaning, inspection and repairs will take place from May 7 to June 10 and will require the hiring of about 1,800 temporary workers, said refinery spokesman Alex Moorhead.
Hovensa will not specify how many units will be closed and will not disclose whether the project will have any effects on production, Moorhead said. Hovensa typically does not release such information to avoid disrupting the market.
The refinery, on the island of St. Croix, is a joint venture between a subsidiary of Hess Corporation and a subsidiary of Petroleos de Venezuela, S.A., the Venezuelan state-owned oil company.
CUBA: Castro again jumps into public debate, chiding Bush and Brazil over biofuel
HAVANA (AP) Ailing leader Fidel Castro has returned to the public debate if not view with a column in the Communist Party newspaper denouncing U.S. promotion of using food crops for biofuels.
Castro chided the Bush administration for its support of ethanol production for automobiles, a move that the 80-year-old leader said would leave the world's poor hungry.
Eight months after stepping down as Cuba's president because of illness, Castro also gently chided leftist ally Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva for his country's ambitious plans for ethanol production and his cooperation with Bush in promoting it.
"It is not my intention to harm Brazil, nor get mixed up in affairs related to the internal politics of that great country," Castro wrote in the article, titled "Reflections of the Commander in Chief: The Internationalization of Genocide."
But, Castro said, key questions remained unanswered following weekend talks between Silva and Bush.
"From where and who will they supply the more than 500 million tons of corn and other cereals that the United States, Europe and the rich countries are going to need to produce the quantity of gallons of ethanol that the big companies of the United States and other countries demand in return for their many investments?" he asked in the column published in the daily Granma.
CARIBBEAN: Regional trade ministers to assess EU offer to drop quotas, tariffs in imports
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Caribbean trade ministers will appraise a European Commission offer to remove almost all remaining quotas and tariffs on goods shipped to the European Union, a regional trade official says.
EU Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson said Wednesday the measure would take effect Jan. 1, 2008. By removing the remaining tariffs and quotas for Caribbean, African and Pacific nations, the EU would create the "best possible opportunities for these economies," he said.
The European Commission said the trade offer covered all products, including all fruit and vegetables.
"This might appear to be quite liberal on the part of the EU but ... we are unsure what this means as yet," said Henry Jeffrey, Guyana's trade minister and the region's agriculture spokesman.
He said regional ministers will meet April 12-14 in Jamaica to review the offer, which will take effect through "economic partnership agreements," to be negotiated with each region.
The trade offer would include a phase-in period for two major crops: sugar and rice. Jeffrey said the Caribbean is looking for a fixed price for its sugar, considering the region's 400-year history exporting the sweetener to Europe.
CARIBBEAN: Fugitive founder of BetOnSports gambling Web site to be extradited to U.S.
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) A U.S. federal judge has ruled that BetOnSports gambling Web site founder Gary Stephen Kaplan should be extradited to the mainland United States to face a 22-count criminal indictment.
Magistrate Marcos Lopez also said Kaplan, who was arrested March 28 in the Dominican Republic and brought to Puerto Rico, poses a flight risk and should not be freed on bond pending his transfer from the U.S. island territory.
Kaplan's attorney, Maria Sandoval, said the businessman would seek to be released on bail after he is taken to Missouri, where he faces charges as part of a U.S. crackdown on online gambling. Kaplan, 48, was named in a 22-count criminal case alleging fraud and racketeering.
Federal prosecutors indicted BetOnSports PLC last year for allegedly breaking a 1961 law by allowing U.S. customers to gamble and place bets over the phone and online. The company later closed its U.S. operations.
The company's former CEO David Carruthers remains under house arrest in the St. Louis area awaiting trial.
PUERTO RICO: B. Braun to shutter island plant, shift production
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) German medical device maker B. Braun Melsungen AG has announced it will close its plant in Puerto Rico and relocate production to other factories.
After 33 years of operating in the U.S. Caribbean territory, B. Braun of Puerto Rico Inc. will phase out production in the southwestern town of Sabana Grande and eliminate 400 jobs by the end of the year, plant general manager Felipe Sandoval said in a statement.
Roughly 80 positions will be cut by the end of this month.
Sandoval said the company aims to save money by consolidating operations, and will shift the plant's production to factories in the Dominican Republic, Italy, Brazil, and Pennsylvania.
JAMAICA: Island to target flesh-eating parasite in bid to boost livestock production
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) A destructive parasite that consumes the living flesh of warmblooded animals will be targeted in an emergency eradication program in this Caribbean nation, the government says.
Jamaican agriculture officials have proposed allocating 280 million Jamaican dollars (US$4.2 million; €3.1 million) to eliminate screwworms, the parasitic larvae of a greenish-blue blowfly species that feeds on the flesh of livestock and other warmblooded animals. Screwworms can be harmful to humans.
Under the proposal to Parliament, the government would purchase millions of sexually sterile screwworm flies, which mate with the natural flies but don't produce offspring, effectively short-circuiting the pest's reproductive cycle.
Some 24 million sterile flies would be released each week across Jamaica to battle the bug and increase food production. The method has proven to be effective in other countries, including the United States and Mexico.
"The project is expected to complete the eradication process and declare the country screwworm free," the government statement said.
Screwworm infestations begin when the female fly lays eggs on an open wound. As eggs hatch, the tiny burrowing maggots often kill livestock, wildlife and other warm-blooded creatures while feeding on their living flesh.
PUERTO RICO: Doral gets delisting warning from NYSE for failing to file annual report on time
NEW YORK (AP) Doral Financial Corp., a Puerto Rico-based mortgage banker, says it received a warning from the New York Stock Exchange that its shares might be delisted because it has not yet filed its annual report.
The company's report is late due to delays in preparing its financial statements for the year ended Dec. 31, 2006. Company management is evaluating its internal control over financial reporting.
On March 19, NYSE Regulation Inc. said it would monitor the company and filing status of the annual report for up to 12 months. If the company has not filed with in six moths of the due date, NYSE will formally evaluate the company and either grant an extension up to six months or start suspension and delisting procedures.
Doral said it expects to file its report during the second half of April.
 Load-Date: April 6, 2007

 

End of Document
