

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
September 7, 2006 Thursday 8:17 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1429 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




TURKS AND CAICOS: Premier aims to block Canadian company's purchase of electric utilities
PROVIDENCIALES, Turks and Caicos (AP) Premier Michael Misick has said he will try to block a Canadian company's purchase of two electric utilities, arguing the companies responsible for serving most Turks and Caicos residents should stay in local hands.
Fortis Inc. announced a US$90 million (€70 million) deal last week to buy PPC Limited and Atlantic Equipment and Power Limited, which together provide electricity to 80 percent of the British Caribbean territory's population nearly 7,500 customers.
In a letter to the local companies, Misick said their operating agreement prevents them from transferring the license without government approval. He said he was seeking legal advice from the attorney general.
Misick also said it was in "extremely poor taste and utterly disrespectful" for the companies to sell all their outstanding shares without first notifying the government.
The St. John's, Newfoundland-based company obtained the two utilities from locally owned T.C. Energy Holdings Inc. in a deal that includes assumed debt. Fortis, which also owns electric utilities in Belize and the Cayman Islands, made the deal through a subsidiary, Fortis Energy Ltd of Bermuda.
PPC is the sole provider of electricity in Providenciales, North Caicos and Middle Caicos islands under a 50-year license that expires in 2037.
PUERTO RICO: Government employees, prisoners recruited for island's coffee harvest
MAYAGUEZ, Puerto Rico (AP) Puerto Rico announced it will recruit public employees and prisoners to help complete the coffee harvest on the island, where a shortage of pickers threatens the survival of the crop.
The government will coordinate with farmers in the western highlands to assign employees to work between Sept. 9 and Dec. 17, said Ivette Thon, a spokeswoman for the Agriculture Department.
Volunteer drives have been organized in previous years to help bridge the labor gap, and last year some members of the governor's Cabinet and a small number of public employees participated to highlight the traditional importance of the industry.
Puerto Rico was among the world's leading coffee exporters in the 19th century, but increased competition hurt the business and today nearly all Puerto Rican coffee stays on the island.
The number of coffee pickers available for the remaining crop has dropped, meanwhile, as workers have quit to take less strenuous, better-paying jobs in other sectors.
Last week, Gov. Anibal Acevedo Vila promised "the harvest will not be lost" and asked the Corrections Department to revive a program that allowed inmates to pick coffee beans last year.
The inmates who participated were paid the same as regular coffee pickers US$5 (€4) per 28-pound (13-kilogram) bucket of ripe beans and got 10 days taken off their sentences for each month of work.
U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS: Moody's gives U.S. Caribbean territory its first ever credit rating
CHARLOTTE AMALIE, U.S. Virgin Islands (AP) Moody's Investors Service has given the U.S. Virgin Islands its first ever bond rating, saying the outlook was stable for the territory's economy.
The government sought a bond rating for the first time to attract foreign investment and boost its economy, which is emerging from a period of high unemployment and heavy deficit spending.
New York-based Moody's gave the islands a "Baa3" investment grade rating one notch above junk status for general obligation bonds.
The Virgin Islands government plans to issue up to US$500 million (€391 million) in bonds this year to repair a shortfall in the pension system, said Nathan Simmonds, an adviser to Gov. Charles Turnbull.
In the past, the Caribbean territory has sold US$540 million (€421 million) in bonds without a rating by pledging tax revenue as the primary source of repayment.
The government has also applied for bond ratings from two other agencies, Standard and Poor's and Fitch Ratings.
TRINIDAD: Premier faults U.S. delay in renewing trade deal
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) Trinidadian Prime Minister Patrick Manning said the United States has been "ignoring the Caribbean" and suggested his country could get better prices for its natural gas in other markets, such as Brazil and Mexico.
Manning said Washington had not been working hard enough to renew the Caribbean Basin Initiative, a preferential trade deal for 24 countries set to expire in 2008, partly because it has been preoccupied with terrorism since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
Trinidad's Energy Minister Lenny Saith said that a draft agreement that could lead to gas sales in Mexico was awaiting signatures by both countries.
In a speech to oil and gas industry executives Tuesday, Manning noted the twin-island republic is the leading supplier of liquid natural gas to the United States.
"Too much of our (gas) goes to one destination and incidentally at prices that are not by any means the best prices that are available," he said. "We are going to have to decide whether we wish to place all our eggs in one basket."
U.S. Ambassador Roy Austin, who was in the audience during the speech, told reporters afterward that he would send a copy of the remarks to Washington.
The Caribbean Basin Initiative offers 24 countries duty-free access to the U.S. market for most goods and accounts for more than US$1 billion (€780 million) in annual commerce, according to trade officials.
PUERTO RICO: Aviation and aerospace parts company expands plant, creating 400 jobs
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Aviation and aerospace parts company Hamilton Sundstrand is planning a multimillion dollar (euro) expansion of its plant in southern Puerto Rico that will create 374 new jobs, the governor has said.
The US$40 million (€31 million) expansion in Santa Isabel will bring the companies total number of employees to 909, said Gov. Anibal Acevedo.
"These jobs are highly skilled, well paid and require technical knowledge," he said.
Hamilton Sundstrand, formerly known as Sundstrand Aerospace, is based in Hartford, Connecticut, and began operating in Puerto Rico in 1992. It makes aviation and aerospace parts, as well as NASA spacesuits.
It is the fourth time the company has expanded its operations during its 14 years in Puerto Rico. A call placed to a Hamilton Sundstrand spokesman seeking comment was not immediately returned.
TRINIDAD: U.S. official calls for private energy investment to maintain regional stability
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) Caribbean countries should open their energy markets to private investment to maintain economic stability, a U.S. energy official said an apparent rebuke of nations receiving oil from Venezuela on preferential terms.
Karen Harbert, an assistant U.S. secretary of energy, told a regional energy conference that a resurgence of government control over energy has increased the countries' vulnerability to economic and security crises.
Under a pact known as Petrocaribe, 14 countries pay only part of the bill for Venezuelan fuel up front and can finance the rest over 25 years at low interest. The government of Hugo Chavez, a fierce critic of the U.S., provides storage tanks, docking facilities and other infrastructure.
The deals signed with Venezuela also require states to assert more control over the oil business, assuming tasks previously left to private companies.
The two-day conference was organized by the Washington-based Caribbean Central American Action, a group that promotes business in the region to spur economic development.
Caribbean delegates said they hoped to reduce their dependence on oil and gas from other countries by focusing on renewable sources of energy. At least 26 such projects are being developed across the region, said Trinidad's energy minister, Lenny Saith.
PUERTO RICO: Tenere de Puerto Rico to close 2 factories in U.S. territory, leaving 92 jobless
PONCE, Puerto Rico (AP) Manufacturing firm Tenere de Puerto Rico will close its two factories in southern Puerto Rico and dismiss its 92 workers, a company official said.
The sites will close on Sept. 30, said Luis Gonzalez, vice president. The work performed at the factories includes precision sheet metal production and finishing.
"The reason that Tenere is leaving Puerto Rico is because we depend on contracts. There is not going to be contract renewals, so obviously it is not viable to remain here," Gonzalez said.
Employees at the plants in Ponce and Penuelas will receive three weeks of compensation pay, among other payments, he said. He did not disclose how much the total compensation would be.
The company is part of Wisconsin-based Tenere Inc.
 Load-Date: September 8, 2006

 

End of Document
