

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
August 24, 2006 Thursday 6:42 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1243 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




PUERTO RICO: Engineering firm Infotech Aerospace Services expands operations in U.S. territory
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Engineering firm Infotech Aerospace Services has opened a second facility in northwestern Puerto Rico and plans to hire 100 new employees, the company has said.
The 22,000-square-foot (2,044-square-meter) facility in Isabela will help the company meet demand for its engineering work, said Rita Peralta, president and general manager of Infotech.
The Isabela-based company began operating in this U.S. Caribbean territory in 2003 as a joint venture of India's Infotech Enterprises Ltd. and Connecticut-based Pratt & Whitney, a unit of United Technologies Corp.
United Technologies was investing $7US.3 million (€5.7 million) in Infotech to create the new jobs, for mainly engineers and draftsmen, which will increase the company's work force to 500, Peralta said.
The company will recruit Puerto Ricans for the positions, allowing the "intellectual talent to remain in the island, contributing to economic development," Gov. Anibal Acevedo Vila said in a statement.
Infotech specializes in aerospace engineering, mechanical design and software development. Its projects include work on the Joint Strike Fighter, a U.S. Defense Department program to build the next generation of planes for the U.S. Marines and Air Force.
TRINIDAD: Atlantic LNG names new CEO
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) Atlantic LNG, which exports liquid natural gas to the U.S., Spain and the Caribbean, has announced that its chief executive officer will leave the company.
Oscar Prieto, a native of Argentina who is currently president of BG Egypt, will replace Rick Cape as CEO on Sept. 1, Atlantic LNG Chairman John Andrews said in a statement.
No reason was given for the departure of Cape, who led Atlantic LNG for more than four years and will now join BP America as a vice president.
Trinidad's Atlantic LNG Train 4 plant began producing liquid natural gas in December and is expected to make 5.2 million metric tons (5.7 tons) of LNG per year. The company is a consortium of BP PLC formerly British Petroleum; Spain's Repsol YPF; and Trinidad's state-owned oil company.
Trinidad and Tobago, a twin-island nation in the southern Caribbean, is the leading supplier of liquid natural gas to the United States, accounting for about 75 percent of imports.
U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS: Refinery seeks to halt payments to active duty troops
CHARLOTTE AMALIE, U.S. Virgin Islands (AP) A new law requiring companies in the U.S. Virgin Islands to pay active-duty National Guard and reserve troops the difference between their military pay and private-sector salaries is being contested by one of the world's biggest oil refineries.
The Hovensa oil refinery, owned by the state oil company of Venezuela and New York-based Amerada Hess Corporation, is suing to strike down the law, passed by the island's legislature in December, saying it's unfair and open-ended.
But critics of the lawsuit argue the measure is necessary to sustain families of soldiers deployed to Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere.
Hovensa, the U.S. territory's largest private employer, sued on July 28 seeking to stop making up the salary difference for at least eight employees serving in the National Guard.
Many U.S. states offer to pay public employees the difference between their federal military pay and state pay, and many large U.S. employers voluntarily pay the difference, seeing it as a matter of patriotism or good business. The new law requires large private employers in the U.S. Caribbean territory to do the same.
Virgin Islands Sen. Celestino White wrote the law, and said the refiner shouldn't complain, especially since it has received tax breaks from the government.
The refinery produces up to 500,000 barrels of fuel a day and sold $6US.5 billion (€5.05 billion) in petroleum products in 2005, according to the Bureau of Economic Research.
PUERTO RICO: Island's Compania Serralles takes over distribution of its rum in U.S.
PONCE, Puerto Rico (AP) Compania Serralles, which makes several Puerto Rican rums including Don Q and Captain Morgan will take over distribution of its products in the United States due to disappointing sales, company officials said.
Jose Higuera, vice president of Serralles, said the company planned to start distributing their rums from New York to other cities in the U.S. He did not say when they expected to begin distribution.
"We will be able to offer to the Puerto Rican community that lives in the United States a better service ... and will be able to have better distribution and presence in the markets in Florida, New York, the center of the U.S. and California," he said.
Various distributors had previously handled delivery of Compania Serralles rums, which also include Palo Viejo, Llave and Granado. Felix Juan Serralles Jr., one of the company owners, said those distributors didn't perform well because the product wasn't manufactured by them.
Millions of crates of rum from the company's distillery in Ponce in southern Puerto Rico are distributed in the U.S. The company gets about $400US million (€310.6 million) back in taxes from its U.S. sales. Information about total U.S. sales was not immediately available.
GUYANA: IDB: Nation cannot use loan to hire former U.S. law enforcement official
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) The Inter-American Development Bank has said funds from a $20US million (€15.6 million) loan to boost Guyana's infrastructure cannot be used to pay former New York City police commissioner Bernard Kerik to oversee reforms to the country's police force.
President Bharrat Jagdeo, who is running for re-election on Aug. 28, said the bank agreed to fund Kerik's services with a portion of the loan.
But on Aug. 18, the bank said in a statement that "none of our current bank operations in Guyana is financing the consulting services of Bernard Kerik either as an individual or as part of a consulting firm."
Shortly afterward, presidential spokesman Robert Persaud said no final decision had been made on hiring Kerik.
Jagdeo had announced that Kerik, who visited the violence-wracked South American nation last week, would help overhaul Guyana's police force if the ruling People's Progressive Party wins a fourth consecutive five-year term.
Kerik first drew U.S. national attention while leading the New York city police department's response to the Sept. 11 attacks. In late 2004, President George W. Bush nominated him for homeland security chief, but Kerik withdrew after acknowledging he had not paid all taxes for a family nanny-housekeeper and that the woman may have been in the country illegally.
PUERTO RICO: Teva Pharmaceutical to close island plant in 4th quarter, affecting 550 jobs
NEW YORK (AP) Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., the world's largest generic drugmaker, is closing a plant in Puerto Rico as part of an reorganization related to its acquisition of Ivax Corp. earlier this year.
The Israel-based company announced that it plans to close its Cidra, Puerto Rico plant, which originally made about 50 products, in the fourth quarter, affecting about 550 workers. Most of the manufacturing performed at Cidra has already been transferred to other plants.
Teva estimates it will save about $45 million (€35 million) in 2007 as a result of the closure.
The company said it will offer affected employees financial and placement assistance, and that the closure will not affect its active pharmaceuticals ingredients plant in Puerto Rico.
 Load-Date: August 25, 2006

 

End of Document
