

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
March 8, 2007 Thursday 8:40 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1084 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: DR enters long-delayed trade deal with United States
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) The Dominican Republic made its long-awaited entry into a trade accord with the United States and Central American nations, leaving Costa Rica as the only signatory country where the deal has not taken effect.
The announcement came 14 months after the Central American Free Trade Act, or CAFTA-DR, was supposed to take effect in this Caribbean country of 9 million. The Dominican Republic's entry was held up while lawmakers revised intellectual property laws governing the pharmaceutical industry and handled disagreements over fuel transportation rights.
The Dominican Association of Free-Trade Zones has called the accord essential to the sector's survival, allowing manufacturers to buy cheaper raw materials and enjoy expanded access to the U.S. market.
"If we had not become a beneficiary state with preferential access to this great market ... it would inhibit the growth of the free-trade zones we have in our country," Dominican President Leonel Fernandez said.
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and El Salvador previously entered the agreement, part of a U.S. push to boost U.S. exports worldwide.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Saudi Arabia consider building oil refinery in DR
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Saudi Arabia may build an oil refinery in the Dominican Republic in hopes of quickly expanding their access to the U.S. market, the kingdom's embassy spokesman in Washington said.
Dominican Foreign Minister Carlos Morales Troncoso discussed the proposal during an hourlong meeting with senior Saudi oil official Ibrahim Al-Mohana and executives of the Saudi Arabian Oil Co., or Saudi Aramco, in Riyadh, the Dominican foreign ministry said.
Saudi Aramco already has refineries in the United States, but Saudi officials see a Caribbean refinery as a means of accessing the U.S. market while avoiding the environmental impact studies required in the United States, Nail Al-Jubeir, spokesman for the Saudi embassy in Washington, told The Associated Press by telephone.
Building in the United States is, "a long, tedious process" that can cost up to $100US million (about €76 million), Al-Jubeir said.
Dominican officials hope a new refinery will end chronic fuel shortages and lower gas prices, which were $4US.01 per gallon (€0.81 per liter) on Tuesday, in the nation of nine million. They also hope to export the refined fuel to nearby countries, including the United States.
BERMUDA: Bacardi seeks to buy Swedish group that makes Absolut
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Bacardi Ltd., the company best known for its top-selling rum, is seeking to add Absolut vodka to its stable of brands.
Bermuda-based Bacardi has informed the Swedish government that it would like to acquire Vin & Sprit AB, the state-owned liquor group that may soon be up for sale as part of a privatization plan.
"Bacardi wants a global premium vodka and to acquire a brand with the international status of Absolut would be terrific," said Patricia Neal, a company spokeswoman in Miami.
The center-right Swedish government has asked Parliament to approve plans for privatizing Vin & Sprit along with real estate group Vasakronan AB and residential mortgage company SBAB.
A deal would make sense, Neal said, because Vin & Sprit V&S is strong in Northern Europe and Bacardi is strong in Southern Europe. "A merger between the two would be about seizing natural growth opportunities," she said.
Privately held Bacardi includes such brands as Bacardi rum, Grey Goose vodka and Dewar's scotch whisky.
GUYANA: Exxon holds talks with Guyanese president on offshore oil
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) A team from Exxon Mobil Corp. has met with Guyana's president, joining other oil companies in positioning itself to begin drilling off the nation's coast once a U.N. body rules on a border dispute with Suriname, officials said.
The U.S. oil giant has the rights to a large concession, but has delayed exploration because of the long-running border feud between the South American nations. The U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea is expected to resolve the dispute in May.
The talks Monday with the Exxon team led by Jim Flannery, the company's South America area manager, come two weeks after the Spanish-Argentine company Repsol YPF and Toronto, Canada-based CGX Energy Inc. met with Guyanese President Bharrat Jagdeo to discuss exploration.
Industry experts say the contested Guyana-Suriname Basin, an underwater area of hundreds of square miles (square kilometers), may hold as much as 15 billion barrels of oil along with huge deposits of natural gas.
JAMAICA: Montego Bay airport adds new terminal for high-end tourists
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) Visitors traveling in private jets to Jamaica's tourism mecca of Montego Bay can now transit through customs at a special terminal for high-end tourists at the international airport.
The new $2US million (€1.5 million) terminal was designed to eliminate long security lines for VIP travelers on private and corporate aircraft, said Wyley Sweeney, manager of the Jet Centre, built by Barbados-based International Aircraft Management, Inc.
"Going through immigration and customs is now a five-minute process," said Sweeney, adding the facility at the eastern end of Sangster International Airport's runway officially opened last week.
The 4,500 sq.-foot (418 sq.-meter) facility also has a private passenger lounge at the north coast resort area's airport, which is managed by MBJ Airport, a consortium of Canadian, Chilean, Israeli and Spanish companies.
CUBA: Cuban government considers trade agreement with Panama
PANAMA CITY, Panama (AP) Cuba has floated a proposal to boost trade with Panama by reducing tariffs on a range of goods, the Cuban foreign minister said during a visit to the Central American nation.
Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque said Havana had presented a list of goods it would like to include in such an agreement to "create conditions to increase trade."
Panamanian Foreign Minister Samuel Lewis Navarro did not comment specifically on the proposal, but said, "We have identified other areas of cooperation which we can explore in the future, like the topic of trade."
Currently trade between the two countries amounts to only about $50US million (€38 million). Panama exports mostly raw materials and manufactured goods to the island nation, while Cuba ships Panama tobacco, rum, cement and pharmaceuticals.
Perez Roque did not say when the two countries might begin talks on an agreement.
 Load-Date: March 9, 2007

 

End of Document
