

A triumph of group spirit for the Azzurri
The Associated Press
July 10, 2006 Monday 5:07 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 935 words
Byline: By ANDREW DAMPF
Dateline: DUISBURG Germany
Body




A triumph of group spirit.
It almost sounds like one of those banal publicity lines printed on a film advertisement. Yet that phrase best captures how Italy won its fourth World Cup.
Starting two years ago when he took over as coach, Marcello Lippi created a cohesive unit that "feels like a club," as he so often said was his objective.
A team in which everyone has a small role and egos are cast aside "for the good of the squad."
This wasn't like 1982, when Paolo Rossi's six goals propelled Italy to its last World Cup victory.
The 12 goals Italy produced over its seven games here were scored by 10 players. Everyone on the roster except for the two backup goalkeepers saw at least some action.
"In this World Cup everyone felt important, from the first guy to the last. That might be the most beautiful thing," defender Marco Materazzi said.
Materazzi and center forward Luca Toni led the team with two goals apiece.
It was Materazzi's fellow defenders though mainly captain Fabio Cannavaro and goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon that formed the backbone of the team's championship run.
Italy didn't allow opponents any goals in normal play. Only Cristian Zaccardo's own-goal in a 1-1 draw with the United States in the first round, and Zinedine Zidane's penalty shot for France in the final found the Azzurri net.
"Cannavaro has been the best player of the tournament, Buffon the best goalkeeper," Lippi said. "Sometimes players see Buffon in front of them and that's enough."
The Azzurri won against the backdrop of the biggest scandal in Italian soccer history.
"If the scandal hadn't happened I think we wouldn't have won the World Cup," midfielder Gennaro Gattuso said. "It has given us more strength."
Scandal and World Cup achievement are old acquaintances in Italy. A betting scandal preceded the 1982 tournament.
Now, allegations of corruption and favoritism have piled up against Juventus, AC Milan, Fiorentina and Lazio the four Serie A clubs that 13 members of Italy's 23-man squad play for.
Prosecutors are seeking to demote Juventus into Serie C and to strip it of league titles won in the past two seasons. They also want Milan, Fiorentina and Lazio relegated to Serie B.
"I've tried to calm my teammates in difficult moments, and there have been many in these seven matches," Cannavaro said.
Prosecutors' requests for relegation were announced in Rome the same day Italy beat host Germany 2-0 in the semifinals.
A day after Italy beat Australia 1-0 on a final-play penalty kick by Francesco Totti in the second round, the national team was hit by news that former teammate Gianluca Pessotto had fallen from a window at Juventus headquarters.
Pessotto is still fighting for his life at a Turin hospital.
Italy was insulted by its own fans during its pre-World Cup training camp in Florence and the squad arrived in Germany enraged. Unleashing weeks of piled-up anger, Italy dominated Ghana 2-0 in its opening game.
The physical draw with the United States followed, with Italy hurting in the second half despite playing 10 on 9.
Italy's low point of the tournament was when midfielder Daniele De Rossi's elbow bloodied the face of United States forward Brian McBride, resulting in a four-match ban for the team's youngest player.
Italy beat the Czech Republic 2-0 to close out the first round and win Group E, opening up a favorable route to the semifinals. The win was costly, however, as defender Alessandro Nesta aggravated a right thigh injury and missed the rest of the tournament.
Materazzi was shown a straight red card for a dubious foul in the second-round game against Australia. Italy struggled to hold off the Socceroos with only 10 men until Fabio Grosso drew another suspect call that resulted in Totti's winning penalty a blast into the top left corner of Australia's net.
Ukraine put up little resistance in the quarterfinals and Toni scored twice in a 3-0 victory.
Germany had never lost in 14 tries in Dortmund's noisy stadium, but the Azzurri weren't unnerved in the semifinals. Grosso and Alessandro Del Piero scored in the 119th and 120th minutes to silence virtually the entire country.
Italy had four strikers on the field in the final minutes against Germany as Lippi sought to avoid a penalty shootout.
"This World Cup marks the end of Italy's 'catenaccio' history," midfielder Andrea Pirlo said, referring to Italy's infamous lockdown defense of the past.
After Zidane's penalty kick and Materazzi's equalizer 19 minutes into the final, Italy finally was forced into its dreaded shootout. The Azzurri were eliminated from three consecutive World Cups on penalties in 1990, 1994 and 1998, with Roberto Baggio famously missing his decisive shot over the bar to hand Brazil the '94 title.
This time, all five Azzurri converted their shots: Pirlo, Materazzi, De Rossi, Del Piero and Grosso. David Trezeguet kicked his attempt off the crossbar for France, and Italy was champion.
What's next for the Azzurri?
The impromptu tarantella they performed on the victory stand should go over well at their next game, a friendly on Aug. 16 in Taranto.
Still, Lippi is noncommittal about returning.
"Whatever my next job is, whether it's with the national team or not, I hope to have the same relationship with the players that I've had here," Lippi said.
Qualifying for the 2008 European Championship begins in September. Italy opens up at home against Lithuania on Sept. 2 and then visits France four days later.
Italy certainly has enough qualified players to make a run at the Euro 2008 title.
Whatever the results and whatever the outcome of the scandal, Italy can call itself world champion for the next four years.
 Load-Date: July 11, 2006

 

End of Document
