

A view from stage right: the making of "A Prairie Home Companion"
The Associated Press
May 26, 2007 Saturday 4:00 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 1518 words
Byline: By DEBORAH HASTINGS, AP National Writer
Dateline: ST. PAUL Minn.
Body




During rehearsal, the boss meanders backstage, singing to himself. He doesn't so much wander as he circles like an approaching jet.
When he descends from on high is anybody's guess. He's also the air traffic controller.
And it's his airport.
The boss is Garrison Keillor, the omnipotent and sometimes oblivious creator of "A Prairie Home Companion," the public radio show adored by 4 million fans, broadcast live from Minnesota's mythical Lake Wobegon home to Norwegian bachelor farmers, strong women, good-looking men and above-average children.
This is not the gentle narrator you hear on the air that witty, sensitive observer of triviality and tribulations. This is a complicated and detached ringmaster, issuing orders that change faster than weather. His loyal, highly professional staff stays in step.
Ditch the script? No problem. Get the mayor of International Falls, Minn., on the phone and patch her into the live broadcast? Alrighty, then. Fill five minutes of otherwise dead air because he's cut short his much-loved monologue ("Well, it's been a quiet week here in Lake Wobegon ...") in the middle of a live broadcast? You betcha, as they say in Minnesota.
He's written books, essays, columns and a screenplay, but he's most revered for what he does on Saturday nights: tender teller of tales from a town that does not exist; impresario of an exceptional house band and troupe of actors who deliver a dizzying series of skits, songs and sound effects.
Virtually the entire two-hour program comes out of his head. Which is its beauty, or its conceit, depending on one's view.
But for right now, take a moment to enjoy this view: stage right at the Fitzgerald Theater in downtown St. Paul. The house lights are dimmed. The 996 red-upholstered seats are empty. Onstage, the cast and crew are rehearsing.
Linger over images not seen in the mind's-eye of radio. This is the well-oiled and often magical machine that produces "A Prairie Home Companion."
There are two shows this weekend.
Friday's performance won't be broadcast it's staged only for the program's worshipful hometown audience, and serves as a kind of dress rehearsal for Saturday's regular show, carried coast-to-coast on more than 580 stations and later aired in Europe.
At 2 p.m. on Friday, tonight's musical lineup is dripping with love.
"Devoted to You," the Everly Brothers classic; "Loving You," a 1957 hit by Elvis Presley; "I Can't Stop Loving You," made memorable by Ray Charles, and Freddy Fender's country promise, "Before the Next Teardrop Falls."
Keillor and band leader Rich Dworsky who can play most any song off the top of his head are working out chord changes with the Guy's All-Star Shoe Band.
Keillor loves to sing, but the feeling isn't mutual. He is sometimes on key, and just as often not.
His hair stands on end. He hasn't shaved. His body language says: "I Am Thinking. Approach At Your Own Peril."
Keillor, who is about to turn 65, has never cared much about his appearance.
His forehead is a cliff dropping into overgrown eyebrows. His 6-foot-4 frame hangs at odd angles. His legs go on for miles.
"I have a face for radio," he says quite often.
Words are most important. Writing, he believes, is rewriting.
He does the latter during rehearsals, after rehearsals and during the broadcast. A song is in. It's out. Likewise for the comedy skits.
The performers learned long ago to roll with it. "This is his show," smiles bassist Gary Raynor, who's recorded with Janet Jackson and played with the Count Basie band. "We put this together very fast. There's not a moment to waste. Everyone just kind of gives him space. He always has a vision, and he knows what it is."
Stage manager Albert Webster may be the hardest-working man in Lake Wobegon: he keeps the show on schedule, despite morphing dialogue and disappearing songs.
At 3 p.m. Webster doesn't have a script for tonight's performance, just a succession of marked-up pages. Webster gets each version to actors Sue Scott, Tim Russell and sound-effects guy Tom Keith.
"A lot of it's off the top of their heads," Webster jokes, "and other body orifices."
Where else could a group of actors and musicians put on a radio show featuring famous guests like Meryl Streep and Bonnie Raitt? Accompanied by comedy bits, gospel songs, audience sing-alongs and poetry readings?
Forty-five minutes later, Keillor is having second thoughts. "I'm going to scratch 'Teardrop,'" he says. "It's gone."
At 5 p.m. Keillor announces: "I'm thinking of restoring 'Teardrop,'" he says. "Try it."
The band moves on to "Loving You," whose lyrics he has rewritten. Now it's an ode to erupting children. He rhymes diarrhea with bad tortillas. Next verse: "Pools of vomit in my lap. Great big chunks. Of your lunch."
There's plenty of potty talk on "Prairie Home Companion." Much ado about poop and boogers and the various vagaries of advancing age incontinence, for example, and its slippery slide into Depends. There is constant work for the sound-effects guys (Keith and Fred Newman) in simulating audible flatulence.
Such pranks never fail to delight audience members possessing a 10-year-old boy's sense of humor. Many have gray hair.
To his sound-effects table, Keith has added shoes (he buys very old pairs at thrift shops because they have harder soles and make more noise). There also are miniature doors with metal knobs, a dead bolt lock, a rotary dial telephone (to get that old-fashioned, metallic brr-iinn-gg).
They run through other bits, including a scene from Cafe Boeuf, where the patronizing waiter speaks in bad puns and French-accented gibberish. "What wine goes with zee pea-nuht buhterr and jellie sandweech? Why zee pea-nuht new-arrr, but of course. Heh heh heh."
Keillor listens with a faraway look. His mouth hardens into a perfectly shaped, upside-down U. This happens when he's not crazy about what he's hearing.
His monologue for tonight is not written down. It's all in his head.
In his tiny dressing room, he changes into a white shirt and black pants. Pacing, he fiddles with the knot of his red tie, which matches the color of his socks and shoes, the uniform of every show.
He slips on a black jacket and takes a sip of water. He strides across the hardwood floor boards and turns to face the Shoe band.
"Tony, white spot please," he says to an unseen technician. Arms lifted, he nods to Dworsky at the piano, who plunks out the well-known notes of the show's theme song.
"Oh, hear that old piano from down the avenue ..."
The audience claps and whistles. The noise grows thunderous.
Curtain up.
In the cold light of Saturday, as rehearsals begin anew, here's the question: How much of the show has Keillor changed overnight?
A lot, it turns out. And he's still at it.
He's rewritten the skits. And then there's the matter of the music therapist. No one has seen him, and Keillor has invited him to perform during the broadcast.
At 3:15 p.m. a nervous-looking man in glasses approaches the stage manager.
"You're the music therapist?" asks Webster.
"Yep."
"You have any idea what you're supposed to do?"
"Not a clue."
Keillor has appeared. Webster presents Todd Schwartzberg of the McPhail Center for Music in Minneapolis.
Like a lamb to slaughter, Schwartzberg trails the host across the stage to meet Dworsky. By way of introduction, the boss says: "Todd is going to do a couple of songs with the audience, and you're going to play."
Dworsky nods. Schwartzberg looks terrified.
He has to borrow a guitar from the band.
The therapist sings: "What kind of feelings do you have? Are you happy? Are you frustrated? Are you sad?"
This is a little too touchy-feely for stalwart Lake Wobegon, where one simply soldiers on like a good Norwegian Lutheran and keeps one's pie hole shut.
Keillor doesn't answer. He's wearing that frown he gets when he doesn't like something.
Without a word, and without resurrection, "Feelings" dies.
Twenty minutes to show time.
Keillor stands in the wings, his monologue its usual mystery.
But it always evokes a reverent response: Silence descends as he plops on a stool and begins to weave another intimate dispatch from a community so small you never need to use your turn signal, because everyone knows where you're going.
Just a few seconds to show time.
The music therapist stands at stage right staring straight ahead like a man about to be hanged.
The house lights dim.
Dworsky begins to play.
Keillor takes a long breath. "Oh, hear that old piano ..."
Three hours later, Keillor sags with exhaustion. He has shaken the hand of every fan who stayed after the show, He poses for photos. He signs autographs. He does this every week.
He thinks the monologue fell flat, but doesn't say why. After three decades of doing this, he still can't say what constitutes a good show. He's better at saying what doesn't.
He directs his comments to a bottle of iced tea he swirls in his hand like a brandy snifter. "I aspire only to silliness," he intones.
Yet he built Lake Wobegon, a place where, week after week, millions of wistful strangers slide into the corner booth of a make-believe cafe, feeling they belong to a town that exists only in Keillor's head.
And next week, he'll invite them back.
 Load-Date: May 27, 2007

 

End of Document
