

A vigil to remember the dead, pray for the missing after ice rink collapse
The Associated Press
January 3, 2006, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 927 words
Byline: By STEPHEN GRAHAM
Body



Associated Press Writer
 
BAD REICHENHALL, Germany (AP) - Residents held flickering candles in the steadily falling snow Tuesday to honor the 11 dead and pray for four missing in the wreckage of this Alpine spa town's ice rink.
Church bells tolled and thick snowflakes filled the sky a day after two deafening cracks rang out as the roof gave way, creating a twisted mass that looked like a giant broken ribcage.
"We heard two loud crashes and ran out to see what had happened," 60-year-old Isle Michel said of Monday's collapse.
"It fell in like a house of cards," Christian Lindenberg told N-24 television. "I could hear people screaming for help, screaming for their lives."
In the wreckage he found two girls, one with a wound on her head and another trapped behind a wall and wearing ice skates. "I told her, fall down and I will help you out," he said, describing how he caught the girl and brought her to safety.
As word of the collapse spread, families gathered outside the building, many searching for children or grandchildren who had gone skating.
Eleven people died, including seven children and two teenagers. A woman and two boys and a girl, aged 12-16, were believed still trapped beneath the rubble Tuesday.
A nurse, Gabi Holzner, said she treated several people whose children were killed.
"You feel so helpless. You can utter no comfort," Holzner said, lighting a candle at the vigil held around a snow-filled fountain in front of the three-story town hall.
Rescuers halted the search of the wreckage Tuesday as fears of another collapse forced officials to call in a special heavy crane to lift crossbeams from the wreckage.
Officials said they hadn't given up hope, but the delay would mean a second straight night in freezing temperatures for anyone still alive.
"As soon as it is possible, we will continue to work with dogs and helpers into the area to find the people who are still in the wreckage," said Rudi Zeif, a fire official. "We will continue the search until we have rescued or recovered all the missing."
He said searchers using dogs were "80 percent sure" of the location of one missing person. Asked if the person could be alive, he said earthquake victims had survived for several days. "We're no prophets, but we're doing everything we can to get them out as quickly as possible," Zeif said.
Pumping in warm air was ruled out because it could melt the snow and the rink ice, leaving any survivors wet and colder than before. Rescuers hoped the snow could produce an "igloo effect" that might create relatively warm pockets of air.
The steeply tilting ruined roof was threatening to collapse further, and an expert survey indicated it would be irresponsible to keep rescue workers in the rubble, said Georg Grabner, a local councilor.
Rescuers using dogs, shovels and their hands found a 5-year-old girl with only minor injuries around 11 p.m. Monday, but had found no one alive since. No calls for help have been heard since, police said.
Officials said they hoped to use a special crane to lift huge crossbeams, including one that had shifted, putting pressure on a wall and leading to fears of another collapse.
Setting up the crane was expected to take all night and officials hoped rescue operations could be resumed by dawn Wednesday.
Eighteen people were seriously injured in the collapse, which occurred Monday at 4 p.m. as the rink was about to close for the day.
Chancellor Angela Merkel expressed her "deep sympathy" for the victims Tuesday, praising the efforts of rescuers who were in "a race against time" to find survivors.
Prosecutors launched an investigation into possible negligence, an automatic step after a fatal accident.
All the victims came from Bad Reichenhall, a town of 15,000 near the border with Austria, or the surrounding area, and residents asked angry questions about why a public building could not withstand a heavy but predictable snowfall. Experts suggested a structural flaw was a more likely cause than the weight of the snow.
"There's something rotten about this. We've had a lot more snow than this before," retiree Erna Schweiger-Nolte said as she stood outside the police cordon. "The politicians say, 'save, save, save,' but it shouldn't be on the wrong things."
She said it was "well known" that the building, erected in 1972, was in poor shape and leaking.
Suspicions were fueled by an official with the town's ice hockey club who said he was told by town authorities 30 minutes before the collapse that a practice session later in the day was canceled because there was a risk of the facility collapsing.
Local officials said there had been a roughly 8-inch layer of snow on the roof, which Mayor Wolfgang Heitmeier said was well within the building's margin of safety. Nonetheless, town officials had planned to close it after the end of the day's free skate because the heavy wet snow was continuing.
Heitmeier said renovations had been discussed, but to the pool and rink equipment, not the structure itself, which was regarded as sound.
Several structural engineers expressed doubt that snow alone was the cause, and said such buildings should be inspected as they age.
"No one would get on an airplane that wasn't regularly maintained and checked," engineer Carsten Koenke said. And Horst Franke, another engineer, said on N24 television that "it couldn't just have been the snow."
German meteorologists measured nearly 1 1/2 feet of fresh, wet snow Monday in the Bavarian Alps, where Bad Reichenhall is located.
---
Associated Press writer Irene Preisinger contributed to this report from Bad Reichenhall.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos KJBR105, FRA115-117, 106, 110, REI106, 114; AP Graphic GERMANY ROOF COLLAPSE.
 Load-Date: January 4, 2006

 

End of Document
