

Academy of the Fine Arts shows the art of war
The Associated Press
September 11, 2008 Thursday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 687 words
Byline: By JOANN LOVIGLIO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA 
Body




From slogans of "taxation without representation" to paintings of noble patriots dying in battle for the greater good, words and images have long served as powerful tools to influence American public opinion during wartime.
A new exhibit at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts tracks the course of the second-longest conflict in U.S. history the American Revolutionary War and the ways art helped rally support for independence from the British and promote the values of the emerging republic.
A collaboration between the Pennsylvania Academy and the American Revolution Center, the exhibit includes about 50 examples of artwork, weapons, maps and artifacts from both organizations as well as private collectors, the Library of Congress and other institutions.
Created to celebrate the 225th anniversary of the signing of the 1783 Treaty of Paris, which formally ended the war and officially recognized the United States' sovereignty, the show will run only a month until Oct. 12 in part because of the fragility of many items.
"If people think of the American Revolution at all, they think of Yorktown (in) 1781, but there were two more years when things could have gone a number of ways," said Revolution Center curator Scott Stephenson. "(The exhibit) also takes you back to the fervent 1760s and the outbreak of the Revolution."
The show illustrates how art, in subtle and explicit ways, was used to generate support for the war, convey the necessity of sacrifice and affirmed the moral superiority of the colonials, Pennsylvania Academy curator David Brigham said.
Large portraits of George Washington and King George III hanging at opposite ends of the main gallery may look similar at a distance, but closer inspection reveals otherwise. Charles Willson Peale, an American soldier and unwavering patriot, converted the formal "grand manner" style painting of the British monarch for his 1779 portrait of Washington.
Both paintings show the respective leaders in full length, standing upright with one arm akimbo. Peale's Washington, however, lacks the aloof posture and elaborate garments broadcasting the king's wealth and status. The first president is shown at the Battle of Princeton, looking directly at the viewer not away like George III with a slight smile, the captured German flag at his feet.
"It's an ingenious adaptation," Brigham said. "Peale's saying, "This is not a monarch. He's making it very clear that Washington isn't, and he doesn't want to be."
Paul Revere's hand-colored engraving of the Boston Massacre of 1770, depicting British soldiers standing in formation and shooting unarmed civilians upon command at close range, was widely distributed in the colonies and helped shape public opinion against British oppression.
British accounts of the day, however, describe a chaotic scene nothing like Revere's heartless premeditated attack. Those reports portray an angry mob pelting the soldiers with ice, followed by a weapon discharging, then a flurry of gunfire erupting in the confusion.
"Art was a persuasive agent of the Revolution, not as a reflection of history but to say, 'We are just and right and the British are abusers of power,'" Brigham said. "Images are powerful political weapons, as much then as now."
The American Revolution Center wants to do more collaborative projects like the current show, as its roughly 10,000 artifacts remain in storage amid a bitter feud over plans to build on private land inside Valley Forge National Historical Park.
The museum and conference center development, first announced more than a decade ago, is being vehemently challenged by some residents and advocacy groups saying it is too big, too commercial and would detract from the landscape and history of Valley Forge.
"Things get bogged down in the controversy about the development," Stephenson said. "This is our opportunity to show what it's all about education and trying to re-engage Americans and international visitors about the founding of our country."
On the Net:
Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts: http://www.pafa.org
American Revolution Center: http://www.americanrevolutioncenter.org
 Load-Date: September 12, 2008

 

End of Document
