

Alitalia: Spinetta resigns from the board of directors of the Italian airline
The Associated Press
January 17, 2007 Wednesday 3:04 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 496 words
Byline: By COLLEEN BARRY, AP Business Writer
Dateline: MILAN Italy
Body




The Air France-KLM chief executive on Wednesday became the second Alitalia board member to resign this week leaving the board with just two members and without a quorum as the government seeks a bidder to take over the struggling national carrier.
Transport Minister Antonio Di Pietro was critical of the move, saying it weakened the board as the Jan. 29 deadline loomed for potential bidders to come forward with a turnaround plan.
"The fact that some board members have resigned shortly before the privatization ... weakens the board, which should be operating at its best to see this operation through," Di Pietro said in Rome, Italian news agencies reported.
Air France-KLM said in a statement that Jean-Cyril Spinetta could not remain on the Alitalia board because of the Italian government's tender last month to sell the airline but the airline refused to comment on whether the move made a bid more likely.
"As Air France-KLM is one of Alitalia's commercial partners, its chief executive can no longer be part of its board," the airline said in the statement.
The Italian government, which controls a 49.9 percent share of Alitalia, announced last months conditions for the sale of at least a 30.1 percent share to a buyer with a turnaround plan spawning speculation about possible buyers.
Buyers must have minimum capital of €100 million (US$131.73 million) and must continue employing Alitalia's 18,000 workers, keep the national routes and maintain the carrier's Italian identity.
Air France-KLM, the world's largest airline by revenue, was in exploratory talks with Alitalia, but has insisted the Italian airline improve its finances before it would consider a partnership.
Italian Premier Romano Prodi told a French television channel last week that the government would not block any move by Air France-KLM to take a controlling stake in Alitalia, as long as it maintained the bulk of the carrier's routes.
Spinetta is the second board member to step down from Alitalia's board this week, following the resignation Monday of Gabriele Checchia to concentrate on duties as Italy's ambassador to Lebanon.
The resignations, coming after other board members stepped down last year, leave the Alitalia board with just two members, which according to Alitalia's statutes leads to the board's automatic dissolution. Alitalia refused to comment and there was no immediate word from the government.
The resignations put into question a board meeting scheduled for Friday, which reportedly was to discuss the sale of non-strategic assets, among other matters.
The government is seeking a buyer to reorganize the struggling national carrier, which has reported widening losses due to higher fuel costs, competition from low-cost carriers and the impact of a series of strikes.
Meanwhile, a contested strike to protest the privatization, announced for Friday, was averted on Wednesday when the last union backed down.
Associated Press Writer John Leicester in Paris contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: January 18, 2007

 

End of Document
