

All in the dynasty
The Associated Press
March 30, 2007 Friday 3:15 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1164 words
Byline: By NANCY DEWOLF SMITH, The Wall Street Journal
Body




Showtime's new series about Henry VIII, "The Tudors," is good fun, and not as bastardized as its advertising campaign suggests (starting Sunday, 10-11 p.m., ET). Hearing Showtime blare that Henry was "the rock star of his age" was off-putting enough. Straining harder for relevancy, the pay-cable network is now also using the blurb "Before the Ewings, before the Carringtons, before the Sopranos, there were the Tudors."
Lest potential viewers groan that they have seen the fat king and his six wives a million times before, Showtime points out that this version is, in effect, the prequel: a sort of Henry, the Wonder Years, highlighting the "sexy young man who has been overlooked until now." Writer Michael Hirst makes it clear in the publicity handout for the series that he set out to break the old mold made by previous Henrys. "We didn't want another Royal Shakespeare Company or Masterpiece Theatre kind of thing all these English actors in period costumes with elaborate and totally contrived mannerisms."
The good news is that despite all this, "The Tudors" conceived as a "television soap opera" is in fact a satisfying period costume drama of a familiar sort: one that transports us back in time even with a few jarring modernisms along the way. These include all the sex scenes, featuring Henry (played by Jonathan Rhys Meyers) in various explicit positions with a bevy of topless beauties. The dialogue, pepped up to sound less Masterpiece Theatre-ish, can clang. As in the exchange after Catherine of Aragon has offered wifely advice on political affairs: "Since when are you a diplomat?" Henry snaps. And a chastened Catherine replies, "Henry, why do you not visit my bedchamber as you used to?" This sort of thing, plus the souped-up villainy of Sam Neill as Henry's machinating adviser Cardinal Wolsey, sometimes gives the production the slightly ludicrous air of "The Godfather Part III."
Yet nothing can distract from the compelling story of the young head of a shaky dynasty in Renaissance Europe. When he isn't thinking about women, playing tennis and agonizing over the lack of a male heir, Henry is thrust into the machinations for power that marked the age at home and abroad. On the Continent, this meant making and breaking alliances with France and Spain. At home, Henry was in the process of shoring up his kingly credentials by weakening the nobility and elevating more ordinary chaps, and, ultimately, by diminishing the hold and the fortunes of the church.
The costumes are duly glorious men in ruffs, ladies in pearls and the King of France draped in sapphires the size of eggs. For added interest, it does have a darker, more medieval look than some previous Henrys. The action ranges from jousting to beheading and even a wonderful scene where tiny birds fly out of a pie. Historical accuracy is less of a selling point. Although most of the central events really happened, the devil is in the details, many of which are made up. Yet there would be no fun without salacious, if imagined, tidbits about how Anne Boleyn's father shoved her at Henry after her sexually talented sister, also pimped out by dad, failed to capture the king's lasting attention.
So conniving is everyone here, however, that it's difficult to find anybody to root for. Poor Catherine of Aragon comes across as a decent sort, as does Henry's mentor, Sir Thomas More (Jeremy Northam), the humanist, peacenik and women's-rights campaigner. The main man, however, hardly seems worthy of our attention, so inscrutable is he here and, it would seem, so shallow. The real Henry seems to have been a fellow of many interests and talents. This one is all glitz and gyrations ... like a rock star.
It's not too late to catch up with "The Riches," the FX series about a family of struggling con artists who take over the house, and life, of a couple killed in a car accident (Mondays 10-11 p.m.). British actors Eddie Izzard and Minnie Driver are Wayne and Dahlia Malloy, members of a huge clan of Travellers, derogatively called "white gypsies," from Louisiana.
Dahlia had been in prison for two years when the show began this month, and once the family was reunited in their shabby RV, her husband decided that it was time to make a new start after stealing some getaway money from the clan leader. On the way to wherever, the Malloys got involved in a two-RV road-rage incident that accidentally forced a passenger car off the road. It crashed, killing the couple inside it and leaving their belongings, including the keys to a new house in a ritzy Florida development, ripe for the taking. True to their nature, the Malloys took. And as luck would have it, nobody in the Florida development ever met the real new neighbors, so the Malloys easily assume the identity and lifestyle of the family Rich.
Yet what Wayne describes stealing the American Dream isn't going to be any easier than living it ever is in the American Beauty land of suburbia. Wayne has no trouble playing golf with the other suburbanites and beating them at all their games, including macho psych-out ones. He's even managed to fake the lawyerly skill of the dead man he is impersonating. His wife is having a harder time fitting in. Partly, this is because she became addicted to drugs in prison and misses her extended family back home. As played by Ms. Driver, however, Dahlia is both more impishly canny and less stable than her husband. He glides and slides in his new role; she darts. The children meanwhile, a pretty daughter with nerves of steel (at first), a suave son, and a boy who appears to like dresses, are beginning to taste the real world for the first time.
While the basic plot leaves room for lots of funny moments, the essential creepiness at the heart of "The Riches" is impossible to forget. It swings from hijinks to bloody drama and back in ways that are distressing. Eddie Izzard and Minnie Driver are such accomplished actors that we were on the Malloys' side from the first minute of this show. Criminals they may be, but we want them to make it. If only they were better parents and hadn't isolated their children in a realm of cons and cynicism, we might like them more.
The documentary "This Film Is Not Yet Rated" an assault on the Motion Picture Association of America's mysterious movie-rating system caused a sensation when it was released last year. The MPAA was so embarrassed by the dirt that director Kirby Dick dug up that it has since announced some reforms that should make the ratings system less secretive. For those who missed all the fuss, the IFC network is showing the film Saturday from 11 a.m.-12:40 p.m. In the era of downloads and movies on cable, it's difficult to shed many tears for filmmakers who claim that an NC-17 rating makes their movies inaccessible to many Americans, specifically to kids under 17. Then again, their other complaint is that fear of an uncommercial NC-17, the modern equivalent of an X, makes them self-censor their own art. That is pitiful.
 Load-Date: March 31, 2007

 

End of Document
