

As Sweden chips away at the welfare state, the "wealth" tax may be gone
The Associated Press
March 29, 2007 Thursday 3:38 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 584 words
Byline: By KARL RITTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: STOCKHOLM Sweden
Body




Might the next Bjorn Borg not feel compelled to move to Monaco?
Sweden plans to scrap a decades-old "wealth" tax that imposes levies on assets not just income.
The tax, which a handful of developed countries retain, was designed to keep the rich from getting richer but is increasingly seen as harming primarily the not-quite-rich upper middle classes.
The move, expected to be approved by Parliament later this year, underscores the country's efforts to keep successful Swedes and their capital at home by reforming its fabled but costly welfare state.
"It's not sustainable to keep taxes that radically diverge from other countries," Finance Minister Anders Borg, who is not related to the tennis great, told The Associated Press on Thursday. "Not if you want the money to stay in the country."
Several European countries have dropped taxes on wealth in the past decade, including Denmark, the Netherlands and Finland. In France, taxes on the rich have become a top campaign issue ahead of the presidential elections in April and May. Luxembourg and Spain are the only other EU countries that impose wealth taxes, according to the Swedish government.
Sweden's wealth tax, introduced in 1947, is one of many levies imposed on the well-off, on top of taxes on luxury goods, capital gains and inheritance. They add up to the world's highest taxes more than 50 percent of Sweden's gross domestic product, according to the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development.
Not surprisingly, the wealthiest Swedes have fled the country, including IKEA founder Ingvar Kamprad, No. 4 on Forbes magazine's list of the world's richest people. He lives in Switzerland.
Five-time Wimbledon winner Bjorn Borg moved to tax-haven Monaco in the late 1970s. The principality is also home to many Swedish sports stars like Alpine skier Anja Paerson, high-jumper Kajsa Bergqvist and triple jumper Christian Olsson.
The government says more than 500 billion kronor ($70 billion) of Swedish capital is outside of the country's borders.
"This is money that if it was brought home could be invested to create jobs and welfare in Sweden," the four coalition leaders said in a joint statement this week.
Stefan Persson, the main owner of fashion retailer H&M, threatened to leave the country in the 1990s because of the wealth tax. The Social Democratic government at the time changed the law, giving him an exemption.
Such moves only added to criticism that the really rich are able to avoid the tax, while upper-middle-income families are hit once their Volvo, home and savings accounts push their combined assets beyond 3 million kronor ($430,000).
The wealth tax, which was halved to 0.75 percent on Jan. 1, only accounts for about 0.3 percent of Sweden's total tax income. The government wants to compensate for the lost revenue partly by reducing the tax deductions allowed for pension savings.
But the plans have upset the country's powerful labor union movement, which staged countrywide protests earlier this year when the government trimmed handouts to the unemployed.
"It's a tax break for the richest people in Sweden," union boss Wanja Lundby-Wedin said. "Some kind of extra taxes on capital income is needed to help reduce unacceptably high income gaps."
Borg, the finance minister, admitted scrapping the wealth tax would benefit the rich. But he added it was necessary for Sweden to remain competitive in an increasingly globalized economy.
"It's a step on the way back toward making Sweden an entrepreneurial society," he said.
 Load-Date: March 30, 2007

 

End of Document
