

At the shrine of Iran's revolutionary leader, the hard-line base mourns and rallies
The Associated Press
June 4, 2007 Monday 7:23 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 710 words
Byline: By MICHAEL WEISSENSTEIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEHRAN Iran
Body




The chant for the dead echoed off the massive shrine and rolled across a sea of asphalt, mixing with the roar of diesel buses disgorging pilgrims from across Iran.
Inside the shrine of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, leader of Iran's Islamic revolution, the president stabbed a finger in the air and promised no retreat from the government's nuclear ambitions.
Outside, a laborer took a bedroll off the roof of his car after a two-day drive from southern Iran. Others rode bicycles or crammed into farm trucks, swelling a crowd that appeared to be in the hundreds of thousands Monday, the 18th anniversary of Khomeini's death by the Persian solar calendar.
"All these people are here to make a new pledge of loyalty to their leader and their president," said Mohammed Qoili Edalat Pishe, a 37-year-old laborer.
The annual commemoration of Ayatollah Khomeini's death in 1989 is part funeral, part festival and part political rally for the base that sustains Iran's hard-liners amid rising dissatisfaction with inflation, unemployment and social constraints.
In a country with few reliable opinion polls, the hard-line base has been estimated at anywhere between 10 and 30 percent of the 46.7 million voters. Its turnout was seen as key to hard-line victories in the last four years, including the election that brought President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to power.
But some analysts say the appeal of the hard-line ideology is flagging, as evidenced by municipal elections last year in which candidates associated with the president fared poorly relative to more moderate figures.
"These things have a very fragile quality about them," said professor Ali Ansari, director of the Institute for Iranian Studies at St. Andrews University in Scotland. "They're the core loyalists, but the numbers are not huge. The ideology is starting to lose its appeal."
There was some evidence of discontent even at Khomeini's shrine, a complex on the southern outskirts of Tehran.
A group of young men who rode in on bicycles proclaimed their love of Khomeini, and their satisfaction with the current state of affairs. But as an American reporter walked away, one of the men chased after him and said, out of earshot of his companions: "It's not true. There's a lot of problems."
Security was tight at the three-day mourning ceremony. Flights in and out of Tehran's airports were halted, a new precaution.
Inside the shrine, Ahmadinejad praised the memory of Khomeini. He also called on Iranians to support the government's nuclear program, which Iran says it wants for electric power, but Washington calls part of a weapons program.
"The nation that believes in the Imam will not retreat!" Ahmadinejad declared, standing before a three-story-tall portrait of Khomeini.
Few people mentioned the nuclear program outside the shrine, where many slept under the arches of the neighboring cemetery. Others sat sharing a meal in the flower beds. Young men played drums or kicked soccer balls.
"Those who are saying there are no jobs available, they are lazy," said Massoud Mohammadi, an 18-year-old coffee shop worker who rode a motorcycle with a friend from Zanjan, 140 miles away.
Many said they came to thank Imam Khomeini's Relief Committee, which directs the earnings of state-run industries to the elderly, veterans and other needy Iranians.
Machinist Taghi Ahmadi drove with 14 relatives, many in the back of his 15-year-old pickup truck, from the central city of Esfahan to thank the committee for payments to his father-in-law, Hossein Roshan.
"We are satisfied with the country and everything," said Roshan, 68, as he prepared to spend the night with his family on a single blanket laid in the parking lot. The family said they received no official encouragement to attend.
Ahmadinejad ended his speech, and those who live nearby poured onto the highway. For some, the only way home was on a motorcycle taxi.
"I don't know why these people bring their families here and stay overnight," one driver said over his shoulder. Pressed for his thoughts, he responded: "For the sake of Imam. He built the country. But Ahmadinejad and people like Ahmadinejad, they haven't done anything. While rich guys are sleeping, poor guys like me have to ride a motorcycle and carry passengers in the middle of nowhere."
 Load-Date: June 5, 2007

 

End of Document
