

Baroness Hayman confirmed as the first elected Speaker of the House of Lords
The Associated Press
July 4, 2006 Tuesday 7:12 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 317 words
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




A baroness from Britain's governing Labour Party was confirmed Tuesday as the first elected Lord Speaker of the House of Lords part of Prime Minister Tony Blair's project to remodel the unelected upper chamber of Parliament.
Helene Hayman is the first person to fill the new position, which replaces the centuries-old office of Lord Chancellor.
Baroness Hayman, who was appointed to the House of Lords in 1996, finished first in a field of nine candidates.
As Lord Speaker, she will preside over debates from the Woolsack, the large ceremonial cushion where the Lord Chancellor sat. The Woolsack dates from the 14th century reign of King Edward III, when sacks of wool were placed in the chamber as a reminder of the source of national wealth.
The innovation is one facet of Blair's unfinished modernization project of the upper house, which previously had been comprised of hereditary peers and peers appointed for life by consecutive governments.
The government had already expelled some 600 hereditary members from the chamber in 1999, allowing 92 others to remain, but it still had not decided how members should be chosen in the future.
The Lord Speaker takes over some of the duties of the Lord Chancellor, who continues to head the judiciary and remains a member of the Cabinet.
The elected Speaker will not serve in the Cabinet as a member of the government, and will not wear a wig another break with tradition.
The post comes with an annual salary of about $185,000, plus an expense allowance of $62,000.
Hayman, 57, was elected to the House of Commons in 1974, serving until 1979. After her appointment to the Lords, she served as minister for roads, then as a health minister and an agriculture minister.
The House of Commons elected its first female Speaker, Betty Boothroyd, in 1992. She was elevated to the Lords in 2001.
On the Net:
House of Lords, http://www.parliament.uk/about lords/about lords.cfm
 Load-Date: July 5, 2006

 

End of Document
