

Bringing order to the Wild East is the key to Congo's future
The Associated Press
November 17, 2006 Friday 8:37 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 892 words
Byline: By MICHELLE FAUL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KINSHASA Congo
Body




Soldiers, mercenaries, militiamen, miners and risk-ready foreigners make up a motley group that exploits some of the world's richest mineral reserves, often illegally, in Congo's Wild East.
All will be anxiously watching to see whether Congo's president-elect moves to end the free-for-all. This week, incumbent Joseph Kabila was declared the winner of the presidential runoff, and his people hope he will bring political stability and economic order to a country long mired in war and poverty.
Congo's mineral resources are worth an estimated $300 billion over the next 25 years. In the past, though, the earthly riches have only contributed to misery and today most of the nation's 58 million people remain mired in poverty.
If Kabila marshals the mineral wealth for his people, he will be reversing a history of corruption that has seen the country's promise benefit only the powerful.
A parliamentary commission investigating corruption in the mining sector has recommended that 28 international and Congolese companies be investigated for violating the law and that 17 people be prosecuted for fraud, theft and other charges.
It also said 16 mining contracts should be canceled or re-negotiated. It's unclear if they will be, since Kabila was in charge of the transitional government that approved them.
The president-elect has promised to fight corruption, but many have pointed to the fact that little was done while he was interim leader.
Business leaders have warned against targeting the entire industry, which is vital to the nation's development.
One can use "a broad brush to say all mining activity is counterproductive and not in the interest of the state," said Arthur Ditto, chief executive officer of Katanga Mining. His company hopes to be the first major mining operation to start up since civil war ended in 2002, under a joint venture that gives the state mining company Gecamines 25 percent of shares in what was the world's most lucrative copper and cobalt mine.
"But what I see is that if you can get properly capitalized mining ventures operating in the country, it's extremely important to developing some financial stability and reviving the economy," he said.
Congo's resources were first looted by Belgian colonizers and then by dictator Mobutu Sese Seko, whose 32-year rule ended in 1997 when Rwandan troops helped propel rebel leader Laurent Kabila, the president-elect's father, to power.
Laurent Kabila, who was assassinated by a bodyguard in 2001, also invited foreign armies to help him keep power and in return allowed them to plunder Congo's resources, which include cobalt, copper, diamonds, gold, silver, tin and coltan, an essential ingredient of cell phones, as well as coffee, rubber and palm oil.
Mining fever has attracted foreigners, dozens of whom enter on tourist visas bought from corrupt diplomats abroad, then operate on concessions illegally granted by government officials in the capital, Kinshasa, the parliamentary report commission said. Unrefined minerals are spirited across borders.
"These foreigners that call themselves investors live in overcrowded conditions in rented 'houses of fortune' ... and they mine with equipment from abandoned locomotives and hydraulic picks," the commission said. "This massive presence of unregulated expatriates constitutes a definite menace and a growing source of insecurity in (Katanga) province ... where arms enter in massive, uncontrolled fashion."
The parliamentary commission said Ditto's contract with Gecamines, signed in February by a transitional government also headed by Kabila, is one of those that should be re-negotiated.
The London-based organization Rights and Accountability in Development is strongly critical of the Katanga Mining contract, saying it has documents proving that Ditto was negotiating it when the majority owner of the company he then represented, Canadian Kinross Gold, was running Gecamines. His company's Web site boasts that two new board members include the governor of Congo's Central Bank and the head of a Congo government development agency.
Ditto said the contract was negotiated at a time when Congo had little prospect of attracting foreign investment.
"We're taking not only the project risk but all the other elements of risk tied to it: the fact it's Congo, the poor infrastructure with respect to roads, railroads, power supplies, it's a frontier area," Ditto said, adding that his company has created 1,600 jobs.
Without development, Congo "just remains a failed state," Ditto said in a telephone interview from his base in Toronto.
Gecamines produced $1 billion worth of copper and cobalt a year in its heyday in the 1990s and today is a minor partner in projects with some 30 foreign companies. The parliamentary commission has suggested some of those contracts were little more than licenses for foreigners to plunder Congo. Gecamines itself is trying to redraw two contracts.
Congo's minerals are concentrated in the east, where Gecamines is based in Katanga province, and it's no accident that that is where some of the most brutal massacres and worst fighting took place during back-to-back wars from 1996-2002.
Even today, rebels, marauding foreign troops, U.N. peacekeepers and government soldiers continue to fight there, though the rest of the country has been at peace since an internationally backed agreement in 2002.
 Load-Date: November 18, 2006

 

End of Document
