

Burundi says last rebel group will disarm by the end of the month
The Associated Press
September 12, 2006 Tuesday 1:09 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 313 words
Byline: By ELIZABETH A. KENNEDY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUJUMBURA Burundi
Body




It will take several weeks to disarm Burundi's last rebel group after it signed a cease-fire deal solidifying the end of a 12-year civil war, officials said Monday.
Burundi and the rebel National Liberation Force known by its French acronym, FNL signed the agreement Thursday in Tanzania, more than a year after the country's other rebel groups agreed to lay down arms.
The deal was seen as a vital development toward long-term peace in Burundi, an impoverished central African nation of 7 million people.
The terms of the FNL's deal weren't released, but the group had been demanding that it be incorporated into the national army.
"This very week a commission will start studying how FNL former combatants will be assembled and demobilized," Brig. Gen. Evariste Ndayishimiye said.
He said disarming the rebels would likely take until the end of September, although he did not say when or where the process would begin.
Burundi is still reeling from a civil war that killed more than 250,000 people, most of them civilians who died of disease and hunger. The war started in 1993, when Tutsi paratroopers assassinated the country's first democratically elected president, a Hutu.
A dozen years of conflict ensued between the majority Hutus and the minority Tutsis, who have dominated the government, economy and military since independence from Belgium in 1962. All of Burundi's main Hutu rebel groups have signed peace deals, leading to democratic elections last year that established a new government with a Hutu president.
Although the civil war has ended, political problems here are rampant. Several people, including the former president, have been arrested recently in connection with an alleged coup to overthrow the government.
Critics say the government fabricated the plot in order to arrest opposition members.
Associated Press writer Aloys Niyoyita contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: September 12, 2006

 

End of Document
