

Can the dollar get it together?
The Associated Press
January 4, 2008 Friday 4:46 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 803 words
Byline: By JOANNA SLATER, The Wall Street Journal
Body




The dollar has started 2008 in much the same way it spent the final months of 2007: beaten down by fears about a potential recession.
So far in the young year, the dollar has weakened 1 percent against the euro and 2 percent versus the Japanese yen, continuing last year's slide. Yet, while the dollar may face rocky times in the next few months, some investors say they believe it might rebound later this year against currencies in the developed world.
If the U.S. escapes the housing bust and credit crunch without a severe recession as many economists still expect the dollar might be primed to recover when the dust settles later in the year. Even if the economy does worsen, the fallout may spread to other countries, hurting their currencies. And the U.S. has an improving trade position on its side.
Currency strategists predict that by year's end the dollar will have strengthened modestly against the euro, the British pound, the Canadian dollar, the Mexican peso and the Brazilian real, according to a survey last month by Consensus Economics Inc. The average forecast put the euro buying $1.41 in December 2008, down from $1.4750 late Thursday in New York.
"Our view is certainly less negative than 2007," said David Gilmore, of Foreign Exchange Analytics, a research firm. Currencies such as the Canadian dollar and the pound, which did well against the dollar last year, might not be able to repeat that feat if economic growth slows in those countries.
Of course, currency movements are notoriously difficult to predict, and the dollar may weaken further in the weeks ahead, depending on where the economy and the presidential campaign are headed.
Investors are united in believing the dollar will keep weakening against certain Asian currencies, particularly the Chinese yuan. China's government has long clamped down on the yuan's appreciation but in recent weeks has let it strengthen at a faster pace.
Still, some analysts see a shift that might produce a modest rebound in the dollar in the year's second half.
The economy is expected to reaccelerate as Federal Reserve interest-rate cuts have an influence. Meantime, economic growth in Europe could slow. Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal in December predicted the growth rate of U.S. gross domestic product would accelerate to 2.7 percent in the fourth quarter of 2008 from 0.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 2007.
The euro "will struggle against the dollar when the U.S. starts to recover by mid-2008," Stephen Jen, Morgan Stanley's global head of currency research, said in a recent report. He suggested the dollar's moves this year might even recall its brief rally in 2005 the only year out of the past six in which the dollar strengthened against the euro.
The length and depth of the dollar's slide are reasons some investors believe the long-term down trend may be nearing an end. Since the start of 2002, the dollar has lost more than 20 percent of its value against a broad group of currencies and almost 40 percent versus the euro.
Given how much the dollar has weakened, it is hard to imagine a repeat of its decline in 2007, said Greg Anderson of ABN Amro, who expects a modest weakening of the currency this year.
He sees the improving U.S. trade position as positive for the dollar. U.S. exports of goods and services grew at a 19 percent annual rate in the third quarter, well outpacing the 4.4 percent growth rate of imports.
The U.S. also continues to draw global investors, with recent moves by several foreign funds to pump cash into American financial institutions such as Merrill Lynch & Co. and Morgan Stanley as examples. The U.S. depends on that constant flow of investment from overseas to finance the gap between what it saves and what it spends.
"These are all significant direct investments, indicating that longer term, U.S. assets are a good trade," said Alan Eisner, managing director at Millennium Global Investments, a London asset-management firm specializing in currencies. "They're interesting capital flows that are positive for the dollar."
Lastly, the long deflating of the dollar means it is extremely cheap by most measures used to value a currency, particularly versus the euro. For instance, currency experts put the fair value of the dollar against the euro at a level where one euro buys roughly $1.20, a rate last seen in early 2006.
Analysts use several methods to value currencies, including by comparing prices for a basket of goods in two countries to come up with a theoretical exchange rate. Currencies are prone to stray far from those levels, as the dollar already has with the euro.
Still, the dollar has become so cheap against developed-country currencies that it recalls moments as in late 1987 and mid-1995 when a long fall in the currency finally touched bottom, Bank of America said recently.
 Load-Date: January 5, 2008

 

End of Document
