

Chechnya's ghosts loom large in the death of former spy
The Associated Press
December 7, 2006 Thursday 10:04 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1005 words
Byline: By DANICA KIRKA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




Alexander Litvinenko counted some of the staunchest foes of the Kremlin among his friends, including leaders of the Chechen separatists who have fought two wars against Moscow.
His sympathies ran so deep, some say, he converted to Islam on his deathbed and asked to be buried on Chechen soil.
How did a former Russian spy come to sympathize with rebels who have killed so many in his motherland including many of his former comrades-in-arms? And did his support for the cause of Chechen independence have anything to do with his death?
"He was really a guy (with a) mission," said Litvinenko's friend, Andrei Nekrasov, adding the former agent was the "odd man out" in their circle of Russian intellectuals and human rights advocates in London a robust man of action in a room full of academics.
The 43-year-old Litvinenko, who died of radiation poisoning two weeks ago, knew a lot about Chechnya: he served there with Russia's Federal Security Service, or FSB. After he sought asylum in Britain in 2000, he forged a friendship with Chechen rebel envoy Akhmed Zakayev.
Around the time he was poisoned, Litvinentko was investigating the murder of the crusading Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya, shot in her Moscow apartment building in October.
Over the years, Politkovskaya had angered many in the military and the government by reporting on alleged human rights abuses by Russian troops and pro-Russian Chechen forces in Chechnya.
Litvinenko's experiences both in Chechnya and after made him sympathetic to the cause of Chechen independence, said Vladimir Bukovsky, Litvinenko's friend and fellow critic of the Kremlin.
The former FSB counterintelligence officer was so moved by the rebels' struggle, Bukovsky said, that his dying wish was that his body be moved to Chechnya when peace was at hand.
"On his deathbed, he asked to be buried when the war is over in Chechen soil," Bukovsky said after a memorial service at a London mosque. "He was a fierce defender of Chechnya and critic of the Kremlin."
Chechnya is a predominantly Muslim region of Russia, where Russian military forces have twice tried to crush separatist rebels in the past 12 years.
The fighting has been marked by human rights abuses on both sides, according to Human Rights Watch and other groups.
But it is Chechen terror attacks against Russian civilians which have drawn the most attention. In recent years, rebels from Chechnya and some of Russia's other Islamic regions staged a string of suicide bombings in Moscow.
They seized a Moscow theater in 2002, and staged another bloody siege in a school in the city of Beslan in 2004.
The role of the Chechens in an early, critical terror attack, though, is disputed.
In 1999, when Chechnya was under the control of a separatist government, Russia was shaken by a series of mysterious apartment house blasts that killed some 300 people. The Kremlin blamed the Chechens.
Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered Russian troops to invade Chechnya, triggering the post-Soviet nation's second Chechen war.
Litvinenko, though, was among those who blamed his former comrades at the FSB, saying the blasts were staged to drum up support for a new war against the breakaway region.
"He pointed out even before the explosions there was outrageous corruption" in the FSB, Nekrasov said. "He had this bent, now he was in England, he talked nonstop. He was obsessed with a desire to let the world know."
For some, Litvinenko's reported conversion to Islam raises suspicions that he was sympathetic to militants. For others, it represents his identification with the outcast and the underdog.
Some questioned whether the former spy had really converted at all.
One family friend, Alexander Goldfarb, confirmed an imam had visited him in the hospital, "when he was heavily sedated and on the verge of death."
He couldn't say if his friend had really embraced Islam.
But Zakayev, the envoy for what remains of Chechnya's separatist government, said Litvinenko had become a Muslim. He said an imam had read Quranic verses over the former spy the day before he died.
Why would the former spy make such a dramatic, deathbed conversion?
He was moved by the immense suffering of Muslims in Chechnya, some acquaintances said. Others suggested conversion may have been an act of moral redress, for the injustice Muslims feel globally.
"For Litvinenko, his conversion meant that he associated his struggle for justice with the struggle of the Islamic communities worldwide and in Russia in particular," said Geidar Dzhemal, the head of Islamic Committee of Russia, the leading Islamic advocacy group in Russia.
"Litvinenko must have felt that he shared responsibility for the actions toward Muslims in Russia over the past decade, and he apparently was seeking atonement for the feeling of guilt he had."
One friend, who spoke to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the matter, said the family wanted a non-denominational funeral, fearing "the inevitable attempt by Litvinenko's enemies to portray him as an associate of Islamist terrorists."
Despite this, an imam appeared uninvited and performed rites at the burial, Goldfarb said.
Outsiders like Dzhemal, of the Russian Islamic council, suggest Litvinenko recognized the impact his reported deathbed conversion might have on the Chechen cause.
"Clearly, that was a deliberate political action, not an emotional outburst," Dzhemal said. "Litvinenko's conversion wasn't only a spiritual act, it had political importance as well. For Litvinenko, that meant casting a challenge to both the Russian regime and the United States, since Russia and the United States both have been at the forefront of action against the Islamic world."
Nekrasov said his friend always knew he faced powerful forces and that he would only be taken seriously after he died.
"He was certainly larger than life," Nekrasov said. "There's a feeling of the quasi-religious dimension about (his death)."
AP writers Maria Hegstad in London and Vladimir Isachenkov in Moscow contributed to this story.
 Load-Date: December 8, 2006

 

End of Document
