

Citing crime, spending irregularities, the EU weighs closing the money tap for Bulgaria
Associated Press
July 18, 2008 Friday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 452 words
Byline: By ROBERT WIELAARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRUSSELS, Belgium 
Body




The European Commission could freeze hundreds of millions of dollars in assistance for Bulgaria next week because of its spending irregularities, corruption, organized crime and slow moving judicial reforms, officials said Friday.
Bulgaria joined the European Union in 2007, with neighboring Romania, on the condition that it embrace significant judicial reforms and stamp out corruption and organized crime.
While Romania has made progress in those areas, Bulgaria has not. The country has seen some 150 mafia-style slayings since it emerged from communism in 1989, but no convictions, and it is a frequent target of EU complaints about lax controls on the spending of EU money.
"Bulgaria is a very clear case," said one EU official Friday.
"You can do a simple test: how many (organized crime) prosecutions have there been? The simple answer is: there haven't been any," said the official, who is very familiar with plans to freeze funding for Bulgaria. He spoke on condition of anonymity because the EU probe won't be completed until Wednesday.
That day, the European Commission is to issue a regular report card on Bulgaria's compliance with EU membership rules.
Johannes Laitenberger, the chief European Commission spokesman, confirmed Friday that the EU executive is looking at European Union spending in Bulgaria, but stressed "there will not be a finalized report" until Wednesday.
Two EU officials said in all about $1 billion of aid is at stake, money spent through a variety of programs, some running through 2009. They said how much could be suspended remains an open question. They also spoke on condition of anonymity because the final decision regarding Bulgaria is pending.
Only last month, the European Commission froze about $190 million in agricultural aid to the country, citing spending irregularities. That decision was the "direct result of an investigation by the EU's anti-fraud office," said EU spokesman Michael Mann.
Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergei Stanishev has pleaded for leniency and cautioned the EU that a wholesale freezing of its funds will only alienate many Bulgarians.
In an April Cabinet shuffle, Stanishev named Meglena Plugchieva as deputy premier in charge of EU spending in Bulgaria. The former envoy to Germany has reorganized government agencies, launched a debate about overhauling Bulgaria's public procurement laws and created a blacklist of companies involved in irregular spending of EU funds.
Plugchieva was in Brussels on Friday to discuss the matter with EU officials.
Meglena Kuneva, Bulgaria's EU Commissioner in Brussels, has sidestepped commenting directly on the EU spending issue.
"Bulgarians are very ambitious, and they will get things right," she said this week.
 Load-Date: July 19, 2008

 

End of Document
