

Clash of the steel titans: The saga of Mittal's takeover bid for Arcelor
The Associated Press
May 9, 2006 Tuesday 1:31 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 417 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Timeline of Mittal's takeover bid for steel rival Arcelor
 Jan. 24: Arcelor SA wins bidding war for Canadian steelmaker Dofasco Inc. after Germany's ThyssenKrupp AG pulls out. Analysts say at €3.95 billion (US$4.85 billion), Arcelor has paid too much.
 Jan. 27: Mittal Steel Co. announces surprise €18.6 billion (US$22.8 billion) cash-and-stock bid for Arcelor.
 Jan. 29: Arcelor board rejects Mittal offer as hostile.
 April 4: Arcelor raises its share dividend and sets up trust to prevent resale of Dofasco. It also says it may buy back €5 billion (US$6 billion) in shares to fend off Mittal.
 April 19: Mittal Chairman and Chief Executive Lakshmi Mittal calls Arcelor Chairman Joseph Kinsch to ask for a meeting and "friendly discussions" about revising his proposal in return for support from Arcelor management.
 April 21: Kinsch asks Mittal for a written proposal before any meeting, including details on valuation, corporate governance, Mittal's industrial plan, business plan, social plans and customer policy.
 April 28: Mittal tells Kinsch he is ready to make "significant corporate governance changes" and revise the offer. Mittal also sends its full industrial plan setting out future goals, a review of its social commitments and its customer relationship policy.
Arcelor shareholders re-elect Kinsch to the board despite criticism of measures to protect Dofasco. Kinsch calls Mittal Steel "neither open nor transparent."
 May 4: Kinsch responds to Mittal's letter, saying the offer is "wholly inadequate" and Arcelor has significant concerns about the real value of Mittal shares. He says Mittal's plan does not justify the industrial logic for the deal but does not rule out talks.
 May 8: Mittal makes "courtesy call" to Kinsch, saying he will respond to his latest letter soon and these exchanges will be made public the next day. Mittal says sharing a business plan at this stage raises regulatory problems and he does not intend to revise the offer without a recommendation to the board.
Kinsch replies by e-mail and Arcelor issues a statement saying it needs "sufficiently precise information" before the two sides could meet. It says it will examine all options and proposals based on a strong and coherent industrial model that would maximize shareholder value.
 May 9: Mittal Steel says it is ready to revise the offer and make corporate governance changes "in the event of a recommended deal." Lakshmi Mittal says he is disappointed that Arcelor is not willing to enter meaningful discussions.
 Load-Date: May 10, 2006

 

End of Document
