

Clash of the steel titans: The saga of Mittal's takeover bid for Arcelor
The Associated Press
June 26, 2006 Monday 10:36 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 452 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Timeline of Mittal's takeover bid for steel rival Arcelor
 Jan. 24: Arcelor SA wins bidding war for Canadian steelmaker Dofasco Inc. after Germany's ThyssenKrupp AG pulls out. Analysts say at €3.95 billion (US$4.85 billion), Arcelor has paid too much.
 Jan. 27: Mittal Steel Co. announces surprise €18.6 billion (US$22.8 billion) cash-and-stock bid for Arcelor.
 Jan. 29: Arcelor board rejects Mittal offer as hostile.
 April 4: Arcelor raises its share dividend and sets up trust to prevent resale of Dofasco. It also says it may buy back €5 billion (US$6 billion) in shares to fend off Mittal.
 April 19: Mittal Chairman and Chief Executive Lakshmi Mittal calls Arcelor Chairman Joseph Kinsch to ask for "friendly discussions" about revising his proposal in return for support from management.
 April 28: Mittal tells Kinsch he is ready to make "significant corporate governance changes" and revise the offer.
 May 4: Kinsch says the offer is "wholly inadequate" and Arcelor has significant concerns about the real value of Mittal shares.
 May 9: Mittal Steel says it is ready to revise the offer and make corporate governance changes "in the event of a recommended deal."
 May 10: Arcelor Chief Executive Guy Dolle describes as "insufficient" Mittal's offer to revise its bid.
 May 11: Arcelor says it has filed a lawsuit in the United States against Mittal for copying a type of steel for the auto industry.
 May 12: Both companies announce better-than-expected results, although profits suffer due to higher costs of raw materials. Arcelor toughens its stance, announcing plan to spend up to €7.5 billion (US$9.5 billion) to buy back almost a quarter of its shares.
 May 18: Mittal formally launches its offer.
 May 19: Mittal raises its offer by 34 percent and says it would reduce the Mittal family's stake in the company.
 May 26: Arcelor announces a deal with Severstal that will give it a controlling stake in Russia's largest steelmaker and €1.25 billion (US$1.59 billion) in cash for 32 percent of Arcelor.
 June 2: European Union antitrust regulators approve Mittal bid on condition the new combined steel giant sell off some of its facilities if the bid succeeds.
 June 9: Arcelor confirms it has held talks with Mittal on the term of its bid.
 June 12: Arcelor rejects Mittal revised bid and recommends shareholders accept deal with Severstal.
 June 19: Arcelor cancels shareholder meeting on share buyback amid growing shareholder opposition.
 June 21: Market regulators in France, Spain, Luxembourg and Belgium suspend Arcelor shares, saying they want more clarity on the state of talks with Mittal and Severstal.
 June 25: Arcelor's board agrees to sweetened bid from Mittal worth about €26 billion (US$33 billion).
 Load-Date: June 27, 2006

 

End of Document
