

Dollar sinks to another 20-month low against the euro
The Associated Press
November 29, 2006 Wednesday 2:30 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 921 words
Byline: By MADLEN READ, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




The dollar fell to a new 20-month low against the euro Tuesday, as a spate of disappointing U.S. economic data further dimmed the prospect of higher interest rates in the world's largest economy.
The 12-nation euro rose as high as $1.3203 its highest point since March 2005 in midday New York trading, up from $1.3079 late Monday. In late trading, the euro was at $1.3189.
Durable goods orders saw their biggest drop in more than six years, the median home price saw its largest year-over-year decrease ever, and consumer confidence fell to its lowest reading since August.
The reports which suggested to investors that the slowing U.S. economy may not be able to withstand a rate hike were enough to overshadow comments from U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke that inflation is "uncomfortably high."
Higher interest rates, a weapon against inflation, tend to strengthen a currency by making investments in that denomination more attractive.
The euro crossed the $1.30 mark late last week, when many traders were off for the U.S. Thanksgiving holiday. The 12-nation currency has been bolstered by expectations that the European Central Bank will continue to raise interest rates, thanks to some surprisingly strong European economic data, while the Federal Reserve holds, or eventually cuts, rates.
"The data in Europe has been on the strong side, and the data in the U.S. is soft. As a result, it looks like ECB will have to continue on their tightening path," said Paul Barrett, head of foreign exchange trading at JPMorgan Private Bank.
Also, Barrett said, currency traders are concerned about the lagging housing market's effect on the dollar a worry that was firmed on Tuesday by Bernanke, who said residential construction will continue to be to be a drag on the U.S. economy.
Barrett expects the euro to reach the $1.33-$1.35 range, but then face "verbal headwind" from European officials. A too-high euro could hurt European exports, especially if the currency breaks above the record it reached in December 2004 of $1.3667.
"Americans don't want to see that happen, Europeans don't want to see that happen. The only situation where we go there and stay there is if we have a very hard landing in the U.S.," Barrett said. He said a gradual slowdown is more likely, given that employment remains strong.
So far this month, most U.S. data have indicated that the economy is cooling. Lisa Finstrom, senior futures analyst at Smith Barney, said that because the Fed is still very focused on economic reports to determine the course of interest rates, upcoming data especially next week's employment figures will be closely watched by currency traders.
At this point, she noted, the market is pricing in lower interest rates for next year.
The Fed's current rate stands at 5.25 percent, having paused for three months after more than two years of quarter-point hikes. The market is expecting the Fed to hold rates steady for the next two months, and euro-dollar futures late Tuesday were pricing in a 76 percent chance of a quarter-point rate cut in the first quarter of 2007.
By late trading Tuesday, the British pound rose to $1.9509 from $1.9317 late Monday. The dollar fell to 1.2036 Swiss francs from 1.2105, but rebounded against the yen to 116.10 from 115.75 late Monday. A dollar bought 1.1309 Canadian dollar, down from 1.1324 on Monday.
A weakening dollar can be a double-edged sword for the U.S. economy; it decreases Americans' purchasing power, but it makes U.S. goods cheaper for foreigners, and therefore more competitive in the global market.
To keep its own exports cheap, China has been controlling the value of the yuan. The country's central bank on Monday bumped up the yuan's official level to 7.8402, and the currency traded at a record high versus the dollar. Still, daily movements are limited at 0.3 percent above or below the official level a trading system set up in July 2005.
Another reason the dollar is declining is speculation that China is reducing its percentage of dollar holdings in favor of other currencies.
Speaking in Beijing Friday, the bank's vice governor Wu Xiaoling reportedly noted the risks arising from the U.S. dollar's decline for East Asian holders, triggering dollar selling.
China's central bank, the People's Bank of China, refused to comment Tuesday on rumors that Beijing is shifting its foreign reserve holdings away from U.S. Treasurys.
China's foreign reserves are thought to have exceeded $1 trillion after officially hitting $987.9 billion by late September.
Earlier this month, the U.S. Treasury Department said foreigners sold more Treasurys than they bought in September for the first time in three-and-a-half years. However, the selling was led by Japan, the largest holder of U.S. Treasurys; Japan's holdings fell in September to $639.2 billion from $644.3 billion in August. China, the second-largest holder of U.S. Treasurys, boosted its stake to $342.1 billion in September from $339.1 billion the prior month.
A long-term factor behind the weakening dollar is the widening U.S. current account deficit; many market watchers say the dollar is just now catching up with the fact that the United States is deep in debt.
But former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan, speaking at an investor conference Tuesday, said concerns over the dollar were unnecessary if the U.S. economy stays flexible.
He added that forecasts about the dollar's direction are about as reliable as a coin toss: "Everyone has an opinion on which way the dollar will go ... and half of them will be right."
 Load-Date: November 29, 2006

 

End of Document
