

Energy prices fall as the economy takes over from storms as the worry du jour
The Associated Press
August 16, 2007 Thursday 4:08 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 706 words
Byline: By JOHN WILEN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Oil and gasoline futures fell Thursday as investors turned their attention away from tropical storms and to the cooling economy and falling stock market.
Natural gas prices fell after the government reported a slightly larger increase in inventories than analysts expected.
The stock market tumbled again as concerns about economic conditions were exacerbated by more bad news from the mortgage sector, and by dismal reports on housing construction and employment.
"That again has once again raised fears that oil demand will fall," wrote Addison Armstrong, an analyst with TFS Energy Futures LLC in Stamford, Conn., in a research note.
Stocks and the economy stole some thunder from Hurricane Dean, which was bearing down on the Caribbean from the central Atlantic, and Tropical Depression Erin, which was downgraded from tropical storm status after making landfall in Texas early Thursday morning.
Erin appeared to spare most Gulf Coast oil and gas infrastructure. Valero Energy Corp., for instance, said operations were not affected at its Corpus Christi, Texas, refinery. And updated forecasts continued to call for Dean to pass to the south of the Gulf, making landfall on Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula.
"If this happens, then the storm will obviously lose some steam over land before it enters the Bay of Campeche," in the southwestern Gulf, wrote Stephen Schork, an analyst and energy trader, in his daily Schork Report.
Light, sweet crude for September delivery fell $2.56 to $70.77 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, while September gasoline fell 6.37 cents to $1.9451 a gallon.
Nymex heating oil fell 6.2 cents to $1.9649 a gallon. In London, September Brent crude fell $2.43 to $69.21 a barrel on the ICE Futures exchange.
"I think this is less about supply and demand risk and more about what's going on in the global financial markets right now," said Jason Schenker, an economist at Wachovia Corp.
Mortgage lender Countrywide Financial Corp. said it had to draw on a credit line to fund new mortgages. Meanwhile, the government reported that construction of new homes fell to the lowest level in a decade in July, and the number of newly laid off workers filing for unemployment benefits rose unexpectedly last week.
Despite the swoon, oil and gasoline futures will continue to react to any changes in storm forecasts, analysts say.
"The energy complex will continue to gyrate with each update to Tropical Storm Dean's strength and path," wrote Jim Ritterbusch, president of Ritterbusch & Associates in Galena, Ill., in a research note.
Nymex natural gas fell 13.2 cents to $6.732 per 1,000 cubic feet after the Energy Department's Energy Information Administration reported that gas inventories grew by 21 billion cubic feet last week, slightly more than the 20 billion cubic foot increase analysts on average had expected.
Natural gas prices spent much of the morning higher, anticipating a lower increase in inventory levels, analysts said. Their reaction to the inventory report is a further sign that traders are discounting the impact of Dean and Erin, at least at the moment, analysts said.
"If it was the storms, I think the entire complex would be up," Schork said in an interview.
At the pump, meanwhile, the average national price of a gallon of gas remained steady overnight at $2.762, according to AAA and the Oil Price Information Service. Retail prices, which typically lag the futures market, have fallen nearly 47 cents from their May peak of $3.227 a gallon.
Schenker noted that crude prices were falling despite an EIA inventory report on Wednesday that many considered supportive. While refinery activity grew by an expected 0.5 percentage points, crude inventories fell by 5.2 million barrels last week, more than twice the 2.1 million barrels analysts, on average, had expected.
Oil prices' decline in the face of these numbers, and of the threat from Dean, show that speculators continue to liquidate their positions, Schenker said. Many analysts have said speculators are a large part of the reason oil prices rose to records above $78 a barrel two weeks ago.
"It's the unwinding of trades," Schenker said.
Associated Press Writers George Jahn in Vienna and Gillian Wong in Singapore contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: August 17, 2007

 

End of Document
