

EU, Asian leaders commit to lowering emissions beyond the 2012 deadline of the Kyoto Protocol
The Associated Press
September 11, 2006 Monday 4:54 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 603 words
Byline: By ROBERT WIELAARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HELSINKI Finland
Body




The leaders of the 25-nation EU and 13 Asian nations on Monday pushed climate change to the top of their agenda at a summit where terrorism and energy resources were also hot topics.
The leaders vowed to set targets for greenhouse gas emissions beyond the 2012 deadline of the U.N.'s Kyoto Protocol but, reflecting Asian reluctance, no targets were detailed in a climate change declaration issued after a two-day summit.
The leaders also observed a minute of silence for the victims of the Sept. 11 attacks, vowing to stay the course in the international fight against terrorism.
"The fight against terrorism ... must make use of many different means. The end does certainly not justify any means," German Chancellor Angela Merkel said. "But it is of great significance that the international community act in unison."
The leaders also pledged to boost across-the-board cooperation and dialogue using their combined economic and political clout to help shape a safer, healthier, more equitable and multilateral world.
The summit participants were the leaders of the 25 EU nations and China, Japan, South Korea, Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.
Their drive for closer political and other ties is meant to more accurately reflect the fact Western Europe and its Asian partners account for 40 percent of the world's population and half its economic output and trade.
The summit issued a "Declaration on the Future," detailing areas of closer cooperation, notably multilateralism, globalization, competitiveness, labor issues, health, education, science and technology, environment, sustainable development, climate change and energy.
The statement's subtext and, indeed, that of the summit was providing some counterbalance to America's outsized weight in global affairs, often seen in Asia and Europe as fueling unilateralism.
"Our deliberations have brought both our regions closer together in defining joint responses to global challenges," Finnish Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen, the summit chairman, said after the summit.
The leaders agreed to admit Pakistan, India and Mongolia to their club, along with Romania and Bulgaria once they join the EU in 2007 or 2008.
The Kyoto Protocol commits 35 industrialized nations to reducing greenhouse-gas emissions to an average 5 percent below 1990 levels in the 2008-2012 period. But it exempts such rising economic giants as China and India and says nothing about post-2012 cuts.
Importantly, the United States has stepped away from the deal, saying it demands disproportionate cuts in carbon dioxide, methane and other emissions that are blamed for global warming.
While Monday's statement reflected a willingness to go beyond the Kyoto Protocol and nudge Washington into more action to protect the environment, no post-2012 emission targets were announced.
This was a setback for the EU, which had hoped for a tougher stance by the Asians, notably China.
The leaders also promised to share low-carbon "cleaner and climate-friendly" technologies, "without overlooking any relevant option, be it existing or new" which includes nuclear power. The leaders promised to work with international financing and development institutions to encourage investment in clean energy.
Without naming the U.S., the leaders urged "all parties" to work toward an early resumption of global trade talks. But ahead of the summit, the EU said it may pursue bilateral deals if global talks stay deadlocked on market access and farm subsidies disputes.
The EU has strong trade ties with Japan, China and South Korea, the three Asian economic powers.
 Load-Date: September 12, 2006

 

End of Document
