

Excerpts from the citation for the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize
The Associated Press
October 13, 2006 Friday 9:19 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 284 words
Dateline: OSLO Norway
Body




Excerpts from the citation awarding the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize to Bangladeshi Muhammad Yunus, and his Grameen Bank, for efforts to help "create economic and social development from below" by using innovative economic programs such as micro-credit lending.
"Muhammad Yunus has shown himself to be a leader who has managed to translate visions into practical action for the benefit of millions of people, not only in Bangladesh, but also in many other countries.
Loans to poor people without any financial security had appeared to be an impossible idea. From modest beginnings three decades ago, Yunus has, first and foremost through Grameen Bank, developed micro-credit into an ever more important instrument in the struggle against poverty.
Grameen Bank has been a source of ideas and models for the many institutions in the field of micro-credit that have sprung up around the world."
"Every single individual on earth has both the potential and the right to live a decent life. Across cultures and civilizations, Yunus and Grameen Bank have shown that even the poorest of the poor can work to bring about their own development.
Micro-credit has proved to be an important liberating force in societies where women in particular have to struggle against repressive social and economic conditions. Economic growth and political democracy cannot achieve their full potential unless the female half of humanity participates on an equal footing with the male."
"Yunus's long-term vision is to eliminate poverty in the world. That vision cannot be realized by means of micro-credit alone. But Muhammad Yunus and Grameen Bank have shown that, in the continuing efforts to achieve it, micro-credit must play a major part."
 Load-Date: October 14, 2006

 

End of Document
