

Executive warms to his new role: The climate fixer
The Associated Press
April 9, 2007 Monday 2:19 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 2394 words
Byline: By MATT MOFFETT, The Wall Street Journal
Body




MANICORE, Brazil Deep in the rain forest, Johan Eliasch, the Swedish-born executive who revived sports-equipment maker Head NV, was inspecting his latest turnaround project. Peering under a wooden trellis, he examined hundreds of tiny seedlings that will be planted on land he now owns. Trees act as a kind of sponge for carbon dioxide, the most prevalent of the gasses contributing to global warming.
In 2005, Mr. Eliasch bought titles to about 400,000 acres here, an area twice the size of New York City. He shut down a timber-cutting operation and plywood plant, and planted trees, motivated, he says, by what he considers slow progress in tackling climate change. "Things needed to be stirred up a bit," he says.
He certainly succeeded in doing that. Some local environmentalists say he's a dilettante dabbling in "green colonialism." Many Brazilians have charged that he's the latest in a long line of foreigners with designs on their natural resources. Mr. Eliasch's conservation project, meanwhile, has put some locals out of work.
Sounding the alarm about a foreign plot to take over the rain forest, a senator from the Amazon, Arthur Virgilio, delivered a speech in Brazil's Congress in which he called Mr. Eliasch "audacious and unbalanced."
After the stink caused by his first efforts, Mr. Eliasch has tried to bring Brazilians into his corner, with some success. He's trying to get off the ground two more-ambitious projects under the umbrella of a group dubbed "Cool Earth." One would enable regular citizens to invest in preserving chunks of the rain forest; another would use financial derivatives to encourage companies to back environmentally friendly projects.
Mr. Eliasch, 45 years old, has a personal fortune estimated at $700 million, a yacht and an influential post as deputy treasurer of the U.K.'s Conservative Party. He's not many people's idea of a tree-hugger. But his work in the Amazon has plunged him deep into a debate over what role individuals especially wealthy ones should play in developing solutions to environmental problems. While non-governmental groups have long purchased land, private citizens from the late "Crocodile Hunter" Steve Irwin in Australia to Mr. Eliasch in the Amazon, are increasingly stepping into the breach.
Many Brazilians have said Mr. Eliasch should spend time helping fix problems at home, such as vehicle emissions, before embarking on adventures overseas. Mr. Eliasch says he treats the global ecology as though it were a distressed company "a big loss-making carbon enterprise," as he puts it. If rain-forest destruction could be slowed, Mr. Eliasch argues, that would buy time for wealthier countries to clean up their industrial and energy systems.
"It's like any turnaround or restructuring situation," he said, machete in hand, as he strolled across land where he's planted 200,000 trees. "You look where you can have the biggest impact in the short term and stem the losses." He chalks up the cool reception from other environmentalists to turf battles.
Many scientists and environmentalists view the rain forest as a neglected front in the battle against climate change. Trees absorb and store carbon dioxide, yet each year, a swath of forest the size of Portugal is destroyed around the world, according to the World Bank. The big danger comes if trees are burned, which causes them to unleash that stored carbon. According to the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change, a report commissioned by the British government, deforestation accounts for nearly one fifth of global greenhouse-gas emissions, more than transport.
Pushing for change as an outsider isn't easy. Wary Brazilians note that the Amazon has long been a magnet for foreign tycoons with extravagant schemes. In the 1930s, Henry Ford tried creating the world's largest rubber plantation in an Amazon village dubbed Fordlandia. The project was sunk by American managers who insisted on a 6 a.m. to 3 p.m. workday despite the heat. Beginning in the 1960s, billionaire U.S. shipping magnate Daniel Ludwig tried building a vast eucalyptus plantation in the Amazon to gain a stranglehold on the global paper market. It was scuttled by operating difficulties and a political backlash.
Jeff Langholz, associate professor at the Monterey Institute of International Studies, says Mr. Eliasch represents a new band of activists he approvingly calls "conservation cowboys," independent operators riding to the rescue of habitats and species.
The earliest proponents focused more on conservation than global warming. In the 1990s, J.A. Bruckner, an engineering executive and farm-owner in Namibia, convinced his neighbors to integrate their properties into a wildlife preserve that's now the size of greater London. In Queensland, Australia, Terri Irwin, the widow of the late TV personality Mr. Irwin, helps oversee wildlife sanctuaries on 90,000 acres.
In Patagonia, by contrast, there's been a backlash against foreign preservationists. Douglas Tompkins, who built apparel maker Esprit de Corp., and his wife, Kristine McDivitt, former CEO of clothing chain Patagonia Inc., have spent a chunk of their personal fortune buying acreage in southern Argentina and Chile.
In response, Latin American politicians have accused the pair of having CIA links and plotting to seize fresh-water reserves. Last year, a left-wing Argentine congresswoman launched an unsuccessful bid to expropriate their Argentine land holdings. The Tompkins decline to comment.
Environmental activism represents a new direction for Mr. Eliasch, grandson of G.A. Svensson, a notable Swedish real-estate entrepreneur who barred his descendants from receiving their inheritance until they turned 50. Mr. Eliasch hasn't needed his grandfather's money.
After obtaining degrees in business and engineering in Sweden, he worked in London during the 1980s at a firm that overhauled troubled shipping and energy companies. Mr. Eliasch started his own company, and in 1995 acquired the financially ailing Head from the Austrian government for $1 million plus the assumption of more than $300 million in debt.
Mr. Eliasch cut costs, introduced new products, such as titanium tennis rackets, and exhibited a flair for promotion. In 1998, he was the forerunner the skier who makes a first test run on the stomach-churning course used for the Hahnenkammrennen race in Kitzbuhel, Austria, one of the biggest events in skiing.
Head is now one of the world's largest manufacturers of skis and the second-largest producer of rackets after Wilson Sporting Goods Co. Mr. Eliasch has become prominent in sporting and social circles, golfing at British Open qualifiers, cutting business deals with athletes including U.S. Olympic skier Bode Miller and partying with the U.K.'s Prince Andrew.
His focus on the Amazon started after he grew worried about the European ski season, whose recent poor state Mr. Eliasch chalks up to global warming. The lack of snow has been bad for business at Head, which counts on winter sports for nearly half of its revenue. In a February conference call with analysts, Mr. Eliasch attributed a decline in fourth-quarter winter sports revenue to "probably the worst snow conditions we ever knew." While concern about the impact of global warming is growing, scientists can't say for sure whether Europe's recent mild winters are caused by climate change or natural weather cycles.
Mr. Eliasch visited Brazil for the first time five years ago. In 2005, Mr. Eliasch bought a plywood plant owned by Gethal Amazonas, a logging company in turn owned by GMO LLC, a Boston investment fund. He also acquired title to forest acreage in the area. Mr. Eliasch won't reveal the price.
"I think (Mr. Eliasch) made the correct assessment that he can produce results faster," than the government alone, says William Cohen, Secretary of Defense during the Clinton administration and a member of Head's supervisory board, a European-style board of directors.
Mr. Eliasch owns title to several parcels, not all contiguous, clustered around the rugged river town of Manicore. The surrounding jungle boasts an unusually rich variety of tree species, including Acai palms, with their dark purple berries, and Bellaco-Caspi, whose bark can be used as a pain reliever. Mr. Eliasch says he's traveled there three or four times, leaving daily oversight to managers who used to work for the timber company.
By his measure, Mr. Eliasch's land purchases have preserved around 80 million tons of carbon that's the amount that would be released if all his lands were forested and burned equivalent to almost half the U.K.'s annual carbon emissions. Estimates for how much carbon is stored in the rain forest can vary greatly depending upon the region and method used. Mr. Eliasch's figures reflect assumptions on the high end of the possible range.
The businessman has also discovered that the Amazon can be an administrative nightmare. In a kind of rain-forest Catch-22, Mr. Eliasch says about a quarter of his titles aren't formally registered that means they're open to dispute because there's no registrar's office specified by law.
Last year, Mr. Eliasch's managers found about 30 loggers working on his land who claimed indigenous status. Mr. Eliasch says they were mostly "fake Indians" who had painted themselves in an effort to avoid prosecution. Local police aren't authorized to deal with indigenous affairs, which are regulated on a federal level. To get rid of the ersatz Indians, Mr. Eliasch's manager let them keep some of the trees they felled and helped them find work elsewhere.
Northeast of Mr. Eliasch's land, in the town of Itacoatiara, the plywood plant is now closed and 600 ex-workers are scrambling for a living. "Instead of thinking so much about the forest, (Mr. Eliasch) should be worried about people," says general-store owner Raimundo Almeida. He says his sales have fallen 20 percent since the factory closed.
Recently, Darcy Perreira Macedo, a former plant worker, was repairing holes in his fishing nets, his source of income since getting laid off. The catch hasn't been good lately; he's run up a huge debt at the grocery store. "Other people are more desperate than me," Mr. Macedo says.
Mr. Eliasch says he gave the laid-off employees severance packages that went beyond what was required under Brazil's worker-friendly labor law. After Mr. Eliasch flew into Manicore's ramshackle airport in January for a get-to-know-you session with local authorities, Manicore Mayor Emerson Franca asked him to fund a public-works program to upgrade housing and water. "We've been forgotten by everyone and are absolutely counting on the Swede," Mayor Franca says.
Back in the U.K., Mr. Eliasch was getting encouragement to expand his project. In March last year, Frank Field, a Labour member of parliament, contacted Mr. Eliasch to ask how he could sponsor a few acres of jungle himself. Mr. Field says the two men, who hail from competing political parties, at once decided to "leapfrog the clanking machinery of government." They formed an organization, Cool Earth, which would allow regular citizens to contribute to rain-forest land purchases. When word of the group came out last year, more than 6,000 citizens contacted Mr. Field seeking to participate.
Cool Earth suffered a setback in October when Britain's Environment Secretary was quoted in the British press talking about the planned "privatization" of the rain forest a loaded word during a Brazilian presidential election. Incumbent leftist Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva was running as the anti-privatization candidate. (A U.K. Environment Department spokesman denied there was any such plan.)
In the ensuing diplomatic dustup, Brazilian officials said citizens of wealthy nations should clean up plants at home rather than encroach on territory abroad. "The Amazon is not for sale," said an op-ed in a Sao Paulo paper under the names of Brazil's foreign, science and environment ministers.
Mr. Eliasch launched a campaign of personal diplomacy with officials in Amazonas, the state where his property is located. He won their blessing by promising to involve locals in preservation projects. Mr. Eliasch "is creative, innovative, and has access to new partners in the business community," says Virgilio Viana, Amazonas's Harvard-trained environmental minister, who was initially skeptical of the entrepreneur.
But the group is yet to launch its first venture. "When it actually comes down to getting these projects off the ground, it's much harder than you ever imagined," says Evan Bowen-Jones, Americas Program Director for Fauna and Flora International, a 104-year-old London-based conservation group. He's been discussing a possible partnership with Cool Earth to preserve land threatened by farmers and ranchers.
Cool Earth is also trying to draw capital from corporations and professional investors. Many companies, in particular those in the European Union, have to comply with emissions caps. They can meet their obligations in two ways: Either they can clean up their factories or they can buy or earn exemptions called carbon credits. Credits can be earned by funding projects in poorer countries. They can also be bought, like coffee or orange-juice contracts, on international exchanges, where pollution has been turned into a commodity.
But the Kyoto Protocol, the treaty under which most industrialized countries pledged to reduce emissions, doesn't recognize preserving the existing rain forest as a way to earn a carbon credit. Kyoto's framers feared that activity halted in one part of the rain forest might simply shift to a different part. They also worried that rain-forest credits might divert attention from cleaning up fuel and industry.
Environmentalists and some governments have been growing more receptive to the idea of rain-forest credits. Wagering that Kyoto will eventually be amended, Cool Earth is preparing to launch a derivative linked to "avoided deforestation" later this year on the Chicago Climate Exchange.
Richard Sandor, founder and chairman of the Chicago exchange, says the derivative is a promising idea on which Mr. Eliasch is "on the forefront." Others, however, have a wait-and-see attitude. "It takes time to determine who is doing serious work and who is just an adventurer," says Enrico Bernard, Amazon project manager for Conservation International, a large environmental group.
 Load-Date: April 10, 2007

 

End of Document
