

Heard on the Street
The Associated Press
November 7, 2008 Friday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1425 words
Byline: By, The Wall Street Journal
Body




Bold Lady of Threadneedle Street
The Bank of England has pressed the panic button.
To put it in context, the central bank's 1.5 percentage-point interest-rate cut Thursday is bigger than the actual level of the fed-funds rate in the U.S. The move by the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street not only ditches the gradualist approach to monetary policy of recent years, but it also attempts to get the central bank back ahead of the slumping economy.
By itself the cut won't avert a nasty recession. But the high level of variable-rate mortgages in the U.K. gives the central bank a stronger lever than in many countries to take the heat off consumers.
About 40 percent of the mortgage stock outstanding in the U.K. is effectively pegged to the Bank of England interest rate. An additional 9 percent are "variable-rate mortgages" that are set by individual banks, some of which will probably decide to rebuild margins rather than pass the full benefit through to customers.
Even so, a drastic interest-rate cut has an immediate impact by reducing monthly mortgage payments. A crude calculation, based on the GBP 1.2 trillion ($1.878 trillion) of mortgages outstanding in the U.K., puts the annualized stimulus to consumers at around GBP 9 billion, or 1 percent of household consumption, according to Goldman Sachs. That is of a similar magnitude, in percentage terms, to what U.S. consumers received in the form of one-off stimulus checks earlier this year.
The feed-through into other areas is murkier. Most corporate variable-rate borrowing, for example, is based off the London interbank offered rate. While the extreme pressure in that market has reduced in recent weeks, it remains unsettled. But the absolute Libor should fall after the rate cut, which will help reduce corporate interest payments.
The biggest problem remains unsolved, however. Banks need to start making new loans again, to restore some equilibrium to the economy. The rate cut doesn't help on that score. Banks remain fearful of lending to one another and are focused on rebuilding capital ahead of further heavy credit losses.
Meanwhile, stretched consumers are more likely to add to their savings rather than borrow more: The number of mortgage applications in September was the lowest monthly total since 1974.
The government will try to use its new stakes in some of the country's leading banks to force them to open their vaults and get lending, even if that compromises the value of its recent investments. But asset prices, particularly houses, still need to correct further before the system can heal fully.
In the meantime, the Bank of England has at least shown it is ready to take radical steps. With rates now at 3 percent, it still has plenty of dry powder at its disposal at least compared with the U.S. Federal Reserve.
 Sean Walters
Asian Self-Help Club: A Capital Idea?
Asia's finance ministers are getting a little cozier.
After nearly a decade of scant progress on regional support systems, governments are making plans to shore up defenses against a worsening global economic crisis.
Already planned is an $80 billion pool of reserves against which central banks can borrow. China, South Korea and Japan would contribute 80 percent of that.
Bilateral deals are in the works as well. South Korea's central bank is working to expand a currency swap deal with China which, according to Korean media reports, could equal one in place with the U.S. Federal Reserve.
The talks showcase Asia's collective $4.4 trillion of foreign exchange reserves, and have some wondering if the natural extension of this cooperation isn't a regional alternative to the International Monetary Fund.
Skepticism about an Asian Monetary Fund is warranted. The idea was floated 10 years ago. But it could get more traction than in the past because of the credit crunch.
The IMF may find itself unable to swat down the idea as it did when the economic crisis was of Asia's own making. The body is adamant that its $200 billion war chest is ample, but Ukraine, Hungary and Iceland are already asking for its help and a wave of problems in the Baltic states could stretch its resources further.
Asian leaders still cringe at the thought of the IMF's one-size-fits-all austerity programs of a decade ago. Pakistan, for one, approached China before starting serious talks on aid with the IMF.
China would certainly play a key role in any pan-Asian initiative in ways it doesn't at the IMF. There, Belgium and the Netherlands together have more votes than China.
 Karen Lane
Cable's Lack of Vision
Cablevision Systems has lost its ability to shock. The cable operator's latest announcement that it is no longer considering strategic alternatives, such as asset spinoffs, was fairly predictable. Amid such uncertain economic times, trying to do such deals to boost the stock price is pointless.
And with $1.7 billion in debt maturities due next year, Cablevision probably can't afford stock buybacks, which investors also were hoping for.
As logical as the decision is, Cablevision still faces the situation that sparked the strategic review in the first place: an investor community distrustful of the company's controlling shareholder, the Dolan family.
No surprise then that Cablevision stock fell as much as 13 percent, before recovering. Mixed results didn't help.
It can't be forgotten that Cablevision's late-July disclosure that it was contemplating ways to boost the stock price was so out of character that Pali Research analyst Rich Greenfield wrote he was continually being asked "'why have the Dolans suddenly become shareholder friendly?'"
A few days later, Harbinger Capital Management, which months earlier had successfully pushed other family-controlled media concerns for board representation, disclosed it had accumulated a stake. Suddenly the Dolans' behavior appeared to make sense.
While Harbinger may have been hit hard by the market crunch, it hasn't disappeared. Stay tuned for more.
 Martin Peers
Buyout Firm Could Call In Their IOUs
Some investors may soon be faced with offers they can't refuse. No matter how dire their financial straits, those who have committed to invest in private-equity funds could be forced to follow through.
That prospect could throw up yet another hurdle to a return to the go-go days for the buyout business. The issue is that private equity generally entails a long-term, roughly 10-year, investment. Investors, who don't plunk down all their cash at once, have to provide money to a fund as needed.
This can lead to cash drains at the worst possible time. Also, many private-equity firms, unable to exit from investments, are unlikely to return much money to investors anytime soon.
Blackstone Group stressed on its earnings call Thursday that investors have a legal obligation to meet capital calls. The firm emphasized that investors can otherwise lose 50 percent of their existing investment.
In fairness, Blackstone has to take a hard line. The firm has a fiduciary duty to its shareholders and all the investors in its funds, so it can't go easy on a single investor. But it still may jar investors who never fully realized that, once in, there are no easy exits from private equity.
One outcome could be investor demands for shorter lockup periods, or ways to redeem some money in a pinch. That would wreak havoc with the private-equity model, which is designed to give firms time to re-engineer purchased companies without having to worry about redemptions.
An alternative is that chagrined investors may allocate less money to illiquid holdings such as private equity. At the least, they may demand lower fees.
Blackstone and others have to play tough. But they themselves might end up taking a hit down the road.
 David Reilly
Overheard
In volatile markets where hearsay and truth are hard to differentiate, Morgan Stanley decided to poke fun at one rumor that dogged the firm Thursday morning. Traders in the loan market were talking about a massive $2.4 billion list of loans for sale being circulated by Morgan Stanley.
The firm denied it, but at midday a trader sent around a list with the subject line, "We're finally 'fessing up." Attached was a spreadsheet filled with joke positions for sale. One was a "2006 Regional Bank Almanac, signed by FDIC Chair." Another was five Morgan Stanley-Wachovia Bank "Merger Integration Plan Books." Then there was a "slightly used" copy of "Welcome To Goldman Sachs New Employee Hand Book." Another gem was a "heavily used" copy of "How to Win any Sports Argument."
Word of advice to those Morgan Stanley traders keep your day jobs.
 Load-Date: November 8, 2008

 

End of Document
