

Inflation in Zimbabwe surges to record 3,714 percent, the highest in the world 
The Associated Press
May 17, 2007 Thursday 2:02 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 632 words
Byline: By ANGUS SHAW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HARARE Zimbabwe
Body




Zimbabwe's annual inflation rate surged to an unprecedented 3,714 percent at the end of April, the official state newspaper reported Thursday, as the government set up a new commission to try to bring price hikes down to single digit levels.
Prices more than doubled last month as shown by a 100.7 percent increase the highest on record in the consumer price index calculated by the state Central Statistical Office, the Herald newspaper said. In the past year they increased 36-fold.
The Herald said that President Robert Mugabe on Monday signed into law new regulations to enforce wage and price controls through "comprehensive price surveys and inspections," with a penalty of up to five years in jail for violators. The ultimate aim would be to bring inflation into single digits.
In recent years, the government has tried to freeze prices for corn meal, bread, cooking oil, meat, school fees and transport costs with little success. Socialist-style controls have driven a thriving black market in scarce commodities.
For instance sugar, unavailable in regular stores for weeks, fetches at least 10 times the government's designated price at a dirty, seething market in Harare's impoverished western township of Mbare.
Minibus drivers, the country's main commuter transport, routinely ignore government directives on fares, citing soaring black market prices for gasoline. Commuters questioned at police roadblocks often lie about the fare they paid or risk being thrown off the bus and left stranded.
The independent Confederation of Zimbabwe Industries estimates most factories across the country are running at around 30 percent capacity or less, and countless businesses have shut down, fueling record unemployment of about 80 percent.
Many consumer items have disappeared altogether, forcing supermarkets to fill out their shelves with empty packaging behind the few goods on display.
The worst economic crisis since independence in 1980 is blamed on corruption, mismanagement and the often-violent seizures of thousands of white-owned commercial farms since 2000 that disrupted the agriculture-based economy.
Hikes in prices of power, other fuels, passenger transport, vegetables and meat contributed to April's surge in the consumer price index, which was double the increase in March of 50.3 percent, the Central Statistical Office said, according to The Herald.
The international benchmark for hyperinflation is a 50 percent month-on-month increase.
The government warned Wednesday that the price of bread is likely to rise because only a fraction of the normal wheat crop has been planted.
In Zimbabwe's bizarre economic meltdown, a regular can of locally made baked beans in a supermarket now costs three times the price of the equivalent in Europe, compared at the official exchange rate of Zimbabwean $15,000 to the U.S. dollar.
On Monday, the state postal service upped its charges by 600 percent, the second increase in three months. A stamp for a local letter weighing 20 grams (0.7 of an ounce) went up to Zimbabwean $40,000, or US$2.60 (€1.90).
A 1-ounce letter mailed within the United States costs US$0.41 (€0.28), five times cheaper than in Zimbabwe where only an urban minority have access to e-mail and many rely on the crumbling postal services.
The Reserve Bank last year introduced sweeping currency reforms knocking off the final three digits thus Zimbabwean $250,000 became Zimbabwean $250 in a vain attempt to tame inflation.
Even so, consumers are still forced to carry around huge bricks of notes to pay for scarce supplies and basic services.
For example, a pest control service on Wednesday charged Zimbabwean $1 million as a callout charge to a homeowner whose house was plagued by the rats which are thriving as the country's sanitation and garbage collection collapses.
 Load-Date: May 17, 2007

 

End of Document
