

Iran, at global conference, accuses the United States of being the true nuclear proliferator
The Associated Press
May 11, 2007 Friday 9:08 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 808 words
Byline: By GEORGE JAHN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIENNA Austria
Body




Iran on Friday accused the United States of being the true violator of the Nonproliferation Treaty as a global conference ended without managing to bridge conflicting priorities on how to tighten the pact meant to prevent the spread of nuclear arms.
The United States and the European Union, in turn criticized Tehran for hamstringing the 106-nation meeting for a week by blocking consensus adoption of its agenda because of a phrase calling for the "need for full compliance" with the treaty. Diplomats accredited to the conference said Iran felt that wording would allow it to be targeted for its defiance of the U.N. Security Council.
Differences were reflected to the last minutes of the meeting by the failure of delegates Friday to adopt the Japanese "chairman's factual summary" Yukiya Amano's review of the debates initiated and documents submitted at the 130-nation meeting since its opening April 30.
The document was to have been annexed to the meeting's concluding report. But opposition from nonaligned nations, which felt it did not reflect their priorities and from Tehran, which opposed mention of "serious concern ... expressed over Iran's nuclear program," led it to be listed only as one of dozens of documents submitted at the meeting.
Since the outset of the meeting, Iran has been a major issue, with Tehran defending its nuclear record and the United States and its allies accusing it of breaching the treaty.
The summary dedicated only one of its 59 paragraphs to Iran, noting that Tehran was urged to comply with U.N. Security Council resolutions calling for a halt of its uranium enrichment program.
Still, that was too much for Iran. And while nonaligned delegates did not specify their opposition, several said the summary was "not factual enough."
That indicated they did not share the priorities of nuclear weapons states, whose main nonproliferation focus is tightening the rules on nuclear technology in an attempt to prevent non-weapons states from acquiring the capacity to make such arms.
Chief U.S. delegate Christopher A. Ford said the "summary inadequately reflects ... the well-merited criticism that Iran has faced" at the conference an allusion to Tehran's obstruction to adoption of the agenda.
A European Union statement also targeted Iran for "unjustifiable objections" to the agenda, while France was also critical.
The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty calls on nations to pledge not to pursue nuclear weapons in exchange for a commitment by five nuclear powers the U.S., Russia, Britain, France and China to move toward nuclear disarmament.
Turning the tables on the United States, whose delegation had accused Tehran of violating the treaty by nuclear activities that point to a desire to develop an arms program, chief Iranian representative Ali Ashgar Soltanieh said Washington and its allies "are in violation" of the treaty.
"The message at this conference is deploring the capabilities of weapons states and noncompliance of their obligations" to disarm," he told reporters.
Iran argues it is entitled to enrich uranium under the treaty provision giving all pact members the right to develop peaceful programs. But suspicions bred by nearly two decades of clandestine nuclear activities, including questionable black-market acquisitions of equipment and blueprints that appear linked to weapons plans, have led to U.N. sanctions over its refusal to freeze enrichment.
Tehran's ultimate goal is to have 50,000 enriching centrifuges at the underground Natanz facility. That would be enough to supply fuel for what Iran says is a planned network of atomic reactors to generate electricity. Or it could produce material for a full-scale nuclear weapons program.
Iran denies it has any plans to make weapons, asserting it wants to enrich uranium which can produce the fissile material for nuclear warheads purely to generate nuclear power, and describes its other activities as also serving solely peaceful aims.
In Tehran, top nuclear negotiator Ali Larijani warned that Iran would not suspend enrichment as a precondition to talks meant to reach a compromise over its nuclear program.
Senior diplomats from the five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council and Germany held talks in Berlin on Thursday. German officials said the meeting was preparation for another round of talks between European Union foreign policy chief Javier Solana and Larijani.
After meeting late last month, Solana and Larijani spoke of some progress and agreed to meet again within weeks in hopes of finding enough common ground to serve as the basis of renewed talks between Tehran and the six countries.
Also on Friday, Vice President Dick Cheney issued a warning to Iran while aboard an aircraft carrier in the Persian Gulf, saying the United States would join allies to keep Iran from getting nuclear weapons "and dominating the region."
 Load-Date: May 12, 2007

 

End of Document
