

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
December 8, 2006 Friday 1:47 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 896 words
Dateline: MASSILLON Ohio
Body




State lawmakers earmarked $75,000 to help the city pay for a design of a museum honoring legendary football coach Paul Brown.
Brown, who founded the Cleveland Browns and Cincinnati Bengals, got his start as a high school coach, leading the Massillon Tigers to six state championships and four national titles from 1932 to 1940.
"A Paul Brown museum belongs here in Massillon," Mayor Frank Cicchinelli said Thursday. "He always considered Massillon his home. I know the Brown family feels the same way. It's an exciting project."
Massillon plans to build a museum housing items such as a suitcase that Brown took on the road and the famous trench coach he sported on the sidelines. The museum will be at the school's football stadium, which also bears the late coach's name.
Brown's wife donated the family's collection of memorabilia to the Massillon Tiger Booster Club.
The museum is the idea of Brown family friend Jeff David. He wants to see the stadium renovated at a cost of $2.5 million to $3.5 million with the museum included in that effort.
Brown led Ohio State to its first national championship in 1942. He died in 1991 at 82.
PARIS (AP) Lawyers for FIFA and France's soccer federation criticized efforts by two groups of fans demanding an official investigation of Zinedine Zidane's expulsion from the World Cup final.
A Paris court held a hearing Thursday to decide whether to allow the investigation, reviving memories of the star's head-butt of Italy defender Marco Materazzi in extra time, which led to a red card for Zidane.
Italy won the July 9 final in Berlin in a penalty shootout.
The groups, whose names translate as "World Cup 2006 Justice" and "The National Action Group for Truth in the World Cup Final 2006," want the match replayed.
They claim the fourth official's view of the head-butt was blocked, and he had to rely on a video replay to make the call a move not permitted under FIFA rules.
"What better than the World Cup to get your name known," said Benjamin Peyrelevade, lawyer for the French soccer federation, calling it a "publicity stunt."
The groups accuse of the federation of wrongdoing, along with FIFA. Lawyers for the two soccer bodies argued that French courts don't have jurisdiction to rule in the case, and have sought to have it thrown out.
HARTFORD, Conn. (AP) The purse for this year's Travelers Championship golf tournament will be $6 million, including more than $1 million for the winner.
The announcement was made Thursday by organizers, who hope the purse and planned improvements to the TPC at River Highlands in Cromwell will attract the PGA Tour's best players and more fans.
"Travelers is committed to building the championship into one of the most prestigious events on the tour," said Jay Fishman, the St. Paul Travelers chairman and CEO.
The Travelers Championship, called the Buick Championship last year and the Greater Hartford Open before that, is scheduled for June 18-24.
Improvements include a new practice facility, driving range and renovations to the course skyboxes. They will begin in January and be phased in over two years.
MILAN, Italy (AP) Italian downhiller Kristian Ghedina is coming out of retirement for a final race on his favorite course. The 37-year-old will race the World Cup downhill in Val Gardena on Dec. 16.
"I didn't have a farewell race last season, so this will be my farewell to everyone," Ghedina said Thursday on his Web site.
Ghedina retired at the end of last season. His four victories in Val Gardena tie him for the record with Austrian great Franz Klammer.
Ghedina will use the same equipment from his downhill debut on the Saslong course 17 years earlier.
Like the rest of the Alps, Val Gardena has had warm weather lately and officials won't confirm until Saturday whether the races will be held.
ORLANDO, Fla. (AP) The Orlando Magic want their arena to be named after Amway, the direct-sales business that team president Rich DeVos co-founded.
The four-year deal would bring $375,000 annually to the city, which owns the arena. Amway would also get first crack at naming rights to the new arena planned a few blocks from the current one, where the team is expected to start playing in 2010.
The City Council is scheduled to vote on the agreement Monday.
The previous naming deal with brokerage firm TD Waterhouse, recently acquired by Ameritrade Holding Corp. and now named TD Ameritrade, expired Sept. 30. It paid more annually, but required the city to maintain signs and pay for upgrades, which meant a yearly net profit of anywhere from $273,000 to $303,000.
Magic spokesman Joel Glass said the team was in talks with two other companies before deciding on Amway.
LEXINGTON, Ky. (AP) A new park will commemorate a jockey who won three Kentucky Derbys.
The Isaac Murphy Memorial Art Garden will honor the black jockey, who has been called the greatest jockey of the 19th century. Murphy once lived in the area.
"It's been talked about for years how to take advantage of this neighborhood being historically connected to the horse industry," said Jim Embry, a member of NorthEast Lexington Initiative, one of the organizations involved in development of the park.
Plans call for the park to be built on a half-acre parcel owned by the state but designated for use as a park, Embry said in Wednesday editions of the Lexington Herald-Leader.
Work on the garden is expected to start in the spring, he said.
 Load-Date: December 8, 2006

 

End of Document
