

New heights in the hunt for high-fashion exclusivity
The Associated Press
February 21, 2007 Wednesday 4:32 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1802 words
Byline: By STACY MEICHTRY, The Wall Street Journal
Body




A few months ago, Pier Luigi Loro Piana, co-owner of the Loro Piana SpA fashion label, climbed the Andean plains to watch a vicuna mating ritual. The vicuna is a goat-size relative of the llama whose fleece is spun into one of the world's most valuable wools. As a farmer wearing a multicolored poncho played a flute, a group of men pushed the heads of two vicunas together to simulate a kiss.
Loro Piana has snagged most of the world's supply of vicuna fleece, cementing its reputation as one of the world's most exclusive brands. As a result, the numbers of this once endangered animal have surged. So has Mr. Loro Piana's business. His Italian fashion house uses vicuna wool the Incas called it "the fiber of the gods" for its best products. Suits made from vicuna cost $23,000, compared with $4,400 for those made from merino, which comes from sheep.
In this search for exclusivity, Loro Piana is trying to tackle one of the thorniest problems in fashion: How do you keep drawing customers to expensive merchandise when mass-market retailers are aping designs and fabrics used by top-tier labels? Cashmere, a once high-end fabric, has been diminished in recent years as inexpensive goods made in China flood the market. Crocodile skin for years was used by leather-goods companies to add an aura of exclusivity, but now industrial-scale crocodile farms have made the skin relatively commonplace.
The commoditization of materials that once defined luxury has prompted fashion brands to scour the world for new ones. Milan fashion house Ermenegildo Zegna SpA holds an annual contest in Tasmania, Australia, in which wool growers compete to produce the finest fleece. And rival fashion houses are following Loro Piana to the Andes, scouring for vicuna supplies as the herds recover.
James Sugden, managing director of United Kingdom woolens maker Johnstons of Elgin Ltd., concedes that Loro Piana has been "faster off the mark," but he says the race is far from over. "We're the tortoise, and they're the hare," he says. Mr. Sugden is planning to visit the region this spring to procure his second helping of fleece.
This increasing competition is Loro Piana's biggest worry. So far, its vicuna products have been immune to pricing pressure for a simple reason: It controls most of the world's supply of the wool, the bulk of which comes from Peru. "There is no way that vicuna can be a cheap item," Mr. Loro Piana says.
But with other buyers coming into the market, this dominance is likely to dissipate. Loro Piana buys about 60 percent to 70 percent of Peru's supply of vicuna fleece. A couple of years ago, a Loro Piana consortium bought 100 percent through a contract with the government. As products made with vicuna proliferate, Loro Piana may find itself banking on a material of diminishing exclusivity, exactly the problem it was looking to avoid.
Vicuna fiber is scarce and painstaking to harvest. Vicunas need lots of space two and a half acres per animal or they won't breed, forcing farmers to fence off vast swaths of territory to manage their herds. In earlier decades, cash-strapped farmers found it simpler to hunt vicuna and sell the pelts to corrupt middlemen. Unlike cashmere goats, vicunas can be sheered only once every two years, and even then don't yield much fleece. A ready-to-wear $16,000 overcoat requires 42 vicuna sheerings.
The Loro Piana family, which hails from Italy's northern Piedmont region, has been in the textile business for six generations. Mr. Loro Piana and his brother, Sergio, took over in the 1970s. The two set about transforming the firm into a manufacturer of high-quality cashmere and wool. Today, it sells wool directly to some of the biggest names in fashion, such as Giorgio Armani and Hermes, and also makes finished goods that are sold to consumers through a chain of boutiques.
Mr. Loro Piana's father imported vicuna fleece from Peru in the 1950s and 1960s, limiting his production mainly to overcoats, an item that had become a status symbol. Vicuna had a moment of notoriety in 1958 when President Eisenhower's chief of staff was forced to resign for accepting a vicuna overcoat from a favor-seeking businessman.
Soon after that, vicunas all but disappeared from the market. Hunters looking to sell the pelts had driven the animal to the brink of extinction. In 1969, the Peruvian government banned the trade of vicuna fleece. Poaching, however, continued as armed bands of the Maoist guerrilla group Shining Path unloaded pelts on the black market.
By the 1980s, the cachet of cashmere, Loro Piana's most profitable fiber, was falling. In vicuna, despite its problems, Mr. Loro Piana sensed an opportunity. He began scouting flocks during visits to a vicuna reserve in Pampa Galeras, a 10-hour drive south of Lima.
In his first encounter on the windswept highlands, Mr. Loro Piana realized he'd found in the long-necked animal a potential new business partner. "It was like a dog," he says. "It looked into my eyes and seemed like it really wanted to talk to me."
In 1992, Mr. Loro Piana approached the Peruvian government and suggested it sell the exclusive right to buy 100 percent of the country's annual vicuna production. The Peruvian government had been exploring ways to use the vicuna as a resource for the region's peasant farming communities, but was wary of putting it back on the open market for fear of sparking another wave of poaching.
Mr. Loro Piana's idea solved the government's quandary. It would guarantee farmers a steady income while allowing authorities to monitor the trade.
Several leading cashmere producers, including the U.K.'s Dawson International PLC and Johnstons of Elgin, entered negotiations after the offer was announced. They had manufactured vicuna prior to its ban and felt they needed a role in supplying one of the world's most exclusive fibers.
"It's like having a store on Via Montenapoleone in Milan," says Karl Spilhaus, president of the Cashmere and Camel Hair Manufacturers Institute, based in Boston. "You've got to be there."
Loro Piana formed a consortium that included Condortips, a textile producer from the southern Peruvian city of Arequipa, and Lanerie Agnona SpA, a northern Italian producer of knitwear. The consortium agreed to pay around $400 a kilogram (about two pounds) of vicuna fleece at the time, about 14 times the price of cashmere, Loro Piana says. It also pledged to finance an association of vicuna herders to help improve breeding and conservation techniques.
During a recent interview at his villa in the foothills of the Italian Alps, Mr. Loro Piana dipped his fingers into a sack of billowing vicuna fleece that was sitting on the coffee table. "For us, vicuna has been a kind of mission," he said.
In 1994, Mr. Loro Piana sat next to Peru's then-President Alberto Fujimori at a glitzy ceremony in Lima to officially ink the deal. A pair of vicunas on leashes stood nearby.
The arrangement fueled a comeback for Peru's vicunas. With sales of fleece generating income for farmers, the herds became a valuable resource, prompting the Peruvian government to send troops into the Pampa Galeras to defend the animals from guerrillas. About 180,000 vicunas now roam the Andean highlands more than double the number when the trade ban was relaxed. Mr. Loro Piana thinks the herd could top one million within a decade.
"A large, large part of the increase in numbers is a result of the (economic) incentive," says Jane Wheeler, a researcher with Conopa, a Lima research institute that monitors Peru's vicuna populations. "People were suddenly more interested in having them alive than killing them for their pelts."
Bringing the vicuna back to the market, however, turned out to be as tricky as restoring the herds. It's hard to pitch a product to a generation of consumers unaware of its existence, let alone its exclusivity. Vicuna's status as an animal in danger of extinction also created regulatory hurdles.
Peru had cleared the fleece for export, but the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service kept a trade ban in place until 2002. "Fifty percent of our market was lost. So I was really discouraged for a while," Mr. Loro Piana recalls.
To get the word out, Mr. Loro Piana began organizing "vicuna conferences" for retailers and the media in fashion capitals such as Paris, London, Milan and Tokyo, where he touted the fiber's exclusivity over cocktails and antipasti. Vicuna items are displayed prominently in the company's boutiques, which hand out hardcover booklets chronicling the vicuna's recovery from the brink of extinction, as well as certificates guaranteeing that the fleece is "legally sheared."
Jim Gold, chief executive of Bergdorf Goodman, says Loro Piana sends stacks of reading material to the department store to familiarize sales staff with vicuna's strongest selling point: its softness.
In recent years, Mr. Loro Piana has rolled out a new line of vicuna goods, including outdoor jackets for $14,500 and crew-neck sweaters for $5,900. Loro Piana ruled out blending vicuna with other fibers in its ready-to-wear line a move that would have made the fabric more affordable, but less exclusive.
Sales of vicuna wool and vicuna products are worth more than $1 million to Loro Piana. While that's a fraction of the company's total revenues of about $500 million, Loro Piana's status as one of the few vicuna suppliers has added to the mystique of its products.
Loro Piana's 1994 deal with the Peruvian government expired two years ago, prompting the influx of competitors into the Andean high plains.
Mr. Loro Piana says he has to embrace, in part, the inevitable commoditization process which for years he managed to avoid. He's pressing suppliers to increase the size of their herds and improve their yield. If Loro Piana can process vicuna fleece in larger volume, it could lower manufacturing costs and the price of finished goods.
In the meantime, Mr. Loro Piana is leveraging his current dominance of the market as best he can. He has rejected attempts from Peru's farmers to charge higher prices. Loro Piana currently pays between $400 and $500 for a kilogram of raw fleece roughly the same amount it paid in 1994.
Even though the vicuna market is open to new players, only a handful of textile makers have the expertise to manufacture and market a large amount of vicuna. That limits farmers' pricing power. Mr. Loro Piana's refusal to budge on price has left Peru's farmers with little choice but to raise revenue by increasing the size of their herds.
The Italian is looking farther afield, as well. He has met with government officials in neighboring Argentina, Chile and Bolivia to try to persuade them to follow in Peru's footsteps and develop their own vicuna populations. Loro Piana is also marketing a fleece called "baby cashmere." It comes from an infant goat found in China and Mongolia.
 Load-Date: February 22, 2007

 

End of Document
