

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 15, 2006 Friday 2:17 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1459 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Paul Arizin
PHILADELPHIA (AP) Paul Arizin, an early pioneer of the jump shot who led the Philadelphia Warriors to the 1956 NBA championship and was chosen one of the 50 greatest NBA players, died Tuesday. He was 78.
A Hall of Famer who was cut from his high school team, Arizin died in his sleep, according to a statement from Villanova University, where he had an outstanding college career.
Despite losing two years in his prime to the Korean War, "Pitchin' Paul" forged a sensational pro career on the strength of his jump shot, a recent evolution of the game. Arizin perfected the style playing on slippery gym floors and averaged 22.8 points in his 10-year career. He was inducted into the basketball Hall of Fame in 1978.
Drafted by the Philadelphia Warriors in 1950, he led the league in scoring in his second season before serving two years in Korea with the Marines. He returned to lead the Warriors to the NBA championship in 1956, scoring almost 29 points per game in the playoffs.
By his second season in the NBA, Arizin captured the scoring title by averaging 25.4 points. He also averaged 11.3 rebounds while leading the Warriors to the playoffs.
At 34, Arizin retired in 1962 when the Warriors moved to San Francisco. He played three seasons with the Camden Bullets of the Eastern Basketball League.
Anton Balasingham
COLOMBO, Sri Lanka (AP) Anton Balasingham, the chief negotiator for Sri Lanka's Tamil Tiger rebels, died Thursday. He was 68.
Tamil died of cancer in London, a pro-rebel Web site reported.
Balasingham was associated with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam from its inception more than 30 years ago and had been a political adviser to reclusive rebel leader Velupillai Prabhakaran, the TamilNet Web site said.
Balasingham has represented the rebel group in peace talks with successive Sri Lankan governments since 1985, after a violent separatist war flared up in 1983.
Until his death, he played a key role in the peace process initiated after Norway brokered a cease-fire between the government and the rebel group in 2002.
Balasingham tried to transform the rebel group's militaristic image into a political one.
Balasingham, who was born in Sri Lanka, later became a British citizen and lived in London.
Ahmet Ertegun
NEW YORK (AP) Ahmet Ertegun, who helped define American music as the founder of Atlantic Records, a label that popularized the gritty R&B of Ray Charles, the classic soul of Aretha Franklin and the British rock of the Rolling Stones, died Thursday. He was 83.
Ertegun, a Turkish ambassador's son, started collecting records for fun but would later became one of the music industry's most powerful figures with Atlantic, which he founded in 1947.
The label made its name with rhythm and blues by Charles and Big Joe Turner, but later diversified, making Franklin the Queen of Soul, as well as carrying the banner of British rock (with the Rolling Stones, Cream and Led Zeppelin) and American pop (with Sonny and Cher; Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young; and others).
Today, the company, part of Warner Music Group, is the home to artists including Kid Rock, James Blunt, T.I., and Missy Elliott.
Ertegun's love of music began with jazz, back when he and his late brother Nesuhi (an esteemed producer of such jazz acts as Charles Mingus and Ornette Coleman) used to hang around with Louis Armstrong and Duke Ellington in the clubs of Washington, D.C.
Ertegun parlayed his love of music into a career when he founded Atlantic with partner Herb Abramson and a $10,000 loan. When the label first started, it made its name with blues-edged recordings by acts such as Ruth Brown.
In later years, Ertegun signed Midler, Roberta Flack and ABBA. He had a gift for being able to pick out what would be a commercial smash, said the late producer Arif Mardin.
Although he was slowed by triple-bypass surgery in 2001, he still went into his office almost daily to listen for his next hit.
Lamar Hunt
DALLAS (AP) Lamar Hunt, the Kansas City Chiefs owner who founded the American Football League, helped lead the AFL-NFL merger and came up with the term "Super Bowl," died Wednesday. He was 74.
He died at Presbyterian Hospital of Dallas because of complications from prostate cancer, Chiefs spokesman Bob Moore said.
"His vision transformed pro football and helped turn a regional sport into a national passion," NFL commissioner Roger Goodell said.
The son of Texas oilman H.L. Hunt, Lamar Hunt grew up in Dallas. He played football at Southern Methodist University but never rose above third string.
Along with two brothers, Hunt tried to corner the silver market in 1979 and 1980. Their oil investments also soured in the 1980s. Some estimated the family's losses in the billions.
When NFL owners rebuffed Hunt's attempt to buy a franchise and move it to Dallas, Hunt founded the AFL. He owned one of the AFL's eight teams from the inaugural 1960 season, the Dallas Texans.
The Texans struggled in competition with the expansion Dallas Cowboys of the NFL. Convinced that both franchises would suffer as long as Dallas remained a two-team city, Hunt moved the Texans to Kansas City in 1963.
Hunt realized his dream of becoming an NFL owner after the two leagues merged in 1966.
In 1972, Hunt became the first AFL figure to be inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame, and each year the Lamar Hunt Trophy goes to the winner of the NFL's American conference.
In 1967, Hunt was one of 10 original founding partners in the Chicago Bulls basketball franchise. The same year, he started the first organized effort at a pro tennis tour with World Championship Tennis, and in 1968 he helped bring pro soccer to the United States with his Dallas Tornado of the old North American Soccer League.
Bernard Kleiman
PITTSBURGH (AP) Bernard Kleiman, a labor lawyer and longtime chief negotiator for the United Steelworkers, died Thursday. He was 78.
Kleiman, of Pittsburgh, died Wednesday of cardiac arrest, according to a union statement.
During a 46-year career with the United Steelworkers, Kleiman was a close adviser to five international presidents and served as general counsel from 1965 through 1997. He was most recently special counsel to international president Leo W. Gerard.
Kleiman officially retired from the union over the summer but continued to report to work and was involved in the union's strike against Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. as recently as last week, the union said.
Kleiman, who was born in Chicago, established the union's legal department in 1965 and played a key role in bringing the steel industry into compliance with the Civil Rights Act, which opened steel mill jobs to blacks and women, it said.
Fred Marsden
LONDON (AP) Fred Marsden, the drummer in the Merseybeat band Gerry and the Pacemakers, died Saturday. He was 66.
Marsden died of cancer in Southport, England, according to a family death announcement published Tuesday in the Liverpool Echo newspaper.
The band, fronted by Marsden's brother, Gerry, was the second group signed by Brian Epstein, whose first band was The Beatles.
Gerry and the Pacemakers become the first from Liverpool to have a No. 1 single with "How Do You Do It?" in 1963, followed that year by another chart-topper, "I Like It."
Later hits included "You'll Never Walk Alone," "Ferry Cross the Mersey," and "Don't Let the Sun Catch You Crying," co-written by Fred.
The group disbanded in 1967. Gerry Marsden reformed the Pacemakers in 1973 but without Fred, who had given up the music business to be a telephone operator and later established the Pacemaker driving school.
Catherine Pollard
MILFORD, Conn. (AP) Catherine Pollard, whose 14-year legal battle helped open the doors for women to become scoutmasters and other leaders within the Boy Scouts of America, died Wednesday. She was 88.
Pollard died in Seminole, Fla., said Shawn Smith of Smith Funeral Home in Milford, which is handling arrangements.
Pollard's battle with the organization began after her application for a leadership position was denied in 1974 and 1976.
She was rejected even though she had run a Milford troop from 1973 to 1975 when no men volunteered. The Boy Scouts contended that a woman was not a good role model for young boys enrolled in scouting.
Pollard successfully challenged the action before the state Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities, but that ruling was reversed in state courts.
The state Supreme Court in July 1987 upheld a lower-court ruling that boys need the guidance of men "in the difficult process of maturing to adulthood."
But in February 1988 the national Boy Scouts of America did away with all gender restrictions on volunteer positions, abandoning its 78-year-old policy that banned women from six leadership roles.
Pollard, who was 69 at the time, officially became Milford's first female scoutmaster in 1988.
 Load-Date: December 15, 2006

 

End of Document
