

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
January 22, 2009 Thursday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1873 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Holly Coors
GOLDEN, Colo. (AP) Holly Coors, a conservative political activist and philanthropist and the ex-wife of brewery magnate Joseph Coors, died Sunday. She was 88.
Family spokeswoman Aimee Valdez said Coors died at her home in Golden after a long illness. Valdez did not give an exact cause of death.
Coors served on the board of the Heritage Foundation, which her ex-husband helped create. She was also on the board of the Federalist Society and was founder and president of Women of our Hemisphere Achieving Together, which helps Central American women.
She served as a trustee, director or advisory board member for a dozen other foundations, colleges and institutions.
President Ronald Reagan appointed her to the Board of Governors of the Air Force Academy and named her a goodwill ambassador. President George H.W. Bush appointed her to the White House Fellows Commission.
She was born Aug. 25, 1920, in Bangor, Maine. She met Joseph Coors in Nantucket, Mass., and they married in 1941. They divorced in 1988.
Joseph Coors, who died in 2003, was chief operating officer of Golden-based Adolph Coors Co., which his grandfather founded. The company is now part of Molson Coors.
Edmund de Rothschild
LONDON (AP) Edmund de Rothschild, former chairman of N.M. Rothschild and Sons merchant bank and a noted horticulturist, died Saturday. He was 93.
De Rothschild died at his home, Exbury House, in Hampshire, England, the family said. The cause of death was not announced.
He joined the family bank in London in 1939 and directed its operations after his uncle Anthony suffered a stroke in 1955. He was named senior partner in 1960 and elevated to chairman in 1970.
De Rothschild oversaw the family firm's evolution to a modern institution, ending its private partnership status in 1970. He served as chairman until 1975.
He has been described as being "a banker by hobby and a gardener by profession," like his father.
However, de Rothschild was closely involved in postwar reconstruction in Japan and received that country's Order of the Sacred Treasure (1st class). He also took a personal role in raising funds for a large hydroelectric power station at Churchill Falls Canada.
De Rothschild restored Exbury Gardens, a 260-acre woodland garden which had been neglected after the death of his father, Lionel, in 1942. The gardens were opened to the public in 1955.
De Rothschild developed the Solent Range of Exbury deciduous azaleas and produced several dozen rhododendron hybrids. He received the Victorian Medal of Honor, the highest award of the Royal Horticultural Society.
Shane Dronett
ATLANTA (AP) Shane Dronett, who played 10 years in the NFL and started every game for the Atlanta Falcons' 1998 Super Bowl team, was found dead at his home on Wednesday. He was 38.
According to a statement from the Gwinnett County police department, officers were called to Dronett's home near Atlanta on Wednesday morning in response to a possible suicide. Police spokesman Illana Spellman confirmed Dronett's body was found at the residence.
The medical examiner's office was examining the body to determine the cause of death.
Dronett played at the University of Texas and was a second-round draft pick by Dan Reeves and the Denver Broncos in 1992.
As Atlanta's coach, Reeves brought Dronett to the Falcons in 1996 and said Wednesday the 6-foot-6, 300-pound defensive tackle was a key player when the Falcons made a run to the Super Bowl before losing 34-19 to Denver in Miami.
Dronett made 86 starts and had 44 sacks in 139 career games. His last season as an active player was 2001, but he remained on the team's roster before he was released following the 2002 season.
Herbert Hitzeman Jr.
ST. LOUIS (AP) Herbert Hitzeman Jr., a Washington University official credited with raising more than $1 billion in funds, died Friday. He was 81.
The university said Hitzeman died of cancer.
Before retiring in 1990, Hitzeman led three fundraising campaigns, including the Alliance for Washington University, which raised $630.5 million when it was completed in 1987. The university said that was a record amount at the time.
Hitzeman was a lifelong St. Louis resident and a 1953 graduate of Washington University. He returned as a development officer in 1966. During his 24 years there, he designed and implemented the university's development and alumni programs.
Horace Kornegay
GREENSBORO, N.C. (AP) Former North Carolina Rep. Horace Kornegay, who vigorously defended cigarette manufacturers in Congress and later as Big Tobacco's chief spokesman, died Wednesday. He was 84.
Kornegay died at The Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital in Greensboro, said friends and a hospital spokesman. The hospital did not give a cause of death.
Kornegay came from the heart of the state's tobacco economy, raised in Greensboro and educated at Wake Forest College now known as Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem. The Democrat joined Congress in the 1960s and was forced to defend the cigarette industry in the wake of a 1964 Surgeon General report that tied smoking to health problems.
After four terms, Kornegay moved in 1969 to the Tobacco Institute, an industry trade group that also assembled a team of lobbyists and built a reputation as one of Capitol Hill's most powerful forces. There, he continued to push back against increased taxes and regulations that were dogging an industry that he cast as one of America's best.
In 1986, serving as chairman of the Tobacco Institute, Kornegay ardently fought against a Surgeon General suggestion that the nation ban cigarette advertising.
Dante "Gluefingers" Lavelli
CLEVELAND (AP) Football Hall of Famer Dante "Gluefingers" Lavelli, a sure-handed receiver who helped the Cleveland Browns build a dynasty in the 1940s and 50s, has died. He was 85.
Fairview Hospital spokeswoman Denise Smith said Lavelli died Tuesday night. The cause of death was not immediately available.
Best known for his great hands, Lavelli was a favorite target of legendary Browns quarterback Otto Graham. Lavelli was part of four championship teams when the Browns dominated the All-America Football Conference in the 1940s. After Cleveland joined the NFL in 1950, Lavelli was a member of three title teams while playing for coach Paul Brown.
Lavelli started at right end for the Browns from 1946 to 1956. He caught 386 passes for 6,488 yards and 62 TDs. But because Cleveland played in the AAFC, many of his accomplishments are not recognized on the club's career lists.
Along with his achievements on the field, Lavelli was instrumental in the formal beginnings of the NFL players' union.
Carl McIntosh
BOZEMAN, Mont. (AP) Carl McIntosh, a former president of Montana State University, died Monday. He was 94.
The Dokken-Nelson Funeral Home said McIntosh died at home after being under hospice care but said it did not know the cause of death.
McIntosh was MSU's eighth president, serving from 1970 to 1977. He lived in Bozeman in retirement and returned to the public eye in 2008 when he donated his boyhood beetle collection to the university.
McIntosh said last fall that he once thought about pursuing entomology as a career, but he discovered that he enjoyed public speaking even more than insects.
McIntosh received his bachelor's degree from the University of Redlands and his master's and doctoral degrees from the University of Iowa. He was president of Idaho State College from 1946 to 1959 and president of what is now California State University-Long Beach from 1959 to 1969.
David "Fathead" Newman
KINGSTON, N.Y. (AP) Jazz musician David "Fathead" Newman, who was a tenor soloist with the Ray Charles Band, died Tuesday. He was 75.
His manager, Karen Newman, said Newman died of pancreatic cancer in a hospital in Kingston, N.Y.
A Dallas native, Newman left college to tour with Charlie Parker's mentor, Buster Smith.
According to his Web site, Newman spent twelve years with the Ray Charles Band starting in 1954. He began as the baritone player and became the star tenor soloist.
He returned to Dallas and led his own bands before moving to New York City. As a studio musician he worked on recording projects with musicians including Herby Mann, Aretha Franklin and Aaron Neville.
Claudine Ryce
MIAMI (AP) Claudine Ryce, the mother of a 9-year-old boy whose 1995 murder received national attention, died Wednesday. She was 66.
A spokeswoman for Jimmy Ryce's family said the boy's mother died of a heart attack.
Jimmy Ryce was kidnapped after getting off a school bus near the family's rural Miami home. Claudine Ryce and her husband, Don, participated in the three-month search.
Authorities arrested ranch hand Juan Carlos Chavez after the boy's backpack was found in his trailer. Chavez confessed to raping Jimmy, shooting him and then dismembering the body, placing it in planters and sealing them in cement.
Chavez was found guilty of murder. He is on death row pending appeal.
A state law bearing the boy's name keeps sexual predators in custody even after they finish their sentences if they are considered a danger.
Dina Vierny
PARIS (AP) Dina Vierny, muse to French sculptor Aristide Maillol and model for painters Henri Matisse and Pierre Bonnard, died Tuesday. She was 89.
Vierny, whose death was announced Wednesday by her sons, Bertrand and Olivier Lorquin, would have turned 90 on Sunday, a statement said. She died Tuesday morning in an undisclosed location.
Vierny, who began modeling for Maillol at the age of 15, was his greatest fan and the leading force in making his acclaimed figurative bronzes available to the public. In 1963, she gave France a collection of monumental Maillol sculptures that now stand in the Tuileries Garden. In 1995, she created a foundation to house the works of Maillol and others, the Musee Maillol, a cozy house-like museum on Paris' Left Bank.
She collaborated with the artist until his death in a car accident in 1944, inspiring sleek, bold works like "La Montagne" (The Mountain), "L'Air" (Air) and "La Riviere" (The River), one of his last works.
She worked for the French Resistance during World War II, eventually getting herself arrested. Maillol sent her to southern France to stay with his friend Henri Matisse, reportedly instructing him to use her as a model. They became fast friends. She eventually also posed for Raoul Dufy and Pierre Bonnard, who used her as inspiration for his "Grand Nu Sombre."
Vierny grew into an art lover in her own right, opening a gallery in Paris' artsy Saint-Germain-des-Pres district as early as 1947.
Norman Oliver Walker
ARLINGTON, Va. (AP) Norman Oliver Walker, a journalist for The Associated Press for more than 30 years in Louisiana and Washington, D.C., died Sunday. He was 96.
Walker died at his Arlington home. His daughter, Andree Walker Lanser, said the cause of death had not been determined.
Walker began his career with the AP in 1934 in New Orleans, where he helped cover the assassination of Huey Long. Walker later served as Baton Rouge correspondent and moved to the AP's Washington bureau in 1943.
He covered labor relations for the AP from 1945 until he left the wire service in 1963, a span that covered a time of great upheaval in labor relations.
He served as information director for the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service from 1963 until his retirement in 1978.
 Load-Date: January 22, 2009

 

End of Document
