

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
January 5, 2007 Friday 2:31 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1934 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Otto Breitenbach
MADISON, Wis. (AP) Otto Breitenbach, a former athletics administrator at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and commissioner of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association, died Tuesday. He was 82.
Breitenbach suffered a heart attack Monday while watching the Wisconsin football team play Arkansas in the Capital One Bowl, university officials said. He died Tuesday at St. Mary's Hospital.
Breitenbach joined the UW Athletic Department in 1973, serving UW athletic director Elroy Hirsch's right-hand man. While Hirsch dominated the spotlight, Breitenbach handled many backstage duties until he retired in 1988. He oversaw football and men's basketball and transformed the men's hockey program into a national powerhouse.
Breitenbach also served as WCHA commissioner from 1983 to '94, developing a three-day league playoff tournament now known as the Final Five.
He also paved the way for St. Cloud State and Alaska-Anchorage to join the league, expanded the NCAA tournament to 12 teams and two regionals, and led the merger of WCHA and Hockey East Association schedules that gave the latter league national credibility.
Born June 27, 1924, in Madison, Breitenbach graduated in 1941 from Edgewood High School, where he was a three-sport standout. He enrolled at UW and played halfback for the Badgers before interrupting his education to serve as an instructor and pilot in the U.S. Air Force during World War II.
Breitenbach earned his bachelor's degree in physical education in 1948 and a master's degree in 1955. He coached football and basketball at Chilton, Middleton and Madison La Follette high schools before returning to the University of Wisconsin.
Billie Jean Cherry
CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) Billie Jean Cherry, a key figure in one of the most expensive U.S. bank failures since the Great Depression, died Friday. She was 82.
Cherry, who was serving a sentence of 16 years and five months at a federal prison camp in Lexington, Ky., was diagnosed with a cerebral hemorrhage and died at the University of Kentucky Hospital, a spokesman for the federal Bureau of Prisons said.
Charleston lawyer Dwane Tinsley, who was part of Cherry's defense team, said that family members had told him Cherry had been on life support after suffering a massive stroke.
Cherry was chairwoman of the board for the First National Bank of Keystone when the McDowell County bank was declared insolvent by the Office of the Comptroller in 1999. The office cited "apparent fraud" when it closed the bank after it was unable to account for $515 million of the bank's reported $1 billion in assets.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation had to pay out $664 million as a result of the bank's collapse.
Cherry, who was also a former Keystone mayor, was convicted in 2001 of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit bank embezzlement and money laundering.
Janos Furst
BUDAPEST, Hungary (AP) Janos Furst, a Hungarian violinist and conductor who worked with orchestras around the world, died Wednesday. He was 71.
Furst died of cancer in a Paris hospital, Sandor Gyudi, director of the Szeged Symphony Orchestra, said.
Furst had been the artistic director of the orchestra, based in the southern Hungarian city of Szeged, since 2002.
Born in Budapest in 1935, Furst studied violin in the Hungarian capital's Ferenc Liszt Academy of Music and left Hungary in November 1956, in the wake of the short-lived anti-Soviet uprising.
After winning the Premier Prix at the Brussels Conservatory, he worked as a concertmaster and later turned to conducting.
Besides his work with orchestras in Paris, Madrid, Prague, London and Helsinki, among others, Furst was music director of the Marseilles Opera for nine years and taught conducting at the National Conservatory of Music in Paris.
In 1990-1994, Furst was principal conductor of the Musikkollegium Winterthur Orchestra in Switzerland.
Furst also collaborated with orchestras in the United States, Canada, Australia, Israel, Japan and Latin America.
Martin David Kruskal
MOUNT LAUREL, N.J. (AP) Martin David Kruskal, a mathematician whose work on the properties of an unusual kind of waves helped pave the way for fiber optic technology, died at 81.
Kruskal died Dec. 26 in Princeton after a series of strokes. His death was announced by Princeton University, where he spent 38 years on the faculty before moving to Rutgers University in 1989.
Until his first stroke earlier this year, Kruskal remained an active scholar, colleagues said.
Kruskal's best-known advance came in the 1960s when he was able to use equations to explain a phenomenon first recorded in 1834 when Scottish scientist John Scott Russell noticed a bump of water traveling through a canal near Edinburgh. On his horse, Russell followed the bump for about two miles.
Usually, waves that collide deform each other. But this other kind, which Kruskal and collaborator Norman Zabusky came to call "solitans" do not; instead, they pass through one another. Light transmitted over fiber optic cables for communication purposes has the same properties.
For his work on solitans and other issues in math including using the Theory of General Relativity to help explain black holes, Kruskal was given a National Medal of Science in 1996 and the Steele Prize for Seminal Contribution to Research by the American Mathematical Society last year, among other awards.
He first came to Princeton in 1951 to work on a then-classified project to produce controlled thermonuclear fusion. He was later a professor of astronomy and then held a chair in applied and computational mathematics before becoming a professor of mathematics in 1979.
Another of his legacies, which better known among magicians than mathematicians, is the Kruskal Count, a card trick that employs some deceptively simple math to make it seem like the magician is reading the mind of a subject who picks a number between one and 10.
Bernard D. Meltzer
CHICAGO (AP) Bernard D. Meltzer, the labor law scholar who helped draft the charter of the United Nations and served as a prosecutor at the Nuremberg war crime trials after World War II, died Thursday. He was 92.
Meltzer died at his home in Chicago, according to the University of Chicago Law School, where he was the Edward H. Levi Distinguished Service Professor Emeritus. A statement from the school did not specify a cause of death.
Meltzer was born in Philadelphia to Russian immigrant parents and spent four semesters at Temple University before transferring to the University of Chicago in 1934. He earned his undergraduate and law degrees there and later did postgraduate work at Harvard Law School.
Except for one year with a Chicago law firm, Meltzer spent 1938-1943 working for various federal agencies, including the Securities and Exchange Commission, the National Defense Advisory Commission and the State Department.
In 1943, he was commissioned as a Navy officer and assigned to the Office of Strategic Services, the forerunner of the Central Intelligence Agency. After work on the U.N. charter at the end of World War II, Meltzer joined the U.S. prosecution team at Nuremberg in 1946 and coordinated a specialized team of lawyers who focused on the economic crimes of the Germany's Nazi regime.
Meltzer conducted the pretrial interrogation of Adolf Hitler's second-in-command, Luftwaffe Commander Hermann Goering, and presented the trial case against former German Economics Minister Walther Funk, who was sentenced to life in prison.
After Nuremberg, Meltzer joined the University of Chicago Law School, where he developed the nation's first law course on international organizations, the university said. He later specialized in labor law, and retired in 1985.
A. Richard Newton
BERKELEY, Calif. (AP) A. Richard Newton, a technology pioneer and professor who headed the College of Engineering at the University of California, Berkeley, died Tuesday. He was 55.
Newton, a leader in the field of developing software to produce increasingly complex microchips, died of pancreatic cancer at the UC San Francisco Medical Center, according to UC Berkeley.
His work in microprocessor software design led to the founding of at least six tech companies, including Synopsys and Cadence Design Systems.
After he became the engineering college's dean in 2000, Newton combined his knowledge of business, academia and technology to transform the school, making it larger, more efficient and more financially accountable.
He was the driving force behind UC Berkeley's Center for Information Technology Research in the Interest of Society, the first public-private collaboration designed to tackle social, environmental and health care problems affecting California and the world.
Born and raised in Melbourne, Australia, he was a standout athlete but eventually chose science over sports. He earned his bachelor's and master's degrees in engineering at the University of Melbourne and his doctorate at UC Berkeley, where he became a professor in 1979.
Earl Reibel
KITCHENER, Ont. (AP) Earl (Dutch) Reibel, a former Detroit Red Wings player who helped the team win back-to-back Stanley Cups in the mid-1950s, died Wednesday. He was 76.
Reibel died in Kitchener, Ont., from complications resulting from a recent stroke, according to a death notice posted by the family.
He joined the Red Wings in 1953 and helped them win Stanley Cups in 1955 and 1956.
Reibel finished in the top 10 in NHL scoring in each of his first three years and won the Lady Byng Trophy in 1957.
He was the only player to dethrone Gordie Howe as the Red Wings' top scorer between 1950 and 1964, beating him by four points in 1955.
Reibel was traded to Chicago in 1957 and played for Boston the next season before retiring.
Vincent Sardi Jr.
NEW YORK (AP) Vincent Sardi Jr., owner of Sardi's restaurant, the legendary Broadway watering hole where for decades the New York theater celebrated its opening nights, died Thursday. He was 91.
Sardi, who had been hospitalized in Berlin, Vt., died of complications related to a urinary tract infection, said Max Klimavicius, managing partner of Sardi's.
Sardi's, located in the heart of midtown Manhattan's theater district, was a magnet for celebrities, particularly in the years before and after World War II, and many of them, especially when they were appearing on Broadway, had their caricatures on its walls.
Gerald Schoenfeld, chairman of the Shubert Organization, Broadway's biggest landlord, said Sardi's was once a place where deals and careers were cemented.
Sardi's father started the restaurant in 1921, and the son took over around 1945 after serving in the Marines. Sardi, who was born in New York, eventually sold the restaurant in 1985 but ended taking control of it again about five years later. Sardi then retired in 1997. His grandson, Sean Ricketts, now manages the landmark eatery.
C. William Verity Jr.
COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) C. William Verity Jr., a former U.S. secretary of commerce and steel executive, died Wednesday. He was 89.
Verity, who suffered from asthma, had been hospitalized for four days and died from complications of pneumonia in a Beaufort hospital, said his oldest son, John Verity.
Born in Middletown, Ohio, William Verity was named commerce secretary in August 1987 after secretary Malcolm Baldrige was killed in a rodeo accident.
As U.S. secretary of commerce, Verity established the Malcolm Baldrige Award, which "in the 1990's helped businesses improve the quality of their work," John Verity said.
Verity retired as chairman of the board of Armco Steel Co., now known as AK Steel Corp., in 1982 but remained a member for another four years. He was the grandson of George M. Verity, who founded the firm.
 Load-Date: January 5, 2007

 

End of Document
