

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
August 8, 2008 Friday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1540 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Erik Darling
RALEIGH, N.C. (AP) Erik Darling, the reedy-voiced guitarist and banjo player who deftly stepped in when Pete Seeger left the pioneering folk music group The Weavers, died Sunday after battling lymphoma. He was 74.
In an e-mail posted on Darling's Web site, Willard Svanoe, a fellow member of The Rooftop Singers, said Darling died on Aug. 3 in Chapel Hill.
He was perhaps best known for his hit "Walk Right In" and for his arrangement of the iconic Southern true-crime ballad "Tom Dooley," which inspired The Kingston Trio's recording of the song that topped the charts in 1958. He was a member of the Tarriers, known for its version of "The Banana Boat Song (Day-O)" the signature tune of Harry Belafonte.
Darling replaced Seeger in the Weavers in the late 1950s, a few years after the band was blacklisted for its political views.
Jean Dent
HUNTSVILLE, Ala. (AP) Jean Dent, a public health nurse who made sure blacks in northern Alabama got medical care in the segregated 1940s and '50s, died Wednesday. She was 101.
Dent died in her sleep at her Huntsville home. Her death was reported by The Huntsville Times.
In 1973, Dent became the first black registered nurse to be named Alabama's nurse of the year by the Alabama State Nurses Association.
Madison County's health department hired the Tuskegee University nursing school graduate in 1946 to train midwives, including some unable to read or write. She later helped bring the first clinic to Triana.
County Health Officer Larry Robey said "Nurse Dent," as she was known to generations of patients and their families, made sure poor people had access to vaccinations and prenatal care.
Her nephew Irvin Dent said she helped integrate the health department by demanding that black patients be allowed to come through the front door.
Eric Dowling
LONDON (AP) Eric Dowling, nicknamed "Digger" for helping excavate tunnels used in the breakout from a World War II German prison camp that became known as the "Great Escape," died July 21. He was 92.
Son Peter Dowling said his father died at a nursing home near Bristol in southwest England on July 21, a day before his 93rd birthday.
The elder Dowling played a key role in planning the 1944 escape by 76 prisoners from Stalag Luft III prison near Sagan in eastern Germany now Zagan, Poland. He forged documents, made maps and helped dig three tunnels code-named Tom, Dick and Harry.
The daring breakout was one of the most celebrated incidents of the war and inspired the 1963 film "The Great Escape" starring Steve McQueen and Richard Attenborough.
All but three of the escapees were recaptured, and 50 of them were shot on the orders of Adolf Hitler to deter future attempts.
Dowling was not among the more than 200 prisoners chosen by lottery to make the escape attempt on the cold and moonless night of March 24. By the time German guards discovered the breakout, 76 men had crawled free.
Ken Going
WELLINGTON, New Zealand (AP) Ken Going, a former fullback with New Zealand's national rugby team, the All Blacks, and a member of one of the country's most famous rugby families, died Wednesday. He was 66.
Going died of cancer, the New Zealand Press Association reported. His family confirmed his death.
Going and his brothers, Sid and Brian, represented New Zealand's Northland province, the New Zealand Maoris, and the All Blacks through the 1960s and 1970s.
Sid, who played 29 tests at halfback, was the most famous of the brothers, but Ken earned belated selection in 1974 and played three matches, though no tests, on New Zealand's tour to Ireland that year.
He played 130 matches for his province and 24 for New Zealand Maori.
William M. Goldstein
PHILADELPHIA (AP) William M. Goldstein, a prominent tax lawyer who argued an appeal of the definition of income in 1990 that is cited in textbooks, died Wednesday. He was 72.
Goldstein died after a yearlong battle with cancer, according to Drinker Biddle & Reath LLP, the Philadelphia law firm where he was a partner for 26 years.
The 1990 case, Zarin v. Commissioner, involved the now deceased Atlantic City, N.J., developer David Zarin, who settled a $3.44 million debt with Resorts International Casino for $500,000 in 1981.
After the Internal Revenue Service ruled that the $2.94 million in forgiven debt should be taxed as income, Goldstein successfully appealed to the 3rd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. The court ruled that the debt was not enforceable because the casino had illegally extended credit to Zarin, who later joined Gamblers Anonymous.
Goldstein was deputy assistant secretary of the treasury for tax policy under President Ford and worked to determine the Treasury's position on tax and economic issues. He helped form the Tax Reform Act of 1976 and served as head of the U.S. delegation that worked out tax treaties with the Philippines and Brazil.
Simon Gray
LONDON (AP) Simon Gray, British author of literate, bittersweet plays and acerbic diaries, died Wednesday. He was at 71.
Gray's publisher, Granta Books, said Gray died in London. He had been diagnosed with cancer last year.
Gray wrote more than 30 plays, including "Quartermaine's Terms," "Otherwise Engaged" and "The Old Masters," as well as five novels and the screenplay for the 1987 film "A Month in the Country."
A rakish figure who claimed to have consumed three bottles of champagne a day for years, Gray also was steeped in the academic world.
Born in Hampshire, southern England, on Oct. 21, 1936 and educated at Canada's Dalhousie University and the University of Cambridge, Gray taught English for many years at the University of London's Queen Mary college.
Universities provided the setting for several of his best-known plays, including "Butley," the story of a dyspeptic English professor in meltdown that was turned into a movie starring Alan Bates, and "The Common Pursuit," about the aspirations and disappointments of a group of students working on a literary magazine.
Ralph Klein
JERUSALEM (AP) Ralph Klein, a basketball coach who guided Maccabi Tel Aviv to Israel's first European league championship, died Thursday. He was 77.
Maccabi Tel Aviv officials said Klein died after a long battle with cancer.
He played for Maccabi Tel Aviv and later coached the team to the European league championship in 1977.
Klein was awarded the Israel Prize, the nation's highest civilian honor, in 2006.
Born in Germany, he survived the Nazi Holocaust in Hungary. Klein moved to Israel in 1951, joining perennial Israeli champions Maccabi Tel Aviv as a player.
Steve Parry
LONDON (AP) Steve Parry, sports editor of Reuters news agency for nearly two decades, died Thursday. He was 64.
Parry, sports editor of the London-based agency from 1982 to 2000 and a member of the International Olympic Committee press commission during that time, had suffered from a respiratory illness. He died in hospital near his home north of London on the eve of the Beijing Olympics, having attended the previous 10 Summer Games.
Reuters' current Sports Editor Paul Radford, Parry's former deputy and a close friend, said: "We at Reuters are devastated by the news. Steve was one of the finest journalists Reuters ever had and one of the greatest men I ever knew."
Parry joined Reuters in 1966 and covered his first Olympics in Mexico City in 1968, taking on the athletics beat at the 1972 Munich Games. Appointed Sports News Editor in 1977, Parry was promoted to the job of Sports Editor at Reuters in 1982.
He expanded the role of sport in Reuters, appointing the first sports correspondents based abroad, one in Paris and one in Bonn.
Outside the news agency, Parry was an accomplished amateur actor and made the occasional fleeting television appearance.
After retiring from Reuters following the 2000 Sydney Games, Parry became a consultant for the IOC. He later became a media adviser for London's successful bid for the 2012 Olympics and then a press operations consultant for the London Games organizers.
Parry was advising both the IOC and London until his sudden death. He was recently advised by his doctor that his health was not up to traveling to Beijing.
Andrea Pininfarina
MILAN, Italy (AP) Andrea Pininfarina, chief executive of the family Italian car design firm that counts Ferraris and Alfa Romeos among its creations, died Thursday in an accident near the northern city of Turin, reports said. He was 51.
Pininfarina, who was on a scooter, collided with a car whose driver failed to stop at an intersection, Luigi Semenzato, police chief in the town of Trofarello south of Turin, told Sky Tg24 television news. He said the driver "didn't see the Vespa coming."
Pininfarina ran Pininfarina SpA, founded in 1930 by his grandfather Battista "Pinin" Farina, who combined his nickname and surname to create the company name and a new family name.
Pininfarina SpA has designed cars for Fiat, Alfa Romeo, Cadillac and Volvo, among others but is most closely associated with Ferrari, designing nearly all of Ferrari's models since the 1950s. They include the convertibles the California Spider and the Daytona Spider.
Andrea Pininfarina took over as chief executive in 2001, and in 2006 also became chairman of the board of directors, a position previously held by his father, Sergio Pininfarina, who is a senator for life in the Italian parliament.
 Load-Date: August 8, 2008

 

End of Document
