

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
October 27, 2006 Friday 12:12 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1681 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Leonid Hambro
NEW YORK (AP) Leonid Hambro, a concert pianist who served as Victor Borge's comedic sidekick and was known for his ability to commit to memory a huge repertoire, died Monday. He was 86.
Hambro died at his Manhattan home of complications from a fall, said his wife, Barbara Hambro.
He had a 10-year partnership with Borge, beginning in 1961, that earned him the most visibility. Borge's piano comedy act had Hambro playing the straight guy to his antics.
He also had a 16-year career as pianist for WQXR, The Times' radio station, where he played live weekly broadcasts and chamber music recitals.
Hambro's ability to memorize numerous, often complex, pieces was used in impressive ways, most notably during a 1952 Town Hall performance in which he was asked to fill in for another pianist. He had learned the piece in just 24 hours.
Hambro amassed a repertoire of more than 200 compositions during his career. He made more than 100 recordings and toured worldwide.
Born in Chicago, Hambro played his first recital at age 5. He attended the Juilliard School and in 1946 won a Naumburg Foundation award. He subsequently was designated the pianist of the New York Philharmonic.
In 1970, he joined the faculty of the California Institute of the Arts as it was being founded and served there as associate dean for 20 years.
Ralph R. Harding
BOISE, Idaho (AP) Ralph R. Harding, a former two-term Mormon congressman who lost re-election in 1964 after publicly berating a church leader for supporting the John Birch Society, died Thursday. He was 77.
Harding died at a hospital in Blackfoot, according to Hill-Hawker-Sandberg Funeral Home. It did not release a cause of death.
Former Idaho U.S. Rep. Richard Stallings said Harding would be remembered as much for his rapid rise in Idaho politics as for his abrupt defeat. Harding, a Democrat who served in the Idaho Legislature from 1955 to 1956, ran against 16-year incumbent Republican U.S. Rep. Hamer Budge for Idaho's 2nd Congressional District in 1960 and pulled off an upset.
A member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Harding blasted LDS Church Apostle Ezra Taft Benson as "a spokesman for the radical right" during a September 1963 speech on the House floor.
He criticized Benson, who had served as Republican President Dwight D. Eisenhower's secretary of agriculture from 1953 to 1961, for a speaking appearance that same month on behalf of John Birch Society founder Robert H. Welch. Welch had just published a book alleging that Eisenhower, commanding general of victorious U.S. forces in Europe during World War II, was a Communist Party sympathizer.
Two months later, Harding lost to Republican George V. Hansen.
Arthur Hill
LOS ANGELES (AP) Arthur Hill, a veteran character actor whose dozens of television and movie appearances included the title role in the series "Owen Marshall, Counselor at Law," died Sunday. He was 84.
Hill died at a Pacific Palisades care facility after a long battle with Alzheimer's disease, said friend Walter Seltzer.
Hill was a well-known face on TV, appearing on "Alfred Hitchcock Presents," "The Defenders," "Ben Casey," "The Untouchables," "The Nurses," "The FBI," "Mission Impossible," "The Fugitive" and "Marcus Welby, M.D."
He was the star of "Owen Marshall, Counselor at Law" from 1971 to 1974.
Hill also appeared in the films "Harper," "The Ugly American," "The Andromeda Strain" and "A Bridge Too Far."
Born Aug. 1, 1922, in Melfort, Saskatchewan, Canada, Hill served in the Royal Canadian Air Force and attended the University of British Columbia.
He moved to Great Britain in 1948 where he performed in a variety of stage productions, then he moved to New York 10 years later and established himself on Broadway.
Hill made his Broadway debut opposite Ruth Gordon in "The Matchmaker," then went on to star in such stage hits as "Look Homeward Angel."
The actor won Tony and New York Drama Critics awards for his role as George in "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf" in 1962.
Edward F. Kenney Sr.
BOSTON (AP) Edward F. Kenney Sr., the Boston Red Sox executive who ran the farm system when the team developed Wade Boggs, Roger Clemens, Dwight Evans, Carlton Fisk and Jim Rice, died Wednesday. He was 85.
Kenney, who spent more than four decades as an executive with the team, died of complications related to diabetes, the club said.
Kenney joined the Red Sox organization as a player in 1946, but arm problems ended a promising pitching career and during the team's drive to the American League pennant that season, he worked in the ticket office.
He joined the team's minor league operations and in 1949 became assistant farm director. When that office was divided into two departments in 1966, Kenney became director of minor league operations.
He was promoted to vice president in 1978 and spent his last three years with the team as vice president of baseball development before retiring after the 1991 season.
Kenney was born in Medford and grew up in Winchester before heading to Boston College, where he was a three-year starting shortstop. He joined the Army upon graduation in 1943, then was signed by Red Sox scout Hugh Duffy and made a pitcher.
Ghulam Ishaq Khan
PESHAWAR, Pakistan (AP) Ghulam Ishaq Khan, Pakistan's president from 1988 to 1993, died Friday following a bout of pneumonia. He was 91.
The former Pakistan president, who won power following the 1988 death of military dictator Gen. Zia-ul Haq, had been ill for the past three months, said his son-in-law, Arfan Ullah Murwat. He died in the northern city of Peshawar, where he spent most of his life, Murwat said.
Khan, a career bureaucrat, was a close ally of Haq and held the post of chairman of Pakistan's Senate when Haq was killed in a plane crash in eastern Pakistan with then U.S. Ambassador Arnold L. Raphel and several top Pakistani generals.
Regarded as a strong-willed figure, Khan worked alongside former prime ministers Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif but dismissed the governments led by both in 1990 and 1993 respectively on charges of corruption and mismanagement.
The row between Khan and Sharif continued following a subsequent Supreme Court decision that reinstated Sharif's government.
Eventually, Pakistan's powerful military intervened in the conflict and forced Kahn to resign.
William A. Marquard
PISCATAWAY, N.J. (AP) William A. Marquard, who is credited with reviving American Standard Cos. in the 1970s and 1980s, died Sunday. He was 86.
Marquard died at the University of Kentucky Hospital in Lexington, Ky., said Bill Satterly, funeral director of the W.R. Milward Mortuary-Broadway in Lexington. Neither the funeral home nor the company released a cause of death.
Marquard had retired as chairman and chief executive in 1985 after 24 years at the top posts of the diversified company known for its kitchen and bath products.
He became chief in 1971 and within eight years cut debt by more than half and increased profits, according to a 1980 report in Fortune.
He oversaw the acquisition of Trane in 1984, which allowed American Standard to re-enter the air conditioning business.
A native of Pittsburgh, Marquard graduated from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in 1940 and joined Westinghouse Electric that year.
Marquard joined Mosler Safe Co. in 1952, becoming its president in 1966, shortly before it was acquired by American Standard.
In retirement, he and his wife returned to her native state, where he was a member of the Transylvania University board of trustees and its executive committee. American Standard said he also served on the boards of Chemical Bank, Shell Oil Co. and New York Life Insurance Co.
Benjamin Meed
NEW YORK (AP) Benjamin Meed, who escaped the Warsaw Ghetto and went on to help reunite survivors and establish a national Holocaust registry and two museums, died Tuesday. He was 88.
Meed died at his Manhattan home following a long illness, according to the American Gathering of Jewish Holocaust Survivors, which he helped found in 1981 and led at the time of his death.
The American Gathering urged President Reagan in 1985 not to lay a wreath at the German cemetery of Bitburg, where the Waffen SS were buried.
Meed and his wife established a national registry in 1981 to document the lives of Jewish survivors who came to the United States after World War II, and help them search for relatives and friends.
Meed helped create two major Holocaust museums, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington in 1983 and the Museum of Jewish Heritage A Living Memorial to the Holocaust in New York in 1997. The registry is housed in the Washington museum.
A Warsaw Ghetto survivor and slave laborer during World War II, Meed was born Benjamin Miedzyrzecki in Warsaw in 1918. He joined the underground in the months leading up to the 1943 Warsaw Ghetto uprising.
Assuming the identity of a gentile, Meed helped get his future wife out of the ghetto and helped smuggle Jews from the ghetto through the city's sewers.
He married Feigele Peltel in 1945. A year later, they immigrated to New York. They officially changed their names to Benjamin and Vladka Meed in the 1950s.
Jeffrey Newbauer Jr.
TWINSBURG, Ohio (AP) Jeffrey Newbauer Jr., a man diagnosed with cancer who was trying to raise awareness of the disease with his quest to visit every Major League Baseball park this season, died Wednesday night. He was 22.
Newbauer died at his home near Cleveland, according to the Web site that chronicled his journey, jeffsballparktour.com.
Donations helped Newbauer visit 26 of 30 ballparks during the last four months.
The quest enabled Newbauer, diagnosed with cancer in 2003, to talk with the media about childhood cancer and research.
Newbauer began his quest at Jacobs Field in Cleveland on June 25 and attended his final game Oct. 1 at AT&T Park in San Francisco, according to the Web site.
He had tickets to Tuesday's Game 3 of the World Series, but couldn't make the trip to watch the Detroit Tigers play the Cardinals in St. Louis because of his failing health. He died less than a half-hour before Wednesday's scheduled start of Game 4, which was rained out.
 Load-Date: October 28, 2006

 

End of Document
