

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
April 3, 2008 Thursday 3:23 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1627 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Peter Baczako
BUDAPEST, Hungary (AP) Hungarian weightlifter Peter Baczako, who won a gold medal at the 1980 Moscow Olympics, died Tuesday. He was 56.
Baczako died in Budapest of cancer, the Hungarian Olympic Committee said. He also had been diagnosed with muscular dystrophy and spent his last few months in a wheelchair.
Considered Hungary's most successful lifter, Baczako won bronze at the 1976 Montreal Games and a total of 23 medals, including four gold, at world and European championships from 1973-82. He competed as a light heavyweight in Montreal and as a middle heavyweight in Moscow.
Baczako spent his entire career at Budapest club BKV-Elore, where he became a coach after his retirement from competition. He also was a member of the Hungarian Olympic Committee.
Nikolai Baibakov
MOSCOW (AP) Nikolai Baibakov, who served as Josef Stalin's oil commissar and later guided the Soviet Union's planned economy for two decades, died Monday, Russia's gas monopoly Gazprom said. He was 97.
Baibakov, who died of pneumonia in Moscow, was believed to have been the last living commissar to serve under Stalin. He was also thought to have been one of the last surviving witnesses of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's historic secret speech denouncing Stalin at the 1956 Soviet Communist Party congress.
Baibakov served as Russia's deputy oil commissar during World War II. In 1944 he was named Stalin's oil commissioner and was fired in 1985 by the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, whose economic and social reforms preceded the Soviet collapse.
In 1942, Stalin summoned Baibakov and told him he would be shot if the advancing Nazi army seized oil wells in Soviet Azerbaijan, he recalled in an 1998 interview with Petroleum Economist magazine. Stalin warned Baibakov that he would also be shot if, after the war, the wells couldn't be returned to production.
Baibakov fulfilled both orders, surviving to launch the Soviet Union's postwar development of oil and gas deposits in Siberia. He pushed for massive investment in the industry that would become the backbone of Soviet Union's planned economy, and the foundation for post-Soviet Russia's booming economy.
In 1955 Baibakov was appointed head of Gosplan, the huge Soviet central planning agency that set production quotas and investment levels for industry and agriculture.
He helped boost industrial production but failed to revive Soviet farm production, which forced the Kremlin to buy wheat from the United States and Canada and weakened the Soviet Union's positions in the Cold War.
Norberto Collado Abreu
HAVANA (AP) Norberto Collado Abreu, the helmsman of the Granma yacht that carried Fidel Castro from Mexico to Cuba to launch his revolution in 1956, died Wednesday in Havana.
The Cuban News Agency confirmed the death, but did not give his age or the cause of death.
The agency said Collado Abreu served in the navy during World War II, but his political leanings later landed him in prison where he met Castro and joined his revolutionary movement.
Both were freed under amnesty and went into exile in Mexico, only to return and launch the uprising that would topple dictator Fulgencio Batista. Collado Abreu held various posts in the Cuban navy under Castro until 1981.
Douglas Kent Hall
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. (AP) Douglas Kent Hall, whose diverse photographs ranged from rock stars and bodybuilders to prisoners and cowboys, died Sunday. He was 69.
His wife, Dawn, found him unconscious on the floor of their Albuquerque home and said paramedics were unable to revive him.
Hall, who began his career as a writer, told The New Mexican newspaper last year that his work in photography began almost by accident while he was teaching creative writing at an Oregon university.
Hall was presented the 2005 New Mexico Governor's Award for Excellence in the Arts for photography. Among his books are "Rodeo," "Arnold: The Education of a Bodybuilder," "The Border: Life on the Line" and "New Mexico: Voices in an Ancient Landscape."
A retrospective of his work, "Forty Images Forty Years: 1968-2007," went on display at Riva Yares Gallery in Santa Fe last November. The exhibit will remain through April as a tribute to Hall, said the gallery's Dennis Yares.
He attended Utah State University and the University of Utah and earned a bachelor of arts from Brigham Young University in 1960.
Stewart Hanson
SALT LAKE CITY (AP) Stewart Hanson, a state judge who sentenced serial killer Ted Bundy to prison for an abduction in which the woman got away, died Sunday. He was 69.
Hanson died after a battle with lung cancer, said his wife, DeAnne.
Hanson was a 3rd District Court judge for nearly 20 years before moving to the attorney general's office, where he would become chief of the litigation division.
In 1992, Hanson was the Democratic nominee for governor. Republican Mike Leavitt won the election.
In 1976, Hanson presided over Bundy's aggravated kidnapping trial and sentenced the serial killer to 15 years in prison. Bundy was extradited to Colorado but escaped from jail in 1977. He was arrested in Florida in 1978 and executed in 1989. Bundy committed more than 30 murders between 1974 and 1978.
Guy McElwaine
LOS ANGELES (AP) Guy McElwaine, who as a Hollywood agent and studio chief was involved in blockbusters ranging from "All the President's Men" to "The Karate Kid," died Wednesday. He was 71.
McElwaine died at his Bel-Air home after a brief battle with pancreatic cancer, according to his daughter, Alexandra McElwaine-Grane.
In the 1960s, McElwaine owned a management and public relations company whose clients included Frank Sinatra, Warren Beatty and The Mamas and The Papas.
He later joined Creative Management Associates, an agency that was the forerunner for the powerful International Creative Management. There, he was the first agent to sign Steven Spielberg, according to a biography in the statement announcing his death.
In the 1970s he was briefly at Warner Bros. as senior executive vice president in charge of worldwide motion picture production, helping supervise movies such as "All the President's Men," "Dog Day Afternoon" and "Oh God!"
When CMA became ICM, McElwaine returned to the agency as a founding partner. In 1981 he left to become president of Columbia Pictures, later becoming the studio's chairman and chief executive officer. Under his tenure, the studio produced or distributed such hits as "Ghostbusters," "The Karate Kid" and "Gandhi."
He resigned in 1986 and two years later was back with ICM as an agent. He later was president and chief operating officer of Trilogy Entertainment Group and at the time of his death was president of Morgan Creek Productions, where he was an executive producer for the 2006 Matt Damon drama "The Good Shepherd."
Ray Smith Poole
JACKSON, Miss. (AP) Ray Smith Poole, a former New York Giants All-Pro end and three-sport star at the University of Mississippi, died Wednesday. He was 86.
Ole Miss officials said he died of cancer.
Poole played baseball and basketball at Ole Miss, where his football career was interrupted by three years of service with the Marines in World War II. After his pro career he returned to Oxford as a football coach, working for longtime Ole Miss coach Johnny Vaught.
Poole's brothers, Buster and Barney, were also star athletes at Ole Miss. The three brothers and their descendants have accounted for 50 athletic letters and a campus roadway is named for them. Will Poole, a reserve on the men's basketball team, is the latest family member to play for Ole Miss.
Ray Poole grew up in Gloster in southwestern Mississippi and earned 11 letters in his career at Ole Miss. He was a guard and center for the basketball team, leading the Rebels in scoring in 1943 and he was 5-2 as a pitcher in 1946.
He returned to Ole Miss after three years in the service and was captain of the football team in 1946. He was all-Southeastern Conference and turned pro after being taken by the New York Giants in the 13th round of the 1944 NFL draft. He played for the Giants from 1947-52 and the Montreal Alouettes of the Canadian Football League in 1953-54.
He was an All-Pro in both leagues. He caught 83 passes for 1,164 yards in 71 NFL games and finished with 223 career points, including nine touchdowns, 27 field goals and 86 extra points.
Poole also was drafted by the Chicago Cubs but never made it to the major leagues.
Grace Thorpe
CLAREMORE, Okla. (AP) Grace Thorpe, the daughter of Olympic great Jim Thorpe, a tribal judge and an anti-nuclear activist, died Tuesday. She was 86.
Thorpe died of heart failure at the Claremore Veterans Center, said her granddaughter, Tena Mallotte.
Thorpe was a direct descendent of Sac and Fox chief Black Hawk and was of Potawatomi, Kickapoo, and Menominee heritage, according to Park Brothers Funeral Service, which is handling memorial arrangements.
Thorpe was a World War II veteran, having served as a Women's Army Corps corporal in New Guinea, the Philippines, and Japan.
She earned a bachelor's degree from the University of Tennessee at Knoxville, and a paralegal degree from the Antioch School of Law in Washington, D.C. Thorpe served as a tribal district court judge, according to the funeral home.
Thorpe also was an Urban Fellow of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and completed MBA course work at Northeastern State University in Tahlequah.
Grace Thorpe served as a congressional liaison to the U.S. House of Representatives American Indian Policy Review Commission and was a personnel interviewer for Gen. Douglas MacArthur at his headquarters in Tokyo during the occupation of Japan, according to the funeral home.
She also was known as a champion of the environment, serving as director for the National Environmental Coalition of Native Americans.
Her father, Jim Thorpe, died in 1953 at age 65.
 Load-Date: April 3, 2008

 

End of Document
