

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 25, 2006 Monday 12:01 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1414 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Robert Bilheimer
CANANDAIGUA, N.Y. (AP) The Rev. Robert Bilheimer, a Presbyterian minister who arranged for religious leaders to oppose the war in Vietnam and apartheid in South Africa, died Dec. 17. He was 89.
His son, Robert, told The New York Times that the leader in the ecumenical movement died of complications from a hip fracture and the late stages of Alzheimer's disease.
Bilheimer organized the first meeting of the World Council of Churches in 1948. The council, made up of 340 churches, denominations and church fellowships in more than 100 countries, is a broad movement with the goal of Christian unity.
He became an associate general secretary of the council and organized the 1960 mission for the South African members, which led to a proclamation rejecting all religious arguments supporting apartheid.
Bilheimer wrote several books, including "The Quest for Christian Unity," "What Must the Church Do?" and "Christians and the Prevention of War in the Atomic Age."
Bo Mya
BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) Bo Mya, a longtime leader of Myanmar's largest guerrilla group, died early Sunday. He was 79.
Bo Mya, who most recently held the title of defense minister in the Karen National Union, died after suffering a long illness, according to group spokesman David Thaw. He died in a private Thai hospital near the border with Myanmar.
The Karen National Union has fought for autonomy since Myanmar gained independence from Britain in 1948. Once in control of large swaths of the Thai-Myanmar border, the KNU has seen its territory shrink to virtually nothing following the capture of its stronghold of Manerplaw in 1995.
Bo Mya, who fought with the Allies against the Japanese in World War II, joined the cause in 1947 when he was a policeman and the country was under British rule.
Over the years, he essentially became the face of the movement, leading its fighters in the jungles of Myanmar, then known as Burma.
Even after he was forced out of the top leadership position of the KNU in 2000, Bo Mya remained a key member of the resistance.
Carlos Alberto Ferreira Braga
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) Braguinha, the Brazilian composer and singer who penned more than 500 tunes including some of the country's most famous traditional Carnival songs, died Sunday in Rio de Janeiro, local media reported. He was 99.
Braguinha, whose full name was Carlos Alberto Ferreira Braga, died from multiple organ failure after being hospitalized Saturday night with a generalized infection, according to the Agencia Estado news service and other Brazilian media.
Braguinha participated in the Brazilian Carnival's golden era in the 1930s and '40s.
He composed more than 500 songs, including "Yes, Nos Temos Bananas" ("Yes, We Have Bananas"), "Copacabana" and "Chiquita Bacana."
James Brown
ATLANTA (AP) James Brown, the dynamic, pompadoured "Godfather of Soul," whose rasping vocals and revolutionary rhythms made him a founder of rap, funk and disco as well, died early Monday. He was 73.
Brown was hospitalized with pneumonia at Emory Crawford Long Hospital on Sunday, said his agent, Frank Copsidas of Intrigue Music. Copsidas said the cause of death was not known.
Along with Elvis Presley, Bob Dylan and a handful of others, Brown was one of the major musical influences of the past 50 years. At least one generation idolized him, and sometimes openly copied him. His rapid-footed dancing inspired Mick Jagger and Michael Jackson among others.
If Brown's claim to the invention of soul can be challenged by fans of Ray Charles and Sam Cooke, then his rights to the genres of rap, disco and funk are beyond question. He was to rhythm and dance music what Dylan was to lyrics: the unchallenged popular innovator.
His hit singles include such classics as "Out of Sight," "(Get Up I Feel Like Being a) Sex Machine," "I Got You (I Feel Good)" and "Say It Loud I'm Black and I'm Proud," a landmark 1968 statement of racial pride.
He won a Grammy award for lifetime achievement in 1992, as well as Grammys in 1965 for "Papa's Got a Brand New Bag" (best R&B recording) and for "Living In America" in 1987 (best R&B vocal performance, male.) He was one of the initial artists inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1986.
He triumphed despite an often unhappy personal life. Brown spent more than two years in a South Carolina prison for aggravated assault and failing to stop for a police officer. After his release on in 1991, Brown said he wanted to "try to straighten out" rock music.
From the 1950s, when Brown had his first R&B hit, "Please, Please, Please" in 1956, through the mid-1970s, Brown went on a frenzy of cross-country tours, concerts and new songs. He earned the nickname "The Hardest Working Man in Show Business."
With his tight pants, shimmering feet, eye makeup and outrageous hair, Brown set the stage for younger stars such as Michael Jackson and Prince.
Uri Dan
JERUSALEM (AP) Uri Dan, a veteran Israeli journalist and close confidant of former Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, died Sunday. He was 71.
The Jerusalem Post said Dan died after a battle with lung cancer, adding that he had continued working until last month. Dan died at a hospital in Kfar Sava, outside Tel Aviv, the paper said.
During a career spanning more than three decades, Dan wrote for a number of Israeli publications, including the Maariv daily and the English-language Jerusalem Post. He also wrote several books, and served as Israel correspondent for the New York Post.
But Dan was best-known for his friendship with Sharon. The two became acquainted in the 1950s, and Dan documented Sharon's crossing of the Suez Canal during the 1973 Mideast War against Egypt.
Dan also served as Sharon's spokesman when he was defense minister during the Lebanon War in the early 1980s. At the time, Sharon was under fire for his actions in the war, and earlier had been passed as a candidate for army chief.
Despite Dan's misgivings about Sharon's pullout from the Gaza Strip last year, the two remained friends until Sharon's debilitating stroke last January. Just two months ago, Dan published a biography called "Ariel Sharon: An Intimate Portrait."
John Gonzales
DANA POINT, Calif. (AP) John Gonzales, founding president of a Los Angeles council of the League of United Latin American Citizens and a longtime activist for Mexican-American rights, died Dec. 6. He was 91.
Gonzales died of natural causes at his home in Dana Point, said his daughter, Diane Lichterman.
Gonzales helped organize the formation of new LULAC councils statewide in the 1940s. He was the organization's vice president general when LULAC in Orange County helped organize a class-action lawsuit against four Orange County school districts forcing Mexican children to attend schools separate from whites.
The landmark case Mendez vs. Westminster School District of Orange County led to the end of segregation in California schools in 1947, nearly seven years before the U.S. Supreme Court's Brown vs. Board of Education decision that declared unconstitutional the racial segregation of public schools.
In 2003, Gonzales received a certificate of special congressional recognition for his work during the case. A year later, the California Assembly presented him a certificate of recognition in honor of his receiving the Patriots with Civil Rights Award from LULAC.
Andrew Spielman
BOSTON (AP) Andrew Spielman, a Harvard School of Public Health professor and a leading authority on diseases passed from insects to people, died Wednesday, his wife said. He was 76.
Spielman, of Needham, died at Brigham and Women's Hospital after being hospitalized with an undiagnosed illness. His wife, Judith, said he worked full time and traveled until he became ill.
Spielman's research took him to remote areas of the world, and he wrote hundreds of publications on topics including malaria, Lyme disease and eastern equine encephalitis. He also co-wrote the 2001 book, "Mosquito: A Natural History of Our Most Persistent and Deadly Foe."
Spielman's contributions to the field included recognizing that the increase in Lyme disease cases was largely due to an explosion in the deer population, said Peter Krause, professor of pediatrics at the University of Connecticut School of Medicine.
Spielman was born in New York City and grew up on Long Island, N.Y. He got an undergraduate degree in zoology from Colorado College in Colorado Springs in 1952 and graduated with a doctorate in pathobiology from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore in 1956. He took a position at Harvard in 1959.
 Load-Date: December 26, 2006

 

End of Document
