

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
May 8, 2009 Friday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1420 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Mickey Carroll
ST. LOUIS (AP) Mickey Carroll, one of the last surviving Munchkins from the 1939 beloved film "The Wizard of Oz," died Thursday. He was 89.
He died in his sleep at the suburban Crestwood home of his caretaker, Linda Dodge, she said. He had heart problems and received a pacemaker in February.
Carroll was one of more than 100 adults and children who were recruited to play the movie natives of what author L. Frank Baum called Munchkin Country in his 1900 book "The Wonderful Wizard of Oz."
Carroll played the part of the Munchkinland "Town Crier," marched as a "Munchkin Soldier" and was the candy-striped "Fiddler" who escorted the movie's wide-eyed orphan, Dorothy Gale, played by Judy Garland, down the yellow brick road toward Emerald City.
Born Michael Finocchiaro, Carroll danced at the Muny Theater in St. Louis when he was in grade school, he said, and in the 1920s worked in Chicago clubs and on the Orpheum Theater vaudeville circuit.
He warmed up crowds for President Franklin Roosevelt while campaigning in New York City and served as a crowd-getter in President Harry Truman's whistlestop campaign.
He did Phillip Morris live radio ads and appeared in shows with Mae West. He later did radio shows with George Burns, Gracie Allen, Jack Benny and Al Jolson.
In November 2007, Carroll and six other surviving Munchkins received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
Leon Despres
CHICAGO (AP) Leon Despres, the former Chicago alderman who battled the late Mayor Richard J. Daley for two decades, died Wednesday. He was 101.
A one-time socialist, Despres served in the City Council from 1955 to 1975. An unashamed liberal who supported civil rights and open housing, the Democrat was often on the short end of 49-1 votes.
The Chicago-born Despres attended boarding schools in Europe before enrolling at the University of Chicago in the Hyde Park neighborhood later represented as alderman. He graduated in 1927, and from Chicago's Law School in 1929.
Donald "Ean" Evans
COLUMBUS, Miss. (AP) Donald "Ean" Evans, the bass player of the Southern rock band Lynyrd Skynyrd, died Wednesday. He was 48.
Evans died at his home in eastern Mississippi after a battle with cancer, said Lowndes County Coroner Greg Merchant.
Evans joined Lynyrd Skynyrd in 2001 and had been touring regularly with the band until being diagnosed with cancer in 2008, when he cut back on performances. The Jacksonville-based band was formed in 1966 by a group of high school students.
They released their first album, "Pronounced leh-nerd skin-nerd." It became one of the South's most popular rock groups and gained national fame with such hits as "Free Bird," "What's Your Name" and especially "Sweet Home Alabama," which reached the top 10 on the charts in 1974. The band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2006.
The band suffered a tragic loss on Oct. 20, 1977, when their chartered plane crashed in a swamp near McComb, Miss. The crash claimed the lives of six people, including lead singer Ronnie Van Zant. In 2001, bassist Leon Wilkeson died in his sleep in a hotel room near Jacksonville, Fla.
Guy Mascolo
DALLAS (AP) Guy Mascolo, co-founder of the international hair salon Toni & Guy, died Wednesday. He was 65.
Mascolo suffered a fatal heart attack and died at his Dallas home, his family said.
Guy Mascolo founded the renowned hairdressing company with his brother, Toni Mascolo, in London in 1963 when they were both teens.
With skills learned from their hairdresser father, they created a global company known for its cutting-edge salons, commitment to training stylists and popular hair care products such as Bed Head, S-factor and Catwalk.
Guy Mascolo was chairman of Dallas-based Toni & Guy USA, which has 56 salons and 11 cosmetology schools.
Born Gaetano Mascolo in Southern Italy, Guy Mascolo was the second oldest of Francesco and Maria Mascolo's five sons. The Mascolos immigrated to the United Kingdom in the mid-1950s.
In 1983, Guy Mascolo and younger brother, Bruno, sought to expand the business in the United States. They moved to Dallas where they opened salons in shopping malls and began growing TIGI, their professional product line. Guy, Bruno and another brother sold TIGI for $415 million in April, Bruno Mascolo said.
Guy Mascolo also was an artist who sold his paintings to raise money for charities.
Frank Melton
JACKSON, Miss. (AP) Frank Melton, the Jackson mayor who had just lost a re-election bid in a Democratic primary one week before his second federal trial was to start, died Thursday. He was 60.
Melton died at a Jackson hospital, city spokeswoman Goldia Revies said. Melton, who had a history of serious heart problems, was taken to the hospital on Tuesday shortly after polls closed.
Next week, a second trial was set to start for Melton and a former bodyguard, who each faced two federal civil rights charges related to a sledgehammer attack on a duplex on Aug. 26, 2006, that Melton considered a crackhouse.
Prosecutors said he was drunk on scotch and power when he ordered a group of young men some with criminal records to destroy the duplex in a poor neighborhood. Melton had said he was only trying rid the city of a drug den.
A judge declared a mistrial in the first case in February after a jury failed to reach a verdict.
Melton and the bodyguard, Jackson police officer Michael Recio, were both acquitted in April 2007 on state charges related to the raid.
Melton was elected by a landslide in 2005 after campaigning on a tough-on-crime platform. Since then, however, he has been hounded by legal problems related to his unorthodox tactics.
Andras Nagy
BUDAPEST, Hungary (AP) Andras Nagy, a Hungarian light-heavyweight boxer, died Thursday after suffering a brain injury. He was 23.
He underwent two operations for brain swelling in Melbourne and was placed in an artificial coma but died, Hungarian Boxing Federation president Sandor Csotonyi said. The injury occurred during a training bout on May 1, his birthday.
Csotonyi said Nagy who had a 3-0 professional record was on a six-month stay in Australia, boxing with a Croatian license.
During his amateur career, Nagy, a native of the city of Gyor in Hungary, competed for the Vasas sports club. Competing in the 165-pound class, Nagy won a silver medal at the 2002 World Cadet Championship in Kecskemet, Hungary.
He took part in the 2005 World Senior Boxing Championships in Mianyang, China, winning his first match and losing the second.
Danny Ozark
PHILADELPHIA (AP) Danny Ozark, the former Phillies manager who led the team to three consecutive National League East titles but fell short of the World Series each time, died Thursday. He was 85.
Ozark, whose streak of three consecutive NL East titles in the late 1970s is unmatched in team history, died at his home in Vero Beach, Fla., team officials said.
Ozark twice led the Phillies to more than 100 wins, tallying back-to-back 101-61 records in 1976 and 1977. The Phillies went 90-72 under him in 1978 for their third straight NL East title, but lost in the National League Championship series each time.
Ozark was fired late in the 1979 season as the Phillies stood at 65-67. They went on to finish 84-78 and rebounded under Dallas Green in 1980 to win the World Series.
Ozark was named Associated Press Manager of the Year in 1976 and finished with a 594-510 record in seven seasons with the Phillies. His 594 wins are third-most in team history.
Ozark played and managed in the Brooklyn system and later coached for the Dodgers in Los Angeles. He also was a coach and interim manager for San Francisco.
Venetia Phair
LONDON (AP) Venetia Phair, who was 11 years old when she suggested Pluto as the name of the newly discovered planet, died April 30. She was 90.
She died at home in Epsom, her family said. The cause of death was not disclosed.
Born Venetia Burney, she suggested the name Pluto to her grandfather at breakfast in 1930. Phair's grandfather was Falconer Madan, retired head of the Bodleian Library at Oxford University in England, and he had the right connections to move the idea forward.
He relayed the suggestion to the university's professor of astronomy, who sent it to the Lowell Observatory in the United States, where the discovery was made.
When the name was publicly announced on May 1, 1930, Phair said her grandfather rewarded her with a five-pound note, now worth about 230 pounds, or $350.
An asteroid discovered in 1987 was named in her honor: 6235 Burney.
She studied mathematics at Cambridge University, and taught economics and math until retiring in the 1980s.
 Load-Date: May 8, 2009

 

End of Document
