

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
January 3, 2007 Wednesday 2:31 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1489 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




James Andelin
CHICAGO (AP) James Andelin, a voiceover artist and actor who had roles in "Field of Dreams" and "Grumpier Old Men," died Wednesday. He was 89.
Andelin died of congestive heart failure and emphysema at Chicago's St. Joseph Hospital, his daughter Julie said.
The son of German opera singers, Andelin lived most of his life in Chicago's Lakeview neighborhood.
He landed one of his first radio roles at about age 12 for a show called "Skippy." The part led to a long career in Chicago radio, including voiceover parts in "Little Orphan Annie" and "Jack Armstrong."
Andelin also worked in television, including as spokesman for Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railroad.
He earned the nickname "One-Take Andelin," his daughter said.
Andelin also was an entertainer in the U.S. Army during World War II and performed with actors such as Mickey Rooney. His movie work also included roles in "Rookie of the Year" and "The Babe."
Andelin married stage singer Julie Dawn in 1948.
Rudi Josten
BERLIN (AP) Rudi Josten, who covered the rise of Adolf Hitler for The Associated Press and went on to build the news agency's German-language service after World War II, died Sunday in Germany, his daughter said. He was 99.
Josten's friends and former AP colleagues had been preparing a 100th birthday celebration on Feb. 2. Richard O'Regan, the agency's former Germany bureau chief, said Josten told him by phone Christmas Day he was looking forward to the gathering.
Rudolf E. Josten was born in Berlin in 1907 and began working for the AP in 1925.
As head of the agency's German photo service from 1935 to 1939, he accompanied Hitler's motorcade as the dictator swept into Austria in 1938 at the time of its annexation by Nazi Germany.
In 1939, he switched to the news side of the wire service and worked there until 1941, when the Nazis closed AP's local operations after Germany declared war on the United States.
Josten spent the war years monitoring shortwave news broadcasts from abroad for the German news agency Transozean. He resumed work for the AP shortly before the war ended in May, 1945.
In 1973, German President Gustav W. Heinemann awarded Josten the Verdienstkreuz, or Cross of Merit, first class, for his work in journalism.
Teddy Kollek
JERUSALEM (AP) Teddy Kollek, the former Jerusalem mayor who presided over the reunification of the city after the 1967 Mideast war, died Tuesday. He was 95.
Kollek died of natural causes, according to the Jerusalem Foundation, a charity he founded 40 years ago.
The portly central European charmer oversaw a city famed for disputes, where even repairing a road can provoke angry arguments between Israelis and Arabs, secular and religious Jews, or differing schools of archaeologists.
When Kollek took office in 1965, Jerusalem was still divided between Israeli and Jordanian rule, with its center a no man's land of barbed wire and machine-gun posts.
In the 1967 war, Israel seized all and annexed the Arab part. Kollek became known as a builder, pushing to create museums, gardens, and promenades.
He preached fairness to the city's Arabs but said Jerusalem should remain under Israel's sovereignty.
He fought attempts by zealous Jews to move into the Muslim quarter of the walled Old City, but defended the practice of developing Jewish suburbs around the eastern Arab sector to prevent it from escaping Israel's rule.
In 1988, he was awarded the prestigious Israel Prize for his contribution to the country.
Ernie Koy
BELLVILLE, Texas (AP) Ernie Koy, the former Brooklyn Dodgers outfielder who homered in his first at-bat in the majors, died Monday. He was 97.
Koy's family said he died in his sleep at home, longtime University of Texas sports information director Bill Little said. Koy, a rancher, broke his hip on Dec. 1.
Koy, known as "Big Ernie," was a three-time, all-Southwest Conference selection in football, where he was a running back, and baseball. He is in the Longhorn Hall of Honor and Texas Sports Hall of Fame.
Koy played 10 years of pro baseball, including five in the majors. He played for the Dodgers from 1938-40, then spent time with the St. Louis Cardinals, Cincinnati Reds and Philadelphia Phillies before joining the Navy in 1942.
He hit a three-run homer in his first at-bat in the majors and finished his career average with a .279 average, 36 home runs and 260 RBIs. He played in the first televised baseball game and the first night game at Ebbets Field.
His two sons, Ted and Ernie Jr., played on national championship football teams at Texas in 1963 and 1969.
Lord Anthony Lambton
LONDON (AP) Lord Lambton, a former junior defense minister who resigned after he was photographed smoking marijuana in bed with two prostitutes, died Saturday at his Italian home, said Charles Walker, an agent for Lambton's daughter. He was 84.
Anthony Lambton served as undersecretary for defense for the Royal Air Force from 1970 until 1973. The cause of death was not given.
He was one of two ministers who resigned from former Conservative Prime Minister Edward Heath's government because of scandals involving prostitutes. The other was Lord Jellicoe, leader of the House of Lords.
Lambton's scandal in 1973 shocked the government. He was brought down after photos of him in bed with the prostitutes were passed to the Sunday tabloid News of the World.
After an investigation, he was denied access to secret material out of fear that he could be blackmailed.
He resigned and moved to Tuscany, where he bought Villa Cetinale, a 400-year-old estate.
He inherited the Earldom of Durham after his father died in 1970, but Lambton renounced it so he could continue as a member of Parliament. However, he continued to insist on being addressed as Lord Lambton.
Tillie Olsen
NEW YORK (AP) Tillie Olsen, an activist, feminist and an influential and widely taught fiction writer who narrated and experienced some of the major social conflicts of the 20th century, died Monday night. She was 94.
Olsen died at Kaiser Hospital in Oakland, Calif. She had been in failing health for years, her daughter, Laurie Olsen said.
Politically active and class conscious, Olsen countered the literary myths of her male peers. She did not immortalize the cowboy or the outlaw, but the woman who stayed home.
She published just two works of fiction "Tell Me a Riddle" and "Yonnondio" but she was well known among writers, teachers and feminists, her friends and fans including Alice Walker, Margaret Atwood and Grace Paley.
For much of her early life, Olsen was worker, wife, mother and journalist. She was arrested three times for union activism, and spent several weeks in jail after passing out leaflets to meatpackers.
Philippa Pearce
LONDON (AP) Philippa Pearce, author of the best-selling "Tom's Midnight Garden" and other children's books, died Dec. 21, her publisher said. She was 86.
Pearce died after suffering a stroke, said spokeswoman Reetu Kabra of Pearce's publisher, Puffin, part of the Penguin Group.
The daughter of flour miller Ernest Alexander and Gertrude Alice Pearce, Philippa was born in rural Cambridgeshire in 1920. Her home, a traditional mill house with a walled garden on the river Cam, provided the setting for many of her novels among them "Tom's Midnight Garden," for which she received the Carnegie Medal from the British Library Association in 1958.
The book revolves around Tom, a young boy, and his discovery of a secret Victorian garden in the backyard of his uncle's house.
The book is widely considered one of the best works of English children's literature published since World War II. It has sold millions of copies and been adapted for film, television and theater.
Pearce went on to write more than 30 more works, mostly children's novels and ghost stories. She worked as an editor of children's books at Andre Deutsch Ltd. until 1967.
Del Reeves
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) Del Reeves, a Grand Ole Opry star who sprinkled his performances with humor and hit No. 1 on the country charts in 1965 with the song "Girl on the Billboard," died Monday. He was 74.
Reeves died after an extended illness, Grand Ole Opry spokeswoman Jessie Schmidt said Tuesday.
During his 40 years at the Opry, he was hailed as one of its best entertainers because of his comic timing. In addition to his music, he did impressions of stars such as Jimmy Stewart, Johnny Cash and Walter Brennan.
His "Girl on the Billboard" sold a million copies and earned him the nickname of the Doodle-Oo-Doo-Doo Kid for the nonsense syllables that he sang with the song's guitar intro.
His other hits included "The Belles of Southern Bell," "Women Do Funny Things to Me" and "Looking at the World Through a Windshield."
Reeves became a regular performer on the Opry in 1966, and performed for up to 1 million people a year on the long-running country show.
In the late 1960s, Reeves had his own syndicated TV show, "The Del Reeves Country Carnival." He also appeared in several movies, including "Sam Whiskey," starring Burt Reynolds and Clint Walker.
 Load-Date: January 3, 2007

 

End of Document
