

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
April 25, 2007 Wednesday 9:58 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1848 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Alan Ball
LONDON (AP) Alan Ball, the youngest member of the England team that won the World Cup in 1966, has died. He was 61.
Ball was found collapsed outside his home after attempting to fight a fire in his garden, Hampshire Police said. He apparently died of a heart attack during the night, his son, Jimmy, said Wednesday.
He reportedly died just hours after watching Manchester United beat AC Milan 3-2 in the first leg of the Champions League semifinals at Old Trafford.
"I was talking to him last night just after the football and he was in great form," Jimmy Ball said.
The former midfielder won 72 caps in a 10-year England career. He made 116 appearances for Blackpool and later played at Everton, Arsenal and Southampton before ending his career in the United States.
"Alan holds a hugely significant place in the history of Blackpool," chairman Karl Oyston told the club's Web site. "He was a man of great character, energy and huge talent. I feel privileged to have met him and our thoughts go out to his family."
Warren Avis
DETROIT (AP) Warren Avis, a canny entrepreneur for decades after selling the nation's first car rental business to be located at airports, has died. He was 92.
The founder of Avis Rent A Car died Tuesday of natural causes at his farm in Ann Arbor with his wife, Yanna, at his side, the Avis family said in a statement.
A decorated bomber pilot with the Army Air Corps in World War II, Avis formed his car rental company in 1946 at airports in Miami and Ypsilanti, Mich., with an investment of $85,000. He started with two employees and fewer than 200 cars.
Avis said he got the idea for the business when he was a pilot and couldn't find ground transportation once he arrived at airports.
Avis built what became the world's largest car rental system until it was overtaken by Hertz after years of ferocious competition. He sold his interest in the business for $8 million in 1954.
The company now is called Avis Rent A Car System LLC and is part of Parsippany, N.J.-based Avis Budget Group Inc.
After selling the car-rental giant, Avis began converting rental properties to condominiums. In the 1970s, he founded Behavioral Science Training Laboratories Inc., which focused on human relations in business management.
Steven Derounian
NEW YORK (AP) Steven B. Derounian, a former judge who represented part of Long Island in Congress in the 1950s and 1960s, has died. He was 89.
Derounian died April 17 of complications from pneumonia in Austin, Texas, said his nephew, Paul D. Derounian.
Derounian, a Republican, won a House seat in 1952. He served for six terms and earned national recognition while a member of a 1950s subcommittee that investigated scandals in quiz shows and payola on the airwaves.
In 1968, he won a seat on the state Supreme Court on Long Island. He retired from the bench in 1981 and moved from Garden City to Texas, his wife's home state.
He was born Steven Boghos Derounian in Sofia, Bulgaria, to Armenian parents who later settled on Long Island. He graduated from New York University and Fordham Law School, then served in an infantry division in Europe. He was discharged as a captain in 1946, having earned a Purple Heart and a Bronze Star with oak leaf cluster.
John R. Drexel III
NEWPORT, R.I. (AP) John R. Drexel III, the head of a powerful Philadelphia banking family and a socialite, has died. He was 87.
Drexel died April 13 of heart failure at his Newport estate, said his daughter, Noreen O'Farrell.
Drexel was a great-great-great-grandson of Francis Martin Drexel, who founded the banking house Drexel & Company in the early 19th century. His great-great grandfather was a business partner of financier J.P. Morgan and founded Drexel University in Philadelphia.
For most of his life, Drexel managed his family's fortune and devoted himself to charities benefiting Newport Hospital, Good Samaritan Medical Center in West Palm Beach, Fla., and an animal shelter in Middletown.
Drexel and his wife, Noreen Stonor, played host to the prominent and wealthy over the years. The Duke and Duchess of Windsor were guests at their home, while a party for their 25th wedding anniversary attracted Aldriches, Astors and Rockefellers.
Paul Erdman
HEALDSBURG, Calif. (AP) Paul Erdman, an economist and banker known for his best-selling novels of suspense and intrigue in the world of high finance, has died. He was 74.
Erdman, who also wrote Internet and newspaper columns and several works of nonfiction, died Monday at his Sonoma County ranch after a long illness, according to his family.
Known as a pioneer of the financial thriller, Erdman performed the unlikely feat of turning obscure economic concepts into exciting and accessible fiction.
His 1973 debut novel, "The Billion Dollar Sure Thing," won an Edgar Award from the Mystery Writers of America. His next book, "The Silver Bears," was turned into a 1978 movie of the same name starring Michael Caine and Jay Leno.
His books, which also include "The Crash of '79" and "The Swiss Account," have been translated into 32 languages and spent a combined 152 weeks on the New York Times best-seller list. His last novel, "The Great Game," is set to be published this year.
Erdman was born in Ontario in 1932. He graduated from Georgetown's foreign service school and earned a doctorate in economics with the highest honors from the University of Basel in Switzerland.
He worked as an economist in Europe and at the Stanford Research Institute and was the chief executive of a Swiss bank he founded.
He later became a founding financial columnist at MarketWatch.com. A sports fan, he also published newspaper pieces on professional football.
Jim Moran
HILLSBORO BEACH, Fla. (AP) Jim Moran, an automotive businessman and philanthropist, has died. He was 88.
Moran's cause of death was not being released, said Anne-Beth Nemeroff, a spokeswoman for Moran's Deerfield Beach-based company, JM Family Enterprises Inc. He died Tuesday.
Moran, born in Chicago, founded the company in 1968. Company officials said it had a year-end revenue of $11.1 billion.
The company's flagship subsidiary, Southeast Toyota Distributors LLC, is the world's largest independent distributor of Toyota vehicles, the company said.
In 1984, Moran founded the Youth Automotive Training Center, a privately funded school for at-risk young people. He also established The Jim Moran Foundation in 2000 to help improve Floridians' quality of life, the foundation's Web site said.
In 2005, Moran was inducted into the Automotive Hall of Fame.
Bohdan Paczynski
PRINCETON, N.J. (AP) Bohdan Paczynski, a Princeton University astrophysicist who pioneered ways to use gravitational fields in outer space to learn more about stars and planets, has died. He was 67.
Paczynski died Thursday in his Princeton home after a three-year battle with brain cancer, the university announced.
He is best known for using an effect called gravitational microlensing, in which the gravity of a star passing in front of another one much farther away can magnify the background star's light much like a telescopic lens.
Paczynski showed that the effect could be used to survey the population of stars in our galaxy and to determine the mass of stars. It can also be used to discover planets around other stars, because the gravity of planets around the foreground star changes the lensing effect.
Paczynski was part of a consortium of astronomers who founded the Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment, which has witnessed thousands of lensing events. The project last year discovered one of the smallest planets known to exist outside the solar system.
Besides his work with microlensing, Paczynski was also known for his championing of a once-controversial idea that gamma ray bursts large bursts of energy observed in outer space actually originated billions of lights years away, rather than within the Milky Way galaxy.
A native of Poland, Paczynski spent 20 years at what is now Warsaw's Copernicus Astronomical Center, reaching the rank of professor in 1979. He came to Princeton in 1982.
Wayne Schenk
SYRACUSE, N.Y. (AP) Wayne Schenk, who won $1 million in the lottery shortly after finding out he had terminal cancer, has died. He was 51.
Wayne Schenk died Monday at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Syracuse, according to the Baird-Moore Funeral Home.
On Jan. 12, Schenk won $1 million playing a $5 scratch-off ticket in the New York State Lottery's High Stakes Blackjack. Five weeks earlier, he had found out that he had less than a year to live because of inoperable lung cancer.
Schenk had tried to get the lottery to give him a lump sum so he could enter a hospital that specialized in treating advanced cancer. His prize pays out in $50,000 annual installments over 20 years.
Lottery officials said they were sympathetic but couldn't break the rules to give him a lump sum. He had received just $34,000 of his win by the time of his death.
Schenk was a lifelong smoker whose parents died of lung cancer in the 1990s. He served on a troop ship off Lebanon during a stint in the Army from 1976 to 1980. Last year, he bought a tavern after decades of working odd jobs in construction, in the highway department and at a ski resort.
He plans to leave his winnings to his wife, Joan, friend Nick Pascazi said.
Michael Smuin
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) Michael Smuin, an award-winning choreographer who was co-artistic director of the San Francisco Ballet and then founded his own dance company, has died. He was 68.
Smuin collapsed of an apparent heart attack on Monday during rehearsal with his company, Smuin Ballet, according to company spokesman David Perry. He was pronounced dead at a hospital, Perry said.
The Missoula, Mont., native danced with American Ballet Theatre and the San Francisco Ballet before beginning a second career as a choreographer at age 27. Smuin served as co-director of San Francisco Ballet from 1973 to 1985, then returned to the city nearly a decade later to found Smuin Ballet.
His ballets include "The Catharine Wheel," "Pulcinella Variations," "Romeo and Juliet, "The Christmas Ballet," "Shinju," "Zorro," "Frankie and Johnny" and "Fly Me to the Moon."
During his career in film, television and Broadway, Smuin won a Tony Award for his choreography of the Broadway revival "Anything Goes," and was nominated in 1981 for his co-choreography and direction of "Sophisticated Ladies." He received an Emmy Award in 1984 for "Great Performances: Dance in America." His film credits include "The Cotton Club," "Rumble Fish" and "A Walk in the Clouds."
Glenn Sutton
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) Glenn Sutton, a songwriter and music producer who penned hits for artists including Tammy Wynette, has died. He was 69.
Sutton, who co-wrote the 1966 million seller "Almost Persuaded," recorded by David Houston, died April 17, Woodlawn-Roesch-Patton Funeral Home in Nashville announced. He suffered an apparent heart attack, The Tennessean newspaper reported.
Sutton also wrote or co-wrote "I Don't Want to Play House" and "Your Good Girl's Gonna Go Bad," both 1967 hits for Wynette.
As a producer, he recorded Lynn Anderson's "(I Never Promised You A) Rose Garden" in 1970.
 Load-Date: April 26, 2007

 

End of Document
