

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
January 12, 2008 Saturday 4:25 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 2128 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Jorge Isaac Anaya
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) Jorge Isaac Anaya, a former Argentine navy chief who was the leading proponent of the past dictatorship's ill-fated 1982 invasion of the Falklands Islands, died Wednesday of complications from heart problems, his family said. He was 81.
Anaya, who suffered a heart attack in 2006 while awaiting court questioning about human rights abuses during military rule, died at home.
Anaya was the chief proponent of the failed military campaign to take the remote British-held South Atlantic archipelago, called las Malvinas by Argentina.
The invasion triggered a 10-week war that claimed hundreds of lives and hastened the end of Argentina's last dictatorship.
Anaya, junta leader Leopoldo Galtieri and other top officers were prosecuted after the end of the 1976-83 dictatorship for negligence in leading the war.
In 1986, a military tribunal ordered Anaya to serve 14 years in prison and be stripped of rank. He was pardoned in 1990 along with other top former officers by then-president Carlos Menem.
In November 2006, Anaya was summoned back to court to testify before a federal judge probing hundreds of cases of illegal kidnapping and torture at the former Navy Mechanics' School the chief clandestine torture center of the former dictatorship.
Authorities said Anaya suffered a heart attack before he was to testify and remained in declining health since.
Jose "Pepin" Bello
MADRID, Spain (AP) Jose "Pepin" Bello, who influenced painter Salvador Dali, film director Luis Bunuel and poet Federico Garcia Lorca, died Friday. He was 103.
Bello died in his sleep of old age at his Madrid home, his family told Spanish national news agency Efe.
In 2004, Bello was awarded the Gold Medal of Fine Arts by the Spanish Government. He was also the subject of several documentaries and books,
Bello was known to be the last living representative of the cultural movement known as the Generation of 1927. Despite his influence over some of the country's best known cultural figures, Bello produced few literary or art works himself.
Christopher Bowman
LOS ANGELES (AP) Christopher Bowman, the former U.S. figure skating champion dubbed "Bowman the Showman" for his flair on the ice, has been found dead at a hotel in the San Fernando Valley. He was 40.
Bowman was pronounced dead Thursday of a possible drug overdose, said Coroner's Lt. Joe Bale, who wasn't immediately able to provide more details. Bowman's body was found at a hotel in the North Hills area, and an autopsy was planned for this weekend, Bale said.
Bowman, a former child actor, was one of figure skating's bigger personalities in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Immensely talented, with a gift for performance that few others could match, he won the U.S. men's figure skating titles in 1989 and 1992, and was runner-up in 1987 and 1991.
He also won a silver medal at the 1989 world championships, and a bronze the next year. He skated in the 1988 and 1992 Winter Olympics, finishing seventh in 1988 and fourth in 1992.
Bowman also had some run-ins with the law.
In November 2004, he pleaded no contest to two misdemeanors involving having a gun on him while drunk in Rochester Hills, Mich.
In 1993, while skating with the Ice Capades, he was beaten at a hotel in a seedy neighborhood in Pittsburgh, according to a police report.
Born in Hollywood, Calif., on March 30, 1967, Bowman had a part in the TV series "Little House on the Prairie" for one season and appeared in dozens of commercials.
Bowman recently returned to acting. He had a role an assistant coach in the upcoming Brian J. De Palma-directed movie "Down and Distance" staring Gary Busey.
Vincent Gruppuso
HICKSVILLE, N.Y. (AP) Vincent Gruppuso, a former bread deliveryman who bought a recipe for rice pudding from a Brooklyn deli in the 1960s and turned it into multimillion-dollar company, died Dec. 29 of complications of diabetes. He was 67.
Gruppuso, the founder of Kozy Shack Enterprises, died at his home in East Hampton, N.Y., said Suzanne Cruse, the company's corporate counsel.
One of Gruppuso's stops on his bread delivery route in the mid-1960s was the Cozy Shack delicatessen, where he took an instant liking to the creamy rice pudding. He started selling trays of the pudding at his other stops and in 1967, he bought the recipe and started his own business in Queens.
Four decades later, the company now has more than 400 employees with plants in Hicksville, Turlock, Calif., and Lough Egish, Ireland. The pudding is sold at supermarkets in the United States, Canada, Mexico and Europe.
John Harvey-Jones
LONDON (AP) Businessman Sir John Harvey-Jones, who shared his passion for business with millions of viewers through the British Broadcasting Corp. television series "Troubleshooter," died Thursday. He was 85.
Harvey-Jones died Thursday after a long illness, the broadcaster said, without elaborating.
The former chairman of Imperial Chemicals Industries PLC, Harvey-Jones became Britain's best known industrialist during the late 1990s thanks to the television program in which he advised struggling businesses.
The retired executive, who lived in Wales, was known for his outspoken leadership style.
In a 1996 interview, he attacked the rising trend on television of aggressive managers such as the star of the U.K. version of "The Apprentice," Sir Alan Sugar, along with Gordon Ramsay and Simon Cowell, insisting the ethos behind his shows was always one of constructive guidance.
Harvey-Jones led ICI from 1982 to 1987, when he transformed the loss-making firm into the first British company to post more than 1 billion pounds in annual profits in 1984. That's nearly $2 billion at today's exchange rates.
He joined ICI as a junior manager and rose through the ranks to join the board in 1973 and eventually become chairman in 1982.
He was knighted for services to industry and served as chairman of The Economist magazine from 1989 to 1994.
Andres Henestrosa
MEXICO (AP) Mexican writer and poet Andres Henestrosa, a Zapotec Indian who defended and promoted his native language, died Thursday after a monthslong battle with pneumonia. He was 101.
Henestrosa died in his Mexico City home, his daughter Cibeles Henestrosa told reporters Friday.
Henestrosa, who was born in southern Oaxaca state and didn't learn Spanish until he was 15 years old, often focused his work on indigenous cultures and languages. He wrote a Zapotec-Spanish dictionary in 1936.
Henestrosa also dabbled in politics and was elected to Mexico's Congress and Senate.
Carl N. Karcher
ANAHEIM, Calif. (AP) Carl N. Karcher, the founder of the Carl's Jr. fast-food chain, died Friday. He was 90.
Karcher suffered from Parkinson's disease and was being treated for pneumonia when he died at St. Jude Medical Center in Fullerton, said a spokeswoman for CKE Restaurants, Inc., the parent company.
Karcher, who was a bread-truck driver before getting into the fast-food business, opened the first Carl's Jr. in 1956. He added "Jr." to distinguish it from his full-service eatery.
In 1989, Karcher and his family agreed to a $664,000 settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission after the agency alleged Karcher told six family members to sell stock ahead of an announcement that company profits would plummet by 50 percent.
In 1993, after increasingly bitter feuds with his board of directors and crippling personal financial losses, the 76-year-old founder was ousted as the company's CEO.
Today, Carl's Jr. has more than 1,000 locations across the West. CKE made $1.52 billion in sales in 2006 and had 29,000 employees. CKE also owns the Hardee's, La Salsa Fresh Mexican Grill and Green Burrito chains.
Eddie "Bozo" Miller
OAKLAND, Calif. (AP) Eddie "Bozo" Miller, a man known for his amazing capacity for food consumption, died Monday. He was 89.
Miller, who had struggled with diabetes and other health problems, died of natural causes at his home in Oakland, said his son-in-law, Steve Blackman.
Miller, was known for his appetite for life and feasting. He once downed 27 two-pound chickens at one sitting for a bet.
The 5-foot-7 Miller weighed 330 pounds at his peak and claimed a number of celebrities as his friends.
He worked at a variety of jobs, including being a bookie, fight manager and restaurant owner.
But it was with knife and fork that he made his name.
He told the Oakland Tribune in November that he once ate 12 club sandwiches in a row. He also was known for eating more than 300 ravioli at one time.
His prowess as an eater landed him in record books and newspaper columns.
He was born Edwin Abraham Miller in San Francisco to parents who were in vaudeville and traveled with them on the circuit as a boy.
Sara Misquez
TULAROSA, N.M. (AP) Sara Misquez, a former president of the Mescalero Apache Tribe in southern New Mexico, died Wednesday in a sport utility vehicle crash. She was 62.
She was alone when her vehicle crashed on U.S. 70 near Tularosa, New Mexico State Police said.
Misquez was appointed president of the tribe following the Tribal Council's May 1999 ouster of Paul Ortega after he served six months as president. She won the presidency in an August 1999 special election.
Mark Chino, defeated Misquez in the tribe's 2001 election for president, but the council tossed out the results two weeks later in a voting machine controversy.
Misquez won a special election in January 2002.
Misquez and Chino again faced off for the tribal presidency in the November 2003 election, which Chino won.
Misquez was a graduate of Haskell Indian Junior College in Lawrence, Kan., with a degree in business. She had served as the tribe's administrator, as a council member and as tribal secretary.
Zoel Parenteau Jr.
WICHITA, Kan. (AP) Zoel Parenteau Jr., the former KPTS Channel 8 manager, died Thursday. He was 75.
Cochran Mortuary confirmed Parenteau's death.
Parenteau came to Wichita in 1972, where he served as president and general at the Wichita public television station KPTS until his retirement in 1997.
It was not his first stint running public television.
Parenteau had been general manager of Kansas City's public television station KCPT even before its activation in 1961.
He also was a past president of the Wichita Rotary Club, and remained active in that group until his death.
Charles Tasnadi
WASHINGTON (AP) Charles Tasnadi, who braved minefields and barbed wire to escape communist Hungary and went on to spend three decades as a top Associated Press photographer, died Thursday following a stroke. He was 82.
Famed for his skills as a photographer and revered as a great gentleman, Tasnadi was born Karoly Tasnadi on March 1, 1925, in Ajka, Hungary.
During his career, Tasnadi covered seven presidents, including a return to his native land aboard Air Force One, accompanying President George H.W. Bush.
Bush called Tasnadi into a forward cabin on the jet just before landing and told him it was fitting and proper that this was how he should return home for the first time.
Tasnadi also traveled to Cuba more than 40 times, gaining access to Fidel Castro and other Cuban leaders. A former editor credited Tasnadi with helping pave the way for AP journalists to return to Cuba.
Among Tasnadi's most famous photographs was one of President Johnson displaying his scar to the media following surgery. Others included Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, President Nixon, Soviet Leader Leonid Brezhnev and candid shots of Presidents Clinton and Reagan.
Tasnadi was diagnosed with colon cancer in 2006 and underwent surgery and chemotherapy before suffering a recent stroke.
Rix N. Yard
NEW ORLEANS (AP) Dr. Rix N. Yard, a former Tulane University athletic director, died Wednesday. He was 90.
Yard died at his home in Newport News, Va., the university said Friday.
Yard served as the Green Wave's athletic director from 1963-76 and stayed on as a professor of physical education and director of intramural and club sports until his retirement from Tulane in 1982.
As athletic director, Yard oversaw Tulane's 1966 move from the Southeastern Conference, the football team's move from old Tulane Stadium to the Louisiana Superdome, and was instrumental in Tulane joining the Metro Conference in all non-football sports for the 1975-76 season.
Yard was inducted into the National Association of College Directors of Athletics Hall of Fame, served as the chairman of the NCAA's television committee and was a member of the academic and tuition, and insurance committees.
Yard came to Tulane from Denison University in Granville, Ohio, where he headed a 12-sport varsity program and men's physical education department. He earned Lacrosse Coach of the Year honors in 1963.
Yard was elected to the Ohio Lacrosse Foundation Hall of Fame in 1995 and a bust of him was erected on the Denison University campus on April 14, 2007.
 Load-Date: January 12, 2008

 

End of Document
