

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
January 21, 2008 Monday 3:48 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1394 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Louis de Cazenave
PARIS (AP) Louis de Cazenave, one of the last French World War I veterans, has died. He was 110.
De Cazenave died in his sleep Sunday in his home in Brioude in central France, his son said.
The last known French veteran of World War I is Lazare Ponticelli, also 110.
Born in 1897, de Cazenave was called up to fight in 1916 and served in different infantry regiments before joining an artillery unit in January 1918, according to a statement from the French president's office.
De Cazenave took part in the Battle of the Somme in 1916, when more than a million soldiers died. He also took part in the liberation of France from German forces, the statement said.
Frances Lewine
WASHINGTON (AP) Frances Lewine, a White House correspondent for The Associated Press during the administrations of six presidents, from Eisenhower to Carter, has died. She was 86.
Lewine died Saturday of a probable stroke, according to a coroner's preliminary ruling. She was found by friends.
Lewine joined the Washington bureau of the AP in 1956 to cover general assignments, including White House social events and other activities of the first family. But despite her sometimes glamorous assignments, she often expressed frustration that she was relegated to social and family stories and sidebars while male colleagues covered the president.
Lewine became a leader among women journalists in the '50s, '60s and '70s, protesting discrimination against women in jobs and assignments. She was president of The Women's National Press Club at a time when some major journalistic organizations excluded women or limited their participation. The efforts of Lewine and other reporters eventually led to such groups as the National Press Club and the Gridiron Club opening their membership to women.
Lewine left the AP in 1977 to join the Carter administration and became deputy director of public affairs for the Transportation Department. When President Carter left office in 1981, she moved to the fledgling Cable News Network as an assignment editor and field producer.
Suzanne Pleshette
LOS ANGELES (AP) Suzanne Pleshette, best known for her role as Bob Newhart's wife on television's long-running "The Bob Newhart Show," has died. She was 70.
Pleshette, who underwent chemotherapy for lung cancer in 2006, died of respiratory failure Saturday evening at her Los Angeles home, her attorney and family friend said.
The beautiful, husky-voiced TV, film and theater star died just days before a ceremony honoring her with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
"The Bob Newhart Show," a hit throughout its six-year run, starred comedian Newhart as a Chicago psychiatrist surrounded by eccentric patients. Pleshette as his sardonic wife provided the voice of reason.
Pleshette began her career as a stage actress. She met her future husband, Tom Poston, when they appeared together in the 1959 Broadway comedy "The Golden Fleecing" but didn't marry him until more than 40 years later.
She launched her film career with Jerry Lewis in 1958 in "The Geisha Boy." She went on to appear in numerous television shows, including "Have Gun, Will Travel," "Alfred Hitchcock Presents," "Playhouse 90" and "Naked City."
More recently, she appeared in several episodes of the TV sitcoms "Will & Grace" and "8 Simple Rules ... For Dating My Teenage Daughter."
Eugene Sawyer
CHICAGO (AP) Former Chicago Mayor Eugene Sawyer, who served only briefly but during a deeply divisive period in city politics in the late 1980s, has died. He was 73.
Sawyer, the city's second black mayor, died Saturday at Adventist Hinsdale Hospital after several recent strokes, his family said.
He served as mayor for just 16 months following the sudden death of Chicago's first black mayor, Harold Washington.
Immediately after the death of the popular Mayor Washington, the quiet, soft-spoken Sawyer, then alderman for Chicago's 6th ward, found himself in the midst of a political maelstrom.
Many blacks opposed him, accusing him of being a figurehead for white powerbrokers who had bitterly opposed Washington during his four years in office.
The city council session held to elect Sawyer as acting mayor was highly contentious, with many blacks angrily accusing him of selling out.
Current Mayor Richard Daley defeated Sawyer in the Democratic primary in 1989, and went on to win the mayoral election. After his defeat, Sawyer left public life and became involved in several business ventures.
Among Eugene Sawyer's proudest accomplishments was helping to ensure minorities had a fair chance to bid on city contracts, his brother said.
The Chicago Cubs fan was also proud the installation of lighting at Wrigley Field, allowing for night games at the famed baseball park, happened during his term.
James L. Sorenson
SALT LAKE CITY (AP) James L. Sorenson, who overcame a childhood learning disability and built a fortune in pioneering medical devices and real estate, has died. He was 86.
He died Sunday of cancer, said a spokesman for Sorenson Companies.
Sorenson, creator of the disposable surgical mask, was Utah's wealthiest man with a fortune estimated at $4.5 billion, according to Forbes magazine's 2007 rankings.
He was considered one of the most generous philanthropists in the state, giving millions of dollars to medical facilities, religious organizations and other causes.
Sorenson had dyslexia, but he overcame the challenge and went on to become an astute problem solver.
His other medical inventions included the first real-time computerized heart monitoring systems and the automated intravenous drug pump.
Early in his career, Sorenson bought a goat pasture in the hills above Salt Lake City for $25 an acre. The former grazing land is now home to some of the area's most plush neighborhoods, overlooking the Salt Lake Valley from the Wasatch Mountain foothills.
Later, Sorenson developed an interest in genetics and established Sorenson Genomics, a company that assisted with DNA identification after the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004.
John Stewart
LOS ANGELES (AP) John Stewart, who recorded some of pop music's most acclaimed solo albums and helped create the style called Americana, has died. He was 68.
Stewart, best known for writing the Monkees' enduring hit "Daydream Believer," died Saturday at a San Diego hospital after suffering a brain aneurism, according to a statement on the Kingston Trio's Web site.
Stewart came to prominence in the 1960s as a member of the Kingston Trio. He left the group shortly before the Monkees released "Daydream Believer" in 1967, then went on to record nearly four dozen solo albums, including the critically acclaimed "California Bloodlines" and "Bombs Away Dream Babies." The latter included the hit single "Gold," in which he dueted with Fleetwood Mac's Stevie Nicks.
Still, as with "Daydream Believer," he was likely best known for writing songs for others, including Joan Baez, Nanci Griffith, Roseanne Cash and Anne Murray.
He wrote "Runaway Train," a country hit for Roseanne Cash, and "Strange Rivers," which Joan Baez included on her 1992 "Play Me Backwards" album. Nanci Griffith dueted with him on "Sweet Dreams" and Murray, like the Monkees before her, had a hit with "Daydream Believer."
Don Wittman
WINNIPEG, Manitoba (AP) Don Wittman, the CBC announcer who called some of Canada's most significant sporting events, has died. He was 71.
Wittman died Saturday of cancer, his family said in a statement on CBC's Web site.
For more than 40 years, Wittman was a familiar face on CBC television. He did the play-by-play for football's Grey Cups and hockey's Stanley Cups, and covered curling, golf, and track and field, as well. He was a fixture at both summer and winter Olympics.
Wittman called Ben Johnson's steroid-tainted victory in the 100 meters at the 1988 Seoul Olympics, and he was there when Donovan Bailey sprinted to gold in the same event in the 1996 Games at Atlanta.
Wittman saw Wayne Gretzky win Stanley Cups and was in Czechoslovakia in 1987 for the Canada-USSR brawl at the world junior hockey championships.
During the 1972 Olympics in Munich he stood on a balcony and looked into the masked face of one of the terrorists who kidnapped nine Israeli athletes.
Wittman, chosen as the 2002 broadcaster of the year by Sports Media Canada, was a member of the Canadian Football League Hall of Fame, the Canadian Curling Hall of Fame and Manitoba's provincial sports hall of fame.
 Load-Date: January 21, 2008

 

End of Document
