

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 28, 2006 Thursday 3:50 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1515 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Chris Brown
HOUSTON (AP) Chris Brown, an All-Star third baseman who played six seasons in the majors in the 1980s, died Tuesday. He was 45.
Brown died at Memorial Hermann Hospital nearly a month after he was burned Nov. 30 in a fire at his home outside Houston. An autopsy has been performed but the cause of death is still pending, said Beverly Begay, a spokeswoman for the Harris County medical examiner's office.
Authorities say they are investigating the circumstances surrounding the fire and how Brown was burned. Doug Adolph, a spokesman for the Sugar Land police and fire departments, said arson is suspected.
Brown who played with Darryl Strawberry at Crenshaw High School in Los Angeles, played with the San Francisco Giants, San Diego Padres and Detroit Tigers. He debuted in the majors in 1984 and made the All-Rookie team in 1985 after batting .271 with 16 home runs and 61 RBIs. Brown made the NL All-Star team in 1986, when he hit .317 with seven homers and 49 RBIs for San Francisco.
He underwent shoulder surgery after the '86 season and his statistics tapered off. The Giants traded Brown during the 1987 season to the Padres, who dealt him to Detroit the following year. He appeared in only 17 games with the Tigers in 1989 and batted .193 before he was released. He never returned to baseball.
Brown finished his big league career with a .269 average, 38 home runs and 184 RBIs.
Pierre Delanoe
PARIS (AP) Pierre Delanoe, who wrote the lyrics for more than 5,000 songs for French artists from Edith Piaf to Johnny Hallyday, died Wednesday. He was 88.
Delanoe died of heart failure, the French federation of authors, composers and publishers said. He was known for writing some of France's best-loved tunes, many with singer-songwriter Gilbert Becaud.
One was "Et maintenant," which was translated into English to become "What Now My Love," and was covered by artists including Elvis Presley, Frank Sinatra, Barbra Streisand, The Supremes and The Temptations.
Another of their famous hits was "Je t'appartiens," which became "Let It Be Me," covered by The Everly Brothers, Tom Jones, Bob Dylan, Willie Nelson and Nina Simone.
Delanoe also wrote lyrics for the 1960s and 1970s pop singer Joe Dassin, including "Les Champs-Elysees" about Paris' most famous avenue.
A former tax inspector, Delanoe was also president of France's Sacem, the federation of artists, composers and publishers, from 1984 et 1994.
Gerald R. Ford
RANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. (AP) Former President Gerald R. Ford, who declared "Our long national nightmare is over" as he replaced Richard Nixon but may have doomed his own chances of election by pardoning his disgraced predecessor, died Tuesday. He was 93.
The nation's 38th president, and the only one not elected to the office or the vice presidency, died at his desert home at 6:45 p.m. Tuesday.
Ford was the longest living former president, surpassing Ronald Reagan, who died in June 2004, by more than a month.
Ford's office did not release the cause of death, which followed a year of medical problems. He was treated for pneumonia in January and had an angioplasty and pacemaker implant in August.
His state funeral is to be held Saturday in Washington, D.C.
"The American people will always admire Gerald Ford's devotion to duty, his personal character and the honorable conduct of his administration," President Bush said in a statement Tuesday night.
Ford was an accidental president. A Michigan Republican elected to Congress 13 times before becoming the first appointed vice president in 1973 after Spiro Agnew left amid scandal, Ford was Nixon's hand-picked successor, a man of much political experience who had never run on a national ticket. He was as open and straightforward as Nixon was tightly controlled and conspiratorial.
He took office moments after Nixon resigned in disgrace over Watergate and went into exile.
"My fellow Americans," Ford said, "our long national nightmare is over. Our Constitution works. Our great republic is a government of laws and not of men. Here the people rule."
He occupied the White House only 895 days.
Ivar Formo
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) Ivar Formo, a cross-country gold medalist at the 1976 Winter Olympics, died earlier this week. He was 55.
Formo drowned in a lake in Norway, police said.
He was believed to have fallen through the ice Tuesday while skating on Lake Sandungen near the Norwegian capital, Oslo police spokeswoman Catrina Kveseth said.
Formo won the 50K at the 1976 Winter Games in Innsbruck, Austria, where he also won a silver medal with Norway in the 4x10K relay.
Formo also won silver and bronze medals at the 1972 Winter Olympics in Sapporo, Japan.
John Heath-Stubbs
LONDON (AP) John Heath-Stubbs, a British poet and translator who used classical myth as an inspiration for his verse, died Tuesday. He was 88.
The 1973 winner of the Queen's Gold Medal for Poetry died at the Athlone House Nursing Home in west London, the facility said. The cause of death was not announced.
Heath-Stubbs' works included poetry, plays, criticism and translations, including "The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam" with Peter Avery in 1979 and his own epic poem, "Artorius: A Heroic Poem in Four Books and Eight Episodes" published in 1973.
A close friend, Guthrie McKie, said Heath-Stubbs, who slowly lost his eyesight and went completely blind in 1978, had been diagnosed with lung cancer earlier this year.
In an interview with the British newspaper "The Independent" published in 1993, Heath-Stubbs said the loss of his sight did not detract from his enjoyment of life, but he lamented being unable to scour secondhand book stores.
Born in London on July 9, 1918, Heath-Stubbs earned a degree at Queen's College, Oxford, where his classmates included the writers C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien.
His first published appearance came in 1941 in the book "Eight Oxford Poets" and he helped edit "Oxford Poetry" in 1942-1943. He also edited the 1953 British poetry anthology "Images Of Tomorrow."
Lord Marmaduke Hussey
LONDON (AP) Lord Marmaduke Hussey, who spent a decade as chairman of the BBC, positioning it for the digital era, died Wednesday. He was 83.
His death was announced by the BBC Corp. where he served as the chairman of its board of directors from 1986-96.
Hussey served with the Grenadier Guards in World War II and lost a leg in combat in Italy. Afterward, he joined Associated Newspapers, rising to editor of the Daily Mail.
He later became chief executive of Times Newspapers from 1971 to 1982, and waged a bitter dispute with print unions about modernizing technology that kept the company's flagship Times and Sunday Times papers off the streets for nearly a year.
He became chairman of the BBC after the death of Stuart Young.
Nelva Mendez de Falcone
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) Nelva Mendez de Falcone, a pioneering member of an Argentine group that protested disappearances of loved ones during Argentina's Dirty War, died Monday. She was 76.
Mendez de Falcone died of an unspecified lung problem for which she had been hospitalized for the last 10 days in La Plata, 30 miles southeast of the capital of Buenos Aires, the family said.
She was one of the first members of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, the famous white-scarved activists who for decades have pressed to learn the fate of their children who vanished during the 1976-83 dictatorship.
Mendez de Falcone's 16-year-old daughter Maria Claudia Falcone was arrested and tortured in 1976 by the military regime's security services as were six other students who were accused of organizing a group demanding reduced public transportation fares. The girl and five other students remain unaccounted for and are believed to have been killed.
In 1977, Mendez de Falcone joined the Mothers, who had just begun weekly silent marches on the Plaza de Mayo in front of the presidential palace to demand information about their missing children.
According to official figures, some 13,000 people disappeared under the dictatorship's dirty war against dissidents, though human rights groups put the number at 30,000.
Ralph Stebbins
ARCADIA TOWNSHIP, Mich. (AP) Ralph Stebbins, who won a $208 million Mega Millions lottery jackpot with his wife in April 2005 died Saturday. He was 43.
Stebbins died at his home in Arcadia Township near Lapeer, Sheriff's Sgt. Andy Engster told the Times Herald of Port Huron. Family spokesman Robert Kolt said he suffered a heart attack.
Ralph and his wife, Mary, elected to take a lump-sum payment of $124.7 million, less taxes. They could have chosen to spread $208 million in payments over 26 years.
The couple used part of their winnings to buy a recreational vehicle and said they planned to buy a cow, pay off bills and build a garage to house a 1963 Corvette.
Kolt said he was not aware that Stebbins had a history of heart problems or that he was feeling ill.
Stebbins had previously worked for a well-digging company in Port Huron, where the couple formerly lived, while Mary Stebbins was a $7-per-hour retail sales clerk at a general merchandise store. Both quit their jobs after winning the jackpot and planned to help several other family members retire.
 Load-Date: December 28, 2006

 

End of Document
