

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
February 26, 2007 Monday 1:58 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1515 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Mario Chanes de Armas
MIAMI (AP) Mario Chanes de Armas, who was at Fidel Castro's side in the Cuban revolution and later spent three decades as a political prisoner in the leader's jails, died Saturday. He was 80.
Chanes de Armas had been in a nursing home but fell ill Saturday and died at Hialeah Hospital, said his friend and fellow prisoner, Eleno Oviedo.
Chanes de Armas joined Castro during the 1953 attack that began the Cuban revolution. He was sentenced with Castro and others to 15 years by the Batista dictatorship, though they were granted amnesty and released 20 months later.
Soon after, they organized the insurrection which brought them to power in 1959. But Chanes de Armas joined the opposition to the new regime when he became convinced Castro was betraying the democratic promises he had made.
On July 17, 1962, Chanes de Armas was sentenced to 30 years by Castro.
Often kept in horrible conditions, Chanes de Armas and other prisoners challenged the regime from within prison by starting hunger strikes.
Eventually, he and four other prisoners, including Oviedo, were released with the efforts of several human rights organizations and his family, who had met with President George H. W. Bush.
Chanes de Armas served as one of the directors of Grupo Plantados, meaning those who refuse to budge. He later traveled to Washington in 1993, where he was received by then President Bill Clinton.
Heinz Berggruen
PARIS (AP) Heinz Berggruen, an influential collector of Picasso's artworks and longtime friend of the artist, died Friday in France, the Picasso Museum in Paris said Sunday. He was 93.
Berggruen died at the American Hospital in Neuilly-sur-Seine, just west of Paris, said Anne Baldassari, director of the Picasso Museum. The cause of his death was not revealed.
Berggruen, whose Picasso collection was one of the world's biggest with more than 130 works, also made significant gifts of modern art to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York and the Nationalgalerie in Berlin.
Berggruen was born in Berlin on Jan. 5, 1914. Of Jewish background, he had to leave Germany during the Third Reich, when modern art was branded degenerate by the Nazis.
He studied in Germany and France before leaving for the United States in 1936, where he became a U.S. citizen and worked as a freelance art critic for the San Francisco Chronicle, according to the Picasso Museum's biography of him.
After World War II, he settled in Paris and dedicated himself to collecting art, especially Picasso's.
Berggruen's collection included early pieces such as a 1907 study for the "Demoiselles d'Avignon" and a portrait of Georges Braque of 1909-10. Later pieces included "Seated Nude with Lifted Arms," painted in 1972 months before Picasso's death.
The Berggruen collection at the Metropolitan encompasses 90 paintings and drawings by Paul Klee illustrating the artist's entire career, making the New York museum a major repository of Klee's varied, often whimsical works.
Museum Berggruen in Berlin, part of the Nationalgalerie, includes more than 100 works by Picasso from all phases of his career. Klee is represented with more than 60 pictures. In addition, there are more than 20 works by Henri Matisse and sculptures by Alberto Giacometti.
Berggruen donated those works in 1996 as a gesture of reconciliation with the German people.
Juerg Federspiel
BASEL, Switzerland (AP) Juerg Federspiel, best known outside his native Switzerland as the author of "The Ballad of Typhoid Mary," has died. He was 75.
Federspiel had been missing since mid-January and his body was found on Sunday close to the border with France and Germany, local officials in his hometown Basel said. No cause of death was given, but Klaus Mannhart of the Basel safety department did not rule out suicide, saying there were no outward signs of injury.
Born near Zurich on June 28, 1931, Federspiel worked as a journalist, film critic, essayist and fiction writer, publishing over 20 novels and collections of stories.
His books were translated into six languages and his best-known work in the English-speaking world is "The Ballad of Typhoid Mary," based on the true story of a woman in early 20th-century New York who refused to accept that she was the source of numerous outbreaks of typhoid fever.
Federspiel was strongly influenced in his work by the prose style of the American short story, and he spent repeated periods of his life in New York.
It was not immediately known whether Federspiel, who had been suffering from diabetes and Parkinson's disease in recent years, left behind any family.
Peggy Gilbert
BURBANK, Calif. (AP) Peggy Gilbert, a noted saxophonist who helped female jazz musicians gain acceptance over a decades-long career of leading all-women ensembles, died Feb. 12. She was 102.
A Los Angeles resident, she died of complications of hip surgery at Providence St. Joseph Medical Center here, said her friend Jeannie Pool.
Gilbert was infatuated with the jazz she heard on the radio growing up in Sioux City, Iowa. But when she tried to learn the saxophone in high school, she was told girls could play violin, piano and harp but not wind instruments.
So she turned to a local bandleader for lessons.
A year after graduating high school in 1923, she formed her own all-female jazz band, the Melody Girls, before heading to Los Angeles. It was the first in a string of women ensembles she led over the next several decades at a time when jazz culture was often hostile to female instrumentalists.
Her band performed under various names including Peggy Gilbert and Her Metro Goldwyn Orchestra, and Peggy Gilbert and Her Coeds at popular nightclubs, sometimes sharing the bill with jazz titans such as Benny Goodman. It appeared in Hollywood films and toured the vaudeville circuit with George Burns and other stars.
Along the way, she became known as an advocate for women in jazz.
More recently, she was known for the Dixie Belles, a Dixieland band of older women she formed in 1974 at age 69 and that performed together until 1998, appearing on several TV shows.
Ronald Hilton
PALO ALTO, Calif. (AP) Ronald Hilton, a noted Latin America scholar who uncovered preparations for the Bay of Pigs invasion, died Tuesday. He was 95.
Hilton died of cancer at his longtime home on the Stanford University campus, said his daughter, Mary H. Huyck of Greenwich, Conn.
As director of Stanford's Institute of Hispanic American Studies, Hilton reported that it was common knowledge in Guatemala that the CIA had established a base there to train Cuban exiles for an invasion of Cuba.
A November 1960 editorial in The Nation on preparations for the invasion cited Hilton as the magazine's key source of information. Hilton long held the U.S. press in contempt for failing to work more vigorously to expose plans for the failed 1961 attempt to overthrow Cuban leader Fidel Castro.
Hilton was born in Torquay, England, in 1911 and received his B.A. and M.A. from Oxford University before embarking on an extended tour of Europe as the continent descended into war. He bicycled around Germany in the 1930s and observed the Nazis consolidating power and found himself in Spain at the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936.
After a short stint teaching in Canada, Hilton joined the faculty of Stanford in 1941, where he worked and lived in the same house until he died. He became a U.S. citizen in 1946. He founded the university's Institute of Hispanic American Studies and the Hispanic American Report, the journal where his news of the Bay of Pigs preparations first appeared.
In 1965, Hilton founded the World Association of International Studies, a network of scholars that in 1990 began publishing its work exclusively online.
Hilton edited the multi-volume "Who's Who in Latin America" and published the two-volume "Scientific Institutions of Latin America," among other books. He continued to work with the association, publishing articles and organizing conferences until shortly before he died.
Joseph Samaha
BEIRUT, Lebanon (AP) Joseph Samaha, a prominent columnist who headed and co-founded major Lebanese publications during his career in journalism, died Sunday. He was 58.
Samaha, who for the past year was editor in chief of the Lebanese Al-Akhbar newspaper, died early Sunday of a sudden heart attack in London, the syndicate of Lebanese journalists announced in a statement Sunday.
A prominent columnist who is well known in the Arab world for his nationalist, secular writings and his support for the Palestinian cause, was born in 1949. He began his career in journalism in the early 1970s and helped co-found the leftist Lebanese daily As-Safir.
He worked for several publications, including the London-based pan Arab Al-Hayat daily, and was editor-in-chief of As-Safir from 2001 until 2005. He was appointed editor-in-chief of the newly established Al-Akhbar newspaper last year. He wrote several books and his front-page editorials were widely read.
Al-Akhbar said Samaha had flown to London last week to be at the side of Al-Hayat journalist Hazem Saghiyeh, whose wife, a Lebanese writer and publicist, died after an illness.
 Load-Date: February 26, 2007

 

End of Document
