

Passages cited as similar in 'The Da Vinci Code' and 'The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail'
The Associated Press
March 17, 2006 Friday 9:27 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 392 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Authors Michael Baigent and Richard Leigh are suing Random House, publisher of "The Da Vinci Code," claiming author Dan Brown "appropriated the architecture" of their 1982 nonfiction work, "The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail."
Examples of passages in the two books that lawyers for the plaintiffs have cited as evidence during the trial at London's High Court:
HOLY BLOOD, HOLY GRAIL: "By an edict promulgated in AD. 321, for example, Constantine ordered the law courts closed on the 'venerable day of the sun,' and decreed that this day be a day of rest. Christianity had hitherto held the Jewish Sabbath Saturday as sacred. Now, in accordance with Constantine's edict, it transferred its sacred day to Sunday."
DA VINCI CODE: "'Originally,' Langdon said, 'Christianity honored the Jewish Sabbath of Saturday, but Constantine shifted it to coincide with the pagans' veneration day of the sun,' he paused, grinning. 'To this day, most churchgoers attend services on Sunday morning, with no idea that they are there on account of the pagan sun god's weekly tribute Sun day.'"
HBHG: "The image of Constantine as a fervent convert to Christianity is clearly wrong. He himself was not even baptized until 337 when he lay on his deathbed and was apparently too weakened or too apathetic to protest."
DVC: "'I thought Constantine was a Christian,' Sophie said. 'Hardly,' Teabing scoffed. 'He was a lifelong pagan who was baptized on his deathbed, too weak to protest.'"
HBHG: "In 1139 a Papal Bull was issued by Pope Innocent II a former Cistercian monk at Clairvaux and protege of St. Bernard. According to this Bull, the Templars would owe allegiance to no secular or ecclesiastical power other than the pope himself. In other words, they were rendered totally independent of all kings, princes and prelates and all interference from both political and religious authorities. They had become, in effect, a law unto themselves, an autonomous international empire."
DVC: "Nobody was certain whether the Knights had blackmailed the Vatican or whether the church simply tried to buy the Knights' silence, but Pope Innocent II immediately issued an unprecedented Papal Bull that afforded the Knights Templar limitless power and declared them 'a law unto themselves' an autonomous army, independent of all interference from kings and prelates, both religious and political."
 Load-Date: March 18, 2006

 

End of Document
