

People in the News - Correction Appended
The Associated Press
September 4, 2006 Monday 6:35 PM GMT

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 1498 words
Dateline: SAN JUAN Puerto Rico
Body




The reigning Miss Universe made a triumphant return to her native Puerto Rico on Monday, kneeling to kiss a red carpet rolled out at the airport for her first visit to the island since she was crowned in July.
Zuleyka Rivera Mendoza, wearing a short green dress and waving a Puerto Rican flag, was greeted by the governor of the U.S. territory as she stepped off the flight from New York. Since the contest, she has been touring countries including Japan and Indonesia.
"I'm proud to be Puerto Rican, to represent Puerto Rican women and to represent the Puerto Rican people," the 18-year-old aspiring actress said.
Events set for her homecoming included a parade and performances by Puerto Rican artists including Gilberto Santa Rosa and Black Guayaba.
"Your triumph is the triumph of Puerto Rico because you represent the best of Puerto Rico," said Gov. Anibal Acevedo Vila, who invited the beauty queen to dine with his family.
Rivera, whose parents and two younger brothers also greeted her at the airport, planned to return Tuesday to her hometown of Salinas on the southern coast.
She was the fifth Puerto Rican winner in the pageant's 55-year history.
LONDON (AP) Babyshambles frontman Pete Doherty skirted a jail sentence on drug charges Monday when a judge ordered him to continue rehabilitation while complimenting him on one of his songs.
The 27-year-old singer, nattily dressed in a black suit, white shirt and striped tie, appeared for sentencing on charges of possessing heroin, cocaine and cannabis.
Fans overflowed the public gallery at Thames Magistrates Court, and were reprimanded by the judge for being noisy.
Doherty pleaded guilty Aug. 18 to five charges stemming from arrests in April and August in which drugs were found in his vehicle and home and he was found with a crack pipe and a small amount of crack.
District Judge Jane McIvor on Monday deferred sentencing until Dec. 4, and told Doherty he would not go to jail if he adheres to his rehabilitation program, continues to be employed and commits no other offenses. She noted that he had recently passed drug tests for heroin and cocaine.
She also said Doherty's song "The Blinding" is a "good tune."
Before being whisked away by security, Doherty said he had "mixed feelings" about the judge's decision because he "wants to be trusted" and the clinic where he has been in rehabilitation is too expensive.
The singer gained fame with his previous band, the Libertines, and as the on-off boyfriend of supermodel Kate Moss. His drug habit gained international attention after a British tabloid printed pictures of Moss apparently using cocaine at a music studio where Doherty and his band were recording. Moss was not charged.
PITTSBURGH (AP) The Oscar-winning rap group Three 6 Mafia has asked a judge to dismiss a lawsuit filed by man who claims he was severely beaten at a concert when fans followed lyrics of the song "Let's Start A Riot."
An attorney for the group filed a motion last week in Allegheny County Court saying there is no "genuine issue of material fact" to the complaint. The lyrics are protected under the First Amendment, the motion said.
Ramone Williams claimed in his lawsuit that he was beaten during a concert at a now-defunct Pittsburgh nightclub on Aug. 26, 2003. Before the song was over, Williams alleges, he was thrown to the floor, hit with a chair, stomped on and kicked in the face. His injuries included a fractured jaw.
Williams, who was 19 at the time of the concert, won a default judgment against the club. It closed, and its former operators did not answer the complaint.
Three 6 Mafia, of Memphis, Tenn., won an Academy Award this year for the song "It's Hard Out Here for a Pimp" from the film "Hustle & Flow."
LONDON (AP) Some Paris Hilton fans may have got more or less than they bargained for when they bought her debut album.
Record chain HMV said Sunday it had pulled from shelves several copies of Hilton's "Paris" album that appeared to have been doctored by British graffiti artist and prankster Banksy.
The doctored version includes a topless image of the celebrity heiress, as well as a picture in which she sports the head of a dog. A sticker advertises the album's "hits" "Why am I Famous?" "What Have I Done?" and "What Am I For?"
Instead of Hilton's perky pop, the CD inside features 40 minutes of remixed music by a musician identified only as "DM."
Banksy's spokeswoman, Jo Brooks, said the artist had hidden 500 copies of the altered album in record stores across Britain.
"They're very subtly done and do look like the original albums," Brooks said.
HMV said it had recovered seven copies of the Banksy version of the album from two stores in Brighton, southern England. The chain said it planned to auction off the copies.
Banksy, who has managed to disguise his identity despite his spreading fame, began by scattering subversive stenciled images across British cities, but has moved on to books and gallery shows. He has surreptitiously hung faux artworks in major galleries in New York, Paris and London.
VENICE, Italy (AP) Alfonso Cuaron doesn't believe his movie about a chaotic world set in 2027 in which humans can't procreate is pessimistic about the future.
"It's simply and open window on to the present of what we have in front of our eyes every day," Cuaron said Sunday, where his movie "Children of Men" premiered at the 63rd Venice Film Festival.
In the film, a former activist-turned-bureaucrat played by British actor Clive Owen agrees to help transport a miraculously pregnant woman to a sanctuary at sea, where her child's birth may help scientists save the future of humankind.
The movie is set in a violent, messy London plagued by warring nationalist groups. But "we were very concerned not to glorify violence, or the elements of violence," Cuaron said, which is why Owen's character, for instance, never carries a gun.
Cuaron's former movies include "Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban," "Y tu mama tambien," and "Great Expectations."
The film also stars Julianne Moore, Michael Caine and Claire-Hope Ashitey as the pregnant woman.
Owen said he agreed to take the part because of Cuaron.
"I really wanted to work with Alfonso," Owen said. "He is a highly original, super-talented director."
JACKSON, Miss. (AP) Talk show host Oprah Winfrey plans to be in her birthplace of Kosciusko to dedicate a state-of-the-art Boys & Girls Club she helped sponsor.
The estimated $5 million facility houses a gymnasium, computer lab and garden.
"We know how valuable her time is and happy that she is giving us a little of it to come down here," said Jimmy Cockroft, mayor of the city of 7,334.
Paul Powers, vice president of special projects for The Oprah Winfrey Boys & Girls Club of Kosciusko and Attala County, said the facility will be used mainly for after-school activities for boys and girls 5-18 years old. After homework is finished, children can participate in arts programs or take advantage of the building's gymnasium.
The facility should open in a few weeks.
Construction began in October 2004 on the 32,000-square-foot facility that was funded by The Oprah Winfrey Foundation, said Powers. The facility's garden will be used to teach children to grow their own food.
Children can prepare some of the food in a kitchen area, designed by Winfrey's personal chef, Art Smith, who also will be on hand for the dedication Monday. Powers said children will have access to audio and visual equipment to film themselves and other chefs preparing food. The footage could be made into DVDs and sold as a fundraiser, Powers said.
The project began in 1998, after the talk-show host visited Kosciusko to dedicate a Habitat for Humanity home she funded, Cockroft said. After meeting with the community, Winfrey decided that a Boys & Girls Club would be the most beneficial thing she could do for young people.
On the Net:
Oprah's Official Web Site: http://www.oprah.com
REYNOLDS, Ind. (AP) Tour buses carrying members of Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young stopped in a northern Indiana town to support turning it into "Biotown USA."
The rock group, whose touring vehicles have used alternative fuels for six years, made a detour Saturday on their Freedom of Speech '06 tour to visit the town.
The buses pulled into a new gasoline station in Reynolds that sells alternative fuels and filled up on B-20 a mixture of 20 percent biodiesel and 80 percent diesel fuel. Footage was shot during the stop for a VH1 documentary.
"This is a beginning, a start," Graham Nash said. "Someone has to lead us out of this dark hole of dependence on foreign oil."
Bandmate David Crosby agreed.
"I think it's much better to produce our fuel here and give our money to American farmers then it is to send it to Saudi Arabia where they don't even like us," Crosby said.
State officials hope to break ground in November on a $10 million "technology suite," a privately funded center that will house equipment needed to turn everything from municipal trash to farm waste, hog manure and even town sewage into energy.
Correction




In stories Sept. 5, The Associated Press reported that Oprah Winfrey helped sponsor a Boys & Girls Club in her home town. The story should have said that Winfrey's foundation was the sole funder of the club, and she has donated $1 million to its operations. At the dedication Monday, Winfrey also urged community members and others to help support it.
Correction-Date: September 7, 2006
 Load-Date: September 5, 2006

 

End of Document
