

People in the News - Correction Appended
The Associated Press
September 5, 2006 Tuesday 6:52 PM GMT

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 1751 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: BEIJING 
Body




Chinese director Lou Ye has been banned from making movies in his home country for five years because his film was screened at Cannes in May without government approval, state media said.
The main Xinhua News Agency said Monday that Lou's movie "Summer Palace" would be confiscated and income from it seized. The film is a sexually explicit love story set against China's pro-democracy protests of 1989, which led up to the brutal Tiananmen Square crackdown.
Producer Nai An was also banned from making films in China for five years, Xinhua said.
Lou attended the premiere of the film at the Cannes Film Festival in southern France in May without first obtaining permission from China's State Administration of Radio, Film and Television.
Hong Kong media reported earlier this year that Chinese authorities had ordered local news outlets not to report on "Summer Palace" at Cannes. The film has not been approved for release in China.
In 2000, when Jiang Wen's "Devils on the Doorstep" showed at Cannes without government approval, censors kept the movie off the Chinese market, angering investors. And in 1997, China pulled Zhang Yimou's film "Keep Cool" from the festival competition.
Lou has said his film is somewhat autobiographical.
"I wanted to tell this story, because in 1989 I was myself a student at Peking University and was involved in a romance," he said earlier this year, referring to similarities among him and the characters in "Summer Palace."
The student protests ended with the crackdown at Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989, which left hundreds if not thousands dead. Chinese authorities still maintain the demonstrations were counterrevolutionary riots.
KOSCIUSKO, Miss. (AP) Oprah Winfrey's new youth club opened Tuesday, a day after she returned to her native Kosciusko to dedicate the 32,000-square-foot facility she helped sponsor.
"What I have learned is you dream a big dream and you hand that dream over to a power that is greater than yourself. I call it God," Winfrey told some 400 people at the dedication of The Oprah Winfrey Boys & Girls Club of Kosciusko Attala County.
"God can dream a bigger dream for you than you can dream for yourself," the 52-year-old host of "The Oprah Winfrey Show" said at Monday's dedication.
Winfrey thanked her father, Vernon Winfrey, and her grandmother Hattie Mae Lee, who raised her in Kosciusko.
"She used to say to me she hoped I would grow up to be able to get some good white folks, like she had some good white folks," Winfrey said of her grandmother. "What I don't think she ever imagined is that I would grow up and get some good white folks working for me."
Winfrey said her father understood the importance of education.
"Had I not been sent to live with my father I would probably have five or six kids by now," she said, shortly before turning to him. "Without you my life would not have happened nor would this have happened, so thank you, Mr. Winfrey."
The center, which was built through Winfrey's foundation, expected to welcome 225 children this week.
On the Net:
The Oprah Winfrey Show: http://www.oprah.com/
LOS ANGELES (AP) Ronald Isley has been sentenced to three years and one month in prison for tax evasion.
The 65-year-old R&B singer was also ordered to pay $3.1 million in back taxes to the Internal Revenue Service, said Assistant U.S. Attorney Robert Conte.
Isley was convicted last year of five counts of tax evasion and one count of willful failure to file a tax return.
During Friday's hearing, defense attorney Anthony Alexander argued that Isley should receive probation instead of prison time because of complications from a stroke and a recent bout with kidney cancer.
Alexander also pleaded for leniency because Isley had been attempting to pay down his IRS debt.
"He's been liquidating assets, he's been doing the things that he can," Alexander said.
But U.S. District Judge Dean Pregerson declined to sentence Isley to less time than called for under federal guidelines.
"The term serial tax avoider has been used. I think that's appropriate," Pregerson said.
During the trial, prosecutors said Isley, lead singer of The Isley Brothers, avoided paying taxes numerous times in the past three decades and declared bankruptcy after the IRS seized his yacht, cars and other property in 1997.
He was discharged from bankruptcy four years later, but then did not file tax returns for the years 1997 to 2001 and in 2002 did not sign his return and failed to pay all taxes due.
Alexander argued during the trial that "unfortunate circumstances" such as the deaths of two of Isley's accountants made him unable to get records together and pay taxes during the years that led to the criminal charges.
Isley's recent albums include a 2003 collaboration with Burt Bacharach titled, "Here I Am," and The Isley Brothers album "Body Kiss."
He was expected to be sent to a Bureau of Prisons hospital facility.
HONG KONG (AP) It was an actress' worst nightmare come true.
While promoting her new movie at the Venice Film Festival this week, Zhang Ziyi who starred in Ang Lee's "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" wore the same low-cut polka-dot dress that actress Xu Jinglei wore two months ago.
"Zhang Ziyi, who occasionally fumbles her wardrobe, wore the same outfit that Xu Jinglei wore at a press conference earlier," said a story in the Oriental Daily News. "What a big strategic mistake."
Xu wore the dress identified by the Apple Daily newspaper as an Emporio Armani design at a press conference in Hong Kong in July to promote the upcoming "Confession of Pain."
"Zhang Ziyi wears Xu Jinglei's old dress," said the headline in Apple Daily's entertainment section Monday.
The newspaper also ran a photo of Zhang chatting with Zhou Xun, a fellow actress from her new movie, "The Banquet," inserting a comiclike dialogue box that jokingly quotes Zhou as saying, "Poor you, wearing someone's old dress."
"The Banquet" was shown at the Venice Film Festival on Sunday.
Zhang rose to international fame after appearing in "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon." Her Hollywood credits also include "Rush Hour 2" and "Memoirs of a Geisha."
Meanwhile, Zhang has confirmed that she will appear in an upcoming movie about Hua Mulan, the Chinese folk heroine that inspired the 1998 Disney animated film "Mulan."
"`Hua Mulan' has basically been confirmed, but it won't be filmed quickly because it involves many factors like the script, and other actors," Zhang was quoted as telling the Chinese news Web site Sina.com. The transcript of the interview was posted Tuesday.
LOS ANGELES (AP) Two years after "Frasier" ended its 11-season run, David Hyde Pierce says he's in no rush to get back on another TV show at least while he can still sing and dance.
Pierce has found a new home doing musical theater something he was only able to dabble in during hiatuses in the hit sitcom's run.
"I love doing this. I don't envisage going back to television any time soon," Pierce told AP Radio in a recent interview. "But I also know there's going to come a time when I'm not going to have the energy to be able to do musicals."
Pierce performed last year in the hit Broadway musical "Monty Python's Spamalot," inspired by the film comedy "Monty Python and the Holy Grail."
He's now starring in "Curtains," a musical comedy by John Kander and Fred Ebb that opened in July at the Ahmanson Theater at the Music Center in Los Angeles. The show's run ends Sunday, but producers expect to take the play to Broadway with the same cast.
Pierce plays homicide detective Frank Cioffi in "Curtains," which is set in 1950s Boston. His character sets out to investigate the mysterious death of the production's leading lady, even as the rest of the players emerge as suspects or are themselves killed.
The 47-year-old actor said performing eight shows a week and meeting the physical demands of dancing are bound to take a toll.
"I love that now, but eventually my legs will fall off and I'll have to rethink my strategy," Pierce said. "And maybe television will come calling then."
MEXICO CITY (AP) Lila Downs, whose new CD is titled, "The Cantina, Between Drinks," said Mexicans are looking for a little escape from the political unrest in the country's capital and in her native state of Oaxaca.
"We want to take refuge in the cantinas," Downs said Monday during an appearance to promote her new CD and an upcoming concert at Mexico's National Auditorium.
Downs, who has a Mexican mother and an American father, criticized the Oaxaca state government for being heavy-handed with protesters, who have camped out in Oaxaca City's main plaza for three months and taken over radio and TV stations to call for the governor's resignation.
"There's an excess of power going on," said Downs, whose youth was split between Minnesota and the small town of Tlaxiaco, where she began singing rancheras as a girl.
The performer called on both sides to reach a peaceful agreement in Oaxaca, which has seen its vibrant tourist industry suffer because of the unrest.
"I hope it's resolved soon," said Downs, who now lives part-time in New York.
She said Mexico is going through a difficult time politically as the July 2 presidential election remains in dispute and supporters of the leftist candidate have taken over a main boulevard in the capital.
"I feel very proud to be Mexican, but on the other hand, I'm sad for the divisions and hate that are occurring between us," she said.
On the Net:
Lila Downs: http://www.liladowns.com/
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) The new Miss Universe blew kisses to thousands of admirers along the route of a homecoming parade through the capital, stopping traffic as she traveled from San Juan's international airport on a float shaped like a tiara.
Zuleyka Rivera Mendoza, wearing a short green dress and waving a Puerto Rican flag, was greeted by the governor and first lady of the U.S. Caribbean territory Monday as she stepped off a flight from New York. Since the contest in July, she has been touring countries including Japan and Indonesia.
The procession ended with an outdoor concert where Rivera wearing a yellow suit, the day's third wardrobe change danced onstage with Gov. Anibal Acevedo Vila and well-known Puerto Rican artists, including salsa band El Gran Combo.
"I'm proud to be Puerto Rican, to represent Puerto Rican women and to represent the Puerto Rican people," the 18-year-old aspiring actress said at a news conference.
"Your triumph is the triumph of Puerto Rico because you represent the best of Puerto Rico," said Acevedo.
On the Net:
Miss Universe: http://www.missuniverse.com/
Correction




In stories Sept. 5, The Associated Press reported that Oprah Winfrey helped sponsor a Boys & Girls Club in her home town. The story should have said that Winfrey's foundation was the sole funder of the club, and she has donated $1 million to its operations. At the dedication Monday, Winfrey also urged community members and others to help support it.
Correction-Date: September 7, 2006
 Load-Date: September 6, 2006

 

End of Document
