

People in the News
The Associated Press
July 21, 2006 Friday 4:53 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 1255 words
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




Naomi Campbell was arrested after allegedly causing a disturbance outside a former boyfriend's home, a British newspaper reported Friday.
The Sun tabloid said police were called after the 36-year-old supermodel arrived at the house in the early hours of July 10 seeking the return of some belongings.
The Metropolitan Police confirmed that a 36-year-old woman had been detained for breach of the peace after "reports of a woman causing a disturbance" in London's tony Belgravia district.
She was released without charge several hours later. Police retrieved the belongings, "and the woman left the scene," police said in a statement. "No further action will be taken."
Campbell's representatives did not immediately return calls Friday.
Campbell has a history of volatile behavior. Last month the London-born model appeared in a New York court to face allegations that she threw a cell phone at a maid in a dispute over a missing pair of jeans.
In 2003, the supermodel was sued by a former administrative assistant who said Campbell had thrown a phone at her during a tantrum.
In August 2004 Campbell and her maid came to blows, with the worker claiming the supermodel slapped her across the face. Campbell accused maid Millicent Burton of instigating the fight.
WELLINGTON, New Zealand (AP) Japanese carmaker Nissan said Friday it has pulled a raunchy commercial starring "Sex and the City" actress Kim Cattrall from New Zealand television after complaints over its content.
Cattrall, who played the sex-obsessed, promiscuous Samantha Jones in the HBO series, appears in the ad purring with excitement about Nissan's new sedan.
"Why didn't you tell me it was so big? I just wasn't prepared for it," she gushes. "The all-new Nissan Tiida makes you feel really, really, really good inside."
She tells a salesman: "Ah! That was amazing. Absolutely fabulous! I mean the great body and the way you moved it."
The double entendre-laced ad was approved by New Zealand's Television Commercial Approvals Bureau before broadcast. Nevertheless, it sparked a number of complaints to the Advertising Standards Complaints Board.
Nissan said it was taking the commercial off the air before the board could consider the objections.
"We made this decision in the interest of self-regulation and in response to public feedback," Nissan said in a statement.
New Zealand generally is regarded as liberal when it comes to TV ad content, with no complaints reported about the Australian tourism campaign "Where the bloody hell are you?" which was banned in the UK.
NEW YORK (AP) Beyonce Knowles and her mother, Tina Knowles, have been sued for $1.5 million by a former business associate who claims they neglected to compensate him for securing a deal involving their House of Dereon clothing line.
Greg Walker, CEO of Icon Entertainment, filed the breach of contract lawsuit Wednesday in New York State's Supreme Court. He said the mother-daughter duo, who design the street-chic collection, hired him in August 2003 to help land endorsement and licensing opportunities.
According to Walker, he brokered a $15 million deal for the 24-year-old singer and her mother to create the clothing line with Wear Me Apparel, Corp., a clothing manufacturer. So far, he claims he's collected only $25,000 from Knowles' mother.
"Beyonce and Tina Knowles agreed on the terms of our business relationship, but have failed to properly compensate me for reasons unknown to me," Walker said in a statement. "I just want to receive my fair share and move on with my business."
When contacted by The Associated Press, a spokesman for House of Dereon declined to comment on the lawsuit.
Walker is also suing Wear Me Apparel for neglecting to pay the remainder of his fee. The company has paid him $85,000, he claims.
Corey Silverstein, the Wear Me Apparel's executive vice president, declined to comment.
On the Net:
http://www.houseofdereon.com
TRAVERSE CITY, Mich. (AP) Jeff Daniels will receive the first Michigan Filmmaker Award at Michael Moore's second annual Traverse City Film Festival.
"We couldn't think of a better person to give our first award to," Moore said Thursday. "Jeff is not only one of the best American actors working today, he is also an exceptional independent filmmaker who has chosen to reside here in Michigan."
Daniels will be on hand to accept the award at the July 31 opening of the festival. He will also join a panel discussion with other filmmakers the next morning, Moore said.
Daniels, 51, established the Purple Rose Theatre Company in his hometown of Chelsea, Mich.
He received critical acclaim last year for his role as the pretentious Bernard in "The Squid and the Whale" and also appeared in George Clooney's "Good Night, and Good Luck" as former CBS news head Sig Mickelson. His other films include "Dumb & Dumber," "Terms of Endearment" and "The Purple Rose of Cairo."
He also directed and starred in "Escanaba in da Moonlight," an offbeat comedy about deer hunting filmed on location in its namesake Michigan town.
On the Net:
http://www.traversecityfilmfestival.org
SAN DIEGO (AP) David Arquette was in such a rush to show footage of his directorial debut, "The Tripper," at Comic-Con that he lost the tape on the way to the convention center.
"I'm so embarrassed," the 34-year-old actor told the throng of fans who gathered to see the film at the comic convention. "It'll probably be on the Internet tonight."
To appease the crowd, Arquette acted out a few lines from the movie, which he co-wrote.
He described it as "a political horror film about a person who's obsessed with Ronald Reagan and he attacks hippies at an outdoor music festival."
The film stars Paul Reubens, Jason Mewes, Lucas Haas, and Thomas Jane, who became Arquette's brother-in-law last month when he married actress Patricia Arquette. Arquette plays a small part, a "redneck local" named Muff. His wife, Courteney Cox Arquette, makes a cameo appearance.
The actor said he chose to direct a horror flick because he loves the genre and "you can also get into sex, drugs and rock n' roll more than you can the other genres."
He is still seeking distribution for the independent production, which he called a "passion project."
"The fact that I've completed this, that it's in a box and done, is the biggest accomplishment for me," he said.
Unfortunately for his fans, that box is lost somewhere in the San Diego Convention Center.
BURBANK, Calif. (AP) "The Tonight Show" had an unscripted moment when a woman from the audience walked up to Colin Farrell as he was talking to host Jay Leno.
The 30-year-old actor quickly escorted her off stage and asked for security.
"She said something to Colin Farrell that no one heard, then he took her by the elbow, led her off stage, asked the cameramen to turn off their cameras and asked for security," said Molly Mattaini, who was visiting from St. Paul, Minn.
"Tonight Show" spokeswoman Tracy St. Pierre said Thursday's incident won't be broadcast.
The woman was detained by a Burbank police officer hired by NBC to provide security, but was not arrested "at the request of NBC," said police Sgt. Carlos Gomez.
Farrell's publicist did not immediately return messages left after business hours.
Mattaini, 16, said Farrell returned to the stage and apologized to the audience.
"He sat back down and said, 'My first stalker,' and Jay Leno said, 'Welcome to celebrity,'" Mattaini said.
Farrell remained on stage the rest of the show, appearing "very calm, very collected," Mattaini said. Later in the evening, he appeared at the premiere of his new movie, "Miami Vice."
 Load-Date: July 22, 2006

 

End of Document
