

People in the News
The Associated Press
October 20, 2006 Friday 5:06 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 2222 words
Dateline: NASSAU Bahamas
Body




An attorney for Anna Nicole Smith said Friday the reality TV star has no intention of submitting her six-week-old daughter for paternity testing as demanded by an ex-boyfriend.
A lawsuit filed by photographer Larry Birkhead seeks a court order for Smith to bring the girl to California for a DNA test. A birth certificate lists her current boyfriend, Howard K. Stern, as the father of Dannielynn Hope Marshall Stern.
"Why should she accommodate him at all?" asked attorney Wayne Munroe in an interview with The Associated Press. "I don't think she's going to run her life according to his wishes."
An attorney for Birkhead, Debra Opri, has said she is traveling to the Bahamas this weekend to take depositions from Smith and Stern on Monday. Opri could not immediately be reached for comment.
Munroe said he has not been notified of a request to meet his client. "It doesn't sound like they've complied with the law," he said.
On Thursday, Smith buried her 20-year-old son Daniel, who died while visiting her in a Nassau hospital three days after the baby was born on Sept. 7.
A private examiner said Daniel Smith died of an accidental lethal combination of methadone and two antidepressants. The results of official toxicology tests and a police investigation have not been publicly released.
A hearing on Birkhead's lawsuit in Los Angeles Superior Court has been scheduled for Oct. 26. If he is confirmed to be the father, he could receive visitation or custody rights and possibly a large amount of child support.
Anna Nicole Smith, who moved to the Bahamas while pregnant with her daughter and obtained permanent residency, plans to stay indefinitely, Munroe said.
"What has happened with her son has only made her more inclined to seek tranquility and peace," he said.
LONDON (AP) Renowned astrophysicist and best-selling author Stephen Hawking is getting a divorce, according to media reports Friday.
British newspapers reported he and his wife, Elaine, have lodged divorce papers at Cambridge County Court.
Graham Jones, the office manager at the court, said he could not comment on family cases.
Hawking's university spokeswoman, Judith Croasdell, declined to comment on the reports.
Hawking has been married to his wife, Elaine, 55, for 11 years. Hawking divorced in 1991 from his first wife, Jane, with whom he has three children.
The mathematics professor at the University of Cambridge has done groundbreaking work on black holes and the origins of the universe, making him one of the best-known theoretical physicists of his generation.
The 64-year-old scientist, author of the best seller "A Brief History of Time," is almost completely paralyzed by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease. He communicates with the help of a voice synthesizer, which was designed by his wife's previous husband.
DETROIT (AP) Bob Seger and Anita Baker will sing before the first two games of the World Series at Comerica Park, the Detroit Tigers announced.
Seger, a Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductee, will perform "America the Beautiful" before Game 1, scheduled for Saturday night. Tigers greats Al Kaline and Willie Horton, accompanied by club owner Mike Ilitch, will throw out the ceremonial first pitch.
Baker, a Grammy Award-winning singer and songwriter, will perform the national anthem before Game 2 on Sunday. Hall of Famer Sparky Anderson, manager of the 1984 World Series champion Tigers, will throw out the ceremonial first pitch.
Members of the Boys & Girls Clubs of Southeastern Michigan will deliver the first game ball to the mound before each game. They will be accompanied to the mound before Game 1 by longtime Tigers broadcaster Ernie Harwell and before Game 2 by Alan Trammell, MVP of the 1984 world champion Tigers and Detroit's manager from 2003 to 2005.
LOS ANGELES (AP) "Desperate Housewives" heartthrob Dougray Scott has proposed to his girlfriend, actress Claire Forlani.
Scott, who plays Teri Hatcher's new love interest Ian Kavanaugh on this season of ABC's "Desperate Housewives," proposed to Forlani last month in Los Angeles, according to People magazine.
"I feel so lucky to have met her. She's an amazing actress and human being. I'm very happy," Scott told the magazine.
The pair reportedly met 10 months ago.
Calls to representatives for both actors were not returned Thursday.
Film and TV credits for Forlani, 35, include "CSI: New York" and 1998's "Meet Joe Black." On the horizon for Scott is the World War II film "The Cone Gatherer" with Emily Watson.
ROME (AP) Gina Lollobrigida, once dubbed "the most beautiful woman in the world" after the title of one of her movies, is getting married to a man 34 years her junior.
"We wanted for this to happen sooner, but it just wasn't possible," Lollobrigida, 79, told The Associated Press in a telephone interview Thursday, without elaborating.
Lollobrigida said she met her husband to be, Javier Rigau y Rafols of Barcelona, Spain, at a party in Monte Carlo and the two have been dating for 22 years.
The diva, who in Italy is affectionately nicknamed "La Lollo," told Spain's Hola' magazine, which first reported her wedding plans, that "I have always had a weakness for younger men because they are generous and have no complexes."
The two will get married in New York before the end of the year, Lollobrigida said from her house in Rome.
It will be her second wedding. She was divorced in 1971 from Yugoslavian-born doctor Milko Skofic.
News of her wedding plans was featured prominently in Italian newspapers.
"They have gone mad here in Italy. I didn't think I was going to set off such a bomb," Lollobrigida said bashfully.
Highlights of her career include "The World's Most Beautiful Woman" in 1955, Golden Globe-winner "Come September," costarring Rock Hudson, "Trapeze," "The Hunchback of Notre Dame," "Bread, Love and Dreams" and "Never So Few."
GLENDALE, Calif. (AP) Haley Joel Osment pleaded no contest to misdemeanor drunken driving and drug possession charges resulting from a July accident in which he crashed his car into a mailbox.
Superior Court Judge John Doyle on Thursday sentenced the 18-year-old actor to three years probation and ordered Osment to spend 60 hours in an alcohol rehabilitation and education program, as well as attend at least 26 Alcoholics Anonymous meetings over a six-month period.
Osment, who didn't attend the court hearing, also must pay $1,500 in fines.
The actor's attorney, David Wood, entered the no contest pleas on his client's behalf to one count each of misdemeanor driving under the influence and misdemeanor marijuana possession. Two other charges another misdemeanor DUI and a vehicle code infraction were dropped by prosecutors.
Messages left for Wood and Osment's publicist were not returned Thursday.
Osment fractured a rib and injured his shoulder when he crashed and flipped his 1995 Saturn in La Canada Flintridge on July 20. No one else was in the car, which hit a mailbox mounted on a brick base.
Authorities said the actor's blood-alcohol level was measured after the accident at .16 percent, twice the legal limit.
Osment's movie credits include "The Sixth Sense," in which he was nominated for an Academy Award, and "Pay It Forward." He recently finished work on the film "Home of the Giants."
KUMAMOTO, Japan (AP) Charlie Daniels has done two tours of Iraq. Last year, he was in Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan and Kuwait. He's done Bosnia, Kosovo, Korea.
Make no mistake, Daniels always goes armed and ready with a fiddle.
"I feel very beholden to our troops," the country music legend told The Associated Press at his hotel in this southern Japan city, where he was preparing to headline an annual country music festival. "If you can get me there, I'll go."
That's generally easier said than done. The helicopter flying Daniels took on fire in Kirkuk, Iraq in April. And when a sand storm diverted him from reaching the Baghram Air Base just outside of Kabul, Kyrgyzstan, he played an impromptu show at another nearby base.
"Our drummer was pounding on a garbage can," Daniels said. "But that's kind of the beauty of these things. You just get a bunch of guys together and do it. In some of these places, they haven't had any kind of entertainment for 11 months. We had about 200 people come out."
"They are starved for anything American," Daniels added of the troops. "They are a great audience."
Daniels, who lives on a ranch just outside Nashville, Tenn., continues to play about nine months out of the year, much of that on the road. After Japan, he was to travel on to South Korea to entertain the U.S. troops there. He'll turn 70 on Oct. 28 while he's in China.
In his four-decade career, he has sold somewhere around 20 million records, including the quadruple platnum Fire in the Mountain album. Daniels won the best country singer Grammy in 1979 for the No. 1 hit single, "Devil Went Down to Georgia."
He says he is now working on his 47th album, as well as a duet collection that will include Dolly Parton, Travis Tritt, Gretchen Wilson and Earl Scruggs.
POMONA, Calif. (AP) A couple who claim they were hurt when struck by Paris Hilton's Mercedes-Benz, driven by her cousin in Baldwin Park, must take their lawsuit against the heiress to another court, a judge ruled.
Ivan Alvarez and Monica Delgado suffered less than $25,000 in damages during the May 2004 accident, Pomona Superior Court Judge Robert A. Dukes said Thursday. He transferred their suit to the West Covina Superior Court that handles lesser claims.
Alvarez and Delgado sued Hilton for personal injury, negligence and property damage in May. Both had asked for $250,000 in damages.
Hilton was not present in court for the hearing and was not in the car during the crash.
According to the suit, Hilton's cousin, Brooke Ashley Brinson, was behind the wheel when it rear-ended another car on the San Bernardino Freeway. That car then hit a car carrying Alvarez and Delgado, the suit claimed.
NEW YORK (AP) "Grey's Anatomy" star T.R. Knight says he's gay, but hopes people don't consider that "the most interesting part of me."
The 33-year-old actor addressed rumors of his sexuality in a statement to People magazine Thursday.
"I guess there have been a few questions about my sexuality, and I'd like to quiet any unnecessary rumors that may be out there," Knight's statement read. "While I prefer to keep my personal life private, I hope the fact that I'm gay isn't the most interesting part of me."
Knight plays Dr. George O'Malley on the popular ABC drama. A former stage actor, his television credits also include "CSI: Crime Scene Investigation" and "Law & Order: Criminal Intent."
Knight's "Grey's Anatomy" character, a bumbling, puppy-eyed surgeon, has long been in love with Dr. Meredith Grey (Ellen Pompeo).
On the Net:
http://abc.go.com/primetime/greysanatomy
http://www.people.com
ST. LOUIS (AP) Bill Clinton wasn't among the standing-room-only crowd at Chuck Berry's 80th birthday celebration, but the former president sent birthday greetings to the rock 'n' roll pioneer.
"I've loved your music for nearly half a century," Clinton wrote in a letter read aloud before Berry came on stage at Blueberry Hill nightclub Wednesday night.
"Our lives are richer, our music more memorable, and our artistic legacy greater because of you, and I'm glad to have this opportunity to salute you for truly being an American treasure."
Berry, the duck-walking, guitar-playing rock legend who defined the music's joy and rebellion in such classics as "Johnny B. Goode," "Sweet Little Sixteen" and "Roll Over Beethoven," performed tirelessly for over an hour at the venue where he has given concerts one night a month for the last 10 years.
Berry moved the crowd to its feet with his classic "duck walk," a stage move he patented in a 1956 performance in New York that's been imitated by rockers ever since.
Berry's band included his daughter Ingrid on harmonica, and his son Charles Edwards Berry Jr. on guitar. Back-up musicians who have performed with him over the decades took their turns playing with him on stage.
In a surprise appearance, Aerosmith guitarist Joe Perry also joined Berry on stage.
On the Net:
http://www.chuckberry.com
LOS ANGELES (AP) Jaime Pressly got a surprise last weekend an engagement ring.
The blond bombshell, known for her Emmy-nominated role as the trash-talking Joy on NBC's "My Name is Earl," is engaged to her boyfriend, DJ Eric Cubiche, her publicist confirmed Thursday.
"It's a beautiful ring," publicist Megan Pope said. "They've been dating about a year and a half, and have been friends for nine years."
She did not comment on Pressly's wedding plans.
The 29-year-old actress' previous credits include "Not Another Teen Movie" and "Joe Dirt."
NEW YORK (AP) Sofia Coppola is seven months pregnant with a baby girl, her spokesman, Robert Garlock, confirmed.
The father is boyfriend, Thomas Mars, the singer for the French rock band Phoenix. People magazine reported the pregnancy in May.
The 35-year-old director was married to director Spike Jonze for four years before filing for divorce in 2003. Coppola, the daughter of Oscar-winning director Francis Ford Coppola, won a best screenplay Academy Award for 2003's "Lost in Translation," which she also directed.
Coppola's latest film, "Marie Antoinette," opens Friday. It stars Kirsten Dunst as the 18th-century French queen.
Phoenix's critically acclaimed third studio album was released in May.
 Load-Date: October 21, 2006

 

End of Document
