

ROAD TO TURIN: A visitor's look at the changing Olympic host city
The Associated Press
January 27, 2006 Friday 10:49 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 1647 words
Byline: By HOWARD FENDRICH, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: TURIN Italy
Body




Rome draws visitors to the Colosseum and the Vatican. Florence boasts Michelangelo's David and Brunelleschi's Duomo. Venice's serene canals and Murano glass are famous the world over.
And Turin? It seems to be known mainly as the home of Fiat even as car factories are shuttered in "the Detroit of Italy" and the Holy Shroud which isn't on public display.
Locals hope that's all about to change.
As the Feb. 10-26 Olympics approach, Turin ("Torino" in Italian) is a city in transition, working to rebuild itself and revamp its image to become a true tourist destination for its art, its architecture, its Alps. Signs explaining ongoing projects carry the slogan, "Torino, always on the move."
"For the last 50 years, Torino was a one-company town. It was a manufacturing town. It never had visitors, other than businessmen," said Valentino Castellani, president of the Torino Organizing Committee and a former mayor of the city. "One of the reasons we decided to bid for the Olympics was to change Torino's identity."
The best way to start getting a feel for that identity might simply be to follow the Italian tradition of taking a post-meal "passeggiata" a stroll especially because new pedestrian zones have been created during the recent spree of construction.
On a clear day, what's most striking is that snowcapped mountains are visible from the center of the city. Imagine: Amid all the bustling big-town trappings of blaring horns and smog and graffiti, one can peer down a broad boulevard as the sun sets and find the dark, jagged beauty of the Alps sitting against a backdrop of light pastels.
That alone might be worth the trip. Ah, but there's so much more.
Streets are lined with about 10 miles of porticoes, regal archways that protect passers-by from precipitation, offer shade in the summer and surround walkers with the bittersweet aroma of roasting chestnuts in the winter.
A walk through Turin is a walk through history, with Baroque churches not far from Art Nouveau homes, remnants of ancient Rome a stone's throw from modern glass-dominated architecture, and the latest runway fashions displayed in Via Roma's shop windows right around the corner from straight-out-of-the-1600s Piazza San Carlo.
It's tough to go far without coming upon one of the city's piazzas. The cobblestone-afoot squares serve as gathering places, outdoor shopping malls, taxi and bus hubs. and havens for sitting at a cafe to sip a cappuccino Italians drink those coffee-and-frothy-milk concoctions in the morning only or a "bicerin" (bee-cheh-REEN), a local treat with layers of coffee, milk and melted chocolate that you won't find in Rome or Florence.
Turin is also the birthplace of "gianduiotti" (john-doo-YOT-tee), triangular, hazelnut-flavored chocolates that come in gold-colored wrappers; the Pastiglie Leone anise-flavored candies that come in pocket-sized boxes, and "grissini" (gree-SEE-knee), or breadsticks, which come in all sizes. And look for the bite-sized deserts found in a cafe or pastry shop, "pasticceria" (pahs-teach-eh-REEYA).
For a sense of where things stand in Turin these days, as good a place as any is on the steps of the city's main cathedral, which houses the Shroud of Turin (not scheduled for public display until 2025).
Look in one direction across Piazza San Giovanni, and there's a brand new hotel with a sign reading "Opening soon." Look in another, and there's a rather large construction site, replete with bulldozers, cranes, scaffolding, bricks and dirt. Lots of dirt. A sign describes a theater that dates to B.C. times and notes that this is the future site of an archaeological park, combining a grassy picnic area with cleaned-up ruins. The sign also notes that "work is expected to be finished in December 2005."
Well, not quite.
All sorts of work has been or is being done to beautify or modernize the city, from the airport to the subway to the main train station to outdoor skating rinks to the abandoned part of town that was razed to make way for the Olympic Village. The red-and-black, $60 million Palavela, site for short track speedskating and figure skating next month, was brilliantly built under the existing roof of an abandoned 1961 building. The new structure might eventually host a second branch of the city's impressive Egyptian Museum.
An abandoned stadium was refurbished for the opening and closing ceremonies of the Olympics and later is to be used by at least one of Turin's two professional soccer clubs. On the other hand, about two blocks away are the dilapidated remnants of another old soccer stadium. All that's left are concrete steps leading nowhere; where once there were stands now are burned-out mo-peds and other garbage among some grass and weeds.
But that appears to be the exception. Emblematic of the changing face of Turin is the Lingotto, a former Fiat factory turned into a complex with a mall, hotels, a U.S.-style multiscreen movie theater and a supermarket. Indoors, a spiraling ramp from the ground to the top floor allowed Fiat cars to reach the test track that's still on the roof, which also has one of the city's fanciest restaurants, La Pista. Set aside the art gallery with works owned by Fiat's Agnelli family and the building is pretty much your average suburban mall.
It's a fitting facelift, given Fiat's declining fortunes in recent years (you'll see plenty of Toyotas zip around Turin) and the fascination with most things American (the mall's food court has a place peddling frozen yogurt that proudly declares its products "Made in U.S.A." this, in a country known for its wonderful ice cream).
The roof offers a view of the city, but there are better places to get a grasp of Turin's layout and beauty. One is atop a hill that can be climbed on foot, across the Po River from the center of town. It's called Monte dei Cappuccini (the name has nothing to do with cappuccino drinks; it comes from the cappuccino monks whose monastery is attached to the 16th-century church), and it's home to the National Mountain Museum.
One can see across Turin, straight to the Alps. For a supposed center of industry with a reputation for being gray, Turin is actually rather green, with trees lining the streets and miles and miles of parks. That's part of the reason Turin recently was ranked the fourth-best place in the country to raise children.
At the bottom of the hill is the Gran Madre Church, built to celebrate the return of King Vittorio Emmanuele I after Napoleon's departure. Most of the city's buildings are the same height, which makes it easier to see the Alps. But piercing the skyline is the Mole Antoneliana, a 530-foot tall structure built in the 1800s and originally intended to be a synagogue.
It's a must-see for two reasons: It houses the National Museum of Cinema, and has a glass elevator that soars through the main hall to a panoramic viewing deck. It's a wonderful way to see Turin's orange, yellow and beige buildings and their uniform, rust-colored rooftops.
At the heart of the city is the Piazza Castello ("castello" means "castle"), where about 8,000 people will gather each night during the Olympics for medal ceremonies and concerts. The Palazzo Reale ("royal palace"), built in the 1600s, is there, as are Turin's opera house and the Palazzo Madama, which has a museum and recently reopened after a 17-year restoration (though it will be closed to the public during the Olympics). Even the outside of the Palazzo Madama provides a taste of time: The rear towers date to the Roman Empire, the main building was constructed in the 13th century and the ornate facade was added in the 1700s.
Peeking out from behind Palazzo Reale is the steeple of the Duomo. A short walk from there is the Porta Palatina, the old Roman walls that date to the first century. Beyond that is the Porta Palazzo, a chaotic open-air market billed as Europe's largest.
There's food on offer there, or a quick meal can be had in other spots around town with a slice of pizza "pizza a taglio" (ah-TAHL-yoh) or a sandwich while standing at the counter of a coffee bar or sliced ham with pieces of cheese at a wine bar. Turin also features what locals call a "piola," a small, informal restaurant for simple meals.
When it comes to serious dining, though, it's best to seek out a restaurant that specializes in fare from Turin's region, which is called Piedmont (which means "at the foot of the mountain"). And be sure to wash it down with a glass of one of the region's red wines, such as Barolo, Barbera or Dolcetto.
Places highly touted by locals include Tre Galline, Savoia and Spada Reale all in the heart of town and Ristorante Mina, a short walk from the Lingotto.
Be sure to try Piemontese fare, such as "agnolotti" (ahn-yo-LOHT-ee) tiny ravioli or "bollito misto" (bohl-LEET-toe ME-sto) boiled meats or sample one of the variety of dishes with truffles. Many places offer pastas with melted "castelmagno" (kah-stel-MAN-yo) a local cheese.
Anyone venturing the 60 miles or so toward Sestriere, the skiing resort developed by the Agnellis, should make a detour for Ristorante Du Grand-pere in the quaint village of Champlas Jancier (note the French influence; the border's about 10 miles away). About 3 miles outside Sestriere, the 60-seat restaurant in what used to be a house has exposed wood beam ceilings and windows that provide spectacular views of the snow- and pine-dotted Alps.
If you're lucky enough to get a table (reservations are a must at 39-0122-75-59-70), try the "ghenefle" (geh-NEF-leh) a potato-and-cheese dish served in a ceramic pot or the "brasato di cervo" (bra-ZA-toe dee CHAIR-voe) sliced deer meat. They serve the largest breadsticks you're ever likely to see.
"We'll do our best, in our own small way, to be good hosts to the people coming from far away for the Olympics," said Adriana Miletto, who runs the restaurant with her brother. "We all know this is a big chance for the area."
 Load-Date: January 28, 2006

 

End of Document
