

Rowling's 'The Tales of Beedle the Bard' to be auctioned for charity
The Associated Press
December 13, 2007 Thursday 12:51 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 483 words
Byline: By THOMAS WAGNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




A book of fairy tales created, handwritten and illustrated by J.K. Rowling was being auctioned by Sotheby's on Thursday and was expected to sell for more than $100,000.
The buyer will get one of only seven copies of "The Tales of Beedle the Bard," which is leather bound with silver mounts.
Rowling, whose Harry Potter books have sold nearly 400 million copies and been translated into 64 languages, wrote the Beedle tales after finishing the seventh and final work in her famous series: "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows."
"'The Tales of Beedle the Bard' is really a distillation of the themes found in the Harry Potter books, and writing it has been the most wonderful way to say goodbye to a world I have loved and lived in for 17 years," Rowling said in a statement.
She said the other six copies of the Beedle books have been given to people who were closely connected to the Harry Potter collection.
On Tuesday, the author read some of the Beedle book's five wizardry tales at Sotheby's in London at a public event aimed at promoting Thursday's auction.
The auction will benefit The Children's Voice, a charity co-founded in 2005 by Rowling and Emma Nicholson, a member of Britain's House of Lords. It campaigns for children's rights cross Europe, especially in Eastern Europe. The group focuses particularly on helping children and teenagers who grow up in institutions, often in what many activists regard as unacceptable conditions.
Rowling, 42, said the proceeds of the auction will "help institutionalized children who are in desperate need of a voice."
She has said she will produce no more Potter books, although she still is involved in the making of Potter films.
Sotheby's also planned to auction a painting by Winston Churchill Thursday that was expected to sell for several hundred thousand dollars.
Churchill gave "Marrakech" to President Harry S. Truman in 1951, and it has remained in the Truman family ever since. The work, which shows a panorama of the Atlas Mountains in Marrakech, Morocco, was expected to fetch between $615,000 and $1 million.
The work is being sold by Truman's daughter, Margaret Truman Daniel, who had carried the painting herself from 10 Downing St. to the United States on behalf of her father.
Churchill, who painted as a pastime and gave away many of his works, served as Britain's prime minister from 1940-1945 and 1951-1955, while Truman was president from 1945-1953.
The two first met following the defeat of Nazi Germany, when Truman, Churchill and Soviet leader Josef Stalin met at the Potsdam Conference near Berlin in July 1945 to discuss the future of Europe.
Churchill's paintings have recently set auction records. His "Chartwell Landscape with Sheep" sold for $2 million in July, and his Moroccan scene entitled "View of Tinherir" fetched $1.3 million a year ago.
On the Net:
Sotheby's: http://www.sothebys.com
The Children's Voice: http://www.chlg.org
 Load-Date: December 14, 2007

 

End of Document
