

Samba! Rio wins right to host the 2016 Olympics
The Associated Press
October 3, 2009 Saturday 07:51 AM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 1324 words
Byline: By JOHN LEICESTER, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: COPENHAGEN 
Body




The country's president was blunt. "It is," Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva said, "Brazil's time."
And the International Olympic Committee agreed with him.
Snubbing Chicago on a chilly Danish evening of high drama, the IOC sent the 2016 Olympics to Rio, Brazil's bustling fun-loving but crime-ridden city of beaches and mountains, romance and slums.
President Barack Obama's appeal fell on deaf ears. Chicago was knocked out in the first round in one of the most shocking defeats ever handed down by the committee of former Olympians, sports administrators, royals and other VIPs.
They were wowed by Rio's enchanting sales pitch: some 400 million sports-mad people on a giant untapped and vibrant continent just yearning, hoping, that the Olympics finally might come to them.
Silva wept and Rio partied as only Rio can when the long-awaited announcement came.
"From the bottom of my heart I can say that this is the most exciting day of my life. I feel much more proud to be Brazilian," Silva said.
The IOC closed its eyes to the risks, the huge projected costs of the Rio Games, the concerns about how athletes will get around and where people will sleep, to focus on the reward of lighting the Olympic cauldron in one of the last corners of the globe yet to be bathed by its light.
The indignity suffered by Chicago was such it got just 18 votes despite long being considered a front-runner that some IOC members squirmed. Obama flew overnight from Washington to sell his adoptive hometown and its plans for Olympic competition on Lake Michigan's windy shores to the IOC. Mrs. Obama, with Oprah Winfrey and sports stars in tow, jetted in first and spent two days buttering up IOC members, an essential part of the secretive and unpredictable selection process.
IOC members seemed wowed, posing for photos with Michelle Obama and taking souvenir shots of the president with their mobile phones. But, in the vote, Chicago was shunned.
While blues legend Buddy Guy twanged "Sweet Home Chicago" in a promotional video the city played to the IOC, bad blood between the committee and its U.S. branch they've had flare-ups over revenue sharing and lucrative broadcasting rights proved to be a note of discord. IOC members said the slap to Chicago was more directed at the U.S. Olympic Committee than to the Windy City itself.
Chicago was dignified in defeat. Obama called Silva to congratulate him. But the nature of the loss still rang as a stinging anti-American rebuke. Close to half of the IOC's 106 members are Europeans.
"To have the president of the United States and his wife personally appear, then this should happen in the first round is awful and totally undeserving," senior Australian IOC member Kevan Gosper said.
French IOC member Guy Drut said "an excess of security" for the Obamas unsettled some of his committee colleagues. He complained that he'd been barred from crossing the lobby of his hotel for security reasons, and he grumbled that "nothing has been done" to resolve the financial disputes between the IOC and the USOC.
Of Obama's performance, Drut said: "He didn't do too much. Michelle Obama was exceptional."
"This morning the city was closed because of Barack Obama," he added.
In Chicago, there was bewildered silence when IOC president Jacques Rogge announced: "The city of Chicago, having obtained the least number of votes, will not participate in the next round."
On Rio's Copacabana beach, the party headed into the night.
Rio spoke to IOC members' consciences: the city argued that it was simply unfair that South America has never hosted the games, while Europe, Asia and North America have done so repeatedly.
"It is a time to address this imbalance," Silva told the IOC before it delivered its verdict. "It is time to light the Olympic cauldron in a tropical country."
The win was decisive: Rio beat Madrid by 66 votes to 32. Chicago got just 18 votes in the first round, with Tokyo squeezing into the second round with 22. Madrid was leading after the first round with 28 votes, while Rio had 26.
In the second round, Tokyo was eliminated with just 20 votes. Madrid got 29, qualifying it for the final round face-off with Rio, which by then already had a strong lead with 46 votes.
Madrid's surprising success in reaching the final round came after former IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch made a morbid appeal for the Spanish capital, reminding the IOC's members as he asked for their vote that, at age 89, "I am very near the end of my time."
Samaranch ran the IOC for 21 years before Rogge took over in 2001.
Beating three rich, more developed nations that had all previously held the games represented a giant, morale-boosting coup for Brazil, an emerging nation bounding up the ranks of the world's biggest economies but which still has millions of people living in poverty.
Like a football team before a big final, Rio's bid leaders and Silva held hands and had a silent prayer before walking out to deliver a flawless and impassioned presentation to the IOC. A bid official said Silva's last words of encouragement were "let's stay calm, and stick with our plan."
Brazil's central bank governor reeled off some impressive statistics about an economy predicted to be the world's fifth largest by 2016. The state governor pledged that taxes would not be raised to fund the games and played down the concerns about safety. Computer-generated bird's eye images of how venues will spread across the city, with sailing in the shadow of Sugar Loaf mountain and volleyball on Copacabana, provided the wow factor.
And Silva delivered the knockout.
"Among the top 10 economies of the world, Brazil is the only country that has not hosted the Olympic and Paralympic Games," he said. "For the Olympic movement, it will be an opportunity to feel the warmth of our people, the exuberance of our culture, the sun of our joy and it will also be a chance to send a powerful message to the whole world: The Olympic Games belong to all peoples, to all continents and to all humanity."
Silva, a bearded former union leader, disappeared into a huge group hug with the joyous Rio team after Rogge announced that the city had won. Football great Pele had tears in his eyes. Silva wept into a white handkerchief at a post-victory news conference. Brazil will now hold the world's two biggest sporting events in the space of just two years: in 2014, it is organizing the World Cup.
"There was absolutely no flaw in the bid," Rogge said.
Now, Africa and Antarctica are the only continents never to have been awarded an Olympics.
"We have sent out a message that we want to go global," IOC member Gerhard Heiberg said.
Obama held out the enticing prospect of a Chicago games helping to reconnect the United States with the world after the presidency of George W. Bush. He told the IOC that the "full force of the White House" would be applied so "visitors from all around the world feel welcome and will come away with a sense of the incredible diversity of the American people."
But the IOC's last two experiences in the United States were bad: the 2002 Salt Lake City Winter Olympics were sullied by a bribery scandal and logistical problems and a bombing hit the 1996 Games in Atlanta.
Former IOC member Kai Holm said the brevity of Obama's appearance he was in and out in five hours may have counted against Chicago.
"Too businesslike," Holm said. "It can be that some IOC members see it as a lack of respect."
IOC members said Asian voters may have banded together, at Chicago's expense, in the first round in favor of Tokyo, which offered reassurances of financial security, with $4 billion already banked for the games.
"The whole thing doesn't make sense other than there has been a stupid bloc vote," Gosper said.
Chicago can only rue what might have been.
And Rio ... well, let's samba!
AP Sports Writer Stephen Wilson in London, AP National Writer Nancy Armour and Associated Press writers Jan Olsen and Graham Dunbar in Copenhagen contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: October 4, 2009

 

End of Document
