

Shipping stocks follow the broader market down, analyst says a correction looms for the sector
The Associated Press
June 7, 2007 Thursday 1:44 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 473 words
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Shares of seaborne shipping companies traded down for a second consecutive day, pressured by concerns over interest rates on two continents and whether the stocks can maintain recent momentum.
The activity came amid interest rate concerns in the U.S. and Europe, which pushed the broader markets down for a second straight day. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke hinted Tuesday that signs of strength in the economy reduce the chances of an interest rate cut.
On Wednesday, Europe's Central Bank raised its key interest rate by a quarter of a percentage point to 4 percent, its highest level in six years. Stocks in Europe fell sharply on the news. Higher interest rates make everything from car loans to home mortgages more expensive.
Most shipping stocks also traded lower on Tuesday, partly because they followed the broader markets down but also because of comments from an analyst at Citigroup questioning whether tanker stocks can maintain their current momentum. The stocks are up 50 percent this year, according to John Kartsonas, but charter rates for crude carriers remain in line with 2006, and first-quarter earnings arrived below last year's levels. Given their lack of catalysts, Kartsonas thinks a 25 percent swoon could occur among the petroleum shippers if a correction takes place.
"We continue to believe that currently there is limited value in any of the tanker stocks we cover as valuations have reached unsustainable levels," Kartsonas said in a note to investors after the markets closed on Monday. "Even for the more short-term focused investors, current stock price levels should remain captive to momentum, and any change in psychology should lead to sharp downward adjustments, something that history has shown to be the rule rather than the exception in this sector."
Shares of Frontline Ltd., one of the world's largest publicly traded crude oil shippers and one of the few names in the sector to post gains on Tuesday, fell $2.04, or 4.4 percent, to close $44.32 on Wednesday, when the shares began trading ex-dividend of a $1.50 dividend payable June 22.
Shares of Teekay Shipping Corp., another big name in crude oil transportation, lost $2.18, or 3.5 percent, to $59.49. Shares of Overseas Shipholding Group Inc. retreated $2.17, or 2.7 percent, to $76.99, while shares of Ship Finance International Ltd. fell 62 cents to $30.25. Shares of Knightsbridge Tankers Ltd. gave up 76 cents, or 2.4 percent, to $30.49.
Among dry bulk carriers, which have witnessed stronger fundamentals in recent months and even helped prop up the broader maritime shipping sector as a whole, shares of Diana Shipping fell 44 cents to $22.29. Shares of DryShips Inc. lost 87 cents, or 2.1 percent, to $40.18, and shares of Danaos Corp. traded up a penny to close at $31.91. Shares of Eagle Bulk Shipping Inc., lost 18 cents to $22.46.
 Load-Date: June 7, 2007

 

End of Document
