

Slovenia welcomes euro, becoming the 13th country to adopt the common European currency
The Associated Press
January 3, 2007 Wednesday 2:50 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 476 words
Byline: By ALI H. ZERDIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LJUBLJANA Slovenia
Body




Andrej Belinec searched his pockets for some small tolars for a movie ticket after a cashier told him she simply doesn't have enough euros for change on his 10,000 tolar note about 42 euros.
Such glitches were expected in Slovenia as businesses opened on Wednesday and began trading in euros Slovenia's new currency as of Jan. 1 on the first working day of the New Year.
Both currencies are in use for two weeks, with customers allowed to pay in tolars or euros, but the government says people should receive change only in euros. That has put pressure on retailers to do some quick arithmetic converting 239.64 tolars to one euro.
"It costs 1,000 tolars; it's 4.19 euros," Marica Copic, 45, who sells wallets at an open market in downtown Ljubljana, answered swiftly when asked about one of them though it actually would be 4.17 euros.
Receiving five euros, she turned to an elaborate, newly made multi-drawer box one department for each of the euro coins to return the change.
Slovenes will have to get used to coins having real value, since tolar coins were practically worthless. Copic said wallets designed for coins are a hit at her stall.
The change also made shopping in grocery stores and shopping malls a bit slower, but no major problems were reported. Banks and ATM machines were operating normally.
The European Central Bank said euro was "successfully" introduced in Slovenia, adding the changeover "is proceeding well and fully according to plan."
Slovenia became the 13th nation using the single European currency after meeting the European Union's economic criteria. It is the only one of the 10 countries that joined the EU in 2004 to meet the requirements so far.
The government hailed it as the biggest national achievement since this former Yugoslav country of 2 million joined the EU. A recent EU survey showed two-thirds of Slovenes are happy to adopt the new currency, seeing it as a final step in becoming a part of the European mainstream.
The tolar was introduced in 1991, when Slovenia seceded from the Yugoslav federation.
Slovenia has traditionally been the most prosperous among the ex-Yugoslav republics. Its inflation is 1.9 percent, lower than Germany's. Economic growth was 4 percent last year, and expected to climb to 4.8 percent in 2006 well above the EU's average of 1.4 percent. The average monthly salary is 1,220 euros ($1,600).
The euro is not such a novelty for Slovenes they often travel and shop in neighboring Italy and Austria, which use the currency. And all prices and services in Slovenia have had dual pricing since March 2006.
However, Slovenes worry that conversion to the euro will make everything more expensive. The Consumers' Association has published a list of retailers who have already raised prices and has advised customers to avoid them.
The government pledged to monitor and control unjustified price hikes.
 Load-Date: January 4, 2007

 

End of Document
