

Some of the most open presidential races of the last century
The Associated Press
July 4, 2006 Tuesday 7:12 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 476 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




You may need a scorecard in 2008 to keep track of all the candidates. Neither party has an incumbent president or vice president running, creating the first wide-open race in decades. A look back at previous contests without an heir apparent:
1952:
President Truman decided well before the election that he would not run but didn't make it official until after his defeat in the New Hampshire primary. His vice president, Alben Barkley, entered the race but eventually bowed out because of criticism about seeking the presidency at the age of 74. Dwight D. Eisenhower, wooed by both political parties, allowed himself to be drafted as a Republican candidate as others in the GOP sparred over the nomination. Tennessee Sen. Estes Kefauver won New Hampshire and fared well in other primaries. Although the names of a dozen Democrats were placed in nomination, Illinois Gov. Adlai Stevenson secured the late backing of many party veterans and was nominated after several convention ballots. Eisenhower won a landslide victory over Stevenson.
1928:
President Coolidge announced in 1927 that he would not seek another term, opening the door to a competitive campaign. Herbert Hoover, a member of Coolidge's Cabinet, emerged as the GOP front-runner. Hoover had gained recognition for his work as Commerce secretary and for his efficiency in handling food relief for millions in Europe after the start of World War I. Democrats were determined to avoid the divisions of the past election and coalesced quickly around Al Smith, the governor of New York. Hoover won an electoral landslide over Smith.
1920:
The end of President Wilson's second term left a void for Democrats and Republicans. Public sentiment was running against the Democrats and Republicans had no clear front-runner. Warren Harding, a senator and newspaper publisher from Ohio, didn't appear to be a very strong candidate initially but emerged as a compromise choice. Democrats didn't rally behind any particular candidate, including some members of Wilson's Cabinet, and Ohio Gov. James Cox won the nomination after multiple convention ballots. Cox chose as his running mate a Democrat who would later reshape the party, assistant secretary of the Navy Franklin Delano Roosevelt. The Republicans won the election in a landslide.
1908:
When President Theodore Roosevelt left office, no one claimed the front-runner positions but dominant figures quickly emerged on both sides. Roosevelt pushed his Secretary of War, William Howard Taft, as the GOP candidate. Two-time Democratic presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan overcame a weak Democratic field to run for a third time. Taft easily defeated Bryan to claim the White House.
Sources: Lewis Gould's "Grand Old Party," Jules Witcover's "Party of the People; Gil Troy, author of "See How They Ran: The Changing Role of the Presidential Candidate."
 Load-Date: July 5, 2006

 

End of Document
