

SUMMIT NOTEBOOK: Stately limousines for the opening dinner, snazzy electric cars the rest of the day
The Associated Press
July 15, 2006 Saturday 7:50 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 578 words
Byline: By JUDITH INGRAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST. PETERSBURG Russia
Body




One by one, limousines flying the national flags of the Group of Eight countries pulled up Saturday and dropped off their passengers at an opulent palace or in the vicinity for a sumptuous opening dinner.
Dressed in their evening best, the G-8 leaders and spouses had to walk more than 200 steps to reach their hosts, Russian President Vladimir Putin and his wife, Lyudmila, who greeted them outside the Peterhof palace part of an ensemble famed as the Russian Versailles.
As the couples hoofed their way down the driveway, with some of the wives tottering on high heels, a stiff wind gusting off the nearby Gulf of Finland tousled hairdos and sent trouser legs flapping.
Guests wore brave smiles for the TV cameras recording it all.
U.S. President Bush and Putin used a less stately but more fun way to get to a joint news conference earlier in the day: sporty white electric cars without doors.
Putin drove the golf-cart-like car with Bush in the passenger seat, gripping the roof as the Russian president wheeled around a corner en route from the magnificent Konstantin Palace to the media briefing tent.
Putin carried a full load, with Bush in front and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Igor Ivanov, Putin's national security adviser, in the two rear seats.
The cars, made by DaimlerChrysler, continue a tradition started at the 2004 summit on Sea Island, Ga., when Bush supplied the leaders with electric cars to get around the island.
On the menu: Oil, oil and more oil.
Campaigners for the international aid agency Oxfam donned oversized masks caricaturing the eight leaders and, turning to a 6-foot-tall "menu" posted on a wall, pointed at their choices of fare:
Starter: Oil.
Main course: Oil.
Dessert: Oil.
"There's very little on the agenda apart from oil," said one, urging that poverty be made a priority during the three-day summit.
Bush found the perfect icebreaker for his meeting with Italian Premier Romano Prodi: He congratulated him for Italy's win in the World Cup.
"Congratulazioni, Romano," is how Italians described Bush's opening remarks to the Italian leader. "Grazie, George," Prodi smiled back.
Italy beat France to win the World Cup last Sunday in Berlin. The entire, soccer-crazed country erupted in joyous celebration and Prodi received the victorious Azzurri in a ceremony at his office in Rome after the team returned home.
At the summit, Italy received honors from the organizers. A sign at the offices of the Italian delegation at the media center said: "Italy. Champions' office."
Summit organizers prided themselves for their plan to ferry the swarm of journalists covering the event across the Gulf of Finland from their hotels to the Konstantin Palace, where the three-day summit is being held.
But the system broke down Friday, when hundreds lined up to board the last hydrofoil of the night. Organizers took more than an hour to scrounge up two more, saying that they were short of pilots.
And on Saturday morning, a hydrofoil full of journalists and their heavy computers, cameras and other equipment sputtered and stopped several hundred feet from the dock, sending an army of mechanics in blue overalls running into the hold to tinker with the coughing engine.
After about a half-hour of nervous waiting, another hydrofoil pulled up and journalists piled in to complete the trip across the water.
Associated Press writers reporters Alex Nicholson, Virginia Mayo, Alessandra Rizzo, Jean H. Lee and Martin Crutsinger contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: July 16, 2006

 

End of Document
