

Tax plan adds to the pressures on buyout firms
The Associated Press
June 18, 2007 Monday 2:12 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 2370 words
Byline: By HENNY SENDER
Body




Wall Street's new masters of the universe, hedge funds and private-equity partnerships, are suddenly finding the universe a less-hospitable place.
The latest pressure arose this week when the Senate Finance Committee decided to introduce a bill to tax financial-services partnerships that are publicly traded, as giant Blackstone Group soon will be, at the same higher rate paid by corporations.
This came as a private-equity industry group in the United Kingdom came under scathing attack in a committee of Parliament as it addressed the buyout firms' tax rate there, only about 10 percent.
Labor forces are exerting pressure as well. The big Service Employees International Union has started researching and blogging about corporate-buyout deals and issues, contrasting the players' lavish pay with union wages. In March, union officials from 15 nations called called on industrialized countries to toughen regulation of buyout groups.
All this comes amid a difficult shift in the financial climate. Some interest rates have been moving up, making a bit less affordable the business of taking companies private and loading them with debt.
"It feels like Tony Soprano, sitting in the ice-cream parlor with all this trouble brewing around him, and wondering where the bullet might come from," said Steven Miller, a managing director at Standard & Poor's Leveraged Commentary & Data.
On the stock side, shareholders of potential target companies have been growing more wary about selling to buyout firms, concerned about selling too cheaply to firms famous for flipping companies for lush profits.
No firm is a bigger symbol of the buyout boom than Blackstone, especially since it decided in March to do an initial public offering. That upended the rules of the game, in which these secretive partnerships privatize and restructure companies under the radar.
After Blackstone this week disclosed the value of its offering putting co-founder Stephen Schwarzman's stake at about $7 billion the AFL-CIO urged the Securities and Exchange Commission to require Blackstone to register as an investment company, similar to a mutual fund. That would require more disclosure, including investment strategy. The SEC has not yet ruled on the matter.
The Blackstone IPO plan married several current hot-button issues: tax equity, income inequality and an increasing demonization in some quarters of corporate America and high-paid executives.
As members of Congress look for ways to raise revenue to pay for other initiatives, private-equity and hedge-fund partnerships are tempting targets for some. Concerns about income inequality make taxing them more heavily them "a politically easy and very popular approach," said Charles Nathan, a partner with law firm Latham & Watkins in New York.
The Senate tax legislation, initiated by Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus, a Democrat, and Republican Charles Grassley, remains unsettled. The proposal on publicly traded partnerships is just the first to emerge from a wide-ranging inquiry by the Finance Committee into tax issues raised by the burgeoning alternative-investment industry.
The panel continues to consider an issue with far bigger implications whether to raise the taxes that fund managers pay on their 20 percent or more share of future profits, known as "carried interest." This is a big part of these managers' compensation and is taxed at the capital-gains rate of 15 percent, not at individual income-tax rates of up to 35 percent.
A few hours before the senators announced their plan Thursday, a festive atmosphere prevailed at the Pierre Hotel in New York as Blackstone officials were telling potential IPO investors about the firm's prospects. Each table had a white floral arrangement and the walls were adorned with giant letters "BX," the planned trading symbol. As Mr. Schwarzman was about to speak, his cellphone rang. He then the crowd he had just become a grandfather of twins, according to attendees.
When asked about a possible change in tax rules on Thursday before the Senate committee acted, Mr. Schwarzman dismissed the prospect. Blackstone had been mounting an intense lobbying effort against the idea of taxing publicly traded partnerships at a higher rate. But the committee rebuffed the lobbying effort, with a bill that would require public partnerships that make money from managing assets or providing investment advice to pay corporate income tax.
Blackstone would be exempt from the higher taxes for five years, as would the only alternative investment firm already public in the U.S., Fortress Investment Group LLC. Still, the prospect of an eventual higher tax rate, coupled with the political scrutiny sure to come to a public firm, may diminish the appetite for Blackstone's heavily anticipated IPO.
Shares of Fortress tumbled almost 7 percent Friday as investors digested details of the proposed tax change. One investor said that because Fortress already trades at an expensive multiple of earnings and doesn't have much of a dividend, there would be few bargain-hunters to step in.
Jeff Arricale, who runs a financial-stock mutual fund for T. Rowe Price Group Inc., said of the tax initiative, "You would go from taxing a company's earnings at a much lower rate to doubling it or more, and that could mean a big hit to earnings." The prospect of tax changes, he said, "is not to be dismissed."
As private-equity firms begin to go public, small investors become able to invest. Lawmakers could respond to pressures to protect those investors and urge the Securities and Exchange Commission to step up disclosure requirements for buyout firms.
An immediate complication facing the firm is financial. The debt used to finance these deals has become a bit more expensive relative to Treasurys, a sign of creeping risk-aversion by the lenders who finance the deals.
Other segments of the credit markets are stumbling. This week, a pair of hedge funds run by Bear Stearns Cos. had to liquidate holdings of bonds backed by subprime mortgages because of turmoil in that market. And UBS AG, the Swiss bank, shut down its Dillon Read Capital Management hedge fund last month, partly because of losses in the mortgage-bond market. It is possible that risk aversion in one market, such as mortgage-backed bonds, could spread to others, though it hasn't on a large scale yet.
In one example of the impact of all of this, real-estate firm Tishman Speyer Properties and Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. a few weeks ago lowered their offers for Archstone-Smith Trust, an apartment giant, citing "adverse changes in the debt markets."
In addition, banks that have showered buyout firms with generous terms are starting to push back. Some are becoming uncomfortable making short-term "bridge" loans to the buyout groups. These loans allow the buyout shops to pounce on a deal in short notice, but they stick the banks with all the risk should a deal falter.
The fuse to Thursday's bomb was apparently lit back in February shortly after Democrats took control of Congress. That's when Fortress launched its public offering, stirring heavy press coverage of big payouts and drawing more scrutiny from the new leaders on Capitol Hill, who came in hungry to find new revenues to pay for new spending plans.
Senate Finance aides started researching more an issue that had, until then, been largely unfamiliar to them, and stumbled on some scathing accounts in the tax trade press about the advantages of the Fortress deal. Sen. Baucus soon after told a reporter that he was giving new scrutiny to tax treatment of hedge funds and private equity "because it's in the news so much. ... There's an awful lot of money there."
Some tax lobbyists say the Senate's new attention may have been linked, in a complex way, to a central part of the party's plan to attack income inequality: raising the minimum wage. To get that through a closely divided Senate, Democrats needed some Republicans, who insisted any minimum-wage increase be paired with tax breaks for affected small businesses.
Sen. Baucus of Montana, new chairman of the Finance Committee, and his predecessor Sen. Grassley, an Iowa Republican, attached a provision to pay for those by boosting taxes on executives' deferred compensation. The idea didn't make it into law. It wasn't seen as raising much revenue about $800 million in a decade and drew complaints from a cross-section of companies affected.
But it prompted questions from some private-sector tax experts, who told the Senate staffers they felt the congressional scorekeepers were probably underestimating the revenue that could be raised, because the huge packages private-equity and hedge-fund managers were making were bound to yield more revenue.
That's often how tax policy gets set on Capitol Hill. Low-paid tax committee staffers can't keep up with industry trend. They rely on tips from the private sector, driven by unclear motives perhaps to curry favor with aides, perhaps just as a favor, perhaps driven by a desire to nick a competitor. Whatever the motive, the result was a more detailed look at a secretive industry that tax aides had barely studied before.
Then, Blackstone announced it was planning to go public. Immediately, other firms started to wonder if they should follow suit even as some fretted that the IPO would make private equity a target for politicians.
Blackstone's public-offering document, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, gave Capitol Hill aides a detailed document to dissect and help them in their education on the private-equity world and exactly how lucrative it is.
What followed through the spring was a series of discussions between committee aides and Blackstone representatives about private equity in general and the Blackstone IPO in particular. Blackstone had as its lobbyist Wayne Berman, a former official in the first Bush administration. In April, Senate Finance aides invited Blackstone representatives to a face-to-face meeting in the Longworth Office Building that is used by the Joint Tax Committee, the body that provides official estimates of tax proposals.
The company's outside lawyers explained the structure and flow of money in the IPO they were proposing, and answered aides' questions, in a highly technical, informational conversation. Several follow-up telephone calls between the aides and Blackstone came later.
While committee aides were asking about both the tax treatment of carried interest and the partnership structure, over time they appeared to focus increasingly on the latter. As Finance staff pored over the offering documents, they asked questions of the Blackstone representatives that the Blackstone agents said they couldn't answer because they were being asked for inside information. They said they could only talk about what was in the offering document.
As the discussions continued, the aides grew worried that other firms would soon go public in the way Blackstone had. Hence the rush to get a bill out this past week.
Now, Blackstone is caught in a political battle that will require all its connections. Mr. Schwarzman has been building a higher profile for himself in Washington, serving as chairman of the board of trustees of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. The firm's longtime senior partner, Pete Peterson, is a former Nixon administration Commerce Secretary.
That may not be enough, however. Blackstone hasn't spent heavily on campaign contributions. According to the Center for Responsive Politics, the firm didn't rank among the top 20 contributors in the finance, real-estate and insurance sector in the 2006 campaign. Blackstone employees gave just $183,750 for that cycle, compared with, for example, $1.1 million from Merrill Lynch. Unlike industries like telecom that have huge lobbying shops, the private-equity industry formed its advocacy group only a few months ago.
Congress could act quickly on the tax measure. Speculation swirled Friday that the sponsors may even try a long-shot bid to do so as soon as next week, perhaps by attaching it to an energy bill slated to move through the Senate then.
For all the political excitement behind the measure, private-equity backers profess confidence that they can ultimately defeat the measure.
For one thing, Republicans still hold great sway in the closely divided Senate, and, through a filibuster, could kill the measure by requiring backers to gather a super-majority of 60 votes to end debate. While most lawmakers largely remained silent on the complex proposal Friday, a spokesman for one Republican South Carolina Republican Sen. Jim DeMint said the bill "appears problematic, and we need to take a long look at this legislation before we rush to pass it."
Even where Democrats will come down on the bill remains unclear. One of them, House Ways and Means Chairman Charles Rangel, has spoken positively about the bill even though it could hurt constituents in his state of New York. Yet for all their populist rhetoric, many top Democrats have remained largely silent on the taxation of private-equity and hedge funds. Many have ties to the private-equity industry, and raise significant money from those firms.
Among presidential candidates, New York's junior Democratic Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton and Sen. Chris Dodd of Connecticut hail from states that rely heavily on the financial industry. A Clinton spokesman said she "believes there are broad concerns surrounding private equity in relation to the rest of the market that need to be examined and she is evaluating this and other proposals."
One candidate silent through Friday afternoon was former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards, the most outspoken populist of the field. He worked before the campaign at Fortress. At a Democratic debate in April, he was asked about hedge funds, and responded with less than hostility. "They play an enormous role in how money moves in this country," he said. "And I think those people in New York who work in financial markets understand in some ways at least what can be done, and can play a significant role in trying to lift people up who are struggling."
Kara Scannell, Michael Aneiro, Jason Singer, Paul Glader, Randall Smith and Gregory Zuckerman contributed to this article.
 Load-Date: June 19, 2007

 

End of Document
