

The whereabouts of the potential veep picks
The Associated Press
August 20, 2008 Wednesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 455 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




The prospective running mates of Democrat Barack Obama and Republican John McCain focused on their day jobs or chores at home Wednesday.
Obama, the Democrat, is expected to choose his running mate in the coming days. Republican rival McCain is considering announcing his as early as next week. Here's a look at the whereabouts of their possible choices for vice president:
THE DEMOCRATS:
 Virginia Gov. Tim Kaine was part tourist, part cheerleader for economic development near the state's Atlantic Coast while Obama campaigned in two Virginia cities 200 miles to the west. Kaine dismissed all questions about issues other than state business. He led about a dozen members of his cabinet and key state agency chiefs on a walking tour of Fort Monroe.
 Sen. Joe Biden spent the day in Delaware, where reporters have begun to gather outside his house. The senator left his home Wednesday morning with a load of brush in the bed of a white Ford pickup truck, telling reporters he was going to the dump. He returned about 2 1/2 hours later, saying he was going to be working on his property throughout the day and would have no further comment.
 Kansas Gov. Kathleen Sebelius kept a normal work schedule Wednesday and continued to duck questions about whether she'll be Obama's choice for vice president. "I don't have any idea," Sebelius said before a ceremony at Fort Riley, Kan.
 Indiana Sen. Evan Bayh spent Wednesday working at his home in Washington, D.C., and took his 13-year-old twin boys, Nick and Beau, to a sports camp for the day, said spokesman Eric Kleiman. He said Bayh had no public events on his schedule and had no plans of returning to Indiana until after the Democratic National Convention.
THE REPUBLICANS:
 Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty stuck close to home Wednesday. He started his day at a fundraiser for Sen. Norm Coleman of Minnesota and later appeared at a state Capitol news conference to sign a proclamation supporting a campaign against world hunger and preventable disease.
 Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney was in Boston on Wednesday. A spokesman said the former presidential contender would be making a series of radio station call-ins at the request of the McCain campaign.
 Connecticut Sen. Joe Lieberman, an independent who caucuses with Democrats and is said to be on McCain's short list, is meeting this week with leaders in Georgia, Ukraine and Poland. He left Tuesday and is expected to return to Washington on Thursday night.
 Tom Ridge, a former Pennsylvania governor who was the country's first Homeland Security secretary, worked in the morning at his Washington, D.C., consulting office and then spent the afternoon with his family, said Michele Nix, his spokeswoman. Nix said he had no public events.
 Load-Date: August 21, 2008

 

End of Document
