

The eternal survivor, Berlusconi on the verge of comeback in Italy vote
The Associated Press
April 10, 2008 Thursday 5:40 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 942 words
Byline: By ALESSANDRA RIZZO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME 
Body




At 71, Silvio Berlusconi has a pacemaker and his perma-tanned face is pinched by plastic surgery.
He has been plagued by criminal trials, conflict of interest accusations and headline-making gaffes. During two previous stints as prime minister he defied public opinion by sending troops to Iraq and passing laws that critics say kept him out of jail.
And yet, as his political buddies Tony Blair and George W. Bush look to their place in history, the flamboyant billionaire appears poised for a political comeback in elections Sunday and Monday.
How does he do it?
Beyond the fabled charisma and the showmanship, the cruise ship crooner-turned media magnate-turned political phenom strikes a profound chord with many Italians because he embodies many of their own aspirations, foibles, passions and flaws.
They enjoy his down-to-earth, roguish charm, and his glamorous lifestyle is their Italian Dream. His married life has played out in passionate language in the national press. And if rule-bending is something of a national art in Italy, Berlusconi is the master.
"He's a gifted communicator, he's a gifted demagogue, he has extraordinary personal skills, a sense of humor, he's a real gifted entertainer," says Professor John L. Harper at John Hopkins' School of Advanced International Studies in Bologna. "So I think people see him as an anti-politician."
As such, his platform a classic (some say incoherent) mix of lower taxes and heavy investment not unlike that of his rival Walter Veltroni on the center-left has become a secondary concern.
He may no longer be Italy's richest man he was demoted to third among Italians on the latest Forbes magazine list but he's still the entrepreneur who created a media empire worth $9.4 billion that, along with public broadcaster RAI, dominates TV fare for the nation of 58 million.
"Berlusconi looks to many Italians like a can-do person, a man who does not come from politics, who is self-made, who created a financial empire and who therefore has the expertise, the competence, the spirit and the energy to get his country back up," said Pietro Grilli di Cortona, a political science professor at the Roma Tre university.
Berlusconi is proud of his wealth and not afraid to show it off. He plays it to his advantage, arguing that if he can build a great business he can build a great Italy, too.
Yet his last term as prime minister, a record-breaking five years, ended with the economy mired in zero growth.
Berlusconi is dismissive when not outright contemptuous of career politicians a popular pose in a country that shows little respect for its leaders.
Never mind that he himself has been a politician for the past 15 years since a huge nationwide corruption investigation called "Clean Hands" wiped away most of the ruling class and opened the way to new blood.
Since then, he has been tried repeatedly in cases linked to his Milan-based business interests, on charges ranging from bribing public officials to illegally funneling millions of dollars to political parties.
He has either been acquitted sometimes thanks to laws passed by his own government or seen cases against him expire under the statute of limitations. He has always maintained his innocence, claiming he is the victim of a conspiracy of left-leaning magistrates.
Never one to wax modest, he said at the time of his leap into politics he was the "chosen one" the only person who could save Italy.
Yet, his performance during his last stint, in 2001-06, was a disappointment.
He started out promising to put his business savvy at the service of the country and deliver a "new economic miracle." But critics said his partial liberalization of the labor and pension systems, among Europe's most inflexible, was too timid especially for a self-professed champion of free markets with a comfortable parliamentary majority.
There were highly unpopular decisions such as sending 3,000 troops to Iraq over the street protests of thousands of Italians and moments that exposed him to ridicule, such as revelations of his plastic surgery and hair transplant. He courted controversy when he compared a German politician to a Nazi camp guard or said, shortly after 9/11, that Western civilization was superior to Islam.
But he also insisted that Italy's international profile had been raised, not least thanks to his personal friendship with Bush, Britain's Blair and Russian President Vladimir Putin.
And five consecutive years in power despite a brief midterm resignation and some cabinet shuffles delivered a sense of stability to a country that has had more than 60 governments since World War II.
Eventually, dissatisfaction with his economic performance cost Berlusconi the 2006 election. He had already begun withdrawing troops from Iraq, and his successor, leftist Romano Prodi, finished the job.
But Prodi's unpopular government lasted less than two years, and Berlusconi returned to centerstage, saying he had a job to finish.
In soundings taken two weeks ago, before a pre-election ban on polling took effect, Berlusconi was ahead by 5 and 9 percentage points enough, he says, to guarantee him victory and a hold on both houses of parliament.
He has campaigned against a government he says has ruined the country, and vows to put "Italy back on its feet."
For someone who has likened himself to Napoleon and even Jesus, he now sounds uncharacteristically low-key. The man who once promised miracles now focuses on how to clear Naples' streets of an overspill of trash so huge that it has become a matter of Europe-wide concern.
But Berlusconi's self-belief remains boundless. He would gladly give up politics, he says, except that "I'm still indispensable."
 Load-Date: April 11, 2008

 

End of Document
