

The year's best books: a shelf of standouts
The Associated Press
December 26, 2008 Friday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1526 words
Byline: By MARK LASSWELL, The Wall Street Journal
Body




The Journal's first book review in 2008 discussed Newsweek reporter Daniel McGinn's "House Lust," about America's real-estate binge before the lust went bust, and today's paper carries a review of John W. O'Malley's "What Happened at Vatican II." Between those bookends, our reviewers introduced Journal readers to hundreds of titles on a kaleidoscopic array of subjects: perfumers' search for the next big fragrance; 19th-century English governesses; the Second Life online community; investing in exchange-traded funds; Barack Obama; the quest for a workable jetpack; the threat of nuclear terrorism; dubious treatments for autism; Napoleon's campaign in Egypt; and biographies of Emily Post, Bernard Malamud, Samuel Johnson and Richard Nixon. All this, plus dozens of reviews of literary fiction, mysteries and books for children and gastronomes. Over the course of the year, though, certain books seemed to make an especially strong impression on the Journal's reviewers. Here are the dozen we found the most memorable:
It would be a mistake to call Richard Price a crime writer, because he is "more Balzac than Hammett," according to Kyle Smith, the New York Post film critic who reviewed Mr. Price's "Lush Life." Though ostensibly about the investigation of a fatal shooting during an armed robbery, Mr. Smith said, the story shows the author's gift for "taking a few blocks of New York City pavement and jackhammering through its social strata." Mr. Price has written other fine books, including "Clockers" and "Ladies' Man," but "never before has he used his gifts together (dry comic observation, blunt dialogue, vivid characterization) as expertly as he does in this wholly credible, therefore unsparingly funny, portrait of Gotham in our own decade. It's 'Bonfire of the Vanities' 2.0."
Bret Stephens, who writes Global View, the Journal's foreign-affairs column, lauded Edward Lucas's "brilliantly reported, morally unblinkered" study of what has become of Russia under the leadership of Vladimir Putin. In "The New Cold War," Mr. Lucas, a reporter and former Moscow bureau chief for The Economist, analyzed the sinister rumblings coming out of the Kremlin in recent years and the West's largely indifferent or ineffectual responses and the author came away convinced, Mr. Stephens says, that so far Russia is winning. "Mr. Lucas's advice amounts to building oil and natural-gas pipelines that circumvent Russia and otherwise maintaining a united and vigilant attitude toward the reawakened Bear. That may be the most anyone can do. For bringing the nature of the threat so vividly to light, Mr. Lucas has performed a public service."
According to reviewer Paul Boutin, "The Pixar Touch" David A. Price's history of the animation studio behind such winning children's fare as "Toy Story," "The Incredibles" and "Wall-E" offered "unprecedented detail about the notoriously press-shy company's workings." But Mr. Boutin also admired the book's many "lessons for business people and creative artists alike. Chief among the lessons is that no one invents anything in isolation and that getting fired can turn out to be a promotion." Mr. Price recounted how John Lasseter, a central figure in Pixar's creative rise, was once fired as a computer animator by Walt Disney Co. but then in 2006 returned in triumph, after Disney bought Pixar, as the chief creative officer of the combined Disney and Pixar animation studios. "Redemption, after all," Mr. Boutin noted, "is essential to any story well told."
Florence Nightingale may be widely regarded as synonymous with selfless nursing, but the real story of the woman who aided British soldiers during the Crimean War in the 1850s is much less well known. Mark Bostridge's biography, "Florence Nightingale: The Making of an Icon," makes a superb corrective, according to reviewer Alexandra Mullen. The book is "a dense and compelling biography of a woman who is rightly venerated but often too simplistically understood," Ms. Mullen wrote. "Mr. Bostridge transforms the simple outline of her life into a full and masterly portrait."
In preparation for writing "The Strongest Tribe," former Marine infantry officer Bing West "traveled with 60 U.S. and Iraqi battalions and interviewed 2,000 soldiers. ... His chronicle is full of eyewitness accounts of nerve-wracking patrols, improvised-explosive detonations and small-unit gunfights," wrote reviewer Jonathan Kay, the managing editor for comment at Canada's National Post newspaper. The resulting book about the implementation of the American troop surge in 2007 provided a bracing counterpoint to the usual scornful portraits of the war in Iraq, Mr. Kay said. The book "deserves to be read as an authoritative testament to this historic achievement."
British writer Mark Archer hailed the publication of Jackie Wullschlager's biography of Marc Chagall, "the first critical study of the artist since 1962 and the first one informed by access to the archive of letters, photographs and works of art owned by Meret Meyer Graber, Chagall's granddaughter." The book acknowledges that the artist's reputation was damaged as he produced too much unremarkable work late in life (he died in 1985, at age 97), the reviewer said, but "Chagall" is "an overdue re-appreciation" of his career. "It is an outstanding biography, combining psychological nuance with critical insight, and its narrative energy does full justice to the drama of Chagall's extraordinary life and times."
In "Cost," a novel about the havoc that drug abuse inflicts on the lives of addicts and their loved ones, Roxana Roberts is "both lyrical and unsentimental" in her depiction of a family undone by a grown son's descent into heroin addiction, observed reviewer Frances Taliaferro. "Here begins the 'violent commotion' too familiar to anyone who has ever cared about an addict: shock, resistance, guilt, ignorance, anger, sadness, resignation, hope, despair." Ms. Roberts has produced a work, the reviewer said, that is "richly honest and humane."
Books exploring the rocky marriage of Abraham Lincoln and Mary Todd "have ranged from the implausible to the crackpot," noted Andrew Ferguson, reviewing Daniel Mark Epstein's "The Lincolns: Portrait of a Marriage." Readers might understandably approach the book "ready to cringe," Mr. Ferguson added, but "they will come away lost in admiration at a masterly literary and historical performance." Mr. Epstein shows sympathy for both the moody Abe and his "chatty, sociable wife," and in the process "has written what may be the best Lincoln book in a generation."
John R. Bolton, the former U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, welcomed the publication of Michael Soussan's "Backstabbing for Beginners," a behind-the-scenes account of the Oil for Food scandal that undermined the U.N.'s economic sanctions against Saddam Hussein's Iraq in the 1990s and irrevocably tainted the tenure of Secretary General Kofi Annan. Mr. Soussan went to work at the U.N. as a true believer and, despite his disgust over what he witnessed, remained convinced of the ultimate benefits of what he calls "international governance." That allegiance, Mr. Bolton wrote, is what "makes his reporting on the U.N. so devastating."
In his review of "Dear American Airlines," novelist Scott Morris was taken with the debut fiction effort by Jonathan Miles. The novel takes the form of a long, unhappy letter to the airline by one Benjamin R. Ford, whose flight has been canceled and who is sitting, stewing, in Chicago O'Hare. "Slowly we begin to learn about the real sources of Ford's misery," Mr. Morris wrote, "in a long, thoroughly amusing and ultimately poignant howl about life's injustices."
The combination of a historian's erudition and a journalist's exceptionally sharp eyes and ears distinguished Max Hastings's "Retribution: The Battle for Japan, 1944-45," according to reviewer Peter R. Kann. Mr. Hastings's account of the conflict in the Pacific Theater late in World War II is compelling throughout, Mr. Kann said: at times lyrical and moving, at other times painful. "To the broad sweep of military events," he wrote, "Mr. Hastings adds myriad human stories culled from interviews, letters, diaries and memoirs, and he does not hesitate to offer his own keen analysis along the way."
Although James Rosen clearly aimed to restore the reputation of former Attorney General John Mitchell, the biographer's portrait of the Watergate figure "is no whitewash," said Jonathan Karl, who is now the senior congressional correspondent for ABC News. Instead, "The Strong Man" is the admirably balanced product of two decades of labor by Mr. Rosen, who worked "Ahab-like," Mr. Karl wrote, "as both detective and investigative reporter." The biography "cuts through conflicting accounts of Mitchell's life, tapping into previously unpublished documents ... and presenting a thoroughly documented but vibrant portrait of a complicated and deeply flawed public figure." It is also the sort of achievement that makes us welcome the new year, eager for the fresh evidence it will bring that talented writers have been hard at work.
Mr. Lasswell is the Journal's deputy books editor.
 Load-Date: December 27, 2008

 

End of Document
