

The 2006 Pulitzer Prize winners
The Associated Press
April 17, 2006 Monday 11:36 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1927 words
Body




The 2006 Pulitzer Prizes for Journalism:
PUBLIC SERVICE: The Times-Picayune of New Orleans and The Sun Herald of south Mississippi
The Sun Herald won for "providing a lifeline for devastated readers, in print and online, during their time of greatest need," the Pulitzer board said. The paper published every day during the storm and its harrowing aftermath, even though more than 60 Sun Herald employees lost their homes and almost no one escaped without serious property damage.
The Times-Picayune won for "heroic" and "multi-faceted" coverage of the hurricane and its aftermath. The board noted that the paper made exceptional use of its resources to serve the city, even after the staff had to evacuate the newsroom. Staff members did not return for more than six weeks but did not miss a day of publishing, though the paper published only online in the first days after Katrina. The Times-Picayune was not named as a finalist for public service, but the board voted to award it the prize along with The Sun Herald, said prize administrator Sig Gissler.
BREAKING NEWS REPORTING: Staff, The Times-Picayune
The Times-Picayune won for what the board said was courageous and aggressive coverage of Hurricane Katrina that overcame "desperate conditions facing the city and the newspaper." Reporters and photographers went out on bike, boat and foot to get the story. Staffers lost homes and possessions and worked in conditions akin to a "war zone," the paper said in its entry package. Reporters dodged looters and powered their computers from car batteries, while copy editors, designers and production staffers worked from far-flung makeshift offices.
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING: Susan Schmidt, James V. Grimaldi and R. Jeffrey Smith of The Washington Post
The Post reporters were honored "for their indefatigable probe" of lobbyist Jack Abramoff coverage that exposed corruption and sparked reform efforts, the board noted. With a series of stories throughout 2005, the paper delved into Abramoff's web, including his ties to then-House Majority Leader Tom DeLay. The Post was the first to show that the funding for a DeLay trip to London and Scotland in 2000 came mostly from Abramoff's clients.
EXPLANATORY REPORTING: David Finkel of The Washington Post
Finkel won for his "ambitious, clear-eyed case study" of the U.S. government's attempt to bring democracy to Yemen. Finkel set out to follow a U.S. program to make a country "more democratic." He chose a country other than Iraq but one that was an active front in the war on terrorism, "so that the stakes were not merely theoretical," the paper said in its entry. The series, "Exporting Democracy," was intended to give readers a better sense of the challenges facing the United States as it "presents its traditions to the rest of the world," the paper said.
BEAT REPORTING: Dana Priest of The Washington Post
Priest won for her coverage of secret prisons and the government's counterterrorism campaign, stories the Pulitzer board said were "persistent" and "painstaking." The paper's entry letter said Priest's reporting, which revealed that the CIA was operating secret "black site" prisons in several Eastern European democracies, was "as painstaking and difficult as any reporting undertaken at The Washington Post."
NATIONAL REPORTING: James Risen and Eric Lichtblau of The New York Times and the staffs of The San Diego Union-Tribune and Copley News Service
Risen and Lichtblau were honored for their "carefully sourced" stories on the National Security Agency's secret domestic eavesdropping program, which the Pulitzer board said began a national debate about the boundaries between counterterrorism and civil liberties. The White House had asked the paper not to publish the story, arguing that disclosure would threaten national security.
The staffs of the Union-Tribune and Copley won for disclosing the bribe-taking that sent former U.S. Rep. Randy "Duke" Cunningham to prison. The Union-Tribune is the flagship paper of Copley Press, and more than a half-dozen reporters helped unravel the details of Cunningham's actions. The Pulitzer board noted in particular the work of Marcus Stern and Jerry Kammer, reporters in Copley's Washington bureau.
INTERNATIONAL REPORTING: Joseph Kahn and Jim Yardley of The New York Times
The Times reporters won for what the board said were "ambitious stories on ragged justice" in China, as the nation's legal system evolves. One article in their 2005 series, "Rule by Law," used the story of a Chinese-American entrepreneur, jailed and threatened with death, to show how the rise of quasi-capitalism in China has led to a judicial system that often serves powerful companies.
FEATURE WRITING: Jim Sheeler, Rocky Mountain News, Denver
Sheeler won for "Final Salute," a story about a Marine major who helps military families cope with the loss of their loved ones in Iraq.
Sheeler chronicled the process of notifying and guiding families dealing with troops' deaths in extraordinary detail and from multiple points of view.
In one scene, he described how Marines given the grim task prepare "the same way they would if headed into battle. What if the parents aren't home? What if they become aggressive? What if they break down? What if, what if, what if."
COMMENTARY: Nicholas Kristof, The New York Times
Kristof's columns focused on the genocide in Sudan's Darfur region. The board noted that his columns were "graphic" and "deeply reported" and that at times they put him at personal risk.
His columns have been credited with successfully pressuring many public leaders, including President Bush, to speak out against atrocities in the African country.
This is Kristof's second Pulitzer. In 1990, he and Sheryl WuDunn, writing for the Times, became the first married couple to win a Pulitzer, for their coverage of the Tiananmen Square democracy movement in China.
CRITICISM: Robin Givhan, The Washington Post
Givhan was honored for her "witty, closely observed essays that transform fashion criticism into cultural criticism." Givhan has commented not just on what supermodels wear, but also what politicians' clothing says about their position and power.
One of her pieces opined on the clothing of the children of John Roberts during a news conference in which he was introduced as a Supreme Court nominee. "It has been a long time since so much syrupy nostalgia has been in evidence at the White House," she wrote.
EDITORIAL WRITING: Rick Attig and Doug Bates, The Oregonian, Portland
Bates and Attig wrote "persuasive, richly reported editorials" about abuses at a mental hospital. Oregon legislators have responded by pledging to replace the institution with a modern hospital.
Attig, the Oregonian's lead editorial writer, also wrote pieces included in the paper's 2001 Pulitzer-winning coverage of the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Bates has written a book called "The Pulitzer Prize: The Inside Story of America's Most Prestigious Award."
EDITORIAL CARTOONING: Mike Luckovich, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
The board honored him for a range of work that it said was done in "simple but piercing style." One of the most attention-getting spelled out the word "Why" using the names of the first 2,000 U.S. troops killed in Iraq. Luckovich also won in 1995.
BREAKING NEWS PHOTOGRAPHY: Staff, The Dallas Morning News
The winning photos showed the chaotic devastation that Hurricane Katrina inflicted on New Orleans. They captured not only the pain, but also the exhaustion and frustration, of the many who waited for help after the hurricane struck. One picture showed an evacuee's makeshift shoes, crafted out of thin cardboard packaging and rubber bands.
FEATURE PHOTOGRAPHY: Todd Heisler, Rocky Mountain News, Denver
Heisler won for his "haunting, behind-the-scenes look" at the funerals of Colorado Marines who died in the Iraq war.
His pictures include those of the pregnant wife of a Marine who was killed. In one, she presses her belly against the flag-covered casket carrying her husband's body.
In 2003, Heisler was on a team that won a Pulitzer for breaking news images of wildfires in Colorado. He's visited Iraq three times since the start of the war, usually embedded with U.S. troops.
The 2006 Pulitzer Prizes for Letters, Drama and Music:
FICTION: "March," by Geraldine Brooks
In "March," Brooks imagines the character of John March, the absent father in Louisa May Alcott's "Little Women." To develop March an idealistic chaplain who witnesses barbarism and racism among his fellow Union soldiers during the Civil War Brooks researched the journals and letters of Alcott's father, Branson Alcott, a friend and confidant of Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau.
Brooks got the idea for the story after moving in the early 1990s to rural Virginia, where she became steeped in Civil War history and memorabilia.
GENERAL NONFICTION: "Imperial Reckoning: The Untold Story of Britain's Gulag in Kenya," by Caroline Elkins
Elkins, an associate professor of history at Harvard University, spent 10 years researching the torture and murder of thousands of Kenyans in secret prison camps operated by the British government in the 1950s.
Through hundreds of interviews and access to previously unseen documents, Elkins described how, in their effort to quell the Mau Mau rebellion, British officials detained nearly all the Kikuyu, Kenya's largest ethnic minority, and subjected them to beatings and torture.
BIOGRAPHY: "American Prometheus: The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer," by Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin
For their sprawling biography of Oppenheimer, the physicist who came to be known as "the father of the atomic bomb," Bird and Sherwin spent 25 years researching thousands of letters and FBI records and interviewing hundreds of Oppenheimer's friends, relatives and colleagues.
MUSIC: "Piano Concerto: 'Chiavi in Mano,'" by Yehudi Wyner
"Chiavi in Mano" roughly translated, "if you've got the keys, you own it," is the mantra of automobile salesmen and real estate agents in Italy. And while composer Yehudi Wyner wrote the piece in Rome during the summer of 2004, he sought to give it a distinctly American feel.
The piece was commissioned for the Boston Sympathy Orchestra and had its premiere under conductor Robert Spano last February. It was the brainchild of Mozart scholar and pianist Robert Levin and supported by BSO music director James Levine.
HISTORY: "Polio: An American Story," by David M. Oshinsky
Oshinsky, a history professor at the University of Texas, drew on fresh information from dozens of manuscripts to produce his history of polio in the United States in the 1940s and 50s.
The book chronicles the establishment of the March of Dimes and the discovery of the Salk and Sabin vaccines while describing the present-day battles against polio in isolated parts of the globe.
Despite widespread fear of the disease, Oshinsky found that polio was relatively uncommon and that its effect on the increasingly suburban America of that era was largely exaggerated.
POETRY "Late Wife," by Claudia Emerson
A woman's passage through an unhappy marriage, a divorce and a new life as a second wife is the basis for this collection by Claudia Emerson, an associate professor of English at University of Mary Washington in Virginia.
The collection takes its title from one of its poems, "Artifact," which ruminates on being married to a widower who lost a wife to cancer:
"For three years you lived in your house / just as it was before she died: your wedding / portrait on the mantel, her clothes hanging / in the closet, her hair still in the brush."
 Load-Date: April 18, 2006

 

End of Document
