

U.S. company says it has won the right to take DP World/P&O case to the Appeals Court, delaying takeover
The Associated Press
March 3, 2006 Friday 3:56 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 536 words
Byline: By JANE WARDELL, AP Business Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




A U.S. company objecting to the takeover of British shipping icon P&O by Dubai's state-owned DP World said Friday it has been granted the right to take the case to Britain's Court of Appeal a move that puts the deal on hold.
Eller & Co., which says U.S. concerns about a United Arab Emirates company owning significant operations at six major U.S. seaports could harm its business, said the Court of Appeal would hear its petition for an appeal on Monday.
If the right to appeal is granted, the higher court will immediately hear the case.
"We don't take the decision to appeal lightly," Miami-based Eller said in a statement issued in London. "However, we are deeply concerned for the future of our business and the livelihood of thousands of our staff and contractors and we will do everything in our power to secure their future."
P&O runs shipping terminals in New York, New Jersey, Baltimore, New Orleans, Miami and Philadelphia a fact that has caused unease among some lawmakers and businesses in the United States who have cited security concerns about an Arab company taking over the ports.
DP World has attempted to defuse some of the tension by submitting itself to a second 45-day investigation by the U.S. government, despite already receiving regulatory approval for the deal.
The 3.9 billion pound (US$6.8 billion; €5.67 billion) acquisition of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co. must be approved by the High Court approval that was granted Thursday by Justice Nicholas Warren.
However, Warren placed a hold on his ruling to allow Eller to take the case to the higher court, and it will not become effective unless the Court of Appeal refuses to hear the case.
Lawyers for DP World have warned that a delay beyond Friday means that the company will not be able to access the millions of pounds (dollars; euros) it needs to pay shareholders on time. The deal was previously scheduled to be completed Thursday.
Both P&O and DP World will incur hefty costs while the case drags on and lawyers have said they intend to pursue Eller for the High Court costs when the appeal is decided.
P&O noted that Warren refused to grant Eller the right to appeal but allowed the company to approach the higher court directly because he believed it had little chance of success.
"The boards of P&O and DP World remain confident of concluding the transaction on the agreed terms," the shipping firm said in a statement.
U.S. President George W. Bush has supported the takeover deal and lawmakers initially opposed seem to have softened slightly, tempering calls for an immediate vote to block the takeover. Many said that the new probe reassured them and negated the need for legislation for now.
A U.S. federal judge has also ruled against a request by New Jersey to order an investigation into the takeover.
Warren said in his ruling Thursday that U.S. concerns about port security and threats of port authorities withdrawing business were partly fueled by Eller and that he did not find them credible.
He also dismissed Eller's claim that P&O allowed a series of procedural failings during the bid process, including the misdirection of letters to shareholders in Australia that left them uninformed about crucial meetings.
 Load-Date: March 4, 2006

 

End of Document
