

UNDATED: ... the sand.
The Associated Press
January 18, 2006 Wednesday 6:19 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 1625 words
Body




Jan. 16
Corriere della Sera, Milan, on Europe's role in the Iran crisis:
The position of the European Union in the new cold war (with Iran) is an open question.
This battlefield will decide who has the central power in the 21st century. It will not be the United Nations, which cannot even agree to stop the genocide in the Sudan or to reform the grotesque human rights commission ... The United States, whose technological power is half a century ahead of Europe's, remains dominant.
It is therefore crucial to understand whether Europe will be speaking the German of (Angela) Merkel, critical of the U.S. but from the point of view of an independent ally, or that of (Gerhard) Schroeder, making deals and agreements with (Vladimir) Putin. In the first case, the world will be ruled by a democratic coalition and the U.N. will have a significant role again. In the second case, there will emerge an Earth of 2050 populated by two billion young Muslims with China and Moscow on the brink of war ... Europe can tip the balance between war and peace.
On the Net:
http://www.corriere.it
Jan. 17
Jerusalem Post, on the Golden Globes:
The Golden Globe award for best foreign film went Monday to "Paradise Now," an entry from Palestine about two suicide bombers. Though no independent entity called Palestine yet exists, Nazareth-born, Dutch-resident director Hany Abu-Assad's French-German-Dutch-Israeli co-production has already garnered a plethora of awards, including the Audience Prize and Best Film Award at the Berlin Film Festival, as well as the European Oscar last December.
The latter prize was conferred on the day a Palestinian suicide bomber detonated himself at a Netanya mall, taking six innocent lives and maiming numerous others.
The film details the painstaking preparations of two attractive young friends with whom it is not difficult to sympathize. They feel suffocated in Nablus: Sa'id, the younger, prefers "death to inferiority," while his love-interest Suha - the foreign-born daughter of "an assassinated Palestinian hero" - tries relentlessly but ultimately fails to dissuade Sa'id from showing the "courage of his convictions."
The friends set out with explosive charges around their midriffs, are separated at the security barrier when surprised by an IDF patrol, and later reunite. The tearjerker moments revolve not around the presumed fate of the passengers - mostly young soldiers - on the Israeli civilian bus ultimately boarded by Sa'id, but around his friend's failure, following a last-minute change of heart, to dissuade him from going ahead with the bombing.
We don't believe that those who decided to honor "Paradise Now" necessarily wished to glorify suicide bombers or justify those who target Israeli civilians. Yet we find it unlikely a film delving into the inner struggles of the terrorists who brought down the World Trade Center or who murdered in London, Madrid, Baghdad or Bali will be produced, let alone showered with the same accolades.
The reception accorded "Paradise Now" reinforces the impression that, in the current global struggle against Islamist terrorism, our blood is somehow not as red as everyone else's.
In the film, the bombers' handlers are portrayed as cynical and manipulative. But even if there is no explicit vindication of attacks against Israelis, what else is one to make of a film that treats suicide bombers as sympathetic victims, with no attention paid to their actual victims?
"Paradise Now" is hardly the first movie to make heroes of villains. The gangster movie genre, culminating in "The Godfather" saga, is a case in point. But esteem for the real-life mobsters didn't spiral because the fictional Corleones were popularized. Nor were mobsters portrayed as having a noble cause.
It is scant comfort that "Paradise Now" isn't the only film to attempt making the worst monsters look human. Last year's German film "Downfall," about Hitler's last days, offered a humane depiction of a flawed, repugnant and ranting but also sometimes kindly and generous old vegetarian. Yet "Downfall" was produced more than half a century after the Third Reich's demise, and it did not ignore the Holocaust horrors unleashed by Hitler and his regime.
"Paradise Now" deals with a very real present. The theaters in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem that showed the film, like almost every public place, routinely employ guards to prevent attacks of precisely the sort that the film portrayed - from the bombers' perspective - on the screen. Hence the concern is not over historical accuracy and perspective, but propagandizing for terrorism in the present and future.
Two years ago, Israeli Ambassador Zvi Mazel purposely damaged an art installation in Sweden that depicted a Palestinian suicide bomber as Snow White floating on a sea of blood - an undiplomatic act that was met with near universal cheers in Israel.
"Paradise Now" humanizes mass murderers even more forthrightly, and to a much wider audience. Those who would heap awards on such a film should, even if they are unconcerned by the sensibilities of Israelis, consider whether they would make the same choice if they - their nation or their families - were the victims.
On the Net:
http://www.jpost.com
Jan. 16
Asahi Shimbun, Tokyo, on disarmament talks:
The 65-nation Conference on Disarmament in Geneva is the only organization in the world set up on a permanent basis for conducting multilateral negotiations on disarmament.
Yet, discussions at the conference have remained stalled, and it has produced no tangible results for nearly 10 years.
The biggest obstacle is the way business is carried out at the conference. The decisions at its meetings are made on the principle of unanimity, causing the conference to get bogged down by a single dissenting vote.
If the Conference on Disarmament cannot put its act together on its own, alternative approaches must be sought. There are down-to-earth alternatives, such as the General Assembly of the United Nations, which makes decisions by a majority vote, taking over the disarmament negotiations from the Conference on Disarmament.
For instance, why not conduct talks on the treaty prohibiting the production of weapons-grade nuclear materials at the General Assembly?
Such a treaty would work not only to restrain the military buildup of nuclear powers but also hold in check the nuclearization of non-nuclear powers. Since such a treaty would be in the interest of many countries, compromises may be reached depending on the conditions.
We must extricate ourselves from the ironic situation in which no progress is being made in nuclear disarmament because the issue is left to the Conference on Disarmament.
On the Net:
http://www.asahi.com/english/Herald-asahi/TKY200601170121.html
Jan. 18
Financial Times, London, on European ports:
Like waves crashing on a seawall, another attempt to free up the provision of port services looks likely to dash itself on the rocks of the European Parliament later today. Despite having agreed in recent years to liberalize virtually every other area of European transport - airlines, road haulage, shipping routes and even rail freight - the European Parliament appears set to throw out a draft directive on port services more decisively than it did last time in 2003.
For the measure is not only now opposed by leftwing parties and the dockers' unions. It has also lost some of the rightwing backing it had in 2003, partly because of united opposition from British MEPs to a measure that they feel ignores the different ownership structure of their country's ports.
Ports are the conduit for nearly 90 percent of the European Union's external trade. They therefore need to function efficiently, and increasingly they have. They are now more efficient overall than, for instance, U.S. ports which are still largely dominated by the longshoremen's unions. But there are black spots of resistance to competitive market forces, especially in France. So the Brussels Commission has come up with proposals to require port owners to let companies compete to provide port services ranging from piloting ships to handling cargoes, and to prevent state aid enabling public operators to compete unfairly with private ones.
One big problem, however, is that this draft directive is essentially tailored for continental Europe where ports are usually owned or controlled by state or regional bodies that are also responsible for investment, and not for Britain where most ports are now entirely in private hands. The complaint of the UK port owners is that the directive could force them to let other companies use facilities that they themselves paid for. It is true that ports in the UK as everywhere else are a local monopoly. But unlike most other EU countries, the UK is an island with lots of ports that compete against each other. So a directive chiefly aimed at creating competition within ports may be irrelevant to a country with competition between ports.
Even if its current proposal dies today, the Commission will probably have yet another go at creating an EU ports policy. If so, it must meet the concern - which is not limited to Britain - about port owners getting an adequate return on their investment.
But it could also recognise that the structure of EU ports has become too diverse for a one-size-fits-all directive and turn to use existing tools to achieve the same ends. For instance, Brussels could issue guidelines on state aids to ports as it has recently done on regional airports. Equally, would-be providers of port services could bring suit under the EU treaty's freedom of services provisions. What cannot be achieved legislatively can sometimes be achieved judicially.
On the Net:
http://news.ft.com/cms/s/5f1f699c-87c7-11da-8762-0000779e2340.html
End Editorial Rdp
 Load-Date: January 19, 2006

 

End of Document
