

UNDATED: the labels.
The Associated Press
June 21, 2006 Wednesday 5:59 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1215 words
Body




June 20
Corriere della Sera, Milan, Italy, on the request of the death penalty for Saddam Hussein:
Iraq knows little about the culture of mercy.
In the prosecution of Saddam Hussein, it would have been better ... to entrust his fate to an international tribunal and to postpone the Iraqis' ability to administer justice until better times. If Belgrade is not ready yet, it is hard to believe Baghdad is.
The execution of Saddam would automatically turn him into a martyr and a point of reference in social, ethnic, and religious sectors (not only the terrorists) which would be driven to think, "It was better when it was worse."
Would executing Saddam reopen wounds that won't heal? Would it not rain accusations of little independence of the court? ... Would one not risk fueling the paradoxical myth of Saddam as a victim, a "victim" who created thousands of real victims?
If the death penalty is handed down by the court ... to execute him would be an error. Because a defeated and imprisoned Saddam would be much less dangerous than a dead one.
On the Net:
http://www.corriere.it
June 21
Yomiuri Shimbun, Tokyo, on Iraq pullout:
The government's decision to withdraw Ground Self-Defense Force personnel from Iraq signifies only the end of an opening chapter in Japan's assistance for that country's reconstruction.
Success in rebuilding Iraq is vitally important for Japan, a nation that relies on the Middle East for close to 90 percent of its crude oil imports.
In response to a request from U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan for Japan to assist in U.N. transport activities, the government intends to continue and expand the Air Self-Defense Force's support operation.
It also will be necessary for Japan to increase aid to Iraq through its official development assistance. The government has already said it will extend a total of 5 billion dollars in aid to Iraq, including 1.5 billion dollars in grants-in-aid.
It is essential that Japan continue international peace cooperation activities by the SDF for the purpose of ensuring the peace and stability of the international community.
In order to swiftly deal with each new emergency that may arise, the government must hasten the creation of a permanent law on the SDF's international peace cooperation activities.
Efforts to establish a permanent law covering Japan's international peace cooperation activities constitute a task to be tackled by the government that takes over the reins of the administration of Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi.
On the Net:
http://www.yomiuri.co.jp/dy/editorial/20060621TDY04005.htm
June 21
Daily Telegraph, London, on North Korea:
North Korea, a small, maverick nation that cannot even feed its own people, has the disconcerting ability to alter the balance of power in East Asia. It showed this in 1998, when it fired an intermediate-range ballistic missile over the main island of Japan. And it appears to be on the brink of doing so again, with the launch of a long-range version of that rocket.
The first test shook Japanese complacency about its pacifist constitution and the American nuclear umbrella. Tokyo has since increased co-operation with Washington over theatre missile defence, deployed troops in Iraq, sent naval vessels to the Indian Ocean in support of American operations in Afghanistan, and declared that the future of Taiwan is a national security concern. Last year, the prime minister, Junichiro Koizumi, proposed amending the constitution, with the aim of increasing the self-defence forces' overseas role.
A test-firing of the long-range Taepodong 2 would push Japan's military profile even higher. It would further stimulate the development of missile defence and strengthen the hand of those who want to change Article 9 of the 1947 constitution, which confirms Japan's commitment to peace. It would also encourage the Right to push for reconsideration of the country's policy on nuclear weapons. These are not specifically banned under Article 9. Rather, Japanese governments have been guided by three non-nuclear principles - neither to possess nor manufacture nor store such weapons - adopted by the Diet in 1971.
We are not there yet. Japanese politicians tend to be ahead of the public in their wish to amend the constitution, and even Mr. Koizumi is not proposing to jettison the famous clause renouncing war. However, North Korea's recklessness has brought a change in Japanese attitudes towards projection of power, and it is no longer inconceivable that that could eventually entail a nuclear component.
Just as Iran's going nuclear might cause Turkey, Saudi Arabia and Egypt to follow suit, so North Korea could set off a chain reaction embracing Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. The paradox is that the country most concerned about that prospect is China, the supposed mentor of the North Koreans and the host of six-nation talks designed to bring them to heel. The apparent fuelling of a Taepodong 2 is a reminder that the stakes remain as high in East Asia as in the Middle East.
On the Net:
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/
June 21
The Hindu, Madras, India, on mobile phones:
Getting from zero to a hundred million customers in ten years is a speed few products or services have attained. What the mobile telephone sector has recorded is even more commendable considering that the telecommunications arena has not seen things move with such despatch in a century-and-a-half. After a pioneering engineer, William O'Shaughnessey, demonstrated his experimental telegraph system near Calcutta in 1839 (two years after Samuel Morse did in the United States), it took 12 years for the British Raj to let him set up the first commercial telegraph line. It took over a hundred years for the number of telephone lines to reach 10 million. Even in the 1980s, an applicant needed to wait several years to get his wired telephone connection. Now it takes barely a day to get a mobile connection. And that is one significant reason why more than four million new mobiles log on each month. There may be questions about the accuracy of the 100 million figure; there are allegations that some service providers are exaggerating their subscriber base (by about six to 10 per cent) to secure additional frequency spectrum. But these questions do not, in any way, cloud assessment of a stellar performance.
... The progressive liberalisation of the licensing regime over the past six years and the resulting keen competition among the six service providers have caused a dramatic and continuous fall in the cost of the handset and in the charges for its use claimed now to be the lowest in the world bringing the phone within reach of a wide section of society. It is not just the fall in price: cuts in fixed phones tariff have not helped stem the migration of subscribers to the mobile. The handiness of the device, its portability, versatility, and the overall value proposition it delivers have made it the winner. Yet is this formula good enough to get the phone population up to 250 million by 2007 and 500 million by 2010? Most of the increase needs to come on the back of a wider availability of the mobile signal across rural India. ... One can envisage handset prices falling with domestic manufacture having begun. But usage charges will also need to drop further. ...
On the Net:
http://www.hindu.com
 Load-Date: June 22, 2006

 

End of Document
