

UNDATED: ...the others.
The Associated Press
May 17, 2006 Wednesday 8:02 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1717 words
Body




May 14
Star Tribune, Minneapolis, on eco-cities:
Imagine living in a modern-day village where you can walk to work, bike to a wildlife refuge and, when the urban spirit moves you, make a half-hour commute to one of the world's great cities. Imagine this hometown meets all its energy needs from renewable sources, making zero contribution to global warming, and gets much of its food fresh from nearby farms, its water from captured rainfall. Imagine plentiful open space but no landfill, nor need of one. Two such cities are on the drawing boards but, alas, neither is in this hemisphere. The first will be in China, of all places on an undeveloped island in the Yangtze River, across from Shanghai and the second on the Thames, east of London. Planning for both is being coordinated by Arup Urban Design, a British firm committed to the notion that cities can be allies, not enemies, of sustainable development.
This is hardly a new idea, but it's one that Americans tend to forget; they think about sustainable living as necessarily rural and remote.
The remarkable thing about Arup's concept for Dongtan, as the Chinese village will be known, is that it relies on simple, here-and-now technologies and techniques. Energy consumption has been cut two-thirds by laying out streets, siting homes and choosing building materials for maximum use of sun and shade. All manner of waste sewage included becomes fodder for biomass-derived electricity. Wind power will be captured not only by the familiar large turbines but smaller household versions.
Ultimately, Dongtan may link several villages into a green city of perhaps a half-million people a bold vision, certainly, and profoundly in contrast to our everyday image of Chinese development as a spreading plague of smokestacks and traffic jams.
The Dongtan plan is not fundamentally dependent on easy access to open land, or on any other uniquely Chinese advantage. That's why London's mayor, Ken Livingstone, is so keen to adapt it to the Thames Gateway, a brownfield corridor that presents his city with its biggest redevelopment headaches and opportunities. And it's why American planners should pay close attention as Dongtan develops.
On the Net:
http://www.startribune.com
May 16
Arizona Republic, on President Bush and immigration policy:
Troops don't make an immigration policy, and lame ducks don't usually inspire a following.
But if President Bush keeps the pressure on for the kind of comprehensive reform he talked about Monday night, a realistic immigration policy could result.
Yet the 6,000 National Guard troops Bush wants to send to the border represent the only part of his immigration proposal he can control. The rest is up to Congress.
The president's move to fortify the border with the National Guard now and more Border Patrol agents later may satisfy some of the hard-line opponents in Congress who are blocking comprehensive immigration reform. His call for a guest-worker program and a "rational, middle-ground" approach to the 11 million to 12 million undocumented immigrants in this country will please the business branch of his party.
If Bush can bring those sides together and gather support for the bill the Senate brought back for discussion this week, his speech will rank among the most significant of his administration.
As a short-term strategy, putting troops on the border to achieve some stability while comprehensive reform is implemented sounds reasonable. But keep in mind that enforcement alone has not fixed this problem. The Border Patrol roughly doubled in size since 1995, but apprehensions actually fell 10 percent, according to analysis by Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse.
Nevertheless, Arizona wants its share. The Guard will be deployed based not on the population of border states but on the level of the problem, so Arizona will likely do well.
Gov. Janet Napolitano, who previously asked the Pentagon to send and pay for more National Guard troops, said this will save Arizona taxpayers from picking up the tab for a federal responsibility.
Both she and the Legislature have proposed state expenditures to deal with the federal failure at the border. Much of this is more about plucking political advantage than enacting good policy.
If Bush takes responsibility at the federal level, the wind inflating some of those desperate measures in the Legislature could cool and dissipate, giving Arizona a chance to do the state's business, not the federal government's.
The Guard's role will be to provide support and free up Border Patrol agents. Putting additional eyes on the southern Arizona border this summer may wind up saving a few lives. The death toll of migrants trying to cross the desert's searing heat is an annually recurring human tragedy.
As beneficial as that would be, it is not enough. Troops alone would simply buy into the enforcement-only strategy that has failed for years.
What's needed is comprehensive reform that includes a guest-worker program, tough workplace enforcement and eventual legalization for the current illegal population. Even without additional law enforcement, those strategies would help alleviate the chaos at the border by channeling workers into a legal, orderly process for entering the country. Then the Border Patrol would have a clear mission to go after illegal border crossers who have nefarious goals, rather than the current fuzzy goals that include rescue efforts when migrant workers succumb to the desert's extremes.
Bush's speech offered hope that he's willing, finally, to really push for comprehensive reform.
We only wish he had spent some of his political capital on this issue when he had a little more political capital to spend.
On the Net:
http://www.azcentral.com/arizonarepublic/opinions/articles/0516tue1-16.html
May 15
The Herald, Everett, Wash., on the new 24-hour television network for babies:
What's all the fuss over the new, round-the-clock TV channel called BabyFirstTV?
After all, as Sharon Rechter, BabyFirstTV's executive vice president for business development and marketing, told the Associated Press, "The fact of life is that babies are already watching TV."
Well, not without adult help, they aren't. (How do babies "watch" TV? Ceiling screens? Duct-taping them to the wall across from the flat-screen? Baby cell phones?)
Rechter adds: "That's why having BabyFirstTV is so important what we want to offer is completely safe, commercial-free and appropriate content."
Oh, well, in that case, crank it up. It's safe! Never mind those nannies at the American Academy of Pedriatics who say babies, and children under 2, shouldn't watch TV at all.
When Dr. Donald Shifrin, the organization's spokesman says, "Using videos and television in this age range is basically an uncontrolled experiment on youngsters," he just doesn't understand how safe, commercial-free and appropriate the channel will be.
But Dr. Edward McCabe, a paid adviser to BabyFirstTV, understands. "BabyFirstTV helps parents become better parents," he told "Good Morning America."
A BabyFirstTV claim to fame is that it encourages parents to watch the shows alongside their babies, as opposed to just plopping them in front of the screen. The channel will offer "instructional subtitles on the screen." (How about, "Time to take a break from the TV?") These things, BabyFirstTV hawkers say, make the channel "interactive" and "active, not passive."
They really should've named the station GuiltFreeTV. Hey, parents, TV is good for your babies! All babies are doing it, don't be the last on your block! If you watch TV together, that makes it an active experience!
While BabyFirstTV is still working on its 24/7 lineup, it has announced it has these infant shows in the works:
"Baby Survivor": Two teams of babies battle it out at a deserted day care, voting one member out of the playpen on every show.
"Infant Idol": The talent show for tots, complete with a Simon Cowell-type judge, which gives the innocent babes an early, appropriate lesson about every American's right to be judged, rejected and ridiculed before a national TV audience. "You call that drool?! My grandmother drools better than that!" "Is that supposed be crawling? That's nothing more than wiggling!" "Who ever told you that you can coo? Your mother?"
"Desperate Diapers": A dark comedy involving the secret, wild antics of some suburban babies living on Diphtheria Lane.
Now, where can you buy teeny, tiny TV remote controls? Let the little ones turn it off.
On the Net:
http://www.heraldnet.com/stories/06/05/15/100edi editorial001.cfm
May 12
Daily Record, Parsippany, on legalizing marijuana use for medicinal purposes:
Eleven states allow marijuana to be used for medicinal purposes. New Jersey should become the 12th. There will be a Senate committee hearing in June on legislation to legalize marijuana for those with debilitating medical conditions.
The idea is a good one.
There is admittedly debate about how effective marijuana is as a medicine. The American Medical Association rejects its use, but the National Academy of Sciences has found that marijuana can help patients deal with chemotherapy and AIDS. Those afflicted with cancer and AIDS deserve as much sympathy and understanding as possible. If marijuana is able to help people cope with deadly diseases, it should definitely be tried. Morphine and opium already are used to control pain.
Opposition comes from those who don't seem to understand the difference between a sick patient getting some relief and a teenager shooting heroin.
"This is how they're trying to get marijuana legalized," complains Terrence P. Farley, the director of the Ocean County anti-narcotics task force. We don't know what "they" Farley is thinking of. The only "they" involved here is not a Colombian drug cartel, but sick people seeking a little bit of comfort. The opponents should explain why they want to prevent a person on chemotherapy the relief that marijuana may bring.
The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that marijuana use for medicinal purposes is illegal, meaning that its use can be prosecuted notwithstanding state law. Despite that, New Jersey should still allow the medical use of marijuana. That would make a statement in favor of vulnerable patients. It is also debatable how vigorously the federal law is enforced.
On the Net:
http://www.dailyrecord.com
MORE
 Load-Date: May 18, 2006

 

End of Document
