

Win-win or zero-sum game? China's rise shocks but boosts the global economy
The Associated Press
September 4, 2007 Tuesday 4:00 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1694 words
Byline: By JOHN LEICESTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS 
Body




The argument that China is stealing jobs from the West is lost on Jean-Louis Desjoyaux. He is focused on meeting orders piling up from wealthy Chinese for his made-in-France swimming pools.
Desjoyaux's 210 employees in France have 800 orders for pools from private Chinese clients, and sales are up by 90 percent this year. Desjoyaux opened his first store in Beijing in May and expects China to rival the whole of Europe as a market within a decade, buying 10,000 of his pools each year.
"It gives me shivers, seeing our name on a store in Beijing," he said. "It's just extraordinary."
The image of newly minted Chinese millionaires lounging in pools machine-pressed in the French industrial town of Saint-Etienne pokes a hole in the belief that China poses mostly a threat to workers in the West and that almost everything may one day carry a "Made in China" label.
The fear of China comes largely from its startling growth. This year, for the first time, China will be the largest contributor to global economic growth, the International Monetary Fund says. And by the time of the Beijing Olympics next August, China's economy is expected to zoom past Germany's to become the world's third biggest, after the United States and Japan.
To detractors, these accomplishments are reminders that China is putting Western workers out of work and polluting the environment as it floods the world with cheap goods made with cheap labor. Recent scares about tainted food and substandard toys have further hurt China's image.
"There have been more negatives as a result of trade with China than positives," John Sweeney, president of the AFL-CIO, the largest U.S. labor federation, asserted in an interview. "Globalization as it presently exists is not working for working people."
Yet leading economists, chief executives, independent experts and even some labor leaders suggest there's another side to the China story that is being overlooked amid the alarm about China's rise. Although it is a massive exporter, China imports big time, too creating a growing market for Western companies. And despite growing concerns about quality, China's low-priced goods can still make life better, or at least cheaper, for consumers in the United States and elsewhere.
For generations, Western entrepreneurs dreamed of the untold wealth that China's teeming millions seemed to offer. And yet, for generations, China's crushing poverty and then Mao Zedong's xenophobic communism turned those dreams sour. One reason why Britain fought wars with China in the 1800s was to force it buy opium, because the Chinese weren't very interested in much else the West had to offer.
"I set no value on objects strange or ingenious, and have no use for your country's manufactures," Emperor Qian Long wrote to Britain's King George III in 1793.
Today, China is buying up everything from Western nickel and know-how to Airbus aircraft and $200,000 made-to-order gold watches from Louis Vuitton. The French luxury label has 16 China stores and plans for five more this year. Those long-held Western get-rich dreams are being realized from the world-shaking economic takeoff unleashed by Deng Xiaoping's bold decision in the 1970s to throw open China's doors.
China is now the world's third-biggest importer, behind Germany and the United States, according to the World Trade Organization. The WTO's figures show that China's imports rose 20 percent last year alone to $792 billion.
The mass migration of Chinese farmers to cities is also creating a promising market for Western firms that provide the building blocks of urban infrastructure cement, trains, telephone networks, electricity plants, water treatment and the like. Some 21 million Chinese now get water treated in plants managed by France's Veolia Water or run with Veolia technology almost as many people as the company serves in France.
"Clearly, for some sectors, competition from China is going to be terrible. But for others, the Chinese market will be fabulous," said CEO Antoine Frerot. "Philosophically, you can't contest the Chinese desire to no longer be poor."
Poverty is already just a bad memory for millions of well-heeled Chinese. In the next two decades, China's consumer market will explode to become the third biggest after Japan and the United States, with the world's largest middle class of 612 million people, says consulting firm McKinsey & Co.
China has surged past Japan to become the world's No. 2 vehicle market after the United States. Rolls-Royce Motor Cars Ltd. this year added 50 staff at its assembly plant in Goodwood, England, in large part to meet demand from China its fastest-growing market. Bentley Motors says its China sales doubled, with all manufacturing done in Crewe, England.
Smaller firms are also making headway in a market that long failed to live up to its promise. Deschamps of France is supplying the Beijing Olympics with flag poles, and has a new factory in eastern China. French franchise La Boite a Pizza is opening its third pizzeria in Shanghai this summer, serving French-touch pizzas made with European cheese and even European foie gras.
"The French, I'm sorry to say, need to have a more open mind rather than weep and say, 'I'm miserable, my job is going to be taken away,"' the pizza chain's founder, Frantz Lallement, said in an interview. "We must not be fatalistic. Nothing is ever lost."
China imports not just to feed its consumer market but also to keep its giant production machine rolling.
Take sophisticated machine tools, used to transform metal into products such as the cars that China is churning out.
A fifth of the machine tools produced in the world end up in China, their biggest importer and consumer by far, according to Metalworking Insiders' Report, an industry newsletter. That's great news for Japan and Germany, engineering-savvy machine-tool leaders. It also has meant multiple trips to Chinese trade fairs for Gerhard Hein, economic chief of the German Machine Tool Builders' Association.
In China, "they do not think about people, they do not think about the environment, they only think of increasing material welfare, increasing production, increasing incomes, increasing, increasing. It is a kind of hyperventilation. That frightens me a little bit," Hein said in an interview. "On the other hand, the mere size of the market impresses me."
In all, China consumed $12.9 billion of machine tools in 2006 almost as much as Japan and the United States combined, says the Metalworking Insiders' Report.
It is the staggering speed and scope of China's growth that worries many in the West. By some measures, Chinese growth has outstripped Britain's during the Industrial Revolution and the United States' in the 1800s, the World Bank says.
"Even though China is not the dominant force in the world's economy, the shock it is administering to the world is unprecedented," it said in a January report.
One of the places that the shock is felt most is among workers making products that the Chinese manufacture more cheaply, such as the 169 employees nearly all women laid off from the Arena swimsuit factory in southwest France.
The factory closed in March, with production shifting to China and Tunisia. Iconic British fashion house Burberry and American candy giant Hershey Co. also joined the parade of firms closing Western factories and shifting some production to China.
It didn't matter that many of Arena's seamstresses had worked there for decades and had no other skills, or that they manufactured suits for France's Olympic swim champion Laure Manaudou. The simple fact was that Chinese workers cost less.
"They are sucking everything away. All trades. It's not just clothes. That scares us," said Francisca Bouquey, who had worked at the factory for 35 years. She noted with irony that if she retaliated by boycotting Chinese goods, there'd be little left for her to buy.
Labor leaders say Western working conditions are being dragged down by competition with unprotected, often poorly paid Chinese counterparts. Some 465 million Chinese still live on less than $2 a day.
"There are winners, there are losers, but the overall effect is that China is dragging something down in terms of decent work," said Guy Ryder, general secretary of the 168 million-member International Trade Union Confederation.
But studies in both Europe and the United States suggest actual job losses are not as bad as many think.
The Congressional Research Service said 2004-2005 figures suggest that no more than 12,000 to 20,000 American workers per year a tiny share of the U.S. labor force of 149 million workers lose jobs because their work was transferred outside the United States. Even if one assumes that all those jobs went to Chinese, when balanced against other jobs created by trade with China, "it is reasonable to believe that the impact is either a very small net job loss or a net job gain," the report said.
A big factor in the China debate is that it is easier to track job losses than gains. It's not always easy to prove that shifting jobs to China can help Western firms become more competitive, saving them money they can plow into developing new products that in turn create growth and new jobs. Said OECD employment expert Paul Swaim in an interview: "You can't so easily find a group of women and say, 'ah ha, here are the winners."
Similarly, it's easy to point to China's drawbacks as a source of consumer goods, with scares about tainted food and, most recently, a furor over toys made with lead paint or flawed parts. Yet China also supplies millions of Western consumers with shoes, electronic goods and toys that only seem to get cheaper, such as power tools at $10 a pop. Chinese Vice Premier Wu Yi, formerly the nation's top trade negotiator, says imports from China have saved American consumers $600 billion over the past decade.
"Lower-income folks in America probably benefit to the tune of a 7 percent increase in their income from the availability of cheap goods from China," said William H. Overholt, director of the Center for Asia Pacific Policy at RAND Corp., an American think tank. "That's more than you can ever imagine any welfare program contributing."
 Load-Date: September 5, 2007

 

End of Document
