

'Henry V' and 'The Trojan Women' Get Outdoor Airings - An AP Entertainment Review
June 30, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 858 words
Byline: By MICHAEL KUCHWARA, AP Drama Critic
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




There's quite a study in contrasts this summer in New York's outdoor dramas: a sturdy, sensible yet only fitfully exciting version of Shakespeare's "Henry V" and a wild, woolly and occasionally wonderful deconstruction of Euripides' "The Trojan Women."
Let's start with the more traditional "Henry V," currently on view in Central Park courtesy of the New York Shakespeare Festival. Director Douglas Hughes gives us a clear-spoken production of the play. Gimmickry is kept to a minimum. Unfortunately, so is dramatic impact.
The production depends on its performers to rouse the play, and much of the exhortation falls on the shoulders of the actor playing the title role. Andre Braugher, star of the television series "Homicide," is a decent, if unsubtle monarch. His Henry is an earnest fellow with little nuance. Braugher begins at a certain high pitch - and stays there. Henry's anxieties about being king, brushing off his faithful mentor Falstaff and waging war never really come through in Braugher's performance.
"Henry V" is Shakespeare at his most flag-waving. Yet the master never lets an audience forget the horror behind all the battlefield heroics that dominate the second half of the play. Hughes' production captures this perfectly, particularly in the sudden execution of Bardolph and the death of a young English boy on a battlefield in France.
The production is done half-way in modern dress. During the indoor scenes, the men are dressed in Donna Karan suits; when they go off to war, the costumes revert to 15th century armor.
No Shakespeare play looks better in the outdoor Delacorte Theater than "Henry V." And set designer Neil Patel wisely has incorporated Central Park's abundant greenery and the backdrop of the park's Belvedere Castle into his setting. It makes for a magically medieval setting.
Braugher has his best moments in the play's final scene, Henry's wooing - and winning - of Katharine, the French princess, played sweetly by Elizabeth Marvel.
There are several other standout performances in the large cast, particularly Kathleen Chalfant, who does triple duty as Mistress Quickly, the Queen of France, and as the most forceful member of the chorus. Jarlath Conroy is a memorably scurrilous Bardolph, while Torquil Campbell is affecting as the eager English lad murdered by French soldiers.
This "Henry" then is a textbook examination, perfectly acceptable but rarely reaching the heights of patriotic fever that should infuse the play.
Textbook is not what you will find in director Tina Landau's aggressive production of "The Trojan Women - A Love Story" by Charles L. Mee Jr. It is an extended riff on the well-known Greek tragedy about the women left in desolation after the Trojan War.
The play is the work of En Garde Arts, known for its site-specific productions in such unusual places as the West Side piers, the cathedral of St. John the Divine and New York's meatpacking district. "The Trojan Women" has found a home in an abandoned amphitheater in New York's East River Park. The decaying structure, covered in graffiti, is the perfect place to stage a play about the ruins of war.
Mee detonates the original story, then puts the pieces back together with added asides about the Holocaust, Bosnia, television talk shows and snippets of classic American popular songs.
The 1996-97 New York theater season barely has begun but there probably won't be a more bizarre moment than Landau's slow-motion chorus line of grief-stricken Trojan women wailing "My Man," Fanny Brice's tear-tinged torch song.
The director sprinkles other musical oddities throughout her production, utilizing ditties by such songwriters as Irving Berlin, George Gershwin, Johnny Mercer, Sammy Cahn and Randy Newman.
Helen, the voluptuous siren whose infidelity causes the Trojan War, and her distraught husband, Menelaus, are portrayed as a Greek version of Ginger Rogers and Fred Astaire, warbling snippets of songs from several of the famed dancing duo's movies. Marin Mazzie and Steven Skybell do them proud. And Cassandra, the play's voice of doom, is portrayed as a punk rocker by the strong-voiced Sharon Scruggs.
Yet there are several fierce moments of horror in the play, too. For example, the murder of Polyxena, daughter of Hecuba, Queen of Troy, is chilling.
The first act ends stunningly with the departure of Aeneas, the son of Trojan nobility, and a ragtag group of followers, for a new land. It's an exciting and hopeful finale, beautifully staged by Landau, and the evening could have ended there.
Its anticipation is not fulfilled in Act 2 when Aeneas and company travel to a Carthage that resembles the toniest health club imaginable. James Schuette has designed a land of Stairmasters, exercise bikes and hot tubs.
This second half turns into a slow-moving meditation on love between Aeneas, well-sung by Jason Danieley, and Dido, Queen of Carthage, also played by Mazzie. Trimming is in order.
That shouldn't be too hard because this is scrapbook theater - bits and pieces of what's on the playwright's mind, pasted together in the showiest manner possible by Landau. Imperfect it may be, but it's often theatrically galvanizing.
 Load-Date: June 30, 1996

 

End of Document
