

'The Steward of Christendom' arrives at the Brooklyn Academy of Music - An AP Entertainment Review
January 22, 1997, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 449 words
Byline: By MICHAEL KUCHWARA, AP Drama Critic
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




A small, unmade iron bed stands center stage at the Majestic Theater, the deliberately tumbledown movie palace turned into a stage house by the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
It's virtually the only bit of scenery you will see - outside of a back wall bathed in some exquisite lighting by designer Johanna Town - but no matter. You won't be able to take your eyes off an equally tumbledown actor, Donal McCann, who occupies that spartan cot.
The Irish performer, last seen on Broadway in Brian Friel's short-lived "Wonderful Tennessee," is giving one of those fierce, uncompromising and soul-baring performances that more than fills the stage and wins every acting prize in sight.
The play is "The Steward of Christendom," a bit of family history by Sebastian Barry looking at the final days of Thomas Dunne, the playwright's great-grandfather.
Dunne was the last chief superintendent of the Dublin Metropolitan Police before Irish independence in 1922 forced it out of existence. A servant of the British Crown, he was not the most popular man in Dublin, a fact that followed him for the rest of his life.
Now it is the 1930s and Dunne is in a county workhouse, an emotionally shriveled man who spends his present in the past, a past overfilled with regret. With his closely cropped head and deep-set, haunted eyes, McCann looks like a concentration camp inmate, although the torment has been all of Dunne's own making. He rants, raves, coos and cries in a voice that is impossible to forget.
English critics have made much of similarities between Dunne and Lear, Shakespeare's ancient raging monarch. That may be overstating the case, but Dunne generates a great deal of sympathy, particularly as he tries to come to terms with the death of his son, who was killed during World War I.
There is a catharsis, of sorts, as the man reconciles with the ghost of his offspring, seen here as a young boy (a haunting cameo by Carl Brennan).
For much of the play, Dunne battles with his three daughters and with the caretakers at the county home where he is forced to reside. He also soliloquizes at great length, giving Barry a chance to display his fine sense of poetry, which McCann handles with ease.
Yet those unfamiliar with Irish history may have trouble deciphering the play's murkier passages, not to mention some of the actors' more impenetrable accents. The large Majestic playing area also diffuses the play, creating a gap between the actors and audience that director Max Stafford-Clark hasn't quite been unable to resolve.
Still, the space doesn't detract from McCann's considerable achievement. Its pain and power will remain in the memory even after the details of "The Steward of Christendom" fade.
 Load-Date: January 22, 1997

 

End of Document
