

'This is the place I was born. This is the place I will die'
The Associated Press
June 15, 1999, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 570 words
Byline: By DONNA BRYSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PRISTINA, Yugoslavia
Body




Stubborn and proud, Islam Islami returned day after day to his home to confront two soldiers who had turned it into a barracks.
For a month, they shouted at him, beat him, again and again. But Islami, an 83-year-old retired police officer, kept coming back.
In the end, the soldiers left, and one ethnic Albanian scored a victory over Yugoslavia's Serb-dominated army.
"They told us, 'Go to Albania. It's where you belong,"' Islami recalled Monday, his dark eyes fierce under the black beret favored by older men in Kosovo. "I told them: 'This is the place I was born. This is the place I will die. I will not die a refugee."'
The Yugoslav army and Serbian provincial police are accused of trying to cleanse Kosovo of its ethnic Albanian majority. Kosovo's Albanians - some 850,000 of them still in refugee camps in neighboring Albania and Macedonia - have described an organized campaign involving soldiers, police officers and civilians. In response, NATO launched a bombing campaign that lasted two months.
The bombing ended last week, when Yugoslavia agreed to withdraw its troops, let in NATO peacekeepers and grant Kosovo broad powers to rule itself.
According to Islami, soldiers targeted his hilly, predominantly Albanian neighborhood on the eastern edge of Pristina shortly after the NATO bombing began March 24. Most of his neighbors fled to other countries.
The neighborhood, Vlania, was known as a hotbed of Albanian nationalism. From 1991 to 1998, Albanian professors and students who had been expelled from the University of Pristina by Serbs set up their own campus in homes and storefronts there.
Islami had let the students' union set up offices on the top floor of the large house he shared with his three sons, their wives and his 12 grandchildren. Two months ago, soldiers searching the house were enraged to find student brochures emblazoned with the black double eagle of Albanian nationalists.
The entire Islami household was ordered to leave immediately. Two of Islami's sons fled to Macedonia with their families, and from there on to Germany and Austria. Islami refused to go, and one son, Ismet, stayed behind with him.
Islami, his son, daughter-in-law and a 14-year-old grandson went only as far as a cousin's house in town. Islami spent his nights there, but every day returned to his home.
Several times, they beat him and chased him down the street. But he would return.
Ismet Islami, his wife Sehare and son Visar listened quietly as their patriarch described his nonviolent battle for their home, only occasionally inserting "Po, po, po" - "yes, yes, yes" - for emphasis. Fearful, they had stayed behind each day when he went to demand that the soldiers leave.
Islami had moved to Vlania from an apartment in town only a year ago, after a lifetime of saving and pooling the savings of his sons to buy the house, which oversaw an expansive view of the hills surrounding Pristina. His wife said the soldiers slept in the master bedroom.
Finally, after a month of pressure, the soldiers left, telling Islami: "We don't want to waste a bullet on you," he said. As a parting shot, they kicked in his television set.
Now Islami awaits the return of his sons and neighbors. He is sure they will come now that NATO troops are in Pristina.
"During the bombings, I never slept. I would be awake, looking out the window, wondering who was coming to rob or beat me," he said. "Since NATO came, I've been able to sleep."
 Load-Date: June 15, 1999

 

End of Document
