

--- Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
October 21, 1996, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 743 words
Dateline: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla.
Body




She's Back! Space Superwoman Walks Off Shuttle to Hero's Welcome
 Astronaut Shannon Lucid, NASA's space superwoman, returned to Earth last month after six debilitating months of weightlessness and to everyone's amazement, walked off the shuttle Atlantis.
Doctors had met her inside the space shuttle with a stretcher, figuring the 53-year-old biochemist would be too weak and wobbly to stand, let alone walk. But she surprised them, insisting, "I can stand up."
Two workers assisted her during the short walk onto an airport-style moving sidewalk and into a reclining chair.
After a record-shattering 188 days in space - most of that time aboard the Russian space station Mir - she was thrilled to be home.
"We could hear her laughing all the way up to the flight deck, I'll tell you, she was just so tickled," said Atlantis' commander, William Readdy.
She was still laughing when she met her family a few hours later.
"It was just a great mission and I just had a great time," said Lucid, who rocketed away in March and spent a longer stretch in space than any other American and any other woman.
Lucid was welcomed back to Earth on Sept. 26 with a 10-pound box of red, white and blue M&M's from President Clinton and an offer for 188 cases of potato chips - one for every day she spent in orbit. She had craved both while living aboard Mir.
Lucid, who traveled 75 million miles and circled the Earth 3,008 times, faces weeks of rehabilitation to recover from the effects of prolonged weightlessness, which include weak muscles, fatigue, vertigo, anemia and deteriorating bones.
Unaccustomed to the pull of gravity, she said she felt heavy, but noted that was normal. She also was wobbly, almost falling over when she got up from a chair at NASA's crew quarters. She grabbed onto a table to steady herself.
"It will take just a little bit to get fully adapted back to living in one-G (gravity) again," Lucid said.
Lucid rocketed away March 22 to the Mir station, expecting a 4 -month mission and an early August homecoming. But booster rocket problems and two hurricanes delayed the shuttle's trip to get her, leaving her in orbit an extra seven weeks.
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said Lucid "never, never flinched once" despite all the setbacks.
"This is a tough, brilliant, determined human being," Goldin said. "She's my hero."
 
 Use the information from the story to answer the following questions.
 
 1) How much time did astronaut Shannon Lucid spend aboard the Russian space station Mir?
2) Originally, the biochemist was scheduled to spend 4 months in orbit. Why was her homecoming delayed?
3) How did Lucid travel from Mir back to Earth?
4) Why did doctors think that the space superwoman would need a stretcher when she returned to Earth? Did she need it?
5) List some of the medical problems Lucid might have because of living a long time without gravity.
6) According to the article, how long will it take Lucid to get used to living in one-G (gravity) again?
7) Why do you think Lucid was willing to put up with the effects of prolonged (continued) weightlessness?
8) Does it seem unusual that the brave traveler craved junk food while aboard the Russian space station? Explain.
9) The 53-year-old biochemist's space mission is described as a record-breaking trip. Explain why.
10) NASA administrator Daniel Goldin says that Lucid is a hero. Do you agree? Tell why or why not.
 
 Answer key:
 
 1) Shannon Lucid spent about six months aboard Mir.
2) Lucid's return trip to Earth was delayed because of problems with the booster rocket and two hurricanes.
3) Space shuttle Atlantis brought Lucid back from Mir.
4) Doctors met the astronaut with a stretcher because they thought she'd be too weak to stand up. No, Lucid surprised the physicians by walking off the shuttle.
5) After spending 188 days in orbit, Lucid could have weak muscles, fatigue, vertigo, anemia and weakening bones.
6) It will take weeks of rehabilitation for the 53-year-old scientist to recover from the effects of weightlessness.
7) Answers will vary.
8) Answers will vary.
9) Lucid's trip set a record because she's the first American and the first woman to spend so many days in space.
10) Answers will vary.
 
 PART TWO:
SOMETHING'S MISSING
Shannon Lucid missed certain foods during her historic mission. If you spent a few months aboard Mir, what would you crave? List five things that you would miss most. Are there things that you would not miss at all? Whom would you miss you?
 
 End Adv for Monday, Oct. 21.
 Load-Date: October 21, 1996

 

End of Document
