

--- Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
July 22, 1996, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 580 words
Dateline: GENEVA
Body



Smallpox Virus Stocks Targeted
 After years of scientific wrangling and nightmare scenarios of biological warfare, the World Health Organization agreed Friday to wipe out all traces of the deadly smallpox virus in the next three years.
At the U.N. health agency's annual meeting, a key committee gave the go-ahead to destroy all remaining stocks of the virus - held at high-security laboratories in the United States and Russia - by June 30, 1999.
The agency's 190 members will be asked to approve the decision Saturday, but that is regarded as a formality. They will have to give the final nod at their May 1999 session.
Known as the "spotted death" and the "great fire," smallpox killed about 600,000 people a year in Europe from the 16th century through the 18th century. It kept killing and disfiguring millions more worldwide even after a vaccine was discovered in the 1790s.
Only after WHO organized a huge immunization campaign was the disease wiped out completely. The last recorded case was in Somalia in 1977; three years later, WHO declared smallpox eradicated.
For years, health experts have urged eliminating the laboratory stocks for fear the virus could escape. Others cautioned that if terrorists got hold of the virus, it could become a frightening weapon in biological warfare.
Over the past decade, WHO experts have set a series of dates for destroying about 400 samples of the virus locked in special freezers at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta and a smaller amount at Russia's State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology.
The deadlines were repeatedly postponed because of objections from scientists who said it was wrong to destroy an entire species of virus that might hold clues to fighting other diseases.
But with the development of harmless clones of DNA fragments, scientists are now confident they have the full genetic blueprint of the virus and no longer need to keep the virus itself.
 
 Smallpox Virus OK'd for Destruction
Use the information from the story to answer the following true and false questions:
1. Smallpox is a deadly disease that kills about 600,000 people each year.
2. About two centuries ago, a vaccine was discovered that prevented scarring in people infected with smallpox.
3. The last known case of the "spotted death" occurred in Somalia almost ten years ago.
4. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is mainly responsible for eradicating (wiping out) smallpox.
5. All remaining stocks of the deadly virus are stored in special freezers in the United States and Russia.
6. The World Health Organization (WHO) has agreed to save the last 400 samples of the smallpox virus.
7. It will take about three years to get rid of the high-security laboratories.
8. Terrorists recently used the harmful virus to kill innocent people.
9. Some scientists believe that by studying the smallpox virus, researchers may be able to find cures for other diseases.
10. Today it is possible for experts to study the smallpox virus without using live samples.
BONUS: WHO members agree that only when the virus samples are destroyed will smallpox be declared eradicated.
 
 Answer key: 1)F. 2)F. 3)T. 4)F. 5)T. 6)F. 7)F. 8)F. 9)T. 10)T. Bonus)F.
 
 PART TWO:
CHECK UP
Infants are vaccinated against harmful diseases. Ask a parent about your immunizations. What diseases are you protected against? Using a dictionary, define each of the diseases. Did your parents have any of these serious illnesses?
 
 End Adv for Monday, July 22
 Load-Date: July 22, 1996

 

End of Document
