

16 Years After Death Came For the Archbishop, A Call For Sainthood
April 6, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 763 words
Byline: Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador
Body




The humble room is just as it was when death came for the archbishop 16 years ago: his shoeshine brush on the nightstand beside the bed, the typewriter on a metal desk.
A bloodstained cassock and white vestments also are on display, viewed by the dozens of Salvadorans who each day visit the cancer hospital where Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero lived - and where he was slain.
The San Salvador archbishop, a tireless worker for the poor known as "the voice for those with no voice," was shot through the heart as he celebrated Mass at the hospital chapel March 24, 1980.
Today, the call is rising for sainthood for Romero, El Salvador's best-known church victim of the 12-year civil war that cost 75,000 lives.
Romero became a martyr for much of the country, including the leftist Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, which fought a series of U.S.-backed governments until the war ended in 1992.
Actor Raul Julia played him in the 1989 film "Romero."
A U.N.-sponsored investigation blamed Romero's death on the far right, namely the late Maj. Roberto D'Aubuisson. D'Aubuisson was the founder of the Republican Nationalist Alliance, the nation's ruling party. He died in 1992, before the investigation's final report.
A harsh critic of the Salvadoran military and extreme right, the archbishop's homilies are believed to have cost him his life. Romero was extremely critical of human rights abuses from the outset of war.
In his final Sunday homily, he aimed a blunt message at the right: "I beg you, I order you, in the name of God, that the repression stop, that you not obey if ordered to kill."
Romero has been a difficult figure for the Vatican. While a church martyr, he also came close to militant political activism, which is frowned on by Pope John Paul II.
When the pope visited on Feb. 8, a delegation of young Salvadorans gave him 10,000 signatures urging his help in beatifying Monsignor Romero - "whom we recognize as a martyr, a prophet of hope, a joyous pastor and a model of the saintly life."
John Paul knelt beside the rose-covered tomb in San Salvador's cathedral and prayed. Yet he told reporters it was too early for his intervention, because the matter remained at the local level.
"Monsignor Romero was a humble person, a magnificent person," said Wilfred Enriquez, a 17-year-old high school student who cheered the pope's visit, urging Romero be put on the road to sainthood.
"He was a very good person. I hope they canonize him," said Petrona Rodriguez, 88, who attended many Masses by Romero.
Carmelite nuns care for the bloodstained garments Romero wore when he was shot, which are kept in a glass case built especially for them.
The small room is hung with a dozen pictures of the archbishop, one of them with Pope Paul VI, "a personal friend of Monsignor Romero," recalls Sister Rosa Avalos, the room's caretaker.
There is a silver chalice, tarnished now, that was a gift from Paul VI. And the wooden bishop's staff.
A 65-year-old housewife, Julia Sanchez, is a typical visitor.
"I just wanted to know the place where he lived and the place where our pastor died. Seeing those bloody clothes leaves a deep impression," said the mother of four. "He didn't deserve to die."
The assassination date has been marked with commemorative Masses and marches each year. This year, the current archbishop of San Salvador said the church has forgiven the killers.
"The church would not be Christian if it were not forgiving," said Monsignor Fernando Saenz Lacalle, who holds the same post but is more conservative and has vowed to keep the church out of politics.
Some are not so forgiving. Scores of peasants marched on the anniversary with placards reading, "the people will not forget your assassins."
Romero was killed by a gunman who took aim from the entryway to the small hospital chapel. A single bullet pierced his heart.
A 1993 report by the U.N.-sponsored Truth Commission formed by the peace accords to investigate human rights abuses during the war, said "full evidence exists" that D'Aubuisson ordered the assassination.
The process whereby Romero could be beatified, canonized and even sainted could take decades, or longer.
For some, memories of the death are just as vivid today.
"Monsignor was celebrating a Mass of the dead. He was at the point of consecrating the hosts when a shot was heard. He began to fall immediately … he pulled on the altar cloth and the hosts scattered, his body lay at the feet of Christ," recalled Carmelite nun Luz Isabel Cuevas.
"I ran to help him but it was impossible because he was hemorrhaging from his nose, his mouth and his ears."
 Load-Date: April 6, 1996

 

End of Document
