

9-9-1999: It's not the turn of the century, but why wait?
The Associated Press
September 9, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 619 words
Byline: BURT HERMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




There goes the excuse for forgetting your anniversary.
Thousands of couples across Europe and the world chose what they believe is the lucky day of Sept. 9, 1999 - 9-9-99 - to tie the knot on Thursday.
Hundreds of others lined up to get letters postmarked with the date and mothers asked doctors to time their babies to be born at 9:09 - and nine seconds.
There was even talk of a "9999" bug, an old code used in computers to signal the end of an operation. The Bank of Japan went so far as to add $ 2.7 billion to the economy in case foreign banks needed cash in an emergency. There were no reports of problems, however.
According to Greek mythology, the number nine symbolizes stability, courage and tenacity. In the Muslim faith, there are 99 names for Allah. The Thai word for nine, "kao," sounds the same as the word for "progress," so many Thais view nine as a lucky number.
And forget about 8-8-88 or 7-7-77. Thursday was even better: there are five nines in the date - 9-9-1999.
There were also more ominous tones to the day. For weeks, there have been persistent rumors that activists in Myanmar might be plotting a 9-9-99 uprising like the 8-8-88 protests that almost toppled the country's military government in 1988.
Myanmar's military regime posted riot police around the capital, Yangon, and Thai troops on the Myanmar border were put on alert. Yangon was reportedly quiet, however.
Elsewhere, weddings were the order of the day.
Gretna Green, the Scottish village synonymous with weddings because it was once a haven for eloping couples, was booked up with couples wanting to marry on 9-9-99.
Fifty couples got their way - but another dozen had to wait until the 10th because registrars, church ministers and photographers in the English border town couldn't handle any more.
"It's more like Valentine's Day than a weekday in September," said Alaster Lynn of the Gretna Wedding Bureau, which helped organize 16 services.
Lynn had a theory about the date's significance that had nothing to do with luck: "I think today is particularly popular among men who might otherwise forget the date of their anniversary," he said.
Across the Czech Republic, hundreds of couples were married. At the Old Town Hall in the capital, Prague, the city's favorite wedding spot, ceremonies were scheduled from early morning until midnight.
Many registry offices that perform weddings in Switzerland were fully booked Thursday and some planned to stay open into the evening to handle extra demand.
In Germany, some couples searched for a location as memorable as the date to start the rest of their lives together. Rows of brides and grooms made their vows in TV towers, zoos and public squares across the country.
At the Berlin zoo, an elephant handed a bride her bouquet before their ceremony at the hippopotamus house. The beast apparently also wanted to get in on the action - going after the groom's boutonniere as the three posed for a group picture.
Other Berliners opted for the more traditional City Hall, where couples walked down red carpet into a marble room used for weddings.
Carsten Elsholz, 31, and his new bride, Solveig, said they planned the date three months ago. "I think it's the best day in this year," Carsten said.
Not everyone was convinced. Will marrying on 9-9-99 really bring more luck to a marriage? "Many people say so, but I don't agree," said Reiner Ahnert, the civil servant performing the ceremony.
"If I want to marry, I take a date of my own," he said.
The day didn't turn out to be so lucky for one couple reserved for a City Hall wedding. They never showed up.
It all turned out for the best, though. That meant the number of couples who were to tie the knot there on Thursday was - you guessed it - nine.
 Load-Date: September 9, 1999

 

End of Document
