

A four-decade journey for 'The Crucible' from stage to screen
The Associated Press
December 20, 1996, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 914 words
Byline: By MICHAEL KUCHWARA, AP Drama Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Nicholas Hytner has impeccable theater credentials, so why not have him direct the film version of Arthur Miller's "The Crucible," a play Hollywood has resisted putting up on the big screen for more than four decades?
After all, Hytner - in his movie-directing debut - had made "The Madness of King George," a critical and financial hit that garnered several Academy Award nominations last year.
"But I had no plans after 'George,' " the 40-year-old Hytner said the other day during a breakfast interview near his Greenwich Village apartment. "I didn't even know if I was going to be a good film director or whether I was going to enjoy it."
He was - and he did. So after the success of his first film, scripts flooded in, most of them "rubbish," according to the soft-spoken yet very definite Englishman. Among the dreck, he received a script that promised something more - "The Crucible," with a screenplay written by Miller himself.
Most of the great Broadway plays of the 1940s and '50s inevitably were made into movies, usually sooner rather than later, Hytner explained. Yet Miller's tale of the Salem witch trials of late 17th-century New England wasn't.
Seen by critics as a metaphor for the McCarthy blacklisting of the 1950s, "The Crucible" traces the hysteria that grows in a small Massachusetts community after a group of young women accuse other townspeople of being witches. The story focuses on farmer John Proctor, whose wife Elizabeth is accused of witchcraft by the vindictive Abigail Williams, spurned by the earnest John.
Too close to its time, sniffed some producers and directors; then, after years had gone by, past its time, said others. Miller's film adaptation had been sitting on the shelf at Twentieth Century-Fox, when Hytner was offered it.
"When I went to see Arthur originally, he was pretty skeptical about getting the project filmed," Hytner recalled. "He had been through it all before.
"I'm not sure if Miller had seen any of my stage work in London, although perhaps the fact that I came from the London theater was a big plus for him because that is where, frankly, he has been the most respected in recent years. He is treated with a reverence that the English rarely accord to their own."
Hytner's theater successes have spanned both sides of the Atlantic. He's done a lot of opera and Shakespeare in England. Most theatergoers know him for "Miss Saigon," a transplanting of "Madama Butterfly" to the Vietnam War, as well as for a striking revival of Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Carousel," first done at Britain's Royal National Theater, then at New York's Lincoln Center and now touring the United States.
Hytner and Miller sat down and reworked the film script.
"The substance, the language, the interaction of character and scene. That's all Arthur. What changed was the way it was put together," the director said.
"What the first drafts of the screenplay had done was to suggest ways of embracing a community which, in the play, is off-stage. What I got totally interested in was more - not just this rather loose term they use of 'opening up' the play.
"Obviously, you are going to start this film with those girls and, obviously, you are going to go into the courtroom. What I got terribly interested in was the juxtaposition of that communal hysteria and the intensity of the individual trauma.
"It was a matter of finding a way of telling a story or shooting it so that you weren't just setting a communal scene beside an intimate scene, but you were actually bashing the two up against each other.
"I had a feeling that the whole hysteria should work like an infection, like a virus, which immediately suggested that the thing should be moving around. You should not only see the hysterics, but you should actually feel the hysterics traveling from one place to another, which means traveling people and traveling cameras."
With a budget of $ 25 million, modest by action-adventure film standards, and two bankable stars - Daniel Day-Lewis as Proctor and Winona Ryder as the avenging Abigail - the movie was filmed last year from mid-September into November on an island off the coast of Massachusetts.
The director wanted the change of seasons - from what looked like summer into autumn and then a bleak winter.
Hytner cast the movie with veteran stage actors, starting with the eminent Paul Scofield as the judge assigned to investigate the hysteria. It also includes Joan Allen, Bruce Davison, Jeffrey Jones, Rob Marshall and Frances Conroy.
"It's no surprise that these performers are stage actors, because the point about Miller's language is - in the hands of people who can do it - that it sounds utterly natural," the director said. "It sounds like it is being spoken.
"Over the past 15 years, I have directed a lot of Shakespeare with kids who were doing it for the first time. They are the ones who always make it sound like Shakespeare. The experienced ones make it sound natural."
In some ways, Hytner said making "The Crucible" was easier than "King George."
"People would ask me questions on 'King George,' and I would very confidently make a decision. I wouldn't really know what I was deciding. Ninety percent of the job is to make up your mind any which way and people feel happy. But at least this time, I knew what I was being asked.
"I have no Hollywood horror stories. I wish I did, but I don't," he said with a trace of apology. "I'll tell you something. Compared to putting a big commercial musical on Broadway, Hollywood is a breeze."
 Load-Date: December 20, 1996

 

End of Document
