

A Little to the Right Here, To the Left There OK by President
February 1, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 297 words
Byline: By SONYA ROSS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Yes, President Clinton admits, he'd like to have it both ways. And at his news conferences, that's a right he reserves only for himself.
"Sure. Doesn't everyone?" Clinton said Thursday in response to a reporter's question during a news conference with French President Jacques Chirac.
Clinton had been asked whether he was "trying to have it both ways," as his Republican adversaries claim, by clinging to his presidential duties and sneaking in campaign appearances such as his scheduled visit Friday to New Hampshire.
When the reporter pressed Clinton to answer GOP critics who say he is "talking from the right" to appeal to conservatives while "governing to the left" to appease liberals, Clinton said:
"It depends on how they define the left. I'm still a little to the left of Attila the Hun, I guess," referring to the Mongolian conqueror who looted provinces in southeastern Europe between 441 and 447 A.D.
That prompted Chirac, the conservative former mayor of Paris who was elected last May to succeed the more liberal Francois Mitterrand, to chime in:
"President Clinton has said that he was to the left of Attila. I didn't feel this was aimed at me, quite honestly," Chirac said while standing to Clinton's right.
Chirac then deferred to "whatever certain French journalists may feel about the subject."
So Clinton replied: "I'm not at all sure I'm to the left of President Chirac," drawing peals of laughter from the audience.
But Clinton was determined to be the only one to have his cake and eat it too.
"Are you trying to have it both ways?" Clinton chided a bilingual French reporter who tried to pose a queries to him in English and to Chirac in French.
Chirac scolded the reporter too.
"All your friends already know you speak English, so now you speak French, right?" he said.
 Load-Date: February 1, 1996

 

End of Document
