

A look at the candidates in the Labor Party's leadership race
June 3, 1997, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 397 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




---
EHUD BARAK
Former military chief Ehud Barak, 55, was identified years ago as a possible prime minister. He supports the peace process but, like the late Yitzhak Rabin, is considered a relative hawk who can bring the left-of-center Labor Party centrist swing votes.
Articulate and popular, Barak commanded the elite Sayeret Matkal commando unit and military intelligence and was military chief of staff from 1991-94. Contributing to his dashing image, Barak disguised himself as a woman during a 1973 commando raid against Palestinian guerrillas in Beirut.
Known for his skills as a classical pianist, Barak holds a master's degree in economics and engineering systems from Stanford University.
---
YOSSI BEILIN
Yossi Beilin, 47, is an outspoken dove who was a leading architect of the secret Oslo talks that led to the 1993 Israel-PLO peace agreement.
His intellectual airs place him in stark contrast with the party men and generals who have dominated Israeli politics.
During the previous Labor government, Beilin gained a reputation as a maverick; his ideas sometimes raised eyebrows, such as when he advised an international philanthropic group that Israel had become too rich for charity.
The former journalist holds a doctorate in political science.
---
SHLOMO BEN-AMI
Freshman Labor lawmaker Shlomo Ben-Ami argues that he is the only candidate who can make inroads for the party among the masses of Sephardim, or Middle Eastern Jews, who have traditionally leaned to the right-wing Likud.
Ben-Ami, 53, was born in Morocco and immigrated to Israel with his family at age 12. He became a history professor at Tel Aviv University and from 1986-91 served as Israel's ambassador to Spain.
He argues Israeli leaders have focused too much on security issues and calls for devoting more attention to social ills like a growing income gap, tension between European and Sephardi Jews and the cultural divide between religious and secular Israelis.
---
EPHRAIM SNEH
Ephraim Sneh, who was health minister in the previous Labor government, is a medical doctor and a former military governer of the West Bank.
His father, Moshe Sneh, was a leader of Israel's socialist movement in the early years of the state and would often bring his young son to party meetings. But despite his prodigious experience in the Israeli political scene, Sneh is seen as lacking the charisma needed to attract massive support.
 Load-Date: June 3, 1997

 

End of Document
