

After deal on Nazi labor, Germany must come up with the money
The Associated Press
December 15, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 867 words
Byline: By BURT HERMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




A day after reaching agreement on the amount of compensation for Nazi-era slave and forced laborers, the German government worked Wednesday to gather its share of the $5.2 billion offer.
A breakthrough deal after months of negotiation came Tuesday after the government agreed to raise its offer from $1.6 billion by an unspecified amount. Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder said details of the offer would be announced Friday during a meeting of all the sides in the talks.
President Clinton said Wednesday he was personally involved in reaching the deal, exchanging letters and phone calls with Schroeder and his administration.
"We close the 20th century with an extraordinary achievement that will bring an added measure of material and moral justice to the victims of this century's most terrible crime," Clinton said at the White House.
Those who will benefit are elderly survivors, who are dying at a rate of nearly 10 percent a year, Clinton said.
"This was not an easy step for the German government to take," Clinton said, "but it reaffirms its commitment to human dignity, reinforces its partnership with the United States and strengthens its ties with neighbors in Central and Eastern Europe."
German government officials have said that the burden for paying Nazi labor compensation should not fall on average taxpayers, who already are shouldering an extra tax to pay for German reunification. The country is also in the middle of a $15.6 billion austerity program to cut massive budget deficits.
The government's costs for the compensation will be even greater than the face value of their offer, because it plans to give participating companies a 50 percent tax deduction off their total $2.6 billion contribution.
During a meeting planned for Thursday, Schroeder is expected to ask the governors of the 16 German states to take on some of the burden of the fund.
German states and cities used slave labor for tasks like building roads, cleaning up rubble and repairing buildings after Allied bombing campaigns. In addition, they received up to 70 percent of an assessed wage paid by companies that used the labor, Freiburg historian Ulrich Herbert said.
Some states were backing out of the deal, which they had no role in negotiating. Bavaria, Germany most prosperous state, as well as Hess and Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania said they would not participate.
"The federal government handled its own responsibility. It hasn't spoken a single word or taken a day to make any kind of contact with the states," the head of the Bavarian governor's office, Erwin Huber, told Berlin's InfoRadio on Wednesday.
"They concluded the agreement, and now they want to give the bill to the states," he said.
Germany's chief envoy on the Nazi labor issue, Otto Lambsdorff, on Wednesday criticized the governor of the eastern state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Harald Ringstorff, for saying his state shouldn't have to pay.
Ringstorf told the Berliner Zeitung newspaper Wednesday that the former communist East Germany suffered more after the war and didn't get Western support, such as the Marshall Plan.
But other cities, including Munich, Hanover, Bochum and Hamburg - which also has state status - had signaled their willingness to participate, Lambsdorff spokesman Wolf Meyhoeffer said.
Aside from the states' contribution, the federal government must figure out how it will gather its own share.
Finance Minister Hans Eichel said Wednesday that the German government would use proceeds from privatization of state-owned businesses to fund the deal. The money won't come from Germany's budget, Eichel told German ZDF television.
The companies' share also has to be collected. About 60 companies have said they are participating in the fund, but only about 20 have gone public.
Wolfgang Gibowski, the spokesman for the companies, said more firms needed to join and contribute to the $1.1 billion industry has gathered so far.
In exchange for joining the compensation fund, German industry will receive legal immunity from lawsuits in the United States. The U.S. government has promised to ask courts to refer pending cases to a foundation that will be established by the German parliament.
Germany has already made about $60 billion in payments for war crimes, but there has never been compensation for the estimated 12 million slave and forced workers. Anywhere from 1.5 million to 2.3 million people still alive would be eligible for compensation, mostly non-Jews living in eastern Europe.
Benjamin Meed, president of the New York-based American Gathering of Jewish Holocaust Survivors, said in a letter to his members: "Was this a satisfactory solution? No. It's long overdue, it's coming too late."
Meed, 79, recalled that 55 years ago, "I was a slave laborer in the city of Warsaw, cleaning up the old burned-out buildings and sending the bricks back to be re-used by the Germans. I was a slave - dragged out in the morning, brought back at night." After a year and a half, he escaped through the underground and hid for the rest of the war.
"There is a measure of justice - whatever we are getting is a measure of justice," he wrote, but "at least one-third of the survivor population already died. It's too little too late."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo BER101
 Load-Date: December 16, 1999

 

End of Document
