

After the killing, Kosovo's dead shadow landscape and lives
The Associated Press
June 26, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1348 words
Byline: LAURA KING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PRISTINA, Yugoslavia
Body




Kosovo is a land where the voices of the dead speak as loudly as those of the living - perhaps even louder.
The dead are nowhere and everywhere, some never to be found, others scattered in nameless graves, their bones heaped in the rubble of what were once pretty village homes, their last moments etched in the memories and the haunted faces of those who lived through what happened here.
Everyone, it seems, is on intimate terms with these dead. Nearly every village, every neighborhood, every family has been somehow touched by the savage spasm of killing whose dimensions are only becoming fully clear now, as NATO peacekeepers fan out across Kosovo and ethnic Albanian refugees flood back across the borders.
What the people of Kosovo are finding as they return to their homes is nothing less than a giant charnel house.
So far, the numbers are only estimates: Western military and humanitarian officials say upward of 10,000 people may have died in a concerted campaign of atrocities by Serb police, troops and paramilitary men - this in a province whose prewar population was put at about 2 million.
Over the past week, the reckoning has begun in earnest, as refugees - whose chaotic exodus from Kosovo over the past three months already represented the greatest mass displacement seen in Europe since World War II - come home and confront the proof of terrible doings in their absence, or in the midst of their flight.
They find it, at times, on their very doorsteps. Body parts clog family wells. In some village homes, corpses still lie where people were cut down in the midst of ordinary tasks - cooking a meal, or watching a TV program.
Any plot of open land might have become a boneyard. Belongings lie scattered in rain-soaked gardens and on muddy roadsides: a teddy bear, a pink blouse, a bedroom slipper.
As returning neighbors find one another alive, they embrace and deliver stark news of disaster: I saw your brother. His body was burning. Or: Your cousin's throat was cut. Or: They made them lie on the ground, and then shot them. Your uncle was one.
"Murder is a folk art," the Yugoslav-born writer Charles Simic wrote in "Orphan Factory," a collection of poems and essays published last year. "They keep perfecting it without ever being pleased with the results."
---
Halit Shala, 42 and haggard, offers a wrist-first handshake, thumb clasped against his palm. It's what country people here will do when they want to greet someone, but are afraid their hands are not clean enough to offer.
Shala has been shaking hands that way since he came home from Albania last week and found a shallow grave in his family courtyard containing what he believes are the remains of eight people. Two of them, he thinks, are his brothers.
"If I didn't have faith in God," he said, shaking his head, "I would lose my mind."
Shala lives in Velika Krusa, on the main road between the western Kosovo cities of Pec and Prizren. The town has a melancholy distinction: it was chosen for scrutiny by the International War Crimes Tribunal, and is named in the indictment against Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic.
The horror that Shala came home to is among the sites being investigated by forensic experts gathering evidence for the tribunal. On this day, though, investigators are busy with another site just down the hill and across the main road: a charred home where townspeople say dozens of bodies - perhaps 40 or 50 - were incinerated by Serb police and paramilitary men after a killing spree in the town on March 27, three days after the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia began.
Paprika farmer Skenderku, a cousin of the family that owned the house, was hiding in a grove of bushes when police trucked the bodies to the house and set it ablaze, he said.
"We couldn't get close because of the smoke and the smell," he said, his eyes watering with the memory. "I never imagined this smell, the flesh of humans."
Behind plastic tape roping off the site, investigators were at work, wearing white protective suits, surgical masks and weary expressions. A pile of yellow evidence bags lay heaped outside the house. One investigator knelt to help another off with the plastic bags tied over his boots.
Duraku then went back into the house after the wreckage had cooled, trying to see which of his relatives might be among the dead. Townspeople had scattered in panic after the killings, and many in his extended family were unaccounted for.
"Of course we couldn't tell anything from what we saw - everything melted, mixed together, the house, the bones," he said. "You knew they were people, but who? How do we know? I didn't try to enter again."
Duraku said he didn't know if he could stay on his land and begin farming it again. From anywhere in his fields he can see the hulk of the house, itself a blackened skeleton. Even if it is torn down, he thinks his eyes will always be drawn to the spot.
"It's so hard," he said, "just to be here."
---
The killing in Kosovo simply unhinged some.
In Djakovica, scene of some of the most systematic of slaughters, many people saw family members killed before their eyes. Men, in hiding places because they knew they would be slaughtered if they were found, heard their wives being abused and their children beaten by police and soldiers.
"The city was dead," said Amaia Esparza of Doctors Without Borders, a France-based humanitarian group that began working in the city last week, shortly after the arrival of NATO troops. "And the people, they were dead too in a way, even the ones left living."
Her group came to Djakovica to assess healthcare needs and decided that among the most urgent was to set up a mental health project to begin individual and group counseling for the people of Djakovica.
"You have children who are like little zombies - not even sad, just empty, absent, gone to some other place," she said. "There are old people who just cry and cry. Young girls who were raped - I don't think they will ever talk about it, but their lives are ruined. And for the men it is terrible, because they wanted to protect their families from all of this, and they couldn't."
---
In the town of Junik, on the Albanian border, the dead were Salih Gjoda's chief companions. In his solitude, he thought of neighbors and relatives who had died, and sometimes spoke to them, he said, as if they were there.
For 10 days, Gjoda and his 13-year-old daughter Shkendije had been the only inhabitants of the town, little more than a cluster of wrecked houses at a bend in the road.
They became separated from the rest of the family in the crush to cross the Albanian border, and Gjoda's wife was wounded when their tractor convoy came under Serb attack. When he was at last able to find his daughter, they made their way back home to wait for others to return.
Late last week, they were still waiting. Gjoda, 59, who lost a leg to diabetes years ago, sat patiently on a plastic crate by the side of the road, his crutches propped up against the shattered storefront of his brother's tool shop.
The family home was burned, so he and his daughter were sleeping in the store. Fighters from the rebel Kosovo Liberation Army stopped by now and then to give them a bit of bread.
"If only I could find something to cover the roof so the rain won't ruin everything we have," he said fretfully. The store was completely empty, picked clean by looters.
Around him, the village was a ruin. There was not a building in sight that had not been torched or shelled or shot up. The mosque's minaret was blasted. Water gushed from a broken pipe. Grunting pigs rooted aimlessly about. On a wall was scrawled the Serbian word "umiri" - die.
Gjoda was wearing his eyeglasses upside down because one lens was broken, and he needed the remaining one for his weaker right eye. It gave him the same skewed, shattered look as everything else in sight.
He would be glad to see his neighbors when they returned, he said, but in the meantime he occupied his thoughts by remembering what the village was like before all this happened. And its people, as they had been, before all the killing.
"I have enough company," he said.
 Load-Date: June 26, 1999

 

End of Document
