

AIDS epidemic hits new frontier in Africa - the south
The Associated Press
October 18, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1213 words
Byline: By DANIEL J. WAKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LILONGWE, Malawi
Body




The patients lie two to a bed and on the floor, waiting to be sent home to die. Tattered blankets brought by relatives drape their shrunken bodies, because Lilongwe Central Hospital doesn't have any linen.
The sounds of sawing and hammering in the streets testify to the booming business done by the capital's coffin-makers. Public offices grind to a halt because so many workers are away at funerals. Businesses are crippled when key employees die.
After coursing through other parts of Africa, AIDS is rampaging in southern Africa, turning the region into the epidemic's super nova and changing the nature of existence.
Extraordinarily high death and infection rates are devastating families, threatening economies, creating a generation of orphans and lowering life expectancy in Zambia, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Malawi, Swaziland, Botswana and Namibia.
"It's worse than anything else southern Africa has seen," said Dr. Peter Piot, executive director of the U.N. AIDS program in Geneva. "What other catastrophe is going to kill 20 to 30 percent of the adults?"
All told, Africa south of the Sahara has two-thirds of the world's people infected with the AIDS virus, or 21 million. Four of every five women with the virus live there, and as do virtually all the 8.2 million children orphaned by AIDS.
Already overwhelmed with poverty and basic health issues like clean water, African governments have responded feebly to the epidemic, AIDS experts say, leaving much of the task to foreign donors and aid agencies.
But now the sheer numbers of deaths in upper government and ruling party echelons, middle management, the military and bureaucracy and even their families are moving national leaders to confront the disaster.
It's hard to ignore the numbers.
-In Botswana and Zimbabwe, one of every four adults is infected with the AIDS virus, the U.N. AIDS program estimates.
-In Zimbabwe, where bodies are filling morgue corridors, 1.2 million adults will die from the disease by 2005, the government says.
-AIDS has cut average life expectancy in Malawi to 37, from 51.
-Zambia has 360,000 children orphaned by AIDS.
The continent's biggest economic and military power, South Africa, is reaching its own state of crisis.
From 1994, when free elections ended apartheid, to last year, the infection rate rose from 7.6 percent to 17 percent. In the worst hit province, KwaZulu-Natal, nearly one-third of pregnant women are infected with the AIDS virus.
"In South Africa you talked about the loss of a generation of kids due to apartheid. Now you're talking about a lost generation due to AIDS," said Alan W. Whiteside, who runs an AIDS-economics research division at the University of Natal in Durban, South Africa.
Statistics on the extent of the AIDS epidemic are spotty. Experts rely on figures from prenatal testing clinics and extrapolate from there. Many believe the numbers of AIDS cases are underestimated.
The infection is mainly transmitted through heterosexual sex in Africa. The large-scale movement of people - either refugees or job-seekers forced by poverty - help spread the disease, along with the practice of having multiple sex partners in some cultures. Lack of education and the high rate of sexually transmitted disease also are factors.
Countries in southern Africa are slowly moving into action, partly inspired by Uganda - the continent's only success story in fighting AIDS, where the infection rate is declining because of a public information campaign and broad consensus on tackling the problem.
South Africa introduced a $ 13 million initiative in September designed to push government ministries and private businesses to come up with their own ways to deal with AIDS.
Zimbabwe has a female condom program. Zambia has introduced the subject of AIDS in school curriculums.
The U.S. Agency for International Development is helping Malawi's government develop an AIDS strategy. With little money in the coffers, one of the government's main initiatives in rural areas is to set up volunteer village committees to help orphans, teach families to care for ill members and educate young people on the dangers of AIDS.
Malawi suffers all the AIDS-related problems typical of the region, and a devastation rendered more obvious because of its extreme poverty.
Malawi is so poor there is no television and the highways have more barefoot pedestrians on the roadside than cars. Half the people live on less than a dollar a day.
The epidemic is "killing off a lot of young people, leaving behind orphans, destroying small businesses, taking its toll on most (institutions) and leaving a lot of grief behind," said Owen Kalua, planning director for Malawi's National AIDS Control Program.
"We are already so overwhelmed. And now this. There's a sense of giving up."
Malawi's population of 10 million is roughly that of Belgium, but it has 100 times the number of people infected with the AIDS virus or sick with full-blown AIDS - 710,000.
By 2000, 1.2 million Malawian children, more than a quarter of the total, will have lost a parent to AIDS and other causes, USAID says.
The epidemic is straining the extended family structures that are central to African life.
Grandparents traditionally take in orphans. But the burden can be crushing when the main source of support for the elderly - their own offspring - are dead.
The cost of basic care alone for an AIDS patient, or even a funeral, can drive a family over the brink. Or the costs force families to cut corners such as removing girls from school to save money, undoing basic steps forward in development.
Forget the "drug cocktails" that are prolonging lives in the West. The $ 10,000 to $ 20,000 yearly expense for such treatment is more than many poor Africans make in a lifetime.
The dark heart of Malawi's crisis can be found at Lilongwe hospital.
Four-fifths of the patients are infected with the AIDS virus, half have full-blown AIDS, said Dr. Hamish Dobbie, a Briton who runs the medical wards.
"We're running an HIV unit, with a little bit of this and that," he said, laying charts on top of the listless bodies he examines.
A foul smell of urine and sweat fills the admitting ward. Many patients are gaunt from tuberculosis, which spreads quickly through bodies weakened by the AIDS virus. A teen-ager stares without focus from meningitis, another HIV opportunist.
Like most public hospitals in the region, Lilongwe Central sends its terminal patients home, unable to cope with the sheer numbers. That compounds the tragedy for many, whose families reject them because of the strong stigma AIDS carries in Africa.
In Durban, South Africa, many of those unfortunates end up in the Ark Christian Ministry shelter - a red brick barracks built 65 years ago to house rail workers in the port district. It is one of the few refuges for homeless AIDS sufferers in the city, site of the next World Aids Congress in 2000.
Ivan Tennunson, 28, diagnosed in 1994, moved to the shelter when his father and then brother refused to take him in.
"Sometimes you want to scream about it; sometimes you want to cry about it," said Tennunson, a cigarette in his trembling hand.
"But one thing I can tell you, it's not going to go away. In the end you just want to be alone. You just want to sit on a beach and think, when is this going to come to an end?"
 Load-Date: October 18, 1998

 

End of Document
