

Albright proposes to 'transform the landscape' of the Middle East
The Associated Press
February 1, 2000, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 575 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Declaring Israel and the Arabs have a real desire for peace, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright called on Syria today to use its influence with the Islamic militant group Hezbollah to end fighting in southern Lebanon.
Blaming Syria for violence along the border, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak said Monday he would not negotiate with Syria unless it cut off support for the group.
However, U.S. officials said the prime minister subsequently clarified his stance and it was no longer a precondition for continuing the talks that Albright said were in a "kind of pause" after having made some progress. Barak sent a more restrained message today, saying merely that Syria should do more to promote peace in Lebanon.
Syria has some 30,000 troops in Lebanon and Syria has permitted the flow of arms to the Iranian-backed group. Quieting the border is a key Israeli goal in the now-dormant peace talks with Syria.
Albright said Israel and Syria should seize a historic opportunity to make peace. She said fighting in southern Lebanon did not help and called on all sides to exercise restraint.
Asked whether Syria had the will and capability to rein in Hezbollah, Albright replied: "I do believe it is important for Syria to use its capability there."
Earlier, Albright called on leaders in the Middle East and beyond to join in finding solutions for such problems as scarce water and other resources.
Speaking to the officials from about a dozen nations, Albright said, "The logic of peace has never been more compelling, nor the opportunity for peace so clear."
The conference is the first in eight years of a so-called "steering committee" that will direct five working groups to find ways to improve highways and water pipelines, expand tourism and trade, protect the environment and develop economic cooperation in the Middle East.
These efforts, she said, cannot take the place of direct negotiations between Israel and the Arabs. But while peacemaking efforts have run into hurdles, Albright said, "We believe the desire for peace is real."
She told officials from Europe and elsewhere outside the region that their presence at the conference "is a sign that the parties are not alone in their desire to travel the road to peace."
Their negotiations, she said, can help "transform the landscape of the region."
Albright, Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov and about a dozen other foreign ministers dined Monday evening in a palace built by Catherine the Great. They were serenaded by folk singers and drank some vodka.
Albright and Ivanov boarded a sleigh pulled by horses and rode amid snowbanks in a torch-lit pathway. Midway, they swapped hats, Albright exchanging her Stetson for Ivanov's Russian fur hat.
The Moscow talks are being sponsored by Russia and the United States. In addition to Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, the Palestinian Authority and Israel, they are to include representatives of Canada, the European Union, Japan, China, Switzerland and Norway.
Syria and Lebanon are boycotting the meetings.
The joint effort to promote regional cooperation is cited by the Clinton administration as an example of the United States working with Russia despite disagreements over Chechnya and a proposed U.S. space weapons program.
Albright on Monday accused Russia of using excessive force in trying to suppress a rebellion in Chechnya and said the conflict "has brought a tragic cost in human lives and a high cost to Russia's world standing."
 Load-Date: February 2, 2000

 

End of Document
