

Alexander Lebed, the general who would be Russia's president
The Associated Press
June 21, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1767 words
Byline: By MITCHELL LANDSBERG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KRASNOYARSK, Russia
Body




In Russian, the word "lebed" means "swan," and Alexander Lebed must surely believe in the childhood story of the ugly duckling.
By his own accounting, he's not much to look at: square head, pockmarked cheeks, a body like a baby bull and a voice so supernaturally low it seems designed for the ears of some other species. When he talks, he has a nervous twitch that makes his lip curl up on the left, giving the impression - presumably not intended - of a sneer.
People look at him and they see the general he once was - an autocrat, a dictator-in-waiting. He insists that no, he's a democrat, the man who could set Russia free from the grip of Czar Boris, as he likes to call his old antagonist in the Kremlin, Boris Yeltsin.
Critics talk about him as a man in the mold of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean military ruler, and he says, no, his heroes are Charles DeGaulle and Dwight D. Eisenhower, generals who were democrats, men of reason.
The point is, until now, no one could really say if Lebed, who badly wants to be president of Russia, was the ugly duckling or the swan.
Now they'll know. On May 17, Lebed was elected governor of the Krasnoyarsk region of Siberia, and soon he'll have a track record as a leader of something other than a battalion. One way or another, his feathers will show.
Depending on how he does, Lebed could be in a strong position to become president of Russia in 2000 or 2004.
Strong leaders are a vital part of Russian tradition, and many people yearn for someone like Lebed - a hero - to lift them out of the depression and muck of post-Soviet life. The Cold War may be over, but Russia's president still exercises vast power in his region, and still carries the code to the nuclear button.
And so the question arises: Who is this man?
Is he on the left, the right or the center? He says the center, but what does that mean in Russia these days? Is he authoritarian or libertarian, nationalist or internationalist, friend of the West or its foe?
The first thing that strikes a reader of his autobiography, "My Life and My Country," is that this is a man of overwhelming ambition. Time and again throughout his career, Alexander Ivanovich Lebed has been underestimated. Time and again, he has suffered setbacks. And time and again, he has been patient and he has won.
It happened when he was a kid in southern Russia and decided he wanted to become a military officer. The story, as he relates it, takes on the weight of myth, so remarkable were the obstacles.
There was a broken clavicle that healed badly; he had it rebroken so it would reknit properly. "After all, I thought, I couldn't become an officer with a collarbone like that."
There were multiple rounds of surgery for throat and sinus disorders, no doubt the antecedents of his amazing voice.
He tried skydiving to prepare for paratroop school - that left him hospitalized with multiple broken bones and a severed tendon.
There were tests failed and tantrums thrown, and countless people who told him he'd never make it.
In the end, after two years of trying, he was admitted to officer training school and went on to have a celebrated career as a military officer in Afghanistan, Moldova and elsewhere.
Later, he ran for president against Yeltsin in 1996, did surprisingly well and agreed to join Yeltsin's team as national security chief. In this role, he notched his greatest accomplishment, negotiating the peace in the breakaway republic of Chechnya.
By this time he was being seriously viewed as a future president by people like Alexei Chaplygen, an analyst with a Moscow think tank, the Center for Studies in Civil Society.
"His strengths," Chaplygen says now, "include charisma and his ability as a strategist, and also his courage in dealing with all branches of power.
"As for his weaknesses, I can name excessive straightforwardness. For a politician, this is not a very good quality. And also … he doesn't know his limits. He's unpredictable and unmanageable."
Lebed didn't know his limits when he ran for governor of Krasnoyarsk, a region four times the size of Texas, with a Texan pride in its independence and distrust of city slickers.
Lebed had never lived in Krasnoyarsk, and early polls suggested he stood little chance against the incumbent governor, Valery Zubov, a relative bright light among Russia's provincial leaders.
Lebed campaigned tirelessly, short-hopping the region by plane, tromping through the snow and permafrost in more than 100 towns and villages, from close to Mongolia to the Arctic Circle.
He stood outside in the stinging Siberian wind, the only hatless, gloveless man in sight, and answered questions from audiences until they had no more.
"Alexander Ivanovich," people would yell, "are you going to run for president?"
The answer would rumble out in his volcanic bass: "I'm a military man and I'm a man of my word. People are asking me about the election of the year 2000, and so I promise that I will participate in this election only if I succeed in improving the economy in the Krasnoyarsk region."
"Alexander Ivanovich, why do we work without pay and yet our enterprises are fined only for not paying taxes?" others asked.
A sympathetic nod. "I came to the conclusion that in some countries, people live better than we do, in some they live worse, but nowhere do people live so senselessly."
In the end, he confounded the naysayers. Lebed forced Zubov, once a successful amateur runner, into a runoff. Then he floored him like the boxer he once was. People throughout Russia took notice.
"There are two main conclusions of this election," Lebed told a television interviewer the morning after the runoff. "The first one, which is serious, is that the people turned out to be more clever than the politicians. And the second one, which is a joke, is that the former boxer beat the former runner in long distances."
It was typical Lebed humor: self-aggrandizing and not terribly funny. Another Lebed joke: He likes to refer to Russia as "Lebedyania."
In Krasnoyarsk, Lebed has his work cut out for him. Although the region is in better shape than many in Russia, and has some of the world's richest deposits of timber and minerals, it also has enormous problems.
Whole industries are at a standstill; workers go without pay and, often, without work. To the extent that factories work, they are responsible for some of the worst industrial pollution on Earth. Organized crime flourishes in the cities.
Lyubov Daft, a kindergarten teacher, is among the fed-up majority who voted for Lebed. Standing inside the school where she voted, her strawberry hair tumbling over the collar of her black leather jacket, she spoke with disgust about the managers who run the region's industry.
"I don't know what he should do, but I hope that with his strength of character, he'll be hard on them. He's my last hope," she said.
The question everyone has been asking since Lebed's victory is whether he can turn things around in Krasnoyarsk in time to run for president in 2000.
"From my point of view, he possesses good prospects to become a good governor," said Vyacheslav Novikov, host of a public affairs program on Krasnoyarsk television.
But in two years? "Definitely not."
Novikov is among those who believe that Lebed may have damaged his prospects for the presidency by winning in Krasnoyarsk.
In fact, there are those who believe, darkly, that Lebed was set up. One source for this belief lies in the remarks of Boris Berezovsky, a billionaire business tycoon who is a powerful, shadowy force in Russian politics. Berezovsky said he supported Lebed in Krasnoyarsk precisely because he doesn't want him to be president.
But there are those who believe that, once again, Lebed is being underestimated.
So far, the names most frequently bandied about for president in 2000 are Viktor Chernomyrdin, the former prime minister; Gennady Zyuganov, the Communist Party boss; Grigory Yavlinsky, a leader of the country's liberal forces; and Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov.
All share one trait: They are Moscow insiders. In a country that increasingly resents the capital and its perceived prosperity, this is not an asset. And Lebed, despite his brief and stormy stint in the Kremlin as national security chief, could be in a prime position to capitalize on that.
In the heat of the campaign in Krasnoyarsk, some wild rumors were flying around. The most persistent was that Lebed and his brother, Alexei, another former military officer who is now governor of the neighboring region of Khakassia, were planning to create an independent Siberian republic and secede from Russia.
"In a way, I believe they are right," said Chaplygen, the Moscow analyst. He believes Lebed intends to marshal support throughout Siberia and the Far East and use that for a political assault on Moscow in the presidential election.
Furthermore, he believes Lebed might succeed.
"He's a very strong personality in all respects," Chaplygen said. "We've observed that, in recent months, his team became very strong. He wouldn't lack either ideas or the people to carry them out."
The big question that remains is: What are his ideas? The thing about Alexander Lebed is, no one really knows.
His platform in the election in Krasnoyarsk was so vague as to be meaningless: He wants the region to keep a larger share of its taxes. He intends to crack down on corruption. He'll get industry working again.
Most people assume Lebed is a nationalist and populist with vaguely centrist economic ideas and vaguely authoritarian views on law and order. He is generally perceived as honest, and apparently sincere in his distaste for Soviet totalitarianism. (Lebed says his father spent two years in a Stalinist labor camp for being late to work.)
What kind of president he'd be, nobody knows.
At a polling place in Krasnoyarsk, technical college student Dmitri Vasakin stopped for a minute to give his thoughts about Lebed. Vasakin, dressed in the international youth uniform of black jeans, black jacket and collarless shirt, is naturally worried about his future. In Lebed, he sees a vehicle for hope.
Doesn't it bother him that Lebed is an outsider who only wants to use Krasnoyarsk as stepping stone to higher office? He paused to consider.
"Of course, a lot of people feel a bit apprehensive choosing a guy who's not from the territory," he answered. "But I think it's better to let him try to show what he can do here than if people were to elect him president and have him fail.
"This will be a kind of test for him. People will see what he can do and can't do. … I think people have suffered a lot, and in this man, they associate hope for a better life."
 Load-Date: June 21, 1998

 

End of Document
