

Always Simmering, the Cyprus Conflict Begins to Boil
August 15, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 677 words
Byline: By ALEX EFTY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DHERINIA, Cyprus
Body




Hours after his cousin was buried, Greek Cypriot Solomos Solomou broke through a cordon of U.N. troops who help keep this island separated and tried to tear down a Turkish flag.
As he climbed the pole, shouting and waving to fellow demonstrators, a volley of Turkish gunfire brought him crashing to the ground.
The incident Wednesday shows just how deep feelings still run 22 years after Turkish troops invaded and captured the northern third of this Mediterranean island.
Cyprus has been an independent country since 1960, but it has never resolved the ethnic conflict between the 600,000 Greek Cypriots and the 150,000 Turkish Cypriots.
U.N. forces along the so-called Green Line that divides the island have generally managed to keep the peace since 1974, but there's no solution in sight, and the rising tempers on the island also reflect the larger conflict between longtime rivals Greece and Turkey.
Solomou's family fled the east coast resort city of Famagusta during the 1974 Turkish invasion, which came on the heels of a short-lived coup by supporters of unity with Greece.
Famagusta has since become a ghost town. Solomou's family moved only a short distance away - but to the other side of the Green Line. They've never gone back because most Cypriots - both Greeks and Turks - are not allowed to visit the other side.
Solomou died less than a mile from his old family home.
Several soldiers have been killed in isolated shooting incidents since the 1974 conflict, but this week marked the first time demonstrators have been killed in the buffer zone.
The trouble began Sunday when hundreds of Greek Cypriots protesting the Turkish occupation stormed into the buffer zone and threw stones at Turkish troops and civilians.
When the Turks responded with gunfire and stones of their own, the Greeks retreated, but Tassos Isaac, 24, was caught by the Turks and beaten to death with clubs and stones.
Solomou, Issac's cousin, was a pallbearer at the funeral Wednesday near the Green Line in Dherinia in southeast Cyprus. After the burial, several hundred young men went directly to the buffer zone.
The group burst through successive cordons of Greek Cypriot police and U.N. peacekeeping troops to enter the zone and plant a Cypriot flag and lay wreaths at the spot where Isaac was killed.
They continued onto the Turkish military checkpoint on the other end of the buffer zone, where they stoned the Turkish troops on the other side of a barbed-wire barricade.
Solomou led the charge. He struggled with U.N. troops who tried to push the demonstrators back, and broke through the cordon shouting, "Let me pass. Let me pass."
He managed to squeeze through the barbed wire and started to climb the Turkish flagpole when the shots rang out.
Solomou was killed and 11 people were hurt in the shooting from the Turkish side, including two British U.N. peacekeepers.
The United Nations has criticized both sides for allowing people to enter the buffer zone, and both the United Nations and the United States denounced the Turkish side for opening fire Wednesday.
Greek Cypriot President Glafcos Clerides has urged demonstrators to respect the U.N. buffer zone, but with passions inflamed the slain protesters have been hailed as heroes.
Archbishop Chrysostomos, the head of the Cyprus Orthodox Church, presided over Isaac's funeral Wednesday and hailed what he called his "heroic act, which must be an example for all of us."
The archbishop also praised Solomou after his death.
"We congratulate the parents of the young man who tried to haul down the flag of the foreign occupier from the soil of Cyprus," the archbishop said. "They should feel proud of their son."
Greek Premier Costas Simitis planned to attend his funeral Friday.
Turkish Foreign Minister Tansu Ciller, for her part, made an impromptu visit to the island Thursday to pledge Turkey's backing for Turkish Cypriots' "just cause."
"We will never leave you alone, my Cypriot brothers, in (defending) your right cause," said Ciller, the former prime minister. "We break the hands that reach out in disrespect of the flag."
 Load-Date: August 15, 1996

 

End of Document
