

An AP Entertainment Review - A six-hour, two-part 'Henry VI' at the Public Theater
The Associated Press
December 18, 1996, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 667 words
Byline: By MICHAEL KUCHWARA, AP Drama Critic
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




An iron casket literally falls from the sky, shattering the silence with an unnerving, heavy clang. King Henry V has died, and his 9-month-old son is England's new monarch.
With that unceremonious descent, "Henry VI," the rarely seen Shakespeare history play about the Wars of the Roses, is off and running - sometimes in several directions at once - at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
That's because director Karin Coonrod is brimming with ideas, radically reshaping the three-part play into two three-hour segments, here called "The Edged Sword" and "Black Storm." She also has downsized the cast, employing 10 actors to handle a multitude of roles. And therein lies the problem. Most are not up to their tasks.
Even when she makes the wrong decisions - and there are some ideas and images that just don't work (the less said about the "Tea for Two" finale the better) - Coonrod is a startling director. Plus the actors can't keep up with her or, more importantly, the text.
The pursuit of power is the name of the game in "Henry VI," and the participants in this quest are a particularly nasty and greedy bunch. The one exception is the gentle, shy title character, overshadowed in life by his dead father, a charismatic war hero.
Henry VI also is no match for the Duke of York, later Edward IV, and Edward's three sons, particularly the misshapen creature who becomes the central character in one of the great history plays, "Richard III." Of course, in Coonrod's version, Richard is played by the best-looking man in the ensemble, taking non-traditional casting to the strangest places.
The director never lets us forget that "Henry VI" is a play about family. The best scene of the two-part extravaganza occurs in "The Edged Sword" when the Duke of York, using a felt-tipped pen and white drafting paper, outlines his family's genealogy and why he, and not Henry, should be king of England. The man looks like a college football coach diagraming his team to a sure-fire touchdown.
Coonrod has reconfigured the stage at Martinson Hall, one of the least appetizing playhouses in the Public Theater complex. Now the stage slashes the audience in half, placing them on either side of the action. The effect is one of immediacy. The true fury and bloodiness of the royal deeds are never very far away from the theatergoers.
Much of the violence is stylized - murders in slow motion for example - but they retain their horror and often are hard to watch.
Visually, Coonrod persistently reminds audiences what these calculating killers are after. A golden crown, often lying alone, appears from time to time on stage.
In "Black Storm," the much tighter, better constructed part of Coonrod's epic, a high-tech, steel throne dominates the first half of the action. In the second half of "Storm," Henry VI watches from above the audience, sitting in a swing to observe relatives plotting his downfall.
Many of the images are striking; what's missing is the poetry that should accompany these stage pictures. As a play, "Henry VI" is not in the same league as "Henry V" or the two parts of "Henry IV." Yet there are moving, highly emotional peaks in the plays that Coonrod's overtaxed troupe of actors don't scale.
Tom Nelis, in the pivotal title role, offers a mild, unmoving portrait of the ineffectual king. Right away, audience interest tapers off because they don't care very much whether the monarch lives or dies.
The most consistent performer is Angie Phillips, who plays Queen Margaret, Henry's determined wife. There is a fierceness to her acting that carries over to her recitation of some of Shakespeare's best lines.
Coonrod keeps things busy. Scene after scene is peeled away quickly. These swift transitions also help to put an emotional distance between the audience and the story. There is no time to tarry over all the troubles on stage.
By the time the two parts of "Henry VI" are over, the audience is exhausted, but not exhilarated. A lot of ground has been covered, but the heart hasn't been touched.
 Load-Date: December 18, 1996

 

End of Document
