

At the Movies: 'The Dinner Game'
The Associated Press
July 26, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 631 words
Byline: By CHRISTY LEMIRE, Associated Press Writer
Body




AT THE MOVIES logo
Better pay attention, because the jokes in "The Dinner Game" come as quick as volleys at the French Open.
The biting comedy, one of the highest grossing films in French history, is fast-paced, lighthearted fun.
Although the ending is as message-laden as an after-school special, everything up until then is so amusing, such preachiness is forgivable.
Set in Paris, "The Dinner Game" ("Le Diner de Cons") is about an arrogant, rich yuppie who engages in a cruel competition with his equally obnoxious friends. They hunt for the biggest idiots they can find and invite them to dinner parties simply to make fun of them.
Pierre Brochant (Thierry Lhermitte), a handsome, golf-playing publisher, thinks he's found "a world champion" in Francois Pignon (Jacques Villeret), a short, balding, overweight accountant who toils in the lower ranks of the Financial Ministry. Picture a French version of Danny DeVito.
But Pignon springs to life and his blue eyes twinkle when he talks about his beloved hobby: He builds models of famous monuments using matchsticks. He's more than happy to discuss how many matchsticks and tubes of glue it took to build his tiny Eiffel Tower - if anyone can stay awake long enough to listen.
Pignon is kind and he means well, though. When he goes to Brochant's lavish apartment for drinks before the big dinner, he tries his hardest to help Brochant through a series of sticky situations - with disastrous results.
Brochant's pretty, blond wife Christine (Alexandra Vandernoot), sick of her husband's thoughtless game and his philandering, dumps him on the answering machine for Pignon to hear. Pignon, who fancies himself a crafty thinker, tries to persuade Christine to come back but ends up insulting her and encouraging Brochant's clingy mistress, Marlene (Catherine Frot).
When Pignon offers to help find Christine, he ends up inviting over his co-worker, a ruthless tax investigator who is suspicious of Brochant's beautiful - and undeclared - art works.
The movie's moral is obvious from the start, and it's clear that the smug Brochant is the real idiot and will get what's coming to him.
Unfortunately, "The Dinner Game" relies on basic and somewhat hackneyed tenets of comedy for laughs - mistaken identity, plays on words and over-the-top physical humor. But because the film is funny and well-intentioned, it's easy to overlook these shortcomings.
Lhermitte and Villeret have great chemistry. The scenes in which the two spar with words are a joy to watch.
The supporting cast is strong with terrific comedic timing, notably Daniel Prevost as the tax inspector and Francis Huster as Brochant's buddy who gets caught in the elaborate plot to find Christine.
But the script from writer-director Francis Veber is the real star. Veber, who wrote "La Cage aux Folles" in 1978, got the idea for this film from a real game played in Paris. He thought it would be fun to make life miserable for one of these egotistical jerks, and the revenge he creates in "The Dinner Game" is hilarious.
"The Dinner Game," a Lions Gate Films release, is in French with English subtitles. The film was nominated for six Cesar awards (the French equivalent of the Oscar) including best picture, and won Cesars for best screenplay, best actor for Villeret and best supporting actor for Prevost. It runs 80 minutes and is rated PG-13.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted. End Adv for Release Anytime
 Load-Date: July 26, 1999

 

End of Document
