

At the Movies: 'Thomas and the Magic Railroad'
The Associated Press
July 25, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 636 words
Byline: By FRAZIER MOORE, AP Television Writer
Body




Every weekday on the island of Manhattan, at the start of afternoon rush, a huge percentage of taxicabs go out of service. Just when people need to get somewhere the most - that's the designated time for drivers' shift change. It lasts a couple of hours.
Try hailing a cab then.
I mention this in a review of "Thomas and the Magic Railroad" for two reasons.
First, to confess that I was late getting to the screening (though only by about five minutes).
And second, to note that Sir Topham Hatt, transportation minister for the Island of Sodor, would never permit such nonsense.
Oh, sure, those under Sir Topham's command, like cheeky Thomas the Tank Engine and his rail-hugging chums, may occasionally get themselves into a bit of mischief. But as children and savvy parents know, life rolls along sweetly on Sodor, a place where trains are more than transportation.
Now, after years of enjoying "Thomas" shorts (telecast within the live-action "Shining Time Station" series), these fans of Thomas, Edward, Gordon and the rest can take a long, enchanting ride on "Thomas and the Magic Railroad."
Britt Allcroft, who drew upon the half-century-old "Railway Series" of children's books to make her original "Thomas" films, has written and directed this ambitious new feature. Big, bright and true to its legacy, "Thomas and the Magic Railroad" finds Allcroft living up to the Sodor creed: "Be responsible, reliable and really useful."
As Sir Topham would say, Well done!
The biggest departure: Sodor's engine and rail-car characters, which in the past were all voiced by a single off-screen storyteller (lately, Alec Baldwin), now have their "own" voices. Nothing wrong with that.
One other thing. I must admit that I found the "Magic Railroad" story pretty complex. New characters include the villainous Diesel 10, who threatens the local steam-driven lifestyle. And there's a sidelined "sleeping beauty" of an engine named Lady. Will she ever chug again?
Melancholy Grandpa Stone (Peter Fonda) is visited by his 12-year-old granddaughter, Lily (Mara Wilson), who wants to cheer him up. Meanwhile, Mr. Conductor (Baldwin) is losing his magic sparkle, as is his beach-bum Scottish cousin (Michael E. Rodgers), whom he summons to help find out where the magic went.
(Sir Topham Hatt, if you were wondering, is never seen, just heard, blustering orders over the phone.)
The film, whose exteriors were shot in Toronto, Britain's Isle of Man, and on the steam-railroad line at Strasburg, Pa., is no less farflung in its mythical wanderings.
Besides the Big City (where Lily lives with her mother), the film transports us to Shining Time (where Mr. Conductor is just 18 inches tall) and Sodor (where he and all humans are in proper scale with their pastoral surroundings). The Magic Railroad gets us back and forth, along a dazzling, computer-generated passageway.
Stubborn grownups who struggle to sort all this out will be rewarded to find that the fantasy does, indeed, make a certain fantastic sense.
But, cinders and ashes! We're all better off just doing what the kids will do: take a seat, roll along and enjoy this trip into dream state.
As Grandpa Stone declares, "The magic you refuse to believe in will get the better of you." Why resist?
"Thomas and the Magic Railroad," a Destination Films release, is written and directed by Britt Allcroft. Produced by Allcroft and Phil Fehrle, it is rated G, and runs 89 minutes.
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY385
 Load-Date: July 26, 2000

 

End of Document
