

At the Movies: 'The General's Daughter'
The Associated Press
June 16, 1999, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 519 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body




AT THE MOVIES Logo
When reviewers arrived for a preview screening of "The General's Daughter" at Paramount Pictures, they were handed a printed card asking them not to reveal "the surprising twists and ending of the film."
What do they think we are - spoilsports who tell readers how a picture ends? As to the "surprising twists," it would take a column or two of print to report them all.
What can be said about "The General's Daughter" is that it is a stylish, well-acted thriller, loaded with sex and full of shock as well as perplexity.
Christopher Bertolini and William Goldman wrote the script, based on a novel by Nelson DeMille. While novelists can often convincingly spin far-fetched yarns, these can be difficult to tell in the more realistic medium of film. This is a movie that requires special attention to plot and characters.
"The General's Daughter" gives John Travolta another chance to display his remarkable range. He plays Paul Brenner, a noncommissioned investigator of crimes at a Southern army base. We first see him masquerading as a good ol' boy selling weapons to a crooked buyer.
The buyer thinks he can get out of paying by eliminating the dumb redneck. Bad idea. Brenner gets the better of him with the help of an outboard motor blade.
A horrendous murder is discovered on the base, and Brenner is assigned to investigate. He is surprised to be joined by an officer, Sarah Sunhill (Madeline Stowe). They had been lovers while on duty in Belgium - "We'll always have Brussels," he tells her jokingly.
The relationship between the two sleuths is one of the film's assets. There is little of the male-female bickering you would expect in such a situation. They view each other with respect.
The investigation uncovers a number of characters who are not quite what they seem: a revered general (James Cromwell); a flippant, mystery-laden colonel (James Woods); a serious-minded colonel (Timothy Hutton), an ally of the investigators; the colonel's close-lipped aide (Clarence Williams III); and more.
That's about as far as we can go without spilling any of Paramount's beans.
Travolta has been supplied with sharp dialogue and a well rounded character that could possibly begat a sequel. He and Woods have a lengthy, confrontational scene that is thrilling to watch, like Connors and McEnroe slugging it out in their primes.
Simon West's direction keeps the action and the suspense in high gear throughout, and Peter Menzies Jr.'s camera work maintains a creepy atmosphere, as does Carter Burwell's music.
"The General's Daughter" is a Paramount Pictures release produced by Mace Neufeld. Rated R for language, nudity, violence and depictions of sadomasochism. Running time 118 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: June 16, 1999

 

End of Document
