

At the Movies: 'The Devil's Own'
March 24, 1997, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 514 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body



AT THE MOVIES Logo
"The Troubles," the endless conflict in North Ireland, have become a favored subject for filmmakers. And why not? The situation offers violence, intrigue, human drama, and more violence - explosions, automatic weapons, point-blank shootings.
"The Devil's Own" brings "The Troubles" to New York City with the same violent results.
The story begins in rural Ireland, where a man suspected of sympathizing with the Irish Republican Army is having supper with his wife and children. The door of the modest home flies open and two masked men enter. The father receives fatal shots in the chest, and the killers flee.
The father's son grows up to be Frankie McGuire (Brad Pitt), who seeks his revenge by slaying English soldiers in Belfast. When a bombing is anticipated by the anti-terrorist forces, Frankie is caught in an ambush. He escapes, but he realizes Belfast is too hot for him.
Frankie flees to New York, where he is assigned to acquire munitions for the IRA cause.
Here's where the scriptwriters spring their gimmick: A sympathetic judge arranges for Frankie to board with a New York cop and his family. Tom O'Meara (Harrison Ford) is a peace-loving officer who brings humanity to his work.
Frankie sets about his dangerous mission: to secure a large cache of Russian missiles and transport them to Ireland on a small boat. His activities bring violence to the police officer's home, and O'Meara begins to delve into the young man's life.
After a number of killings, the cop and the terrorist meet for the final shootout.
"The Devil's Own" is a tale you want to believe, because Ford and Pitt are such persuasive actors. But there are too many incongruities along the way, too many unanswered questions. (Is he going across the ocean alone on that boat? Does he know navigation?)
Gossip reports that script troubles were rife during filming and the two stars did not get along. If true, the film reflects that. There is a slapdash atmosphere to the proceedings, as though the filmmakers relied on the usual movie tricks to pump up the action. What might have shed light on "The Troubles" becomes merely another exercise in violence.
Both Ford and Pitt do star turns with their usual skill, and support is added by Margaret Colin as O'Meara's wife, Ruben Blades as his faulty partner, and Treat Williams as a New York restaurateur and munitions dealer.
"The Devil's Own" is a Columbia Pictures release, directed by Alan J. Pakula and produced by Lawrence Gordon and Lawrence F. Colesberry. Kevin Jarre devised the story and wrote the script with David Aaron Cohen and Vincent Patrick. Rated R for language and excessive violence. Running time: 107 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: March 24, 1997

 

End of Document
