

At the Movies: 'The Harmonists'
The Associated Press
March 23, 1999, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 686 words
Byline: BY CHRISTY LEMIRE, Associated Press Writer
Body




It's a good thing the music in "The Harmonists" is on key, because the rest of the film falls flat.
The movie tells the true story of the Comedian Harmonists, a German a cappella group with a unique sound that took Europe by storm during Hitler's rise to power. In matching white ties and tails and impeccable harmonies, they're the Bavarian Boyz II Men.
After achieving enormous success quickly, they hit a scratch. Three of the six members are Jewish, and the Nazis threaten to break them up.
The film begins in the late 1920s. Shy, would-be actor Harry Frommermann (Ulrich Noethen) is having little success in Berlin. He can barely afford to eat, so he nibbles from a bag of seeds he buys for his bird, Paganini. Even his agent tells him to find a different job, so he finally pursues his dream of forming a musical ensemble.
Harry takes out an ad in the paper for singers and, similar to "The Commitments," dozens show up - most without talent. A cocky, aggressive monk named Robert Biberti (Ben Becker) pushes his way to the front of the line, and he has exactly the rich, booming bass Harry seeks. Robert also has a thirst for power, and from the very beginning he and Harry battle for control.
Robert has a friend named Ari Leschnikoff (Max Tidof), a singing waiter with a haunting tenor voice. They add two more singers and a pianist.
The group lives up to Harry's vision of emulating the harmonies of the American group The Revellers. Rehearsing in overcoats in Harry's freezing, dingy apartment, they create flawless five-part harmonies with piano accompaniment.
The lyrics are ridiculous: "The whole wide world is quite bewitched. Veronica, the asparagus is sprouting," but the music is fun, and they have an uncanny way of making their voices sound like musical instruments.
The Comedian Harmonists pack concert halls across Europe, and adoring women in beaded hats, gloves and flapper dresses applaud wildly. Despite Hitler's increasing strength, it's a high time.
Predictably, success brings out the worst in them, and infighting brews. Robert's cigars, belly and ego get bigger. He even pursues Harry's girlfriend, Erna (Meret Becker), a flirty college student who works in the record store where he hears his first Revellers album. Insecure Harry does little to stop him.
The Nazis also catch up with them. They start by painting red swastikas on the record store and harassing Erna. Then an agent from the Reich Cultural Association warns Harry and Robert that he knows three of the six members are Jews, and "suggests" they avoid Jewish songwriters.
In 1934, before the Comedian Harmonists take the stage, the Nazis declare this concert will be their last.
The story itself is interesting, and the fact that it's true makes it even more compelling. But you'd never know it by watching this movie. We never get to know these singers, where they come from or what motivates them.
They are reduced to stereotypes. Harry, the group's founder, is the goodhearted straight man. Robert is the cigar-chomping brute. Ari is the champagne-swilling womanizer. We learn even less about the other three men.
The actors give decent performances, with Becker as the standout. But the whole film skims the surface of the group's rise and fall. There is no sense of fear of the Nazis, nor is there genuine jubilation during their successes. It all feels very superficial - just like the lyrics of their songs.
"The Harmonists," a Miramax Films release, is in German with English subtitles. The producers were Hanno Huth, Reinhard Kaloos, Danny Krausz. It was directed by Joseph Vilsmaier and written by Klaus Richter. The film is rated R, with brief nudity and adult situations, and has a running time of 114 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: March 23, 1999

 

End of Document
