

At the Movies: 'The Third Miracle'
The Associated Press
February 15, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 625 words
Byline: By CHRISTY LEMIRE, Associated Press Writer
Body




"The Third Miracle" is almost a miracle itself - a film that approaches religion with no satire or exploitation, but pure fascination at the mystery of faith.
Director Agnieszka Holland, who wrote and directed the wonderfully stirring "Europa Europa" a decade ago, has created another film full of memorable visual images and strong characters.
Ed Harris plays Father Frank Shore, a wavering Catholic priest living as a lay person among the drug addicts, prostitutes and homeless in a poor, multiethnic section of Chicago in 1979.
Previously, Frank worked as a sort of church-appointed detective, investigating reports of miracles. The bishop tracks him down and asks him to look into reports that a marble statue of the Virgin Mary has wept blood since the death of a beloved church volunteer - but only in November and only when it rains. Frank must decide whether to recommend the woman, a Slovakian immigrant named Helen O'Regan (Barbara Sukowa) who had healing powers, for sainthood.
As he learns more about Helen, he also becomes involved with her daughter, the saucy Roxanna (Anne Heche). When Roxanna was 16, Helen abandoned her to devote her life to the church. Roxanna is hardly a saint herself and doubts that her mother was either.
While it may sound cliche for a Catholic priest to be tempted by a beautiful, younger woman, Harris and Heche have so much chemistry that they make the relationship work. With his strong cheekbones, piercing blue eyes and sexy smile, how could she not be attracted to him?
There's a great scene in which the two visit Helen's grave on her birthday and swig vodka from the bottle in tribute to her. They talk and flirt, and Roxanna asks Frank why he became a priest. When he asks why she wants to know, she smiles slyly and says, "Because I can tell you like this."
But Frank struggles with more than his vow of chastity. Once he decides the church should consider Helen for sainthood, he faces opposition from a judgmental, insulting German archbishop (Armin Mueller-Stahl), who thinks America already has enough saints.
Holland directs with warmth and emotion, and skillfully uses grainy blue and gray tones to depict moments of strong faith. One of the best scenes comes at the beginning, a flashback to Slovakia in 1944 as Allied planes drop bombs on a poor village.
A young girl with long, messy brown hair dressed in rags grabs a statue of the Madonna and child from her home, scurries through the crowded, chaotic streets and kneels at the front steps of a church. She sees before her another statue of the Virgin Mary and prays. The bombing suddenly stops. There is silence, and a broad smile spreads across the girl's face. The girl is Helen.
Harris, as always, gives a terrific, textured performance as a priest torn between love and spiritual redemption. Heche brings a sense of fun and fire to her character, which could have been a nondescript supporting part.
Mueller-Stahl's performance is a bit one-note, however. He is nothing but gruff and condescending.
Toward the end, the film feels long and slightly tedious, but overall it's a fascinating look at an unusual subject.
"The Third Miracle," a Sony Pictures Classics release, is rated R for language, brief drug use and some sexual and violent images. It was written by John Romano, adapted from a novel by Richard Vetere. Running time: 119 minutes.
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY394
 Load-Date: February 16, 2000

 

End of Document
