

At the Movies: 'The Idiots'
The Associated Press
April 26, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 578 words
Byline: By CHRIS GRYGIEL, Associated Press Writer
Body




"The Idiots" is not a movie people will be indifferent about. The avant-garde Danish film from acclaimed director Lars von Trier will either intrigue or offend.
It opens in a restaurant, where a woman dining alone notices a group of young people who seem mentally impaired; they wander around, take things from other patrons' tables and make them uncomfortable.
The lone diner, Karen, is intrigued and goes with the group when they are asked to leave. Outside, she discovers they are not impaired at all - they are faking "spassing" out to get a rise out of people and challenge middle-class complacency. Karen follows them back to their base, a large house on the outskirts of Copenhagen.
Over the next several days she accompanies them on their adventures. They crash a local swimming pool, and some partially disrobe while others splash around in water wings. The uncle of the group's nominal leader, Stoffer, is trying to sell the house they're staying at and the idiots horrify prospective buyers. In a memorable scene, a naked Stoffer chases off a town official who tries to bribe them to leave.
Mainstream American audiences may not find much to like here. "The Idiots" is shot entirely with handheld cameras, which gives it the herky-jerky feel that many people found annoying about "The Blair Witch Project." The dialogue is in Danish, with English subtitles. There's gratuitous nudity, and watching for nearly two hours as people act like morons can be tedious.
However, viewers with an appreciation for the unusual might find some things for them.
Von Trier is best known for the 1996 film "Breaking the Waves," which won the Grand Prix at Cannes and saw Emily Watson receive a Best Actress Academy Award nomination. "The Idiots" was filmed under iconoclastic guidelines known as "Dogma 95," which were adopted by Trier and other directors and call for a minimalist, bare-bones style which emphasizes intense individual scenes instead of the overall story.
There are several notable moments, including a funny one in which Stoffer's uncle shows up at the house and discovers that his nephew's lay-about acquaintances have made it a shambles. Stoffer, nervous that his uncle will kick him out, explains that his friends are actually workers he's hired to renovate the place (this as one of them throws rocks through a window).
Trier's story (he also wrote the screenplay) picks up speed toward the end, as members of the group begin to question what they're doing. Stoffer challenges them to act like idiots in their real lives, around people they work with and love. Some grow uncomfortable and leave.
But Karen, the group's outsider and until now the most reserved, accepts the challenge and returns home with another member of the group. In an unexpected and poignant final scene, the tragic situation Karen was running from is revealed, and the group's silly antics seem absurd in the face of such harsh reality.
The USA Films release was produced by Peter Aalbaek Jensen and Vibeke Windelov. Rated R, with nudity and swearing. Running time: 115 minutes.
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos planned
 Load-Date: April 27, 2000

 

End of Document
