

At the Movies: 'The Assignment'
September 24, 1997, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 484 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body



AT THE MOVIES Logo
At the beginning of "The Assignment," liquid is flowing down a cobbled street in Paris. The camera pulls back, revealing two boys urinating on their way to school. Then there's a long pullback to an apartment across the street, accompanied by sounds of a woman in orgasm. A naked man stands at a window, biting an apple.
Is this symbolism, or simply a director showing off? Whatever it is, it's not a promising opening for an international spy and terrorist movie.
"The Assignment" is based on a far-fetched premise: A Cuban American officer in the U.S. Navy bears an amazing resemblance to the world's most notorious terrorist, Carlos - enough of a resemblance that the officer might be used as a double to trigger the assassination of Carlos.
The excellent actor, Aidan Quinn, assumes the dual role, and he brings much-needed credence to the film. He is first seen as Carlos, tossing bombs that murder men, women and children.
Then Quinn becomes Annibal Ramirez, who is captured by the Mossad while visiting Israel. He is tortured until the Mossad leader, Ben Kingsley, discovers that his captive is not the infamous Carlos.
A CIA agent, Donald Sutherland, has been pursuing Carlos since witnessing his cruelty in a Paris bombing. Sutherland and Kingsley concoct their audacious plan: to use the Navy man in an attempt to make the Russians believe Carlos is selling his secrets to the United States.
The secrets involve Carlos' work for the Russians. Thus, Sutherland and Kingsley reason, the Russians themselves will need to murder Carlos.
First, Quinn must undergo a regimen that would make Marine boot training seem like summer camp. He even must take lessons in Carlos' sex techniques from one of his former mistresses.
The long, exhausting training over, Quinn is ready for his challenge. After a series of violent encounters, he appears to have accomplished his mission. Or does he? The film's ending casts some doubt.
The director of "The Assignment," Canadian Christian Duguay, handles the action with an expert hand, and he is blessed by three superior actors who can breathe life into ambivalent characters. But all are hampered by a script (by Dan Gordon and Sabi H. Shabtai) that attempts too much. Coming on the heels of so many summertime action-adventures, the film has little to distinguish it.
The Triumph Films release was produced by Tom Berry and Franco Battista. Rated R for language, sexual sequences, nudity and excessive violence. Running time: 115 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: September 24, 1997

 

End of Document
