

At the Movies: 'The Peacemaker'
September 25, 1997, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 821 words
Byline: By DOLORES BARCLAY
Body



AT THE MOVIES Logo
As one character says early on in "The Peacemaker," DreamWorks Pictures' firestorm of a debut, "God, I miss the Cold War."
The tug between the West and the Soviet Union provided some of the best fodder for espionage thrillers since Nazis and World War II. Now, we're reduced to the occasional drug lord or arms dealer, Russian Mafioso, crazed Croatian or insane Serb.
"The Peacemaker" resurrects an old standby - a stolen nuclear device - and adds enough technological juice and high-speed excitement to fuel World War III.
At the helm of the first film effort from the infant studio created by the mighty moguls Steven Spielberg, Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen is Mimi Leder, one of the few women ever to direct an action movie.
Leder, who makes her feature film directorial debut with "The Peacemaker," packs a serious punch. Her camera is never dormant and she makes even the most insipid exchange crackle with energy. She has a good taste for action shots and manufactures one of the best car chases in years.
She also pulls a good performance from George Clooney, who seems to waffle from comedy to action, in his role as Lt. Col. Thomas Devoe, an intelligence officer who goes after terrorists who've stolen the device.
Leder opens her movie in a swirl of steam as a train in an isolated area of Russia is loaded with nuclear weapons destined to be deactivated. With angled shots, cutaways of track, wheels and military boots, she sets an ugly and anxious mood.
The train takes off - on a high-speed collision course with a passenger train. The crash is brilliantly choreographed with a tangle of metal and body parts. Moments later, one of the devices goes off. The nuclear blast set off alarms around the world, especially in Washington, D.C., where government officials muster to make sure none of the other weapons is deployed.
Heading the U.S. team is Dr. Julia Kelly (Nicole Kidman), a nuclear scientist who heads the White House Nuclear Smuggling Group. She's convinced that terrorists are responsible and teams up with Devoe, who thinks high-level arms smugglers are involved. Their hunt leads them to Eastern Europe.
They discover that the weapons were taken by profiteers who plan to sell them to the highest bidders in Third World countries. But one device was taken by a lone terrorist who plans to use it against world leaders who he believes are responsible for the death of his wife and child in a sniper attack in Sarajevo.
The convoluted plot jerks the movie around the globe, giving Clooney every opportunity to demonstrate his own brand of macho edginess. And he's just great - a no-nonsense, sometimes laconic, often witty trained killer who's loyal to his men and deeply committed to his mission.
Kidman, on the other hand, gets unintentional laughs. Unfortunately, she's miscast here and appears extremely uncomfortable with her character, who at times comes across as a nitwit.
And there is little chemistry between the two leads, who are reluctantly thrown together to get a job done. Yes, they have the obligatory Hollywood tussle of wills and yes, there's the much-expected flirtation. But it has as much fizz as a day-old egg cream.
The storyline surrounding Dusan Gavrich (Marcel Iures), the emotionally tortured terrorist, is too predictable to be compelling and raises more questions than it answers. Gavrich himself needs to be fleshed out a bit more. He almost works out of character, in that he is shown as a man who loves children (he teaches piano with great passion and care) and who clearly is grieving his wife and child. Yet, he is willing to kill others - the peacemakers who abandoned his country - even children, to avenge his family's death?
Still, even superficially, when the Gavrich story is added to the mix, it blends well enough to send the movie to its fiery conclusion.
"The Peacemaker" is ripe with good support. Alexander Baluev as General Kodoroff, who leads the hijacking, is reasonably nasty and balances the sweet level-headedness of Armin Mueller-Stahl's Dimitri Vertikoff, a former Russian spy.
Leder, who directs from a screenplay by Michael Schiffer, has made a knuckle-cruncher that holds up on its own even without the seriously loud and annoying Hans Zimmer soundtrack that screams at you everytime the filmmakers want you to get excited.
"The Peacemaker" was produced by Walter Parkes and Branko Lustig and gloriously shot by Dietrich Lohmann. David Rosenbloom did exceptional editing chores. The movie is rated R for excessive violence.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: September 25, 1997

 

End of Document
