

At the Movies: 'The Life and Times of Hank Greenberg'
The Associated Press
April 11, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 586 words
Byline: By CHRISTY LEMIRE, Associated Press Writer
Body




In the 1930s and '40s, long before multimillion-dollar contracts and endorsement deals, Hank Greenberg was the kind of athlete who seems all too rare these days.
Humble and hardworking, he actually wanted to be a role model for kids.
He also happened to be Jewish at a time when there were no openly Jewish baseball players in the major leagues. This made him a beacon for American Jews and a target for anti-Semites at the height of Nazism in Europe.
Aviva Kempner tells his inspiring story in her documentary "The Life and Times of Hank Greenberg." It took Kempner 12 years to write, produce and direct this love letter to "Hammering Hank," and the effort was worth it.
She traces Greenberg's progress from playing ball with friends in the Bronx streets to his start in the minor leagues in Beaumont, Texas, to the height of his fame, chasing Babe Ruth's home-run record as a Detroit Tiger. He died of cancer in 1986 at age 75.
Kempner intersperses interviews with the Hall of Famer, his fans and former teammates with vintage black-and-white baseball footage. It's a real treat to see opening day in Detroit in 1934, especially now, at the start of a new baseball season.
Many of the interviews are funny, especially one with Walter Matthau in which he says, "I wanted to be Hank Greenberg, I suppose." Matthau recalls joining a tennis club where Greenberg belonged, just to meet and have lunch with his hero. Matthau doesn't even play tennis.
A female fan admits she was a groupie, and describes how she stood near Greenberg at spring training to get a photo taken that looked like they were standing together. Greenberg never knew she was there.
The film's mood is often playful and the anecdotes are full of rich detail.
It's also serious about the anti-Semitism Greenberg encountered. During the 1935 World Series with the Chicago Cubs, the umpire had to stop the game because of the slurs flying from the Chicago bench. Greenberg simply kept his mouth shut and let his bat speak for him.
Greenberg's prowess on the diamond made him an icon not only among Jews, but among fans in Detroit, where he played from 1933-46, and throughout the nation.
He was the unanimous choice for American League Most Valuable Player in 1933, and in 1938 he fell two runs short of matching Ruth's record of 60 home runs in a season. Former teammates said they suspected pitchers walked Greenberg intentionally because they didn't want a Jew to beat Ruth's record.
He hit more than 100 RBIs a season for seven seasons and his lifetime batting average was .331.
Alan Dershowitz said he thought Greenberg would be the first Jewish U.S. president, and called him the most important Jew to live in the time of Nazi Germany because he defied Hitler's stereotype.
But Greenberg remained humble. In describing his batting style, he says in an interview, "It's just a swing, and if you happen to hit the ball in the right spot, it's a home run."
You walk away from the movie feeling you really got to know someone special.
"The Life and Times of Hank Greenberg" is a Cowboy Booking International release. It is not rated and runs 95 minutes.
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY459
 Load-Date: April 12, 2000

 

End of Document
