

At the Movies: 'The Trench'
November 22, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 411 words
Byline: By LARRY WORTH, For The Associated Press
Body




Yep, war is hell. And recycling that cliche is about all that "The Trench" - the latest celluloid addition to the bullets-and-bayonets genre - has to offer.
Directed by first-time filmmaker William Boyd from his own screenplay, "The Trench" depicts about a dozen World War I recruits and their superiors in the two days leading up to 1916's Battle of the Somme, which produced one of England's highest casualty counts.
Despite what appears to be diligence to historical accuracy, the story has an all-too-familiar, anywhere-anytime feel. To some degree, that's because everyone uses the f-word like "Goodfellas" wannabes. But more importantly, the characters who converse, bicker and bond in the titular trench fall into the usual categories of lovelorn naif, trouble-making grunt, hard-bitten sergeant, tragically misguided leader and so on.
As such, they're more like caricatures than the complex individuals in a similar World War I saga, Peter Weir's "Gallipoli." When Mel Gibson and Mark Lee marched into the climactic line of fire, one cared deeply about their fates. Here, the ending is meant to be equally heart-rending. But it's like watching cardboard cutouts walking into a paper shredder.
The exception is actor Daniel Craig, the only veteran among a cast of virtual unknowns. Craig, whose resume stretches from the big-budget "Elizabeth" to the art-house favorite "Love is the Devil," delivers a nicely nuanced turn as a sergeant who's driven to succeed. The throwaway moments - when he's seen quietly savoring a pot of jam sent by his wife while gunfire erupts nearby - are what make his tough-as-nails army man stand out.
While the confined setting should induce claustrophobia, Boyd's ever-wandering lens fails to let intensity mount. Instead, he seems to think viewers will be sufficiently distracted when a stray bullet rips through a character's cheek or a grenade turns a handsome hero into a torso with steaming entrails.
Even worse, Boyd actually freeze-frames characters' deaths, as if a snapshot of the final agony will drive home the insanity of battle. The gimmickry is distracting and annoying.
The bottom line: Boyd is his own worst enemy, single-handedly putting "The Trench" in a cinematic no-man's land.
"The Trench" is a Blue Sky PM/Skyline Films/Galatee Films production. Running 98 minutes, it also stars Paul Nicholls, James D'Arcy and Tam Williams. It is unrated but contains moments of graphic violence, brief nudity and consistent profanity.
 Load-Date: November 23, 2000

 

End of Document
