

Banks and industry spread the word: The euro is coming!
The Associated Press
December 22, 1998, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 383 words
Byline: DIDI KIRSTEN TATLOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FRANKFURT, Germany
Body




Brightly colored bank ads on a street corner show pictures of a teddy bear, a pen, a piece of candy and a camera next to the words: I am a euro.
Most passersby, of course, know the euro is their future currency, and not any of the above.
The ads, by Dresdner Bank, are part of a broad education blitz aimed at increasing awareness among the 290 million residents in the 11 European Union countries that will adopt the new currency Jan. 1.
Information about the euro has been trickling down since the EU agreed on the concept of a single currency in 1992. But as the launch nears, questions have become more urgent:
Must bank accounts be switched to euros starting Jan. 1? (No, not until the bills and coins appear in 2002.) Will customers be charged if they want accounts changed over to euros? (No.) Will prices go up? (Maybe.) What happens on the stock exchange? (The German mark, French franc, Italian lira and other national currencies give way to the euro when trading opens Jan. 4, the first business day after the switchover.)
"People who are active and ask for things, they're well-informed," said Georg Birgelen, a representative of the EU's executive agency, the European Commission.
"The problem is those who are fringe groups - those who don't read the newspapers, for example. For them, we still have a lot of work to do."
Financial institutions and banks, the most directly affected by the launch, are taking the lead in informing the public - their customers - about what to expect, and when to expect it.
Dresdner Bank even has an information hotline number in huge numbers running nearly half way up its 40-story headquarters in Frankfurt.
Governments and industry also are pitching in with seminars, hotlines, Web sites, brochures, information tents, mobile units and teaching materials - in short anything that will help users understand the euro.
"We've noticed that over the last year something has changed. Until then the questions were always: 'Is the euro coming?' 'Must it be?' Now, the 'why' is irrelevant," said Gunter Lambertz, who organizes euro seminars for Germany's Industry and Trade Chamber.
Is the message getting across?
"It's working, in the sense that we have a long time to get used to the change," said Giuseppe Zambon, who owns an international book store in Frankfurt.
 Load-Date: December 22, 1998

 

End of Document
