

Baseball for the U.N., the real interleague
June 18, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 557 words
Byline: By TIM WHITMIRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




They know all about shuttle diplomacy. The Subway Series is another matter.
U.N. Security Council members traveled to Yankee Stadium on Wednesday to observe a baseball civil war - Mets vs. Yankees. However, they had no intention of brokering a truce.
The multinational observers were in the stands for Game 3 of this city showdown, won 3-2 by the Yankees in 10 innings, the guests of Bill Richardson, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations.
"This is the best way to show off the U.S. and the city," Richardson said.
Whether listening to a large, shirtless man bellow the name of each Yankee batter - as one nearby fan was doing - is good public relations remains open for debate.
But there was no doubt the diplomats preferred their box seats on the third base line to their morning activity - debating sanctions against Iraq.
"The game here is more interesting than the game in the Security Council," said Chinese Ambassador Wang Xue Xian, who was among about a dozen of Richardson's guests.
Wang was one of the few members of the U.N. contingent not wearing a Yankees or Mets cap.
"I'm neutral. I don't want to take sides," he said, adding that while working on the West Coast, he took in baseball games at Dodger Stadium.
For those ambassadors not fully familiar with the American national pastime, Richardson's office provided a packet explaining the game, including such basics as: "The object of baseball is to score runs. … The game is played on a diamond-shaped field with the four bases located at each corner of the diamond. … The pitcher stands in the center of the diamond and throws the ball for the batters to try to hit."
One ambassador who needed no introduction to the game was Hisashi Owada of Japan, a diehard fan of the Tokyo Giants of Japan's Central League. Owada said he went to Shea Stadium in Queens last year to see Japanese star Hideo Nomo pitch for the Los Angeles Dodgers against the Mets, but Wednesday was his first trip to Yankee Stadium.
He anticipated returning once the Yankees bring up their latest acquisition, Japanese pitcher Hideki Irabu, who is preparing in the minors for his major league debut.
"I'm looking forward to his pitching," Owada said.
A late arrival to the game was the ambassador from the United Kingdom, Sir John Weston. He wore, improbably enough, a Yankees cap that would have been considered treasonous 220 years ago.
"This is a fashion item," he explained, somewhat apologetically, then reasserted his nation's superiority over its former colony by adding, "This is the only game the British didn't invent."
Richardson, who was drafted by the then-Kansas City Athletics in 1967 and played briefly in the Cape Cod League, a summer league for college players, before injuring his arm.
He said the field trip was important in light of recent tensions between the U.N. and the city over diplomatic parking tickets.
"I think we want to show a stronger relationship between the U.N. and the city," he said. "This initiative is a small but symbolic step in that direction."
Russian Federation Ambassador Sergey Lavrov, whose country has been involved in the dustup between City Hall and the Russian and Belarussian U.N. missions over unpaid parking fines, sat next to Richardson, intently following the action at home plate.
"No shop talk," he said, when asked about the parking controversy. "No shop talk."
 Load-Date: June 18, 1997

 

End of Document
