

Berlin celebrates 10 years without the Wall
The Associated Press
November 9, 1999, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 980 words
Byline: By BURT HERMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




Germans marked the 10th anniversary today of the night that changed the world: when the Berlin Wall unexpectedly came tumbling down and jubilant residents from East and West, separated for decades by the Cold War, joined to celebrate its demise.
Although Nov. 9 is not a national holiday - meaning Germans still have to go to work and school - officials were expecting up to 100,000 revelers to join evening celebrations at stages set up along the former death strip that once split East and West Berlin.
"What a wonderful time: East Germans freeing themselves, the start toward unity, the overcoming of the East-West confrontation, the fall of the Wall," parliamentary president Wolfgang Thierse told lawmakers and invited guests - including former world leaders George Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev, at an afternoon ceremony at the Reichstag covered live on national television.
Former Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who united Germany in 1990, called it a time of "great fortune" for Germans at the end of a century marked by "the great catastrophes of two world wars and the atrocities committed against many people in the name of Germany."
"We should treat unity as a gift and a chance for the future," he said.
But all too often since then, Germans have focused on their enduring differences. Today's celebrations were also meant to bring easterners and westerners together in a show of unity not seen since that jubilant night 10 years ago when Berliners chipped away at the reviled Wall.
The festivities tonight got off to a slow start as darkness fell in a steady drizzle.
Several thousand people gathered at the Brandenburg Gate, where a jazz band played on the stage set up on brightly lit Pariser Platz. People warmed up in the late autumn chill with mulled wine and hot chestnuts, on sale along with the usual beer and sausages.
Not far away, a couple wiped tears from their eyes as they watched a film about the Wall's collapse being projected onto a building at the former site of Checkpoint Charlie, the famed east-west crossing.
Official observances began with a religious service in central Berlin and a ceremony at City Hall in the heart of former East Berlin.
"For a few moments, Berlin was the center of the world," Mayor Eberhard Diepgen said at City Hall, recalling images of euphoric East Berliners streaming through the Wall, welcomed by their western neighbors. "These pictures of joy are something we should remember as a foundation for the future."
There were, however, further reminders today of the tangible differences that remain between eastern and western Germany.
The latest unemployment data showed improvement in the west, to 8.2 percent in October, while the rate in the formerly communist, still-struggling east worsened to 16.9 percent.
Opposition lawmakers seized on the figures to question the government's commitment to improving the living standards of easterners.
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder acknowledged in parliament that much work remained to be done. "We do know that, together, we can make it," he said.
The chancellor was to speak again today at the main public celebrations in central Berlin. Rock, folk and classical musicians will perform on five stages in former no man's land - the barren strip that separated two parallel Walls, now a bustling hub of construction and development as government and business return to the heart of Berlin.
Cellist Mstislav Rostropovich will give an encore of his spontaneous 1989 performance at the Wall.
Events climax with the illumination of a 2.5-mile path once followed by the Wall with 1-foot high magnesium lights through the Brandenburg Gate, followed by fireworks.
There also were moments for reflection on a date that coincides with the 61st anniversary of Kristallnacht, the Night of Broken Glass, when Nazis destroyed more than 250 synagogues throughout Germany.
"Today we stand in mourning and respect for the victims of Nazi extermination policy," Schroeder noted in his speech in parliament.
It is because the month of November is so full of dates that recall Germany's darker past that Kohl chose October for the official date of German reunification, 11 months later. The actual date - Oct. 3 - was decided after meteorological experts advised the chancellor it was the October day with the best average weather.
Back in 1989, it seemed the partying would never stop. As East Germans crossed the Wall checkpoints in their exhaust-spewing Trabant cars, well-wishers pounded on the roofs. West Germans threw money at easterners to help them buy goods that were unseen in the former German Democratic Republic. One of the most popular items back then: bananas.
Sobering reality quickly caught up with Germans. It has now become cliche to talk of the "wall in the head" that persists between former East and West Germans since reunification in 1990. Yet the culture clashes between the two former nations have been highlighted even as the country commemorates the Nov. 9, 1989 anniversary.
The original list of speakers planned for today's ceremony in the Reichstag had drawn criticism from those who felt the East German dissidents whose demands for democratic reforms helped topple the communist regime.
Schroeder and Kohl volunteered to shorten their speeches to 15 minutes so that Thierse, a former East German pro-democracy activist, could have more speaking time and another East German speaker, could be added: Joachim Gauck, who now administers the communist Stasi secret police files.
There were even more reminders this week of unified Germany's growing pains.
On Monday, Egon Krenz, the East German leader responsible for opening the Wall, lost an appeal and will have to begin serving jail time for the shooting deaths of those killed trying to flee to the West. Krenz claimed the decision was timed to coincide with the Wall anniversary, "to show again very clearly who has the say in (united) Germany."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos TBER107,DBER103,BER112
 Load-Date: November 10, 1999

 

End of Document
