

Bosnian Epitaph: Two Croat Boys Who Survived the War Perish in Peace
January 27, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1280 words
Byline: By LESLIE DREYFOUS, AP National Writer
Dateline: BOBARE, Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




The wailing cuts through the door and out over the cement steps to the narrow, muddy road. A few townspeople mill about, heads down, hands in their pockets.
Ivka Erceg has cried for many days now.
Her son is dead. So many sons across this tiny country have died. But not in peace, she repeats again and again, her eyes spilling tears.
Not in peace.
For this village of two dozen hardscrabble houses, the murder of two young Croats, Silvio Erceg (pronounced Ehrt-zig) and his best friend Jozo Glavas (Glah-vash), offer only one epitaph: Their short lives were a waste.
And in a region where post-war tension and mistrust among Muslims and Croats were already high, their deaths have ratcheted the stakes higher in a dangerous, volatile, very personal way.
These boys were this Muslim-Croat village's pride, the guys all the girls couldn't wait to see; the kids whose presence meant this or that cafe was THE place to be. They grew up together, running with their dogs out in the fields, then fighting together in mountains whose names they didn't know.
Now they are buried together, side by side in no man's land, their fresh plots dug into a newly demarcated zone of separation with the Serbs they fought. A short walk up a snowy hill from their gravesite provides a look down the valley they loved.
Jozo, 22, and Silvio, 23, were murdered on Christmas Eve.
No one knows who did it or why, heightening mistrust and suspicion.
Jozo had taken a bath and then gone up the hill to light a candle at his mother's grave. She died when he was very young, but he kept her close even as he announced playfully to his beloved stepmother that night:
"I don't want to call you Auntie anymore. From now on," Jozo said, scooping her up in his arms, "I will call you 'Old Lady!'
Demobilized by the Bosnian Croat militia only shortly before, the young soldiers had only one thought on their minds as they made the long drive east over snowy roads: We must get home for the holidays.
When they finally arrived they grabbed rifles, firing joyful shots overhead.
"My son was the happiest boy in the world that night because the war was over and he was home," says Mrs. Erceg, who will from now on dress in black from head to toe. "He came and hugged me and kissed me."
"Mother!" he said. "I am going to celebrate!"
Before he left, she fixed Silvio a snack that would be his last.
The young men were in form, fresh-scrubbed with a nice car to drive and plans to prowl for girls at churches celebrating midnight Mass in several neighboring villages.
"We were great friends. We had no secrets. Christmas was coming. We didn't have anyone to celebrate with. We were so hoping they would come home," says 15-year-old Danijela Kainic, a neighbor girl. "Now we can't imagine life without them."
"I heard from some village girls that they all saw each other at about 1 a.m. The girls wanted to go home with the boys," says Jozo's father, Nediljko Glavas.
"But the boys, they wanted to play. That's the last we heard of them. That's all I know for sure."
The young men were Croats, their families deeply Catholic. That didn't matter once. Muslim and Croat children played together in this village, plucking onions and peppers from the rutty ground, trading crushes and dancing in discos as they grew older.
Matters of religious and cultural identity were of little importance in this central Bosnian village and others like it.
Some were home to more Muslims, others were mostly Croat. But it was a comfortable patchwork in which people just got along, scratching what living they could from the land.
This remained true, until the war ended.
Now divisions are opening left and right. Croat and Muslim brigades that worked together during the war have turned on one another at pull-back lines designed to establish peace, their commanders making last territorial grabs in a no man's land whose sandbag perimeters have only recently been defined.
Now there are fears and whispers, stories told and retold of police intimidation, abuse and threats from both the Muslim and Croat sides.
"They do not want us here," a Croat man says in one village.
"They want to drive us out," a Muslim woman declares in the next.
It all might be so much rumor, and no doubt at least some of it is. But Jozo and Silvio are dead. Ambushed on a snowy road on Christmas Eve.
Hours passed before word came. In her home on Christmas morning, Mrs. Erceg and her husband tried not to worry, half-heartedly pretending for their other two children that things would be merry.
But when she saw men dressed in uniform rumble up the road, the sorry game was over. "I saw his car coming up, and then his commanding officer," Mrs. Erceg recalls, her words drifting off.
"Is my son dead?" she bellowed from the doorstep.
He died in a ditch.
From what officials can piece together, one or more people lay in wait for the boys that night. They were met on a dark, back road, their car halted by a burst of automatic gunfire. The sound echoed through the chilly night.
Wounded, the boys tried to escape. It was no use.
All that was found at the scene, according to local officials, was a black beret from a uniform of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian government army and a pack of cigarettes favored by Serbs. There may be more. Muslims and Croat officials alike claim leads have been ignored and evidence hidden.
The theories are crazy-making because all are plausible and none has so far been proved.
Muslims claim the boys were rabble-rousers who were angry that night because they felt Croat politicians had sold them out in the Bosnian peace agreement. They whisper that a friend of a friend of an unidentified friend saw them burn the Croatian flag and that their own people wanted them silenced.
Croats say local Muslims were jealous of the boys, of their nice car and the steady salary they'd drawn while serving in the Croatian militia. Another friend of a friend of an unidentified friend reports they provoked trouble, singing Croatian national songs in Muslim cafes.
A third school of thought holds that Bosnian Serb commandos might have infiltrated, slipping a few miles south to commit the murders in hopes of driving a wedge between Muslims and Croats.
If so, it has worked. Everyone from down in the valley up into the tiniest, most isolated villages is talking about the mysterious murders - and pushing half-informed but zealous opinions.
On the frigid day Jozo and Silvio were buried, three days after Christmas, some 2,000 people filled the narrow road leading up to their hillside graves.
In their cinderblock homes, the young men's families kept on saying goodbye, caressing this one's cheek, adjusting the baseball cap on that one's lifeless head. There was no sense to be made of the waste.
How could it be that they were dead? The families had been well-prepared for the possibility of death during what at times seemed an endless war. They were not prepared for it now, in a time that had promised peace.
Promises no longer mean anything to these people.
Out on the hill, in the cemetery near snow-stooped trees in which their boys used to play, are two fresh graves heaped with flowers. A small burst of color interrupting a landscape otherwise unrelievedly brown and gray.
Jozo Glavas and Silvio Erceg at least are together, side by side as they doubtless would want to be, in this no man's land.
The struggle for peace is now left to their families and friends. The road for them begins with a constant, numbing plea:
"All I would like to know is: Who killed my son?" says Jozo's father, his leathery farmer's face going slack.
"We just want to know why," Mrs. Erceg says, her tears growing violent and then subsiding in a hard stare. "I just want to know why? Why? Why?"
 Load-Date: January 27, 1996

 

End of Document
