

Bosnian Officials Visit Serbia for the First Time Since the War
July 23, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 560 words
Byline: By AIDA CERKEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BELGRADE, Yugoslavia
Body




For the first time since the start of the war in 1992, high-ranking Bosnian officials and businessmen made an official visit Tuesday to rival Serbia.
The two-day visit represents a major breakthrough in the renewal of relations between Bosnia and Serbia, which supported Bosnian Serbs against Bosnian government forces.
The 40-member delegation held talks with Serbian officials, including President Slobodan Milosevic, whose nationalist policies are widely blamed for triggering the Bosnian war. The group was led by Ejup Ganic, vice president of the Muslim-Croat federation.
Ganic, who is also a member of the Bosnian presidency, described his three-hour talk with Milosevic as "open, straightforward." They discussed eliminating travel visas and renewing communications, including air and rail links cut in 1992, he said.
The delegation's main intention apparently was to sideline the Bosnian Serbs, whose hard-line policies and determination to secede from the rest of Bosnia recently have frustrated even their former patron, Milosevic.
The visit angered Serb nationalists, who have warned that Ganic could be arrested while in Belgrade. He was charged by Serbia's military court in 1994 with allegedly ordering the killing of Serb-led Yugoslav Army soldiers when they withdrew from Sarajevo in 1992.
However, it is highly unlikely that Milosevic, who reportedly initiated the visit, would make any moves to arrest Ganic. John Menzies, the U.S. ambassador to Bosnia, accompanied Ganic to Belgrade.
"This is a risky step for myself, but a very safe step for my country," Ganic said after the talks with Milosevic.
"This country must go forward," he said as he left Sarajevo airport. "We want stability in the region and that is exactly the goal of my trip - long-term stability in the Balkans region, as a part of Europe."
The delegation arrived at the Belgrade airport after a circuitous route over Hungary - the air corridor between Sarajevo and Belgrade has been closed to passenger traffic since 1992.
Ganic and Bosnian Federation foreign minister Jadranko Prlic then traveled in motorcades to their various stops, with no extraordinary security arrangements.
The visit was announced by U.S. negotiator Richard Holbrooke who last week held separate meetings with Milosevic and Ganic. Holbrooke described it as "a major step forward in the economic reconstruction of the region."
After talks between Prlic and his Yugoslav counterpart, Milan Milutinovic, Serb-led Yugoslavia's foreign ministry said the two urged "gradual normalization" of relations. It issued a statement saying that could be achieved through dialogue "on all levels and on all questions."
Economic delegations held talks on reopening overall trade as well as rail and air links between Sarajevo and Belgrade.
Members of the Bosnian delegation said they don't expect concrete agreements to come out of the Belgrade talks.
"We will sign two things, I expect," Ganic said, without elaborating.
During the war in Bosnia, Serbia aided the Bosnian Serbs by supplying weapons and ammunition. Since the war began, all ties between Bosnia's Muslim-led government and Serbia have been cut. Serbia and tiny Montenegro are the only states remaining in Yugoslavia.
In another sign of easing tensions, telephone links from Belgrade to Sarajevo were re-established last week for the first time since the war started.
 Load-Date: July 23, 1996

 

End of Document
