

Buchanan accuses the elite of dominating the presidency
The Associated Press
November 8, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 457 words
Byline: By HADLEY PAWLAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUFFALO, N.Y.
Body




Pat Buchanan said Monday that he prefers his bid for the Reform Party's presidential nomination over past campaigns as a Republican because "this is the first time I've ever been the front-runner."
He also said he expected to be the party's candidate for president and help turn the 2000 presidential contest into a three-way race.
Buchanan, who quit the GOP on Oct. 25, also said it was time to end the elite's "pre-emptive claim" on the White House and suggested he could be the man to do it.
Accusing Al Gore and George W. Bush of viewing the presidency as their "right of birth," Buchanan described the Democratic and Republican front-runners as privileged children who went to private boarding schools and Ivy League universities.
"One's father was senator, one's was president. One went to St. Albans, one went to Andover. One went to Harvard, one went to Yale," Buchanan said. "Why not try out someone who went to parochial schools?"
Buchanan attended a Jesuit secondary school, Georgetown University and received his master's degree at the Ivy League's Columbia University. He later was a top aide in the Nixon administration and has worked as a political commentator on television.
About 35 people attended a $100-a-plate fund-raising luncheon for Buchanan, who later visited a downtown mall where about 200 people stood in line for autographed copies of his latest book, "A Republic, Not an Empire."
Campaigning later in the Rochester suburb of Henrietta, Buchanan said he expected to be frozen out of presidential debates by the Democrats and Republicans. Last week, Buchanan said he was considering legal action to force his way into the debates.
"I think there will be a huge battle in this country over whether or not we should be included," Buchanan told about 50 members of the state's Independence Party, New York's version of the Reform Party. "I would rely heavily on the fairness of the American people who would say, 'Look, he's just asking to be heard."'
Buchanan said he chose to visit upstate New York because it's been hard-hit by current trade policies. He said his strong opposition to trade acts, including the North American Free Trade Agreement, sets him apart from Democrats and Republicans.
"They both support a new world economic order and I don't," Buchanan said.
Buchanan also spoke about prayer in school and his commitment to overturning Roe vs. Wade, the Supreme Court decision that legalized abortion. He also charged that U.S. involvement in Kosovo and Bosnia was illegal and unconstitutional.
"When I was growing up, prayer in schools was commonplace and abortion was considered a crime and an abomination. Those weren't bad times in America," Buchanan said. "People shouldn't be afraid of the way it used to be."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: November 9, 1999

 

End of Document
