

Castration may have been a matter of following the leader or the Bible
March 29, 1997, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 422 words
Byline: By JANE E. ALLEN, AP Science Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




The men in the UFO death cult who had themselves castrated may have wanted to be more like their leader, to rid themselves of lust, or as one passage in the Bible says, to do it "for the kingdom of heaven's sake."
At any rate, removing both testicles eliminates almost all the testosterone from a man's body and might make a man a better follower.
"It may have been done to make them more compliant and to decrease any innate aggressive urges," speculated Dr. Mark S. Litwin, a urologist at the University of California, Los Angeles.
With their testicles gone, "Men tend to become more docile, less aggressive, less assertive and perhaps less likely to voice opposition to something they were being asked to do," Litwin said.
Marshall H. Applewhite, who preached an ideal of androgynous immortality to followers in the Heaven's Gate cult, appeared to have to have been castrated long ago, and some of his male followers also had their testicles removed surgically, Medical Examiner Brian Blackbourne revealed Friday.
"I don't have any idea what the reason for that was," Blackbourne said.
One clue might be found in the Bible, in Matthew 19:12, which says "there be eunuchs which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake."
The group's web page had repeated references to the "kingdom of heaven."
Dr. Louis Jolyon West, a UCLA psychiatry professor and cult expert, also noted that "there are certain psychiatrically disturbed individuals who for reasons that are pathological elect to castrate themselves."
West suggested that what Applewhite called chastity may have been "based upon some element of his psychopathology that made him feel he had to get rid of his testicles."
Given that Applewhite saw the body as a disposable container, castration becomes "just a matter of changing the contour of your vehicle, getting rid of the spare tire," West said.
Stephen O'Leary, an expert on apocalyptic religions at the University of Southern California, said he'd never seen this type of self-mutilation among modern American religious cults.
But he cited historic precedent in an apocalyptic sect in Russia known as the Skoptsi, which means "the castrated ones."
"They believed they were in the end times and they castrated themselves as a sign of their absolute dedication," O'Leary said.
And Robert S. Ellwood Jr., a USC religion professor, cited the case of a 2nd century Christian writer in Alexandria named Origen. He "was later condemned as a heretic because he had some beliefs kind of like this group. He castrated himself."
 Load-Date: March 29, 1997

 

End of Document
