

Chechen Deal: Beginning of the End? Or Just the Beginning?
November 25, 1996, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 564 words
Byline: By CANDICE HUGHES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Russia's Communists threatened Monday to try to impeach President Boris Yeltsin over his new deal with Chechen rebels, saying the pact was the beginning of the end of Russia.
A top Yeltsin administration official, however, dismissed their objections as "imperial thinking" and insisted the agreement marks the rebel republic's return to the Russian economic fold.
The uproar started Saturday when Yeltsin ordered the last Russian combat troops out of Chechnya, withdrawing between 8,000 and 10,000 troops in two brigades. An agreement focusing mainly on economic relations between Russia and Chechnya was signed the same day.
While the administration is lauding the benefits of - at last - doing business with Chechnya, the opposition was dwelling on the pain of Russian retreat.
"We are witnessing the beginning of Russia's breakup," declared Viktor Ikyukhin, a Communist committee chairman in the lower house of parliament. "This is sufficient to initiate impeachment proceedings."
A special session was scheduled for Friday in the lower house, or Duma, which Communists and other hard-liners dominate. Ilyukhin said there could be a move to impeach.
It is highly unlikely that there are the votes - or even sufficient grounds - for such a step. But the furor shows what a sensitive issue Chechnya is, both in peace and in war.
The war started two years ago when Yeltsin sent troops into the tiny, mostly Muslim republic. But the economic estrangement began long before, with a fiery declaration of Chechen independence in 1991.
Chechnya, once a major Russian oil refining center on the route of a critical oil pipeline from the Caspian to the Black Sea, became a virtual outlaw.
Once famed as a producer of top-grade oil, Chechnya became notorious for its wide-open arms market.
Ivan Rybkin, head of the president's Security Council, described the new agreements as a way to reforge the links shattered in 1991.
"These economic ties must be quickly restored," he said at a news conference Monday. "For the benefit of all."
Under terms of the agreement, Chechnya's pipelines, refineries, railways, roads and airport will once again knit the republic to the rest of Russia, he said. Long-delayed economic reforms such as privatization will begin, and investment, both Russian and foreign, will be encouraged.
Refineries will be rebuilt, while a new car assembly plant and a brick factory will provide badly needed jobs for Chechens.
"Some of them started fighting at 13 or 14. Now they don't know how to do anything else," Rybkin said.
The current Chechen leaders, he said, have no interest in another outlaw economy. Instead, he insisted, "they have a stake" in mutually profitable dealings with Russia. As evidence, he cited their pledge to guarantee the safety of the oil pipeline.
The two sides have agreed to defer a decision on Chechnya's independence for five years, and the Russians are clearly counting on economics - not arms - to keep it in the Russian Federation.
The withdrawal of combat troops, Rybkin claimed, is no retreat. Chechnya still will have a police force that will include Interior Ministry units, he said. Railway troops and army engineers and emergency teams and other special groups will likely remain.
And Communists' claims that other regions of Russia might be encouraged to break away if Chechens run out Russian troops? "A new edition of imperial thinking," he declared.
 Load-Date: November 25, 1996

 

End of Document
