

Chirac's new strategy: warning about the threat of the left
May 28, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 604 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Faced with the possibility of losing his parliamentary majority, President Jacques Chirac has taken to warning voters about the threat of the left.
On Tuesday, he said Europe would be weakened. On Wednesday, he brought the message closer to home, saying France itself would wind up directionless.
Chirac's stepped-up offensive is rare for this country, where presidents usually remain on the sidelines in legislative campaigns. Until this week, Chirac has followed that tradition.
Meanwhile, the stock market slid Wednesday on fears that the left will win Sunday's runoff elections, and Chirac's allies sought to soften their line on austerity measures aimed at European integration. The belt-tightening has been extremely unpopular with voters.
In Sunday's first round of voting, the left won a majority on the strength of public anger over record 12.8 percent unemployment.
"France cannot change course at just anytime without taking serious risks," Chirac said Wednesday in a statement. "A change of direction would steer inevitably toward confusion … and a weakening of our country."
Chirac dissolved Parliament last month and called elections 10 months early, hoping that Prime Minister Alain Juppe could rally support for economic reforms aimed at preparing France for the euro, the single European currency planned for 1999.
But a majority of voters Sunday appeared to deny Chirac his requested mandate for the reforms. The Socialist Party and its leftist allies won 40.6 percent of the popular vote, while Chirac's coalition won only 29.9 percent - the worst first-round showing by the conservatives in decades. The far-right National Front took 15 percent.
In response, Juppe, the prime target of the left's wrath, promised Monday to step down next week no matter who wins. But there were indications the concession may have been too little, too late.
Though French law bans the public release of opinion polls within a week of elections, three French banks said their private surveys suggest the left will win. Bank officials briefly discussed the polls results on the condition the banks not be identified.
The French stock market's CAC 40 index fell 3.6 percent on news of the polls, which provoked fear that the left would slow down the conservatives' financial reforms, including ambitious sell-offs of state-owned companies.
Chirac's governing conservative coalition could still pull off a victory if it can sway the one-third of voters who opted not to take part in round one. Some far-right voters may also swing toward the conservatives.
To pique their interest, Juppe himself suggested Tuesday that the budget deficit need not fall from 4.2 percent to 3 percent of gross domestic product for France to qualify for the euro. He said the figure "will be decided on intelligently," and that 3.1 percent or 3.2 percent should suffice.
Juppe appeared to be moving toward the Socialists' stand that qualifying for the euro should be based on a "trend" toward deficit-cutting and not a strict figure.
Juppe's most likely successor in the event of a conservative victory, outgoing National Assembly President Philippe Seguin, said he hopes that after the euro comes into being "we will loosen" fiscal policy.
"We need to restart growth," he told the newsweekly l'Express.
Socialist leader Lionel Jospin, meanwhile, sought to dispel doubt that he could form a government with a Communist Party hostile to the euro.
"There won't be different orientations in the government," he insisted on RTL radio. But asked to elaborate, he said only: "We discussed these problems ahead of time. We know where we are and, in time, we'll decide."
 Load-Date: May 28, 1997

 

End of Document
