

Christopher Cockerell, the inventor of the hovercraft, dies
The Associated Press
June 3, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 344 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Sir Christopher Cockerell, the inventor of the hovercraft, has died at a nursing home in southern England. He was 88.
Cockerell died peacefully in his sleep at the Southampton home early Tuesday, his youngest daughter, Frances Airey, was quoted by The Daily Telegraph as saying.
The newspaper said Cockerell had been ill for several months after a fall, although the cause of death was not immediately announced.
Inventor Trevor Baylis said Cockerell's achievement in designing the hovercraft, as well as patenting several dozen other inventions, made him "one of our greatest pioneers."
Sir Christopher was born on June 6, 1910, into a wealthy family.
After a private education, he studied engineering at Cambridge University and worked for the electrical company Marconi, helping develop a transmission antenna for the BBC's first TV station at Alexandra Palace, north London.
During World War II, Cockerell worked on the development of Britain's radar defense system and helped design an aerial direction finder that helped Allied pilots navigate their return to Britain's wartime air bases.
By the early 1950s, he left Marconi and settled in Norfolk, eastern England, to build tourist boats, but he also began work on inventing his hovercraft, which could move across land or water on a cushion of air.
Using a can of cat food inside a coffee tin and reversed airflow from a vacuum cleaner, he proved his theory.
Initial attempts to win backing from the government and the Ministry of Defense failed, and it was only after warning that Swiss inventors were developing a rival system that he was given $ 1,600 in 1957 to develop his invention.
The first prototype hovercraft, the SR-N1, crossed the English Channel in June 1959. The first commercial service began in Britain in 1962 and across the English Channel in 1966.
He was knighted in 1969, and in 1971, he received $ 250,000 from the government for surrendering his patent rights to the hovercraft.
Cockerell's wife, Margaret, died in 1996. He is survived by two daughters.
A private funeral is set to take place today.
 Load-Date: June 3, 1999

 

End of Document
