

Clinton embraces air war victory, says 'finish the job'
The Associated Press
June 10, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 881 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton claimed victory in the air war against Yugoslavia Thursday as American ground troops moved toward Kosovo to protect the return home of more than a million refugees. "We have to finish the job and build the peace," he said.
A wave of euphoria swept through the White House at the successful conclusion of an 11-week conflict that had brought biting criticism and doubts about Clinton's handling of the showdown with Slobodan Milosevic. Clinton said the Serb retreat was a vindication for America's fighting forces.
"We have a real chance for Europe to be put right," Clinton said in a congratulatory call to French President Jacques Chirac. "Twenty years from now we'll look back on this as a great day for Europe." The president spent much of the morning on the telephone with world leaders, including Russian President Boris Yeltsin, British Prime Minister Tony Blair and NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana.
Army Gen. Wesley Clark, the top NATO commander, told Clinton in a call: "I knew we would win it. I knew you would win it, Mr. President."
"This has been a very happy day at the White House because of the peace agreement in Kosovo," Clinton said at a South Lawn celebration with the 1998 World Series champs, the New York Yankees. "It's a good day for America."
Seventy-nine days after addressing the nation at the start of the air campaign, Clinton was returning to the Oval Office to speak about the end of the bombing and the challenge of safely returning refugees to Kosovo.
"This is going to be difficult," Defense Secretary William Cohen said. "I don't think anyone should minimize the hardship that's going to be involved." He said that "the world is going to be outraged" once humanitarian groups get into Kosovo and see evidence of atrocities. Cohen said he hoped Milosevic would be held accountable by his people for the ordeal they've suffered.
The House, meanwhile, backed away from Republican-sponsored legislation that would cut off funds for Kosovo after Sept. 30. The turnabout came after Clinton promised Congress to seek express approval for a peacekeeping force in Kosovo and to manage it "without harming military readiness." Rep. Ike Skelton, D-Mo., said, "Congress would be the laughingstock of the world" if the measure had passed in the wake of the Kosovo agreement.
More than 850,000 ethnic Albanians were forced from their homes and fled to Albania and Macedonia. An additional 500,000 also were displaced but are believed to remain inside Kosovo.
"In the past four months we have seen some of the worst inhumanity in our lifetime, but we've also seen the bravery of our troops, the resolve of our democracy, the decency of our people and the courage and determination of the people of Kosovo," Clinton said after NATO announced it was suspending its bombing campaign.
"We now have a moment of hope," the president said. "And we have to finish the job and build the peace."
The United States has pledged 7,000 troops for a 50,000-member peacekeeping force in Kosovo. The vanguard of those forces went ashore in Greece and began heading overland to Macedonia to spearhead the entry into Kosovo.
"We face challenges and risks in bringing home the refugees and restoring stability," the president said. He declined to estimate how long the peacekeepers would stay, saying, "I don't think we should put a timetable on it."
The United States also is prepared to help European nations rebuild Kosovo and neighboring countries aligned with the West, though Clinton said America shouldered most of the cost of the air campaign and now Europe will carry the heaviest burden of the rebuilding.
Yugoslavia will not get any U.S. reconstruction aid "as long as President Milosevic is President Milosevic," still in power, added presidential spokesman Joe Lockhart.
Clinton said that Milosevic and his country took a beating from the airstrikes.
"They paid quite a high price for this. There were hurt very badly," Clinton said. Once again, he refused to demand the ouster of Milosevic, indicted as a war criminal. Instead, he said it was difficult to imagine how Yugoslavia could grow and prosper as other European nations - such as Hungary, Poland and the Czech Republic - unless its leaders were committed to democracy and human rights.
There were lingering questions about the conflict, with House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., saying Congress should examine why diplomacy failed to avert the war. The House had deadlocked on a tie vote on whether to support the air war.
Clinton commended Cohen and Gen. Henry Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, saying they had "persevered with great confidence and calmness amidst criticisms and the early rough going to achieve the victory that they have achieved."
While NATO suspended its airstrikes, Clinton said the attacks would resume if Serbia violated its commitments.
He said NATO had achieved its objectives and as a result "is now stronger and more united than ever." He thanked alliance leaders "for their fidelity and fortitude."
In Clinton's call with Yeltsin, the Russian leader said that Washington and Moscow stuck together "even though the issues were difficult as we worked through them." Russia had strenuously objected to NATO's bombing, saying it threatened the outbreak of a third World War.
 Load-Date: June 10, 1999

 

End of Document
