

Clinton To U.S. Troops on the Front Line: 'You Are Warriors For Peace'
January 13, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 954 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: TUZLA, Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




In a shroud of extraordinary security, President Clinton paid a front-line visit Saturday to American forces in Bosnia, praising the mud-caked troops as "warriors for peace."
"In Bosnia you came on a mission of peace, a mission for heroes," Clinton declared.
On a slate-gray day, the president visited soldiers in a sandbag bunker at Check Point Lima, a perimeter guard post at the airfield of the U.S. headquarters in Bosnia. The checkpoint is located at the end of a road that soldiers named "Sniper Street." The president pinned promotions on five soldiers.
Arriving five hours late because of bad weather, Clinton brought soldiers bags of mails, 200 cases of Coca-Cola and 5,000 Hershey bars.
Secret Service sharpshooters and armed soldiers followed Clinton around the headquarters of Task Force Eagle. Apache gunships patrolled the perimeter of the base and villagers from nearby Dubrave were not allowed anywhere near the site.
Clinton did not venture from the heavily-secured installation to witness damage wrought during nearly four years of war, and his air routes carefully skirted Serb territory.
The president also met with Bosnian, Croatian and Serb leaders to urge them to hold together the fragile peace accord. "I ask you … to choose peace, choose the future," he said in Zagreb, Croatia, the last stop on his trip.
He left after nightfall and arrived in Washington shortly before midnight, gaining time as he flew across the Atlantic.
The White House said the meeting in Tuzla brought together a mix of religious and ethnic leaders to discuss how to foster peace. "This was, since the breakup of former Yugoslavia, an unprecedented gathering of leaders from each of the religious and ethnic communities of Bosnia," White House press secretary Mike McCurry said.
On the diplomatic front, it was the "single most encouraging thing the president saw," McCurry said.
The spokesman said that en route back to Washington, Clinton telephoned Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic to ask him to do everything he could to preserve evidence of war crimes that might be used at trials conducted by an international tribunal.
McCurry noted that Milosevic was the only signatory to the Bosnian peace accord signed in Paris that Clinton did not meet on his trip, noting that the United States does not have full diplomatic relations with the Belgrade government headed by the Serb leader.
In his Tuzla speech to nearly 1,000 troops in full combat gear, the president praised the sacrifice of American forces and their allies. "From the ashes of war in Bosnia, you and they together are raising the torch of a new and undivided Europe," said Clinton, dressed in a bomber jacket and khaki slacks.
"Step by steady step, you are making history here in Bosnia," he said.
The troops, their boots and uniforms caked in mud, whooped and cheered Clinton. He praised them as "veterans of the Tuzla mud."
"It was nice he came over to let us know he's proud of us," said Specialist Travis Siegler, 21, of Phoenix, who moves into Bosnia on Monday.
His visit was welcomed by some nearby residents, although they were not allowed onto the base. "Clinton cares about the Bosnia people," Mehmed Dedic said.
Short on sleep after a nine-hour hour flight, Clinton opened his trip before dawn in Aviano, Italy - the staging field for all NATO air force operations going into Bosnia.
"Let me say now, good luck and Godspeed. You are heroes for peace," he told several hundred troops who gathered in the early morning at an airplane hangar.
"You are living up to the great tradition of the armed forces of the United States - protecting our nation's interests by keeping a fire out that has threatened the heart of Europe's stability."
Switching from his jumbo jet to a C-17 cargo plane at Aviano, Clinton headed for Tuzla, but bad weather forced him to divert to Taszar, Hungary, the forward staging base to bring supplies equipment and troops to Bosnia.
He gave a personal sendoff to a company of tankers heading in a convoy through Croatia and across the famed Sava River to Bosnia over a platoon bridge built by U.S. engineers.
At the side of the muddy air field at Taszar were broken down Soviet MIGs, a reminder that Hungary is a former Warsaw Pact nation that now hosts NATO troops.
"I know you've been trained to fight wars and to win them, " the president told troops crowded into a mess hall. "You are the best in the world at that, but this mission is different. We've asked you not to fight a war but to give a people exhausted by war the strength to make and stay at peace."
By mid-day, the morning fog at Tuzla burned off, allowing Clinton to land in Bosnia. Aside from greeting troops, he met with Bosnian President Bosnia President Alija Izetbegovic. Later, in Zagreb, Croatia, Clinton talked with President Franjo Tudjman.
Clinton's message to Tudjman and Izetbegovic was that they should fully implement terms of the peace accord reached late last year in Dayton, Ohio.
Despite problems, Clinton said he was satisfied the peace treaty was holding.
"Given the level of animosity which has existed … I think the climate has been quite good," Clinton told reporters. "I'm not trying to minimize the problems. They're significant. But on balance I'm more hopeful now after the first few days of this mission.
Even with Congress' reluctance to send soldiers to Bosnia, a bipartisan delegation of 10 lawmakers accompanied the president to demonstrate support for the troops. The group included House Appropriations Committee Chairman Bob Livingston, R-La., a critic of the president who expressed concern about the troops welfare and tough living conditions.
"We want to do things we can to highlight their problems and do what we can to deal with them," he said.
 Load-Date: January 14, 1996

 

End of Document
