

Clinton commemorates the 50th anniversary of Berlin airlift
The Associated Press
May 14, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 676 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




From the tarmac that 50 years ago was a lifeline for besieged West Berliners, President Clinton today saluted U.S. and Allied pilots who delivered food and supplies in the Cold War's first nervy showdown. He urged American companies to be those pilots' modern-day counterparts.
Clinton, in back-to-back speeches today, underscored the importance of U.S. investment in Germany. Talking with workers at General Motor's Opel car assembly plant in Eisenach, he wished aloud that more American companies would follow suit "until every person in every part of Germany has a chance to live up to the fullest of his or her God-given abilities."
Earlier, Clinton commemorated the Berlin airlift's 50th anniversary at Tempelhof Airport, the main operating base for the U.S. Air Force during the 15-month-long humanitarian mission.
"The most precious cargo did not come in the well-named care packages, it was the hope created by the constant roar of the planes overhead," Clinton said.
"Berliners called this noise a symphony of freedom."
At Clinton's side, Chancellor Helmut Kohl voiced Germany's gratitude.
"This city owes its survival and freedom during the Cold War to the firm resolve of the United States and our other Western allies," Kohl said. He called the 462-day airlift a symbol of democracy's durability.
"This experience generated a desire to join together on a firm and long-term basis in the Atlantic alliance," he added, referring to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization that was formed in April 1949 at the peak of the airlift.
With an old propeller-driven C-54 plane as his backdrop and hundreds of airlift veterans packing flag-lined bleachers, Clinton said Western defiance of Soviet Moscow's road and rail blockade of West Berlin was a defining moment of the 20th century.
"If the communists could fight with fear, then we would fight back with friendship and faith," Clinton said. "The airlift became a sharing of the soul."
He recalled the words of President Truman at the moment he decided to launch the airlift. "There is no discussion on that point," Truman said. "We stay in Berlin, period."
Kohl also thanked the United States for supporting the reunification of Germany when the Berlin Wall fell in 1989. "Our target," he said, "is to complete the building of the European house but we want our American friends to have a permanent right of abode in this house."
The airlift, known by the men who flew it as "Operation Vittles," began June 26, 1948, on orders from Truman after the Soviets blocked all train and road traffic and cut electricity to the western part of Berlin. The 2 million inhabitants of that area were under the administrative control of the United States, France and Britain. Moscow was trying to force the Western powers to abandon their enclaves 110 miles inside the Soviet-occupied zone of Germany.
In all, the Western allies made more than 277,000 flights in round-the-clock deliveries of more than 2.3 million tons of food, fuel and medicine to Berlin. At the peak of the airlift, aircraft were taking off and landing about every minute. On May 12, 1949, the Soviets ended the blockade.
While recalling the 39 Britons and 31 Americans who lost their lives in the airlift, Clinton also hailed heroes such as Gail Halvorsen, who, as an Air Force 1st lieutenant, began the practice of dropping candy with handkerchief parachutes to the German children watching the landings at Tempelhof.
Halvorsen and other pilots became known as the candy bombers.
On Wednesday, Clinton visited the historic Sans Souci palace in Potsdam, the city on the outskirts of Berlin where the United States, Britain and the Soviet Union decided the division of postwar Germany with the Potsdam Treaty of Aug. 2, 1945.
In an allusion to that troubling time, Clinton said he wanted to talk about the next 50 years of U.S.-German relations, "a much different and more hopeful conversation than the one President Truman had here over 50 years ago."
Clinton was flying tonight to Birmingham, England to attend a summit meeting of the leading industrial powers.
 Load-Date: May 14, 1998

 

End of Document
