

Cohen: Only marginal, modest cuts in the offing for the military
May 12, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 548 words
Byline: By SUSANNE M. SCHAFER, AP Military Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Defense Secretary William Cohen, in his first extended preview of a sweeping Pentagon study of strategy and weapons, said Monday the months-long review has resulted in few major changes.
"We have chosen … to largely sustain the current force," Cohen said in the text of a speech prepared for the board of the Brookings Institution, a Washington-based think tank.
"We need the capability to fight and win major theater wars in two places," Cohen said, referring to the Pentagon's years-old requirement that it be able to handle twin conflicts that may erupt nearly simultaneously, such as in the Persian Gulf and the Far East.
At present, there are 1.4 million men and women on active duty. Cohen did not say so, but reports have put the number of cuts expected to result from the "Quadrennial Defense Review" at around 60,000 active duty troops.
"We intend to maintain a robust presence in key regions of the world," Cohen said, which he said means the roughly 100,000 troops in the Asia-Pacific region, as well as another 100,000 deployed in Europe.
"When threats to our interests emerge, we need strong, ready forces that can respond quickly and decisively. In today's world, we must be able to respond across the full spectrum of crisis," Cohen said, indicating that the military's work load won't be reduced in the future, and it must be prepared to handle humanitarian crises and embassy evacuations as well as major conflicts.
Critics of the review have faulted it for failing to make major changes, given the end of the post-Cold War era. However, Pentagon officials have argued that since the military has been successful in such conflicts as Desert Storm, dramatic changes may not be wise.
Even so, the review has been conducted with the expectation that the Pentagon's budget will remain steady at about $ 250 billion annually.
Also, the military faces a budget squeeze as it tries to find more than $ 40 billion to fund updated weaponry by the end of the century. Since overall defense spending is expected to remain flat for the next several years, officials will have to look elsewhere for savings, such as military bases.
Cohen said the Pentagon intends to "invest in the future force with a focused modernization plan," that will introduce new technologies and new systems to keep the military at fighting trim.
"We can afford to take this path by making some marginal reductions in the current force. … We can modestly reduce the number of our active, reserve and civilian personnel, get more out of our newer, more capable ships, aircraft and other platforms, and lose some of the older, less capable ones," he said.
But Cohen also served notice that the military's support structure must be reduced. "We can keep the tooth, but cut the tail. Right now there is too much fat in the tail."
Cohen's spokesman has said the secretary would like to see a new base closure commission set up to tighten the military's infrastructure, but the message has gotten the cold shoulder on Capitol Hill, something the former GOP senator from Maine acknowledged.
"Ultimately, though, cutting the fat from defense depends on Congress. … The choices come down to this: Do we want to build a force structure for the 21st century? Or do we want to protect the infrastructure of the 20th century?" Cohen said.
 Load-Date: May 12, 1997

 

End of Document
