

Conservatives back the pound, but Europe still divides the party
The Associated Press
October 3, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 538 words
Byline: By MARA D. BELLABY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOURNEMOUTH, England
Body




Britain's Conservative Party brought out its heavy-hitters Tuesday to promise to fight the next general election on a platform of keeping Britain out of the euro and the European Union out of British affairs.
But despite the party's efforts to keep this year's annual conference united, pro-Europe Conservatives rallied their own supporters. They warned that hardline statements against Europe could turn off voters and embarrass a future Tory government.
"It is time to stop pretending that entry to the single currency is a step that must inevitably lead to the creation of a superstate," former Treasury chief Kenneth Clarke told a standing-room-only crowd on the fringe of the party gathering at this seaside resort.
"That so-called threat is designed to arouse fears which are quite unreal," he said.
Clarke warned party leader William Hague earlier during a British Broadcasting Corp. interview that such "nonsense" rhetoric would have to be left behind if the Tories won the next general election, widely expected to be called in May.
"If William gets to No. 10, he'll find that he has to live in the grown up world," Clarke said, referring to the British prime minister's residence.
While Clarke was speaking, Hague stood on the windy promenade overlooking the coast and rallied some 200 people in support of the party's official policy to rule out joining the European single currency for the life of the next Parliament. Many of the supporters wore small pound-shaped lapel pins and carried red-and-white banners declaring: "Keep the pound."
Later, in the main auditorium, the party's Shadow Chancellor Michael Portillo backed his leader with a spirited defense of the party's policy on the euro - eliciting huge cheers.
"British public opinion is suspicious of the euro as an unproven piece of political dogma. That is our view," he said. "This is the view of the moderate majority. We want to keep the pound."
Despite his public insistence of loyalty to Hague, Portillo, a former defense minister, is seen by many in the party as a future challenger for the leadership job.
Prime Minister Tony Blair has generally supported joining the euro but has said his government will wait until it meets certain economic conditions before recommending it to the British people, who will then vote in a referendum
The Conservative Party is eager to fight the next election focusing on Europe and the euro, which it views as a campaign winner because of the strong public support for keeping the pound.
Portillo, in a wide-ranging speech that touched on far more than his traditional brief of taxes and spending, continued the party's drive to broaden its appeal. He said people no matter their race or sexual orientation must be made welcome by the Tories.
He also pledged that the Tories would spend more each year than the Labor government but would still save room for tax cuts. He promised to save the National Health Service with a politically risky mixture of public funds and greater private investment.
The governing Labor Party immediately condemned Portillo's plans, saying that private insurers and doctors would gain while those dependent on the beleaguered National Health Service would be stuck with a second-class alternative.
 Graphic



 
AP photos LMN109,110
 Load-Date: October 4, 2000

 

End of Document
