

Could It Be? A House for the Man in the Moon?
March 21, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 327 words
Byline: By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The man who sought to convince the world there was a human-like face peering at us from Mars now is trying to show that someone, sometime, left "a glass dome" and other huge structures on the moon.
What's more, says Richard C. Hoagland, NASA knew it from photographs taken by Apollo astronauts and has been hiding the fact for nearly three decades.
"Our response is, it's not true," said NASA headquarters spokesman Brian Welch. "Everything we found, we made public."
Hoagland, who takes his claims of discovery on the lecture circuit, brought six engineers and scientists and a bunch of fuzzy photographs to a news conference to support his contention. He spoke of something called "hyperdimensional dynamics" at work on Mars, on the moon and in evidence at the ancient Stonehenge site in Great Britain.
Hoagland said recent reviews of pictures taken on the lunar surface by the astronauts of Apollos 12 and 14 showed some of the structures.
"It's not true," said Alan Bean of Apollo 12. "No one, certainly not me and Pete Conrad, who I was with the whole time, saw anything that suggested ancient civilizations."
And it wasn't because they weren't looking. Said Bean: "We wanted to see those things. We wanted to find something like that because it would be so wonderful to find it."
Hoagland described the objects that he said could be seen from official NASA photographs, most taken by Apollo astronauts, variously as "a Grecian Temple," looping cables, a large blob of glass and a 1 -mile high formation he called a "shard."
To the unschooled observer, the objects looked like magnified blobs of dirt on the window through which the photos were taken.
Hoagland has made such claims for years. He got wide publicity in 1988 by suggesting that a mile-wide rock, which appeared to be carved into a human or ape-like face, was part of a "city" on Mars.
NASA spokesman Welch said the agency had not investigated the claims.
"It seems to us kind of a waste of time," he said.
 Load-Date: March 21, 1996

 

End of Document
