

Court TV Tackles the International War Crimes Tribunal
May 5, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 868 words
Byline: By SCOTT WILLIAMS, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It is a 21st century courtroom, almost intimate in scale, that looks as if it were made for TV.
Its walls are a neutral gray and the desktops a cool off-white, each with a recessed video monitor. The chairs are bright blue, echoed in an accent panel behind the bench.
In this quiet, human-scale room in The Hague, Netherlands, trial begins Tuesday for Dusan Tadic before the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. And cable's Court TV will be there to cover it.
Tadic, who faces 132 counts related to a rape, several murders and incidents of torture, is the first person to be tried by an international war crimes tribunal since the 1946 Nazi trials in Nuremberg, Germany.
The Hague tribunal, established in 1993 by the United Nations' Security Council, has given Court TV unique access to the proceedings.
"It took a little bit of explaining on my part as to what Court TV could do, and what we were planning to do, but they warmed up to it pretty quick," said Jim Lyons, the network's news editor.
"These, finally, are things they want publicity for and attention paid to," Court TV executive producer Steve Johnson said. "They need long-form coverage, and we are about the only folks around who do that."
South African jurist Richard Goldstone, the chief prosecutor, put it bluntly: "If the international community isn't told what we're doing here, and particularly if people in the countries where there are victims don't know what we are doing, then there's no point in doing what we're doing."
Johnson sees the tribunal as more than a good story: It's a way of showing Court TV can operate internationally and that it will go where the trials are.
"There's a lot of international bodies that would love to have this attention, but the U.S. media's attention is so fleeting," he said. "We're willing to camp out for two months and cover something. That's what we do."
Court TV executives expect the tribunal logistics to be far easier than the O.J. Simpson trial, where they provided gavel-to-gavel coverage and operated the press pool that provided the video feed from the courtroom.
"We're probably not going to have newscasters from Germany or France complaining about Court TV doing the whole thing," Johnson said. "Generally, they go, 'Great! Can we pick up your feed?' "
At The Hague, the United Nations provides four, remote-controlled cameras, as well as the director who chooses the shot to feed to the press. The proceedings will be simultaneously translated into the languages of the participants.
"We're simply able to plug in, so that whole side of the cost structure just isn't there," Johnson said. "The real problem is the time difference. Our morning Court TV session will be their afternoon session."
That requires an overnight staff to open the satellite feed at 4 a.m. and keep track of events and minimize sequencing problems. "You don't want to show the cross-examination followed by direct examination," Johnson said.
Tadic's case emerged from the tribunal's investigation of some of the nastiest Serbian "ethnic cleansing" in the Prijedor district of northeast Bosnia, where he was a regular visitor to the Omarska concentration camp.
According to the indictment, on one visit in 1992, he and other Serbs beat and kicked the prisoners, then forced one to sexually mutilate another by biting off one of his testicles.
Tadic, 39, a cafe owner, karate teacher and policeman, contends he was not present during any such crimes.
His trial will be one of the first times that rape, used as a systematic instrument of terror and intimidation against civilians, will be prosecuted as a war crime.
The three judges of Tadic's trial chamber both find the facts and determine guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The maximum sentence is life imprisonment.
There is one major difference between this tribunal and Nuremberg.
"The prosecutors at Nuremberg relied almost entirely on paper, on documents," said Terry Moran, who will anchor from The Hague. "They didn't call witnesses."
Much of The Hague testimony will be from witnesses, including the victims of atrocity. It should make for compelling, even harrowing TV, but it raises important questions, too.
"Can they give this guy a fair trial?" Moran said. "Every single word they're speaking in that courtroom is going to be a precedent. But is that going to translate into interest? It's a great discussion, but as we cover it and people watch it, are they going to be caught up, not just in the historic moment, but in the job that the tribunal is doing?"
Court TV has established its own World Wide Web page on the Internet, a portion of which is devoted to the Hague tribunal. Its address is http://www.courttv.com. 
There you can read the complete indictments, filings, procedures and background of The Hague tribunal. You also can browse among key documents from the Nuremberg trial, including the opening address by Robert Jackson.
A justice on leave from the U.S. Supreme Court, Jackson asserted this on behalf of the proceedings:
"The wrongs which we seek to condemn and punish have been so calculated, so malignant, and so devastating, that civilization cannot tolerate their being ignored, because it cannot survive their being repeated."
 Load-Date: May 5, 1996

 

End of Document
