

Croatia's candidate for the common man tries to get out the vote
June 6, 1997, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 592 words
Byline: By JUDITH INGRAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ZABOK, Croatia
Body




He calls himself the candidate of the common man. In a region where politics is most often carried on over the people's heads, Zdravko Tomac prides himself on taking his message straight to them.
There is every indication the Social Democrat is going to take a drubbing from incumbent Franjo Tudjman in presidential elections June 15.
But he insists Croatians deserve better than the authoritarian politics and corruption the 75-year-old Tudjman has given them. He declares he is fighting for every vote in this country of 4.8 million people.
So every day, he heads out in his blue van plastered with 'Tomac for President' stickers and white plastic loudspeakers that announce his arrival in each town. Some days he makes 10 stops, other days 20.
He's spoken to 40 local radio stations in the past week, and given as many press interviews as he can to counter the virtual blanket of silence state television has thrown over his campaign.
"I want to destroy the myth that Croatia needs a leader who's half-God and is the only one eligible to lead," Tomac said. He has criticized Tudjman's love of luxury and pomp, his government's profligate spending and indulgence of businessmen practicing what Tomac calls "wild capitalism."
Tomac, a 60-year-old political science professor, was vice premier in Croatia's first and only multiparty government during its war with rebellious Serbs in 1991.
He was kicked out of the Communist Party of the old Yugoslav federation in the 1970s amid accusations he had nationalist leanings. However, he joined the former Communists in 1989 when they formed the Social Democratic Party.
Tomac's platform calls for better social programs and he disavows presidential perks like Tudjman's airplanes and Adriatic island retreats financed by taxpayers' money.
He has promised that if he becomes president, he'll continue living in his two-room Zagreb apartment and make himself as accessible as he has been during the campaign. He has made a point of visiting towns like Zabok, a little nowheresville 18 miles north of Zagreb.
"I'm open to criticism. You can always say whether you agree with me or not," he earnestly told a couple of dozen people standing around the square in front of Zabok's train and bus station.
Anna Mohuter, a 73-year-old pensioner, said she especially appreciated his defense of the poor.
"He's fighting for the people," she said, nodding approvingly. But her smile faded when asked about his chances of winning, allowing that "everyone knows the outcome."
Two polls published this week each gave Tudjman more than 50 percent of the vote. Tomac and the third candidate, writer Vlado Gotovac running for the Social Liberals, were neck-and-neck, but trailing Tudjman by 40 percent or more.
Seeking a new five-year term, Tudjman enjoys the traditional advantages of incumbency, plus the tools of authoritarian rule: a state bureaucracy that is beholden to him and state broadcast media that cover his every move.
Each candidate will be given an hour of time on state TV next week. So far, Tudjman hasn't even acknowledged that he has competition. He also dismisses reports that he is seriously ill with cancer.
The most valuable weapon in the president's campaign arsenal is the widespread belief that as the man who brought Croatia independence in 1991, he's the most qualified to lead it now.
In Zabok, Tomac plugged away at his speech, doing his best to make eye contact with everybody in the crowd.
He didn't even wince when midway through his speech, a city bus pulled up to the square and half the crowd clambered aboard.
 Load-Date: June 6, 1997

 

End of Document
