

Danger on the job nothing new for aid workers around the globe
The Associated Press
December 18, 1996, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 626 words
Byline: By LAURA MECKLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Each day, U.S. aid workers overseas face guns, mines and other perils that would send most people running back home. And it's just by chance that an American wasn't among the Red Cross workers slaughtered in Chechnya.
"You can take all the reasonable precautions but you can't foresee something like this," said Anthony Kozlowski, president of the Minneapolis-based American Refugee Committee, which has 70 U.S. workers in Africa, Southeast Asia, Bosnia and Croatia.
Six Red Cross workers in Chechnya were shot in their beds before dawn Tuesday by masked killers. A seventh worker was wounded in the bloodiest attack against the Red Cross in its 133-year history.
It was hardly the first time a Red Cross worker died on the job. In Somalia, 15 workers died in separate attacks in 1992. In June, three Red Cross delegates were killed in an ambush in Burundi. And a Red Cross nurse died in Sierra Leone in a 1993 ambush.
Just last week, Rep. Bill Richardson, D-N.M., who is President Clinton's choice as the next U.N. ambassador, traveled to Sudan to negotiate the release of three Red Cross workers, including an American, held hostage for more than five weeks.
With 38 American Red Cross workers now stationed in hot spots around the world, one could have easily been among the victims in Chechnya, said Jose Aponte, vice president for international services at the American Red Cross.
In fact, last week the American Red Cross was negotiating to transfer workers to Chechnya from nearby former Soviet republics, Aponte said. But because of security concerns, the agency decided to wait until other foreign workers left, he said.
No American Red Cross worker ever has been killed while on international assignment, and in Chechnya the six slain workers - five women and one man - were from the Netherlands, Spain, Canada, New Zealand and Norway.
Americans may be less likely to face violence than others, as attackers fear retribution from the world's only superpower, Aponte said.
But all aid workers are exposed to deadly dangers as they attempt to provide humanitarian assistance amongst warring, armed and angry factions.
During the Cold War, most conflicts were between nations, and refugees usually fled to a third country for safety. Aid workers could offer assistance without running into antagonists.
"Those were wars with boundaries and people to negotiate," Aponte said. "Now it's internal factions."
In Chechnya, it's the republic's bloody independence movement against Russia. And internal battles have raged in the former Yugoslavia, in Rwanda and in Somalia.
"Because there's no longer 'Big Brother' watching over them one way or another, these ethnic tensions or racial tensions that have been suppressed have just came up to the surface and exploded," said Kozlowski, who worked overseas for the United Nations for 10 years, representing the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees in Sudan.
"Those of us working in humanitarian situations are at much greater risk today than we were 10 years ago," Kozlowski said.
In many countries, it's common to find land mines, armed teen-agers roaming the streets and bandits who regularly hijack cars.
Humanitarian workers have been forced to walk a line between warring factions that don't understand a commitment to aid all who need help while remaining neutral.
"What they see is you are feeding the mother, the sister, the brother of the guy who killed my mother or sister or brother," Aponte said.
Kozlowski remembered when aid workers had to be evacuated out of Goma, Zaire, as the town was shelled and it became too dangerous to stay.
"Horrendous as that was, within a week and a half, the people who evacuated went back to Goma," he said. "That gives you an idea of the kind of character of the relief workers today."
 Load-Date: December 18, 1996

 

End of Document
