

Divers face overwhelming odds inside the Kursk
The Associated Press
October 23, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 945 words
Byline: By VLADIMIR ISACHENKOV, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




In one of the most daunting salvage efforts in naval history, an international team of divers is grappling with the delicate task of recovering the dead crewmen of the nuclear submarine Kursk from a silt-filled labyrinth of mangled steel.
The explosion that ravaged the Kursk measured 3.5 on seismic monitors, equivalent to a small earthquake. It likely pulverized everything inside the front part of the submarine, and possibly wrenched off the heavy equipment in the back compartments, which divers hope to enter.
That makes the divers' every step a frightening foray into the unknown. As they feel their way through pitch-black darkness, clad in ballooning pressure suits, they risk getting trapped between pieces of smashed equipment and cutting their air hoses on jagged pieces of metal.
Russian navy chief Adm. Vladimir Kuroyedov described the rescue effort as a "serious challenge … in the technological and moral and psychological sense."
Divers reached the site of the Aug. 12 sinking on Friday and spent the weekend working round-the-clock in shifts to cut holes through the hull. Rising winds and waves more than 30 feet high interrupted the divers' work Monday.
The operation in the icy arctic waters is so dangerous that the Russian navy chief has reserved the right to cancel it if experts rule it would jeopardize divers' lives.
Some of the concern surrounds the two nuclear reactors on board the sub, which shut down automatically after the first explosion. Monitors have found no increased radiation around the vessel.
If the decision is made to proceed, only Russian divers would go inside the Kursk, while their British and Norwegian teammates will assist with the operation from inside the diving bell lowered to the vessel, which is lying some 330 feet below the surface of the Barents Sea.
The Kursk, one of the largest submarines in the world, was packed with equipment and had only 20- to 32-inch-wide walkways for the crew - making it nearly impassable for the divers in bulky suits.
"The submarine is a very cramped place," the Kursk's chief designer Igor Spassky said in an interview with the weekly Vek newspaper. "And the diving suit has a geometrically complex shape, with many pieces of equipment attached to it."
Despite the fears, divers have continued preparations for entering the Kursk, cutting through the thick hull to gain access to the bodies. They work in teams of three - two Russians and one foreign diver - and rest between dives in a pressurized chamber inside the mother ship, the Regalia, to prevent injury to their lungs and other organs. They breathe a helium mixture, which affects the vocal chords and makes their voices shrill.
Adding to the high risk and physical rigor of the divers' work is the psychological pressure of working with the dead, the ever-present possibility they'll collide face to face with a floating corpse.
Even if remains are successfully taken out of the submarine, raising them to the surface will be hard, requiring a slow, gradual decrease in pressure. If raised quickly, the bodies would be torn apart by the high pressure inside them.
Penetrating the hull has itself presented obstacles. Unlike most Western submarines, the Kursk has a double hull, consisting of two layers of steel with eight inches of rubber between them to muffle mechanical sounds and make them inaudible to enemy sonar.
Divers have used a high-pressure spray of water and diamond powder to cut holes in the steel hull, but had to use a surface crane to pluck out the rubber.
Experts are still arguing over whether there is a chance of finding bodies. Even if the divers can squeeze inside and perform the nearly impossible task of finding their way amid the silt-flooded maze of hulking engine shafts, wheels and generators, it will be extremely difficult for them to locate any bodies in the darkness.
Spassky said a beam of light from a helmet flashlight reaches only 12-16 feet, and covers even less in the silt. Each of the two or three back compartments the divers hope to enter has about 35,000 cubic feet to explore.
Officials and experts have said at least two-thirds of the Kursk's 118 crewmen were in the weapons and control rooms in the submarine' forward section at the time of the explosion and died almost instantly, their bodies likely blown to bits. The rest could have died later, drowned in the water that seeped through the cracks in the hull.
"We hope to find only 20-30 percent of the bodies in the stern compartments," Spassky said.
Clues to the cause of the disaster are hidden in the sub's bow, which divers aren't going to enter. Officials now agree that the first explosion, which sent the Kursk crashing to the bottom, was likely caused by an explosion of a practice torpedo in one of the nose tubes.
The initial explosion of the torpedo's kerosene fuel and highly concentrated hydrogen peroxide, which was used as an oxidant, thrust the Kursk down onto the seabed, they said. The blast could have been caused by an internal malfunction, collision with a World War II mine or a Western submarine, officials said.
After the Kursk hit the ocean floor, several dozen of its torpedoes, containing tons of explosives, detonated. That sent a giant fireball and shock wave through the hull, killing most of the crew.
Authorities plan to raise the Kursk in the spring, hoping to find out what caused the disaster.
President Vladimir Putin promised to recover the bodies at an emotional meeting with angry relatives of the victims shortly after the disaster. Aware of the risks, marine experts and even many of the victims' families now say the bodies should be left inside the submarine until it is brought to the surface.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo MOSB104
 Load-Date: October 24, 2000

 

End of Document
