

Divided city illustrates the ethnic reality of Kosovo
The Associated Press
July 20, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 763 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KOSOVSKA MITROVICA, Yugoslavia
Body




On the south side of the Ibar river, crowds relax on a balmy summer's evening, sipping drinks and chatting with friends over the din of music blaring from the radios of outdoor cafes.
A few hundred yards to the north, the scene is the same. But the language spoken is different. So is the money to pay the tab.
And between the ethnic Albanian south bank of the river and the Serb-dominated north stands a network of barbed wire, sandbags and heavily armed French troops along a bridge which looks like an international border between two hostile powers.
The contrast between the Serb and ethnic Albanian parts of this city speaks volumes about the nature of life in Kosovo more than a year after the arrival of the United Nations and the NATO-led peacekeeping force.
This is the only city in Kosovo where large numbers of both ethnic Albanians and Serbs still live - close by if not together. And it is the most ethnically charged Kosovo city, where hatreds run the deepest.
Ethnic Albanians consider Kosovska Mitrovica symbolic of the failure of the United Nations and NATO to build a united Kosovo. Serbs see this city as their last chance to maintain a viable Serb community in a province they consider the birthplace of the Serbian nation.
"We are in a strong position here," said Oliver Ivanovic, the leader of Kosovska Mitrovica Serbs. "We have an obligation to defend Serbs as best we can who are not in such a good position."
From the United Nations in New York, to the cluttered U.N. offices in the dusty provincial capital Pristina, to the sandbagged checkpoints manned by troops of dozens of nations, the notion of a Kosovo partitioned into ethnic Albanian and Serb districts is considered unthinkable.
The goal of the Kosovo mission, enshrined in Security Council documents and repeated by scores of international officials, is to build a multiethnic society where tolerance - if not affection - prevails.
Yet a stroll through the streets of this shabby industrial city raises questions whether ethnic partition have already begun. From the Ibar River bridge northward to the boundary with the rest of Serbia about 25 miles away lives the largest Serb community left in Kosovo.
Unlike small, isolated Serb pockets elsewhere, the Serb community here has a safe route to Serbia which does not pass through ethnic Albanian-controlled territory. Serb leaders here feel an obligation to resist what they consider attempts by the United Nations and NATO to split them from the Serb motherland.
As a sign of that defiance, Serbs have resisted attempts by the United Nations for them to register to vote in municipal elections set for October. The balloting has been promoted as the first step toward a democratic, multiethnic society here.
U.N. officials say more than 1 million Kosovo Albanians registered by the Wednesday deadline. Although no ethnic breakdown has been released, U.N. officials acknowledge the vast majority of registrants were ethnic Albanians.
U.N. officials blame Serb resistance on intimidation by hard-liners. Many Serbs say registering would have been an act of disloyalty to the Serbian nation.
"They don't understand the Serbian mentality," Serb activist Nikola Kabasic said. "The more you push down on the Serbs, the more they will resist,"
With the ethnic division of Kosovska Mitrovica, which began in the first weeks of the NATO-led peacekeeping mission, the two communities live side-by-side but apart. That was much the same pattern existing here before the Serb crackdown and the NATO bombing campaign which forced out Yugoslav police and soldiers last year.
On the south bank, passers-by greet one another and chat in Albanian. Street signs are written in the Roman alphabet. Vendors sell Albanian language newspapers from Pristina. Customers pay in German marks, which the United Nations has decreed as the primary currency.
But don't offer a waitress or a sales clerk in the north anything but Yugoslav dinars, lest the customer be reminded that Kosovo remains officially part of Serbia, the main republic of Yugoslavia.
Many signs in the north are written in the Cyrillic alphabet. And vendors sell the latest Serbian language newspapers from Belgrade. Publications in Serbian are as rare in the south as those in Albanian are in the north.
No one dares speak the "wrong" language in public.
On the south bank, cars bear new, U.N.-issued license plates: black numbers on a white background with blue lines on the top and bottom. In the Serb part of this city, cars are equipped strictly with Yugoslav plates, which include initials of the town of registry.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo XVK105, BEL103
 Load-Date: July 21, 2000

 

End of Document
