

Does the European Union Need to be Fixed? The People of Maastricht Speak
March 28, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 534 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MAASTRICHT, Netherlands
Body




Jan Vandewal thinks too much European integration is bad. The little differences, he says, make life in Europe what it is.
"The French drink wine, the Germans drink beer, and the Dutch people smoke hash," he says, alluding to the Netherlands' policy of allowing the sale of small amounts of hashish and marijuana.
"Every country has its identity, and I'm glad," says Vandewal, 42, who describes himself as "financially independent."
"One nation? I don't see the point."
The latest version of the European Union charter was drafted in this sleepy provincial capital in 1991. The seeds of a new Europe, including the decisions to create a single currency for all 15 member nations and common foreign and security policies, were sown here.
As European leaders prepare for a summit in Italy on Friday that will plot the next step for unity between their nations, the European people are widely divided over what that move should be.
A stroll through this southern Dutch city on the Meuse River illustrates just how much.
"The people should be involved more," says Marieke Effting, 20, a student out for a bike ride near the modernist provincial government building where the Maastricht Treaty was signed.
"Now, it's only the presidents of the countries deciding. It should be more the people."
Charles Mukanga, 30, whose roots are in Zaire, believes Europe is run by a secretive "clique in Brussels."
By contrast, Mary Jongen, 65, guiding a gaggle of schoolchildren through one of Maastricht's oldest churches, is excited.
"We like being part of Europe," she says. "It has improved our lives. But we have to work together. It has to become a United States (of Europe)."
Maastricht lies in a nub of Holland, sandwiched between Belgium and Germany, not far from Luxembourg and France. Many residents are multilingual. They easily calculate the value of different currencies in their heads.
Like Mrs. Jongen, many Maastrichters are European-minded without really understanding the EU or its frequently mysterious bureaucracy.
"Europe is far from the man-in-the-street, and therefore a lot more communication needs to be done," says Leo Stasse, 57, a retired bank director, interrupting his hurried walk across a central square.
"I sort of know what's going on, but I don't think about it every day," says Jessica Batteau, 19, taking a breather from a morning jog along the Meuse.
"I think simple structures are better," says Hermine Bakker, 29, taking in the Maastricht air with her yellow dog. "There needs to be more involvement of local people. I think a lot of people just don't understand what Europe is doing for them."
Peer Dewin, a gray-bearded geography professor, is disappointed that the EU's only directly elected institution has so little power.
"Just think about what's going on in the European Parliament," he says. "There you have people with very good ideas. It's a pity that what they think is not, as in every other parliament, put into practice. I think that is a problem."
Has the Maastricht Treaty changed much for Europe?
"It's mostly for business people," says Vandewal, gazing out at the cold Meuse that meanders from France through Belgium into the Netherlands. "But for ordinary people like me, not much."
 Load-Date: March 28, 1996

 

End of Document
