

Dollar up against the mark, down vs. the yen
October 21, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 438 words
Byline: By PATRICIA LAMIELL, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The dollar turned in a mixed performance Tuesday, helped by a rebounding U.S. stock market and hurt by a sharp widening in the American trade deficit.
An economic plan for Japan and the raging debate over a single European currency, known as the euro, also provided cross-currents for foreign exchange traders.
In late New York trading, the dollar was quoted at 1.7896 German marks, up from 1.7725 Monday. But the dollar slipped to 120.82 Japanese yen from 121.16. The British pound also rose against the dollar, climbing to $ 1.6353 from $ 1.6340.
A government report that the U.S. trade deficit widened to $ 10.4 billion in August was worse than expected. But while the flow of dollars out of the United States to buy foreign goods held down the dollar, rising U.S. stocks made dollars attractive to international investors. The Dow Jones industrial average, up 74 on Monday, added 139 on Tuesday to regain the ground lost at the end of last week.
Traders also had to balance the German debate over interest rates against uncertainties about the impact of adopting the euro.
On one hand, Hans Tietmeyer, the president of Germany's central bank, said he was pleased with the slowdown of Germany's broad money supply growth in September. The currency markets took his comments as a signal that the Bundesbank, under an anti-inflation policy of holding down growth of the money supply, would be inclined to raise interest rates.
Supporting the view that German interest rates will rise was a report from Germany's Ifo economic institute that business confidence rose by more than expected in September.
Higher rates in Germany could help support the mark against the dollar. But the mark is suffering from a bigger problem tied to the European currency, said Claude LaMedica, foreign exchange trader at Republic National Bank in New York.
LaMedica says that while German rates could go up near-term, the desire to have a smooth launch of the Euro will make it harder to raise rates in the future.
Meanwhile, the dollar fell against the yen after Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party presented proposals aimed at boosting Japan's flagging economy. Although the plan didn't lay out any specific measures for fiscal stimulus, it did emphasize deregulating the economy and reforming taxes.
LaMedica said he expects the dollar to rise against the yen over time in reaction to severe economic problems across the Far East.
Other late dollar rates in New York, compared with late Friday: 1.4884 Swiss francs, up from 1.4724; 5.9998 French francs, up from 5.9427; 1,745 Italian lire, up from 1,729.5; and 1.3890 Canadian dollars, up from 1.3852.
 Load-Date: October 21, 1997

 

End of Document
