

Down in the polls, German chancellor goes on the attack
The Associated Press
April 18, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 371 words
Byline: By PAUL GEITNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




Facing perhaps his toughest challenger yet in 16 years in power, Chancellor Helmut Kohl attacked opposition candidate Gerhard Schroeder on Saturday as a showman with little to offer except old leftist ideas.
But polls released over the weekend held more bad news for the conservative chancellor, who will attempt to win a record fifth term in elections scheduled for Sept. 27.
A national poll released Saturday by the Bild newspaper and MDR broadcasting showed the Social Democrats supported by 45 percent of voters surveyed, with Kohl's Christian Democrats behind with 36 percent.
It also found most voters think Schroeder has more economic expertise than Kohl, 55 percent to 31 percent, respectively. When asked about employment policies, the spread was even greater in Schroeder's favor, 57 percent to 23 percent. No margin of error was given.
Kohl said that while Schroeder talks of the "new center," his party is offering only "old left" ideas such as higher corporate taxes.
Since the Social Democrats presented their election program, "even the businesses that perhaps had allowed themselves to be blinded by Schroeder are sobering up," Kohl was quoted by the Welt am Sonntag newspaper as saying.
Meeting in Leipzig on Friday, the Social Democrats united behind Schroeder and approved their most market-friendly platform ever at a convention featuring rock music and American-style hoopla.
Schroeder has followed in the footsteps of President Bill Clinton and British Prime Minister Tony Blair, toning down his party's traditionally leftist ideology in an attempt to woo middle-of-the-road voters.
The strategy seems to be working.
The Social Democrats recently won two state elections and the Christian Democrats look likely to get another black eye April 26 in the east German state of Saxony-Anhalt.
Polls released Saturday by Pro Sieben television and Focus magazine showed the Social Democrats with 41 percent of the vote for state offices, and about 24 percent for the Christian Democrats - a drop of 10 points since the 1994 election.
Another trouncing for Kohl's party would increase pressure on the 68-year-old chancellor to step aside in favor of his parliamentary leader and designated "crown prince," Wolfgang Schaeuble.
 Load-Date: April 18, 1998

 

End of Document
