

Ending the IRS: Who'll Collect the Taxes?
September 10, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 699 words
Byline: By DAVE SKIDMORE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Republican Bob Dole and Reform Party nominee Ross Perot are campaigning for president on "ending the IRS as we know it." What does that mean?
The candidates envision a leaner, friendlier agency - or perhaps no agency at all. But even they acknowledge someone has to collect the nation's taxes.
Dole, in his economic plan, revealed limited details on his proposals for the Internal Revenue Service. Perot, in a 30-minute infomercial first aired Sunday, offered next to none.
But Perot makes his intentions clear with advertisements depicting "IRS" in large capital letters, surrounded by a circle and bisected by a slash.
He promises a "fair, paperless, modern system." Experts question whether that means an end to audits and other headaches that are part of today's tax system.
"You can't change the IRS as we know it without changing the tax system as we know it," said J.D. Foster of the Tax Foundation, a conservative-leaning research organization in Washington.
Perot says only that he would consult the experts, run a computer analysis of reform plans and select the best.
Dole, pitching a 15 percent income tax cut, says a new system should be "lower, flatter, fairer, simpler and more savings-oriented." He would eliminate tax-return filing altogether for 40 million low- and middle-income taxpayers.
Joel Slemrod of the University of Michigan Business School said that's "certainly doable" even without radically changing the tax system. Deductions and credits would have to be pared, he said. And a more sophisticated system of payroll withholding would be required to account for midyear changes, like the birth of a child, that raise or lower tax liability.
"It's done that way in both the United Kingdom and in Japan. A typical taxpayer does not have to file a tax return. … At the end of the year, it (withholding) works out just right," he said.
Dole also wants to shift the burden of proof in tax disputes. Currently, taxpayers must prove their returns are accurate and the IRS has no obligation to prove they're not.
While the switch sounds attractive, it almost certainly would involve a more complex process than the current system, said Joseph Lane of Menlo Park, Calif., a former IRS division chief who now represents taxpayers.
"What this says is the IRS will no longer be able to look to the person who files the return and has all the data," he said. "Instead, the IRS would have to go in with a summons to everyone you did business with."
Dole also proposed a one-year amnesty for payment of back taxes without interest or penalties, a move that probably would bring in more revenue at the risk of angering taxpayers who pay fully and on time.
And he wants to cut the IRS' 110,000-person staff by 30 percent and shift the agency's remaining resources toward helping taxpayers file correct returns and away from auditing for mistakes.
The IRS already is struggling to keep offices open and answer its telephones in the face of a 2 percent budget cut imposed by the Republican-majority Congress this year, and the 6 percent to 9 percent cut contemplated for fiscal 1997.
President Clinton doesn't share sentiment for dismantling the IRS.
Instead, Clinton signed a bill in July aimed at curbing abuses by the tax collector. "We have to make sure that the IRS doesn't tangle the American people up in red tape, that it is not arbitrary and that taxpayers are treated with the respect to which they're entitled," he said.
The law allows taxpayers to sue the IRS for up to $ 1 million for reckless collections, sets up a taxpayers' advocate and expands obligations on the agency to deal faster with disputes and refunds.
Meanwhile, as Dole and Perot speak of sweeping change, a study commission established by Congress is starting work on a plan for improving IRS taxpayer service and internal management.
Rep. Rob Portman, R-Ohio, co-chairman of the commission with Sen. Bob Kerrey, D-Neb., said the election-year debate could help in the push for thoughtful reform.
"These political-year exhortations, while they may seem sometimes too simple and too populist, really can play a constructive role if they lead to pressure on Congress to both simplify the code and modernize the service," he said.
 Load-Date: September 10, 1996

 

End of Document
