

Enjoying the good times while the worriers worry
The Associated Press
February 26, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 564 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




"So, who cares," says the confident American consumer, all but certain that if things are so good for him they must be good all over the place.
The thought is reminiscent of the claim "Engine Charlie" Wilson was supposed to have said about General Motors, which he had headed, to wit: "What's good GM is good for America," or some such.
It's a confidence built of wage increases, lots of jobs, rising stocks, easy credit, plentiful mortgage money, and price discounts everywhere. Never have so many had access to so many good things.
Let Alan Greenspan, Bill Gates, or the CIA worry about things. Why should ordinary Janes and Joes worry about over-leveraged stocks, the threat of recession or inflation, or computer crashes and stuff like that?
Is this another example of the "why worry" syndrome so evident in other areas of American life, notably politics? Are consumers enjoying their personal prosperity so much they haven't time to be concerned?
Forget about the possibility of answers in advance; more likely they'll come when historians look back from their superior vantage point and explain what happened. Experience is the teacher of last resort.
Still, when it comes to confidence you can't underestimate the ordinary American, usually referred to as consumers in these economic times. That All-American confidence has done great things in the past.
Confidence in current conditions now is at an all-time high, or the highest, at least, since The Conference Board began its measurements 32 years ago. The Board's associate director, Lynn Franco, offered a concise, telling explanation.
"President Clinton's personal problems and the impeachment trial have had little or no impact on consumer attitudes," she said.
Instead, she observed, America's confident consumers were "most concerned about their jobs, their salaries and the overall health of the economy." In other words: What, me worry?
Meanwhile, Greenspan has revealed the existence of a huge pile of cash, should the edgy consumers decide they want their money in their pockets and not in a bank before the year 2000.
He is concerned also, he told the Congress, that economic instability in other parts of the world pose dangers for America, and expressed again his concern that the high-flying stock market could hit turbulence.
Even Bill Gates has expressed surprise about the high valuations of stocks in the high-tech area, of which Microsoft, the company he invented, is perhaps a leading example. At a gathering of business leaders in Davos, Switzerland, he cautioned about making price projections into the unknown.
A CIA official has also warned about making easy assumptions about the future, reminding us that Y2K could cause serious computer disruptions abroad. Remember, this is one trading world; bad things spread.
Congress has also been put on the alert. Sens. Robert Bennett, R-Utah, and Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., warned other senators in a letter that the Y2K dangers within the country shouldn't be underestimated.
Included in the letter was this forecast: "We will be confronted with one of the most serious and potentially devastating events this nation has ever encountered."
Again, you never can underestimate Americans, whether they are called workers, managers or consumers. All Americans are consumers, and right now they are very confident they can keep a good thing going.
 
 End Adv AMs Friday, Feb. 26
 
 Load-Date: February 26, 1999

 

End of Document
