

Entrepreneurs dream of the good life while living the hard way
May 27, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1072 words
Byline: By ALICE ANN LOVE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




George Assimakopoulos gladhands the receptionists, pokes his head into executive offices to chat, and hardly seems to notice when he's told the check he's come halfway across town for won't be ready today.
But once behind closed elevator doors, leaving the venerable public relations firm, Assimakopoulos' face falls.
"They're thinking isn't this nice, he comes in personally to pick up the check," he says. "Actually, we need the money."
Thousands of Americans dream of owning their own business, and perhaps becoming the next Microsoft or Ben & Jerry's star of the capitalist firmament. But as Assimakopoulos is learning, following that dream involves hard work, financial hardship and the ever-present risk of failure.
New companies have been responsible for 80 percent of the nation's economic growth this decade, but they have a heavy failure rate.
"It's an unwritten code. If you can survive the first two years, then things look good," said Assimakopoulos, 26, who with three partners last summer opened Raven Communications Inc.
The four young men are hoping to make their fortunes teaching other businesses how to use the new world of the Internet for PR and marketing.
They offer everything from technical advice on what type of computer equipment and online services work best to the design of "homepages" on the information superhighway where consumers can browse for information and even purchase products online.
Some day stories may be told of their prodigal success. But for now they're just ordinary guys trying to make a living - the hard way.
After getting his MBA in December 1995, Assimakopoulos used his credit card to pay a corporate agent $ 300 so he could set up the shell of a company with his thesis partner, Konstantin Konstantinov.
Konstantinov, 29, is a Russian physicist who headed to American business school after the Soviet Union collapsed and government research funds dried up. After graduation he needed an on-the-job training opportunity right away in order to extend his student visa. Joining up with Assimakopoulos to start an Internet consulting company qualified.
For the first few months the "company" consisted of Konstantinov keeping his old job in the university computer lab and Assimakopoulos using his dramatic flair to sell the Internet and himself to anyone who would listen. New business didn't exactly roll in.
Assimakopoulos pulls out his wallet with a flourish to show how he covered expenses.
"Visa, Mastercard, American Express," he says snapping the cards down on the table. To save money, he lived with his parents.
Assimakopoulos met his third partner, Dennis Moore, when they were hired, separately, as consultants to a PR firm that wanted to get its clients online.
Moore, 32, had taken a downsizing buyout from the Air Force where he had worked on the Internet for the military. Along with a friend, Dale Thomas, a computer programmer, Moore was trying to peddle computer expertise to various companies.
Over a business lunch - at a Roy Rogers restaurant - Assimakopoulos and Moore decided to join forces.
The lunch led to the creation of Raven Communications. Since then, the four partners have struggled through a year of 18-hour days to make that name into a business.
Assimakopoulos is the sales force. He makes at least 50 relentless calls a day to prospective clients, offering free advice or coaxing information out of secretaries so he can waylay busy bigwigs if necessary to get in to make his pitch.
Raven's four partners started out taking home about $ 250 a month apiece. Being engaged to be married gave Assimakopoulos extra incentive to bring in enough money to move out of his parents house, which he managed by Thanksgiving.
"But I barely had enough money to buy my mother a Christmas gift," he said.
Moore continued to work out of his basement and curtailed his usually frequent visits to see his family in Nebraska. Thomas, the only partner with a wife and kids, kept another fulltime computer programming job and has done his part for Raven on top of it.
In a steadily growing portfolio of clients, Raven now counts Hagen Daas, Circle Films, and The American University, and each of the partners take home about $ 2,000 a month.
But a growing workload has presented its own problems. A young company needs capital to complete projects before it can bill for them - in Raven's case, money to pay for computer equipment and supplies, and starting early this year, wages for eight employees and space for them to work.
"The hardest thing with a start up is understanding growth. You have to plan for it," says Moore.
Because Raven has no financial history, big banks turned them down for loans and credit lines - even when the company could show them a $ 50,000 contract with the United States Government to work on an Internet site for the Environmental Protection Agency.
Raven finally got a line of credit at a small, locally-based bank that is trying to grow too, and the company has established small accounts at larger institutions to build relationships for the future.
"Never burn a bridge," said Assimakopoulos.
Through a friend, the partners found storefront downtown office space they can afford - though to keep the rent down they spackled, painted, and spruced it up themselves.
Raven's new employees are mainly students enrolled at nearby universities or recently graduated, and the partners fret over hiring and payroll tax regulations, as well as providing incentives to keep them.
Konstantinov, the Russian physicist, now deciphers American tax and employment law in his spare time. He relies on former business school professors for free or discounted advice.
"People say how do you find time to do all this and run the business. The answer is you make time," he said.
Raven can't afford many employee benefits yet, but offers a health insurance plan the partners painstakingly researched, and opened a 24-hour computer workroom in April so staff can set their own schedules.
"As we progress, we can afford to be better players," said Assimakopoulos.
The partners are trying build a sense of comradery they hope will last as the company grows. They order out for food on particularly onerous days, and work out disagreements over beer and pool up the street.
Recently, they started taking everyone on staff and their families out to the movies once a month.
"I would love to see us as a company of 1,000 people and have 1,000 people going to the movies," said Assimakopoulos.
 Load-Date: May 27, 1997

 

End of Document
