

European outbreak of mad cow disease rattles the continent
December 1, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1486 words
Byline: By PAUL GEITNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BELLEGEM, Belgium
Body




The picturesque little farmstead - crumbling brick buildings at the end of a lane in the rolling fields of Flanders - is strangely quiet. A dog barks in a barn and cats wander through the muddy courtyard, but there are no cows mooing in the fields.
Denis Veys, whose family has raised cattle here for generations, sits at his kitchen table and fumes.
Until about a week ago, he was the proud owner of 131 cattle. Then mad cow disease struck one animal, authorities seized his entire herd, and a stunned Veys was left to wonder how his family is supposed to get by.
"This is a criminal thing," he says, eyes flashing angrily through the smoke from a cigarette clutched in a dirt-stained hand. "It came from England and infected the whole of Europe."
His anger is shared by many Europeans caught up in a new wave of hysteria about the bovine plague from Britain - and its equally fatal human equivalent - that has swept the continent this fall.
The actual risk of infection is still statistically tiny. But on a continent that still resists hormone-treated beef and genetically modified plants from the United States, mad cow disease has created a frenzy.
Newly discovered cases sent schools from Paris to Berlin rushing to yank beef off cafeteria menus. Butchers in Athens stopped selling all cuts in their shops. Italian farmers blocked trucks at the borders to keep foreign cows out.
"Sales of meat have gone down a great deal," said Stefania Bagalini, who manages the meat counter at a supermarket in Rome. "There's definitely alarmism and panic."
Even at the Brussels headquarters of the European Union, which is struggling to restore public faith in food safety, the fear is visible: A sign taped to a restaurant door informs customers that only beef from Argentina is being served.
Europeans, many of whom like to imagine that their food is still grown by peasants in unspoiled countryside, have been disabused of that notion by a parade of food scares in recent years, from dioxin in chickens to shellfish poisoned by an oil spill.
Still, those on the continent thought that mad cow disease - bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE - was mainly a problem across the English Channel, and had already been dealt with.
The brain-wasting disease originated in Britain in the late 1970s, probably as a mutation of scrapie, a centuries-old sheep disease. Scientists believe it was spread by recycling meat and bone meal from infected animals back into cattle feed.
Unlike the United States, where grains and soybeans are cheap and plentiful, Europeans rely much more heavily on slaughterhouse waste to boost the protein content of animal fodder.
BSE wasn't identified until 1986, but by the mid-1990s, Britain was seeing tens of thousands of cases a year. The pictures were heart-wrenching: infected cattle stumbling about pitifully, as if drunk.
Then in 1996, a link was established between BSE and a new and similar human illness called variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD), a horrible crippling of the nervous system followed by death. So far 81 people have died in Britain.
The public health uproar abated only after the European Union banned exports of British beef and feed in 1996 and millions of British cows were incinerated.
But the all-clear proved premature.
New tests started turning up dozens of BSE cases in continental cows that had apparently eaten contaminated feed before the ban.
"Instead of waiting for animals to be clinically ill, these tests can be used on animals that have just fallen down," said Dr. Maura Ricketts, a medical consultant at the World Health Organization. "Before, if an animal tripped and broke its leg, it might just be an emergency slaughter and enter the food chain."
Then a death from vCJD was reported in France. It was only the second known case outside Britain, and the furor exploded anew in late October, when French officials revealed that beef from 11 potentially infected cattle had made it into supermarkets. The meat was pulled and the dealers placed under investigation for fraud.
Beef sales plummeted 40 percent in France. Other countries, from Italy and Spain next-door to as far away as Russia, imposed bans.
The bad news didn't stop there.
A week ago, Germany discovered its first two BSE cases in homegrown cattle. Another turned up in Spain, which also had prided itself on being BSE-free.
The Frankfurter Allgemeine newspaper, rarely given to overstatement, went so far as to compare the threat to the Black Death that wiped out three-quarters of the population of Europe in the Middle Ages.
"Once it broke out, bubonic plague spread like wildfire," the paper noted. "BSE is capable of doing the same."
Few experts would go that far.
But how did the disease jump the species barrier to humans when scrapie never did, or just what agent causes it? Very little is known for sure.
"We know that a piece of brain tissue the size of a peppercorn is enough to infect a cow," Ricketts said. But how much infected beef makes a person sick "is another important piece of unknown information."
The incubation period for BSE is about five years and for vCJD maybe as long as 20, she adds. "That's why the cases appeared later in human beings and also the reason why it's difficult to predict how many we'll see."
Only one case of BSE has been found in North America, in a cow that was shipped from Britain to Canada. That entire herd was destroyed, and no signs of any other contamination has been found.
Scientists say there is very little chance of the disease reaching the United States because American farmers never imported any of the contaminated feed and the animals they imported have all been traced and either quarantined or destroyed.
"There's no evidence of it occurring anywhere else," said Dr. Alex Thiermann, veterinary attache at the U.S. Mission to the European Union in Brussels. "But we should remain vigilant."
As a precaution, the United States last year banned blood donations by anyone who has spent at least six months in Britain since 1980.
In Europe, the scare has dominated the headlines for weeks.
"Europeans as a people are much more risk-averse than Americans," Thiermann notes.
Throw in a threat to the diet on a continent where cuisine is part of national identity and the sparks fly higher.
The realization that herbivorous cows had been turned into "cannibals" by the food industry only fueled the disgust.
"It's not just a public health threat but a moral question," said Timothy Lang, professor of food policy at Thames Valley University in London. "What is on trial is intensive agriculture."
Compounding the confusion has been the blame-fixing and the disagreement over solutions.
French President Jacques Chirac and Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, political rivals likely to face off in the 2002 presidential race, were quick to start sniping over the best way to respond.
When German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder insinuated EU commissioners were shirking their responsibilities, the EU fired back with complaints about warnings ignored and proposals blocked over national pride.
"The credibility of politicians and scientists in Europe has diminished considerably," Thiermann said.
Hoping to restore public confidence, EU farm ministers are expected to approve on Monday a ban throughout the 15-nation EU on animal products in fodder, for cows as well as for pigs and poultry, for at least six months, just in case the cows eat the pig- or chickenfeed.
Also, starting Jan. 1, all cows over 2 1/2 years old will have to be certified BSE-free before they can be butchered and sold.
The cost of the measures is expected to run into the billions of dollars - and that's not even counting incinerating infected carcasses or outlawed feed.
Furnaces at cement factories will be enlisted, and a German utility said Thursday it may offer its coal-fired power plants to help the government dispose of the stuff.
Health experts welcomed the steps, but stressed that strict monitoring and enforcement were crucial.
"The public having found its voice has taken us a long way toward the goal of not having any more cases of BSE," Ricketts said.
Veys, the Belgian cattleman, was the ninth in his country to have his herd seized this year, and he is angry no one told him years ago about "the garbage they put" into cattle feed.
"Now they guarantee the feed is safe - but before, nothing," he says.
The government is supposed to compensate him, but it could take months, or longer. Until then, the 52-year-old farmer has no income, and his 19-year-old son, who was going to take over the farm, faces an uncertain future.
"It's a shame that I'm so old or I'd do something else," Veys says softly. "But I don't feel like starting again because now I'm afraid."
---
On the Net:
University of Edinburgh site on CJD: www.cjd.ed.ac.uk 
World Health Organization site on CJD: www.who.int/emc/diseases/bse 
European Union site on food safety: www.europa.eu.int/comm/food 
End Adv for Sunday, Dec. 3
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY437-438 of Dec. 1, Graphic MAD COW DISEASE
 Load-Date: December 4, 2000

 

End of Document
