

Everyone's Talking About The Royals - Except British Lawmakers
March 7, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 799 words
Byline: By ROBERT SEELY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Normally, getting an opinion from a member of Parliament is as hard as picking up the telephone or popping down to the House of Commons.
Except if you ask about the future of the monarchy.
While Britain's news media frantically debate the divorce of Prince Charles and Princess Diana and wonder whether monarchy is doomed, Parliament is strangely silent even though it oversees the crown.
And it's no wonder.
The fact is, although the royals have hit a rough patch, Britons still like their monarchy and don't vote for candidates who want to replace it with a republic.
A Labor Party lawmaker who questioned Charles's fitness to be king quickly apologized, under orders from party leader Tony Blair. Only one member of the governing Conservative Party has ventured an opinion, and he's retiring next year.
"We have to play it very cool," said Sir Julian Critchley, a Conservative lawmaker. "We mustn't have people taking sides. If we had a Charles party and a Diana party, the monarchy will be ripped apart."
Many people, legislators included, believe the monarchy is so much a part of the fabric of the nation that damage to one will weaken the other. But a growing number disagree.
Two-thirds of the Labor members in Parliament privately favor a debate in the House of Commons, according to a straw poll taken by Press Association, the British news agency. A debate would be an expression of views and does not require a vote or a motion.
Most of the monarch's powers were given to Parliament long ago, and the queen acts as the government advises her. Parliament technically has the power to legislate the abolition of the monarchy, but any such change would be far more complicated than a simple vote.
George Walden, the retiring Conservative lawmaker, proposed that Parliament send a list of grievances and demands to Queen Elizabeth II about the misbehavior of younger members of the royal family.
A similar litany of the alleged misdeeds of King Charles I's reign in 1641 was one of the factors in the outbreak of England's civil war, which ended with the king's beheading in 1649.
But Britain's moment as a republic was brief - Charles II was welcomed to the throne in 1660.
Walden had nothing so drastic in mind.
He told GMTV television that he thought the government and opposition should join in a statement "suitably delicately phrased" to tell the royal family "you are actually demeaning yourselves and this country, would you please stop."
"When you think of all these blabbing lovers, these duchesses and princesses - are we supposed to defer to these people? If the monarchy itself were composed of a secret republican conspiracy, they couldn't do themselves more damage than they are," he said.
The queen has already made large concessions to her detractors, including agreeing to pay taxes and taking most of her relatives off the public payroll.
This year's round of royal unpopularity started with revelations that the Duchess of York, estranged wife of Prince Andrew, had severe financial difficulties.
Problems worsened when Charles and Diana, under pressure from the queen to resolve the troubles in their private lives, agreed to divorce after 15 years of marriage. Diana immediately fell into a dispute with Buckingham Palace over the terms of the split and her public announcement of it.
Ken Livingstone, one of a shrinking band of old-fashioned socialists in the Labor Party, laid the monarchy's problems squarely on Fergie and Di.
"It is these two airheads in high heels who have done more for the republican cause then all the lefties put together," Livingstone wrote in The Sun, a tabloid whose royal scoops have also contributed to the family's problems.
The topic of the monarchy is so sensitive it has forced Labor's Blair and Prime Minister John Major to agree on at least one thing: Neither wants a parliamentary debate on it.
Labor has dared to denounce the principle of hereditary power, but only as it applies to the aristocrats who inherit their seats in the House of Lords. It proposes no change in the monarchy.
Although polls indicate that at least two-thirds of Britons want to keep the monarchy, support has waned over the past few years.
In a Gallup poll in December, 40 percent said recent events had inflicted "a great deal" of harm on the monarchy.
Although Diana has rivaled the queen and the queen mother in popularity polls in Britain, there is growing concern about the damage she may do to the monarchy. Some see her as a victim of her own desire for celebrity.
Britain has gone through several bouts of republicanism over the past three centuries, said Gregory Claeys, professor of history at London University.
Still, he believes the throne is secure - as long as the queen lives.
"But the institution would be in danger if she departed in the near future," he added.
 Load-Date: March 7, 1996

 

End of Document
