

Excerpts from judge's ruling in the Louise Woodward case
November 11, 1997, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 957 words
Body




Excerpts from Judge Hiller B. Zobel's ruling Monday in the case of English au pair Louise Woodward:
 
 - On public opinion:
The law, John Adams told a Massachusetts jury while defending British citizens on trial for murder, is inflexible, inexorable and deaf: inexorable to the cries of the defendant; "deaf as an adder to the clamours of the populace." His words ring true 227 years later. Elected officials may consider popular urging and sway to public opinion polls. Judges must follow their oaths and do their duty, heedless of editorials, letters, telegrams, picketers, threats, petitions, panelists and talk shows. In this country, we do not administer justice by plebiscite. A judge, in short, is a public servant who must follow his conscience, whether or not he counters the manifest wishes of those he serves; whether or not his decision seems a surrender to the prevalent demands.
- On the jury's task, given conflicting testimony:
The issue for the jury's determination was simply: Did the government prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Matthew Eappen died because defendant shook him and battered him against an unyielding object? Put another way: Did the defense evidence create a reasonable doubt that the death resulted from some other cause?
 
 - On the defense request that he pronounce Ms. Woodward not guilty:
… the law requires our assuming that the jury did indeed discard every scrap of evidence (testimonial or visual, direct or circumstantial) tending to cast doubt on the prosecution's theory.
Measuring the evidence by this strict standard, my duty inescapably mandates my denying the motion in its entirety. Whatever my own views of the evidence might or might not be, I cannot, in deciding this motion, place any of them upon the scales.
 
 - On malice, which is necessary for a conviction of second-degree murder, and the defense request to reduce the conviction to manslaughter:
The test for malice (in the circumstances here) is whether, under the circumstances known to defendant, a reasonable person would have known that her intentional act created a substantial risk of death to Matthew Eappen. This test has long been the rule in Massachusetts. As Chief Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes noted almost a century ago, "it is possible to commit murder without any actual intent to kill or to do grievous bodily harm." The only intent the government need prove is the intent to perform the act, not any particular intent as to the act's consequences. …
The court may not, however, take into account the feelings of those the death has affected; the judge must focus entirely on the events of the trial. Thus although as a father and grandfather I particularly recognize and acknowledge the indescribable pain Matthew Eappen's death has caused his parents and grandparents, as a judge I am duty-bound to ignore it. I must look only at the evidence and the defendant.
Having considered the matter carefully, I am firmly convinced that the interests of justice … and the cases construing it have defined them - mandate my reducing the verdict to manslaughter. I do this in accordance with my discretion and my duty.
Viewing the evidence broadly, as I am permitted to do, I believe that the circumstances in which defendant acted were characterized by confusion, inexperience, frustration, immaturity and some anger, but not malice (in the legal sense) supporting a conviction for second-degree murder. Frustrated by her inability to quiet the crying child, she was "a little rough with him," under circumstances where another, perhaps wiser, person would have sought to restrain the physical impulse. The roughness was sufficient to start (or re-start) a bleeding that escalated fatally.
This sad scenario is, in my judgment after having heard all the evidence and considered the interests of justice, most fairly characterized as manslaughter, not mandatory-life-sentence murder. I view the evidence as disclosing confusion, fright and bad judgment, rather than rage or malice.
 
 - On the defense's all-or-nothing strategy of barring the jury from considering manslaughter:
I do not criticize counsel's advice and defendant's adopting it. Given the state of the evidence, it was a rational, appropriate position. Had it succeeded, the defense would be hailed for courage and foresight.
Should defendant now be permitted to second-guess herself and her lawyers? If one regards the trial of a criminal case as a high-stakes game of chance where losers must accept their losses, the answer is, Certainly not.
Massachusetts, however, never has and does not now view justice as a handmaiden to Tyche, the goddess of good fortune. Of course chance plays a part in litigation, as it does in every aspect of life. A court, nonetheless, is not a casino. The only institutionalized luck in a courtroom is the random selection of the jury venire at the beginning of trial and the random choice of alternate jurors at the end.
 
 - Further on the reason for his decision:
The search is not for justice, but rather for that rare collection of circumstances, the grave failure of justice. If leaving the verdict untouched would preserve a miscarriage of justice, Rule 25(b)(2) makes the judge's duty clear. He must determine the existence of the miscarriage, not its cause.
After intensive, cool, calm reflection, I am morally certain that allowing this defendant on this evidence to remain convicted of second-degree murder would be a miscarriage of justice.
The decision rests, as it should, entirely on my determination, guided by my reason, my conscience, and the established precedents and principles, that the interests of justice are best served here by my exercising my informed discretion and lowering the degree of guilt attributable to defendant.
 Load-Date: November 11, 1997

 

End of Document
