

Expanding the EU: What To Do With All the Farmers?
June 2, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 882 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CZARNYLAS, Poland
Body




Leszek Jakubiak gazes at the 20 pigs snuffling about in their dank sty and reckons life on his 17-acre farm will be better once Poland joins the European Union, though he's not sure how.
His wife, Helena, shakes her head as she slops a pail of water into the feed trough and says he's dreaming.
"I'm willing to work hard so I can live here," insists Jakubiak, 39. "I worked here with my father all my life. If you work hard, it will be all right."
Helena, however, is probably right.
Farms like Jakubiak's, handed down from his great-great-grandfather, are on the short-list for extinction. Too small, too inefficent, this farm and this way of life will no longer be able to support a family. And there are tens of thousands of them, stretching from the Ukraine border to Germany.
Farmers in the West also worry.
In Scotland, 1,200 miles away, dairy farmer Hugh Halcro-Johnston wonders where the money is going to come from to expand EU farm subsidies to the 9.5 million new farmers that will be absorbed when former Soviet bloc countries like Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary join in the next few years.
Studies indicate that when the 10 central and eastern European countries enter the EU, the gross domestic product of the EU will increase by only 3 percent, but its agriculture area will balloon by more than one-third.
Agriculture subsidies already eat up half of the EU's annual $ 111 billion budget. It is estimated that adding the 10 nations will cost an additional $ 11 billion-$ 15 billion.
"The bottom line is that the (EU) farmer is concerned about his income," said Halcro-Johnston. "What we are afraid of is the dilution of the amount of support that is available generally."
The 15-nation European Union plans to expand its membership to countries like Cyprus, Malta, the Baltic states and the newly democratic former Warsaw Pact nations. Though no timetable has been set, the EU indicates membership talks could start as early as next year with the most promising countries, such as Poland.
For the EU, expanded membership will require reorganization of everything from voting procedures to foreign policy to expensive farm aid.
Nowhere, however, are the problems as extensive as in agriculture, and nowhere are the stakes as great as in Poland, where 27 percent of the work force is employed on the farm and where agriculture is bigger than the farming sectors of all the other candidate countries combined.
"There will be a money problem, yes," said EU Agriculture Commissioner Franz Fischler in Brussels, adding that the extent of the difficulty depends on how the EU handles the transition and how world markets develop.
Henri Nallet, a former French agriculture minister, said that if EU farmers "think we are going to force more sacrifices on them in the name of enlargement, they will not like it,"
Talk to an EU farmer, and his greatest fear is that cheap agricultural products from the east will flood markets in western Europe, making a tough life even tougher. Talk to an eastern farmer, and he fears highly subsidized products from western Europe will flood the east, driving prices down.
"The EU farmers need not be afraid of us; we are not that dangerous," said Jan Lesniak, 72, who farms 35 acres at Piaseczno, south of Warsaw. On the other hand, he boasts, given better equipment and a bit more education, Polish farmers will outproduce anybody in the west.
Before the EU can make demands on the eastern European nations, it must first decide on the future of its own Common Agricultural Program, which pumps billions into the farm sector. Reform of the program is a priority for the EU. Phasing out subsidies altogether is one of the options under study.
What is needed in Poland, however, are not subsidies - Poles get none now - but extensive structural changes. The centralized marketing system created by the Communists was destroyed in 1989, but never really replaced. Many Polish farmers are confused about what to grow and who to sell it to.
In addition, Poland has 2 million farms, averaging 12 acres in size, and the government says only about 800,000 will survive in the long run.
Restructuring will cost huge amounts of money. Polish officials say, however, that should not be viewed as a financial drain for the EU, but rather as an investment. Poland, with a population of 38 million, is a tremendous market that will grow as salaries and standards of living rise, they say.
Economic growth in Poland was 7 percent in 1995, more than four times that of the 15 EU countries.
Reducing the number of farms and selling off the state agricultural sector in the name of modernization is fine, but that also means reducing jobs and changing a rural way of life rooted deeply in the Polish social fabric.
New jobs will have to be created to keep people in the rural areas. In many cases that means creating new agribusinesses, such as processing food into finished products for market rather than simply supplying raw materials.
"Poland's accession to the European Union sometimes arouses fears of EU farmers," said Roman Jagielinski, Poland's farm minister. "In our view such fears are based on prejudices and stereotypes. It is our concern that the prospects for the development of our agriculture are appraised honestly and that it is not used as a scare tactic for Europe."
 Load-Date: June 2, 1996

 

End of Document
