

Facing a long wait to confirm the dead, the living begin to mourn
The Associated Press
October 7, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 582 words
Byline: By ROBERT BARR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Laying flowers and saying prayers, a few dozen mourners transformed a mass of twisted metal, charred human remains and scattered belongings into a memorial Thursday at the site of a massive train collision.
They sobbed and hugged each other in a quiet, heartwrenching display of grief.
In the commuter town of Reading, dozens of people waited for police to confirm the loss of a loved one still missing from Tuesday's crash. A bouquet lay in the town center with a note attached: "Daddy come home I love you Clare."
The relatives and friends already know who didn't come home, who left a car unclaimed at a railway station parking lot, and whose mobile phone rings, unanswered, amid the wreckage. But their agonizing wait for some kind of closure didn't appear to be ending any time soon.
Authorities said Thursday they wouldn't even be able to get inside one of the train cars until at least Saturday. They believe dozens of victims may have been inside a first-class coach where the fire ignited by the head-on collision was particularly intense.
Without remains, the Westminster coroner said Thursday that identifying the dead will likely involve procedures including DNA testing.
"I think it's quite likely that we will have to do this in the weeks ahead," said Dr. Paul Knapman. "I think it is very likely that very few, if any, identifiable people will come out of that carriage."
Knapman said 25 bodies were in the Westminster mortuary. Only one had been positively identified and 17 others had been tentatively identified, he said.
Thirty-three deaths were confirmed from the crash, the worst rail disaster in Britain in at least a decade, and police said they expected the toll to be at least 70.
The railway companies, government investigators and police were focusing on reports that the outbound Thames Train raced through a red light and collided with a Great Western train two miles west of Paddington Station. The Thames driver, Michael Hodder, 31, had been on the job just two months.
The Right Rev. Dominic Walker led a memorial service Thursday in St. Mary the Virgin Church.
"At the moment, there is nothing really to say to people to comfort them," said Jane Griffiths, the local member of Parliament, who attended the service. "Too many people won't have a body to bury and that will make the grieving process harder."
Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott said he would move swiftly to adopt improved safety systems for the railways.
In Reading, 35 miles west of London, police said about 50 cars appeared to be unclaimed in the station parking garage.
Inspector Steve Gregory of the Metropolitan Body Recovery Team told reporters that his men - nearly all of whom had recently returned from excavating mass graves in Kosovo - had heard mobile phones ringing 24 hours after the collision inside the blood-smeared coaches.
Leigh Tilley and three friends came to the tracks Thursday to lay flowers in memory of 24-year-old John Northcott, among the missing.
"He was a lovely, friendly bloke and really good to everyone. Everyone, as you can imagine, is absolutely devastated," Tilley said.
Firefighter Sally Cox was among those who combed through the wreckage.
"My initial reaction was shock at what I was seeing," she said. "How something as solid as a train can be ripped apart so easily?
"Seeing people's belongings - the odd shoe lying there, people's mobile phones ringing, books they had been reading - makes you realize just how fragile human life is and how easily it can be taken away."
 Load-Date: October 7, 1999

 

End of Document
