

Facts about the opening of the restored Reichstag
The Associated Press
April 19, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 288 words
Body




Background on the history and renovation of the Reichstag.
----
THE NAME: Reichstag means "imperial parliament," the name it was given when it was built under Kaiser Wilhelm.
The current parliament is called the Bundestag, or "federal parliament." Some Germans argued the building's name should be changed to Bundestag, because of the Reichstag's associations with Prussian militarism and Hitler's Third Reich. Lawmakers agreed last month on a compromise: Plenarbereich Reichstagsgebaeude, or Plenary Area, Imperial Parliament Building.
---
THE RENOVATION: Much of the 19th-century building was destroyed by fire or World War II bombing, including original dome. Interior was restored in 1960s. Beginning in 1995, architect Sir Norman Foster built new dome and gutted interior. Original Italian Renaissance-style exterior and wartime scars inside were kept.
---
THE DOME: Covered with 3,000 square yards of glass. Visitors can walk up spiral ledge along inside of dome to the top. Offers panoramic views of Berlin landmarks. Inside dome is cone-shaped sculpture covered with mirrors that reflect natural light into parliament chamber below.
---
THE THIRD REICH: Hitler never governed from Reichstag, which was gutted by fire in 1933. But he planned to keep the building as part of a new government complex he wanted to build for the Nazi capital, to be renamed Germania.
---
THE MOVE: The Reichstag's opening Monday is first key event in government's move to Berlin. Next comes election of German president in the building in May. Parliament will not start meeting regularly in the Reichstag until its fall session opens in September. The building will be open for public tours April 21-25. Then it closes again for final construction touches.
 Load-Date: April 19, 1999

 

End of Document
