

Feeling the pinch of production slowdown and flight to Canada
The Associated Press
February 19, 1999, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1142 words
Byline: By MICHAEL FLEEMAN, AP Entertainment Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




REEL WORLD Logo
 Veteran film editor Donn Cambern wrapped up work on Disney's "My Favorite Martian" and looked ahead to his next job.
Only there wasn't a next job at the moment.
After years of tremendous growth, Hollywood is starting to slow down, with the big studios cranking out fewer movies, and TV and film productions fleeing to Canada and elsewhere.
The causes include soaring production costs, a glutted movie market, lower costs in producer-friendly foreign countries and fundamental changes - and new choices - in the business of entertaining.
Economists and Hollywood boosters insist it's too early to get too worried, but the change - be it a correction, a blip or the start of something worse - is reverberating throughout the industry, striking hardest at technicians, crafts people, equipment suppliers and other behind-the-scenes workers.
"Many times I have about two pictures in front of me. Right now, there's nothing in front of me," said Cambern, a free-lance editor and the new president of the board of the Motion Pictures Editors Guild, one of many labor groups sounding the alarm. "Everyone is starting to feel the slowdown."
This weekend, Hollywood gets a cold hard look at what more it could lose - and who will take it - as hundreds of film commissioners, from Iowa to Iceland, gather in Los Angeles for their annual convention. Through Sunday, they'll all be making their best cases to move TV and film production to their areas.
The meeting comes amid these unsettling signs:
- The number of films in wide release, usually the bigger-budget motion pictures that generate a larger number of well-paid union jobs, last year was at its lowest level in six years; 139 movies in wide release, down from 151 in 1997.
- The number of television and movie location production days in Los Angeles County, where most of the industry's filming takes place, dropped 4.2 percent last year to 45,653 days, compared with 47,669 days in 1997.
- An estimated 11,300 acting jobs were lost because of work going to Canada. That's on top of the 5,500 jobs lost in the 1996-1997 season and about 2,600 the season before that, according to the Screen Actors Guild.
- Rentals of cameras, sound equipment and other production gear were down 30 percent last year after what a rental industry representative called "a banner year" in 1997.
In California, still the capital of the entertainment business, lawmakers are so concerned about the $ 27 billion industry that they've introduced or are about to introduce three bills to provide tax credits and to ease environmental rules for production companies that remain in the state.
But other states are hurting, too. For example, Washington State, which has a similar geography and climate as its neighbor to the north, has lost significant production to Canada, according to Kristina Erickson, project coordinator at the Washington State Film Office.
"It's very difficult to compete with their economy," she said.
Luring producers with a good monetary exchange rate and federal and provincial tax credits, Canada is popular for filming movies of the week and miniseries. And while "The X-Files" may have gone to Los Angeles in a highly publicized move from Canada, many TV series are still filmed there.
And it isn't only Canada that is attracting producers. "Baywatch," the ultimate California television show with its sexy starlets and beach scenes, is leaving Southern California for Australia, costing about 100 jobs in Hollywood.
Still, economists and Hollywood boosters are not convinced the industry is anywhere close to being in trouble in the United States.
"We know there's been a slowdown. The magnitude of the slowdown - we have to wait and see," said Jack Kyser, chief economist for the Economic Development Corp. of Los Angeles County. "Over the long term the prospects for Hollywood are good. '98 was definitely a year of transition. You'll probably see the transition continue into 1999."
Patti Archuletta, director of the California Film Commission, cautioned the signs of a production slowdown could be merely "a message, a signal we need to pay attention to."
She suggested the entertainment industry is in a state of flux - "with winners and losers" - as a decline in television and movie production may be overcome by gains in other entertainment related industries, including video games, on-line services and cable.
"Maybe there won't be as many people working in the same types of jobs in the future, but I think we're smart enough that there will be jobs," she said.
In motion pictures, much of the slowdown, observers say, could be simply due to a glut of product.
Hollywood went on a movie-making binge in the 1990s, with the number of wide-release films soaring from 120 in 1990 to 156 in 1996, according to ACNielsen EDI Inc., which tracks the box office. That means that by 1996, moviegoers had an average of three new movies a week from which to choose.
The number of wide releases declined to 139 last year, but that's still far above the 1990 level and doesn't include the more limited release films from the thriving independent scene.
"This year it's still going to be tremendously competitive, and you're still going to see two or three new releases every single week of the year," said Tom Borys, president of ACNielsen EDI. "Are we going into some sort of downward spiral? I don't think so."
Certainly, the public's hunger for films has steadily increased. Attendance has risen from just under 1.2 billion in North America in 1990 to nearly 1.5 billion last year, according to another box office-tracker, Exhibitor Relations Co. Inc.
But eating into higher grosses are the even higher costs of making movies. The Walt Disney Co., for example, reported last month it had an 18 percent drop in earnings in the last quarter, with strong box-office results for "The Waterboy" and "A Bug's Life" offset, in part, by rising film production costs.
At Disney, which is also feeling the effects of the Asian financial crisis and costly new ventures, things have been so tight that Chairman Michael Eisner had to settle for a 1998 bonus of $ 5 million, nearly half his $ 9.9 million bonus in 1997.
Many studios have reduced output. The number of feature film production starts in California declined from 637 in 1997 to 510 last year, the state Film Commission reported.
In television, location production days for shows and commercials were both down last year in Los Angeles County, according to the Entertainment Industry Development Corp.
"It was as if you couldn't do anything wrong in 1997," said Ed Clare, president of the Production Equipment Rental Association, which reported a 30 percent drop in rentals despite increased business by its Canadian members. "A lot of these companies built their businesses up, added equipment, added employees. When the slowdown came, many had to pull the plug."
 Load-Date: February 19, 1999

 

End of Document
