

Fire in the Mont Blanc tunnel kills at least 35
The Associated Press
March 26, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 798 words
Byline: DEBORAH SEWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHAMONIX, France
Body




Firefighters searched among the charred remains of cars and tractor-trailers Friday for victims of a catastrophic fire - a blaze that killed at least 35 people in a seven-mile tunnel under Western Europe's highest peak.
The blaze in the Mont Blanc tunnel, which broke out Wednesday on a Belgian truck carrying flour and margarine, was not extinguished until Friday afternoon.
The Alpine tunnel is a major route connecting France and Italy, used daily by up to 4,000 trucks.
On the French side, Philippe Pathous, fire chief for the Haute-Savoie region, said as many as 40 people may have died. On the Italian side, tunnel director Francesco Colombo put the toll at 35.
Among the survivors was the driver of the Belgian truck, Gilbert Degraves. Driving from France to Italy, he said he was alerted to the fire when oncoming vehicles flashed their headlights about four miles into the tunnel.
Smoke billowed from his truck. He stopped, checked underneath and "it exploded," Degraves, a truck driver for 25 years, told RTL radio. "It was a ball of fire for about 30 seconds."
Most of the victims were found in or around their vehicles. Only a few had been able to reach the 17 heat-resistant bunkers lining the tunnel.
It was the first fatal fire in the tunnel, which was the longest in the world when President Charles de Gaulle opened it in 1965.
The fire raised immediate questions about the emergency systems in the tunnel, which is equipped with ventilation equipment as well as the 17 bunkers, each of which can hold dozens of people. However, the bunkers are designed to resist heat and toxic fumes for only about two hours.
Among other safety measures, drivers in the two-lane tunnel can pull out every 1,000 feet in case of breakdowns or if they need to turn around. Tunnel officials also can send messages to drivers through an emergency broadcast system.
The tunnel operator, Mont Blanc Tunnel and Highway, said about 20 tractor-trailer trucks and 11 cars were destroyed in the blaze.
"It was truly a dramatic spectacle, and an apocalyptic situation," Pathous told a news conference at the French entrance. "There will be a problem identifying the bodies."
Temperatures in the tunnel reached at least 1,832 degrees at one point, officials said.
The bodies were still in the tunnel Friday evening, left in place so investigators could better conduct their inquiry into the causes of the fire. It wasn't known when they would be removed.
About 100 firefighters from France, Italy and Switzerland battled toxic fumes and searing temperatures for two days to tame the blaze. For the first time Friday, they managed to penetrate the length of the tunnel.
Using a spray mist, they cooled it down to 158 degrees, then to 122 degrees. Smoke rose from their protective gear as they emerged from forays into the tunnel. They declined to speak to reporters.
Winds blowing through the passage sent toxic fumes from Italy to France, forcing rescuers to focus on the Italian side. The stench of burning rubber and acrid fumes hung in the mountain air.
The burning flour in the Belgian truck thickened the smoke in the tunnel immediately, Colombo said on the Italian side.
Many felt the tunnel's safety measures were not enough.
"For a long time now," said the mayor of Chamonix, Michel Charlet, "it has been said that the Mont Blanc tunnel is no longer suited" to heavy truck traffic. He appealed for a ban on heavy trucks in the tunnel.
Speaking from his hospital bed, Chamonix fire chief Christian Comte said he spent five hours in the tunnel Wednesday, looking for his men.
"The smoke was very dense and the temperatures were soaring, but I knew that I had to go help them," he said from the Sallanches Hospital, where he was recovering from smoke inhalation.
Speaking to The Associated Press by telephone, Comte said he worked his way along the wall of the tunnel until he came to a group of six firefighters - all lying on the ground with their jackets over their heads, motionless.
"I thought they were all dead," he said. He helped them all leave, but one died later.
Among the victims was Pierlucio Tinazi, a 33-year-old Italian tunnel employee. He saved 10 people, Italian officials told a news conference, making repeated trips on his motorcycle before succumbing to the fire.
"I consider him a real hero," Colombo said. "He did his duty and we are very grateful to him."
Colombo said an Italian family of four from a nearby village was also killed.
Five other Italians died. Among the French victims were the firefighter and a couple from Lyon.
Two days of searing heat, smoke and flame took its toll on the tunnel's structure. Police said the ceiling had collapsed for a length of about 100 yards over the fire. French Transport Minister Jean-Claude Gayssot said the tunnel would remain closed for several weeks.
 Load-Date: March 26, 1999

 

End of Document
