

For 28 years, the Berlin Wall stood as Cold War's front line
The Associated Press
November 9, 1999, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 840 words
Byline: By DEAN COX, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




The unnatural dawn of floodlights at 2 a.m. on Aug. 13, 1961, announced the beginning of Berlin's 28 years as a city divided.
The city woke that Sunday to a 25-mile tangle of barbed wire thrown up in haste along the line of the Russian zone of occupation. All day Berlin residents stared from balconies only feet from the border as soldiers uncoiled more wire across vegetable gardens and along streets.
Trains and subways were halted at the East Berlin border. Phone calls did not go through. As East German workers began laying more permanent cinder block, a 19-year-old East German soldier named Hans Konrad Schumann threw away his rifle and leaped over the wire at Bernauer Street. A photo of his desertion was published around the world.
Within weeks, the entire inner city was divided by walls of brick and wood. In the suburbs, soldiers trampled through fields and gardens erecting 10-foot-high fences. Even century-old cemeteries couldn't escape division as coffins were ripped from the ground and reburied in still unknown locations.
Officially, the Wall was erected as an "anti-Fascist barrier," separating the eastern sector of the city controlled by the Soviet Allies from the French, British and American sectors in the West, a division established by the four Allies after World War II.
What communist officials couldn't admit publicly was the crisis that confronted them as hundreds of thousands of their citizens left East Germany for the West. Over 200,000 East German citizens left in 1960 alone.
For most of three decades East Germany bolstered the barbed wire and cinder blocks with watchtowers, electrified fences, machine guns, tank traps, a floodlit mine field and German shepherd guard dogs.
The last major overhaul of the Wall, completed in 1975, was 103 miles long, consisting of 45,000 prefabricated concrete segments, each about 12 feet tall, four feet wide and 6 inches thick.
In the center of the city, a wide swath of land illuminated by flood lights and patrolled by dogs separated two parallel lengths of concrete wall, infamously known in the West as the Death Strip. Armed German guards with shoot-to-kill orders kept watch from towers.
On Aug. 17, 1962, Peter Fechter, an 18-year-old apprentice mason, broke for freedom across the Death Strip. East German bullets stopped his flight at the base of the wall. For 50 minutes he lay unaided, moaning, "Help me."
West Berliners shouted "Murderers!" at the guards, threw first-aid supplies to Fechter and demanded that U.S. troops patrolling at Checkpoint Charlie retrieve the injured teenager.
He bled to death just two feet from freedom before East German police finally carried his body away.
During the Wall's early days, dramatic escape scenes played out daily along Bernauer Street, where fronts of buildings formed the border with the West. Dozens of East Germans jumped from windows before they were bricked - leaps that killed many. Eventually, the buildings were destroyed.
In all, some 5,000 people escaped through or over the Wall. At least 255 died trying to cross into West Berlin, 171 of those trying to breach the concrete barrier that ran through the center of the city.
Berlin and its concrete barrier also became ground zero for the Cold War and the espionage battles between the communist East and the capitalist West. The KGB and CIA operated large offices within a short distance of each other. The Soviet Union traded spies with the West across the Glienicke Bridge, linking West Berlin with Potsdam.
During perhaps one of the most delicate moments of East-West relations, U.S. Army tanks faced Soviet tanks at Checkpoint Charlie on Friedrich Street on Oct. 27 and 28, 1961. The standoff lasted 16 perilous hours in a dispute over American access to the communist-ruled sector of the city.
Two years later, U.S. President John F. Kennedy stood on the Western side of the wall and hurled bricks of oratory at the Communists. A thrilled shout arose from 150,000 West Berliners when Kennedy said, in German: "Ich bin ein Berliner," "I am a Berliner."
Ronald Reagan was at the Brandenburg Gate on June 12, 1987. Addressing himself directly to Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, Reagan said: "If you seek peace, if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, if you seek liberalization, come here to this gate … open this gate … tear down this wall."
East German communist leader Erich Honecker, who had supervised construction of the Wall, ultimately was brought down by his creation. He was forced from office in October 1989 in a desperate restructuring aimed at containing a growing popular call for democracy.
But no one from the East or the West predicted the swift demise of the Berlin Wall.
When it did open on Nov. 9, 1989, it was a bungled statement by East German Politburo member Guenter Schabowski announcing free and clear travel to the West that set the avalanche in motion. Within hours, as the message spread, stunned border guards fearing for their lives opened the gates, allowing thousands of East Berliners to cross to the West.
 Load-Date: November 10, 1999

 

End of Document
