

For the first time in decades, a pontiff heads to the Holy Land
The Associated Press
March 20, 2000, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 803 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan
Body




In the first papal visit to the Holy Land in 36 years, John Paul II embarks on a highly personal pilgrimage today that will see him retrace the footsteps of Jesus from birth, to baptism to crucifixion.
The weeklong journey through Jordan, Israel and the Palestinian territories was born out of the pope's desire to see Christendom's holiest sites in this millennial year, though the mission will be freighted with much broader religious and political significance in this volatile region.
Several sacred places on the pope's itinerary suffer from modern-day disputes, and the pontiff's tour is viewed as a unique opportunity to ease historical friction among Christians, Jews and Muslims.
John Paul would prefer to focus on religion and sidestep the region's political turmoil, but simply by setting foot in contested Jerusalem he becomes an actor in the long-running feud between Israelis and Palestinians.
"With deep emotion I will go to the places in which the Word became flesh, lived and was resurrected for our salvation," John Paul said Sunday at St. Peter's Square in Vatican City. "May this visit, inspired only by religious motives, bring hoped-for fruits for the good of the entire church."
Due largely to political sensitivities, no pontiff has set foot in the Holy Land since Pope Paul VI visited in 1964. The Vatican and Israel had no diplomatic ties, and the two sides were so estranged that Paul VI never mentioned Israel by name in public.
The political map was also very different at the time. East Jerusalem, with many holy sites, belonged to Jordan until it was taken by Israel three years later in the 1967 Mideast war.
John Paul was set to leave Rome today for Jordan, where he's sure to receive a warm greeting from many of the country's 130,000 Catholics, who make up 3 percent of the population in an overwhelmingly Islamic country.
Jordanian King Abdullah, the country's Muslim clerics and ordinary citizens also have been enthusiastic supporters of the pope's visit, and his two days in the kingdom are not expected to be as sensitive as his five days in Israel.
"We want to go out in the streets to welcome the pope," Nabil Haddad, priest at the Melkite Greek Catholic Church told worshippers Sunday in Amman. "Take your Muslim brothers along with you and have women ululate and sigh when they see him, for he is a blessed man."
The Jordanian capital was quiet Sunday, the final day of the five-day Muslim holiday Eid al-Adha, and there were no visible signs of increased security on the lightly traveled streets.
The pope is to look out today from atop Mount Nebo, where tradition says that Moses first saw the promised land. The following day, the pontiff will head to the east bank of the languid Jordan River, where some scholars believed Jesus was baptized by John the Baptist.
In contrast to the relatively low-key ceremonies in Jordan, Israel is planning its biggest security operation ever in preparation for the pope's arrival Tuesday evening.
In Jerusalem, police said suspected right-wing Jewish extremists vandalized the helipad where the papal helicopter is to land, spray-painting swastikas and slogans such as "Pope Out" and "Where were you during the Holocaust?"
Mainstream Jewish leaders welcome the pope's visit and his statements promoting reconciliation among faiths, but they would like him to go further in acknowledging the church's past discrimination against Jews.
Meanwhile, Jerusalem's chief Muslim cleric has turned down the pope's invitation to participate in a public dialogue among Muslims, Jews and Christians, citing the unresolved political dispute over Jerusalem.
Israel controls all of the city, but the Palestinians are seeking to make East Jerusalem the capital of a future Palestinian state.
For the pope, there's no escaping the controversial sites.
He will tour Bethlehem, the birthplace of Jesus - and a town Palestinians consider central to their envisioned state.
Nazareth, where Jesus spent his boyhood, includes a square where plans to build a mosque have sparked tension between Christians, Muslims and Israeli authorities.
The highlight of the entire visit could come on the final day, Sunday, when the pontiff will work his way through the narrow stone lanes of Jerusalem's Old City to sites revered by all three religions.
John Paul will visit the Western Wall, believed to be the only surviving remnant of the Jewish Second Temple. In a show of solidarity with Muslims, the pope also will go to the adjoining Haram as-Sharif, site of the magnificent Dome of the Rock.
And the pope will conclude his pilgrimage at Christianity's holiest site, the Church of the Holy Sepulcher. Six Christian communities share the church, believed to be the spot where Jesus was crucified, buried and rose from the dead.
On the Net: http://www.vatican.va 
http://www.papalvisit.gov.il 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos planned
 Load-Date: March 21, 2000

 

End of Document
