

Frenchman breaks the round-the-world sailing record
February 17, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 557 words
Byline: By JOSEPH SCHUMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LES SABLES D'OLONNE, France
Body




The numbers tell the tale: 26,500 miles, 105 days at sea, three dramatic rescues, one missing sailor and one winner hailed as a hero.
With a full beard and a craving for fresh vegetables, Frenchman Christophe Auguin cruised into this windy Atlantic port Monday and broke the solo round-the-world sailing record.
Auguin finished the Vendee Globe race in 105 days, 20 hours and 31 minutes, beating the previous record by four days. He received a huge welcome from thousands of French supporters, and video cameras whirred from docks and helicopters.
Schoolchildren, let out of class for the event, cheered, "Chris-tophe! Chris-tophe!"
"I feel like I just left yesterday," the 38-year-old former high-school teacher from Normandy said after finishing the race. But, he added: "One time was enough."
Auguin appeared fit, dressed in a red-and-yellow windbreaker. At dockside, while still on his boat, he was handed a magnum of champagne. To cheers, he popped the cork and doused the crowd.
His wife, Veronique, and 18-month-old son, Erwan, were helped onto the boat, and the family sought privacy behind a sail.
After more than three months living off freeze-dried food, Auguin's first request was for a hot drink and a chopped vegetable sandwich.
Auguin has won other round-the-world races before, but never one in which sailors aren't allowed to stop.
Auguin said he hasn't given up hope for a fellow racer who has been missing since Jan. 7. All efforts to find Canadian Gerry Roufs, one of 16 initial competitors, have been unsuccessful.
"I'm still very concerned for Gerry, but I believe in him and I think we need to wait another 15 days or so," Auguin said.
Jean-Marie Finot, who designed Roufs's boat and spoke with him by radio during the race, said his family has not given up either. "We're still dreaming that he'll make it."
Three Vendee Globe competitors were rescued in the Antarctic Ocean - one by a fellow racer, and two by the Australian navy. Tony Bullimore, a 57-year-old Briton, waited four days in the cabin of his capsized yacht before rescuers could reach him.
Others were forced to pull out of the race because of technical or equipment problems.
The remaining competitors - five, not counting Roufs - were expected to arrive later this month and into March. Herve Laurent, in second place, likely will arrive next weekend.
Auguin's victory sparked an outpouring of enthusiasm in a nation beset by recent sports setbacks as well as economic and political doldrums.
"Bravo! It was great!," wrote President Jacques Chirac. "We're all very proud of you."
Prime Minister Alain Juppe said Auguin's victory "opens a path of hope for all those in our society who are overwhelmed by doubt and are looking for signs to give meaning to their lives."
The Frenchman's yacht, Geodis, crossed the line at 9:33 a.m after traveling more than 26,500 miles, finishing 2,000 miles ahead of his nearest competitor.
Auguin said he sailed in waves as high as 35 feet, and that on two occasions felt he was in real danger, facing "unmasterable" elements - especially around Cape Horn.
The last record belonged to Titouan Lamazou, a Frenchman who won the Vendee in 1990, racing around Antarctica and back to France in 109 days. The first Vendee Globe was held in 1989-90 and it has taken place twice since - in 1992-93 and 1996-97. The next one is scheduled for 2000-01.
 Load-Date: February 17, 1997

 

End of Document
