

From the start of submarine disaster, many Russians feared the worst
The Associated Press
August 19, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 433 words
Byline: By ANNA DOLGOV, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MURMANSK, Russia
Body




When word finally came Saturday that the men on the sunken submarine Kursk were almost certainly dead, few people in this navy city were surprised. It was the news they had been expecting all along.
"We have known for a long time that this would happen," said Valentina Boldyreva, a retiree. Like many others discussing the tragedy Saturday, she had known there was little chance of rescuing anyone.
"It was just a waste of time," she said sadly. "It's horrible."
The Russian navy, which gave wildly contradictory accounts of the chances of rescuing the 118 men who went down Aug. 12 on the Kursk, said Saturday there was little hope that anybody could still be alive. Word had been leaking out for days that the Kursk was shattered by a huge explosion, and glum-faced navy officers said most of the crew probably died in seconds.
The Kursk, one of the newest and most powerful nuclear submarines in the Russian navy, belonged to the Northern Fleet, which is headquartered in the Murmansk region above the Arctic Circle. Relatives of the Kursk's crew, who had been trickling into Murmansk from all across Russia, were closeted Saturday at a nearby navy facility.
Murmansk stretches for 11 miles along the Kola Bay, with navy bases dotting the area. The gray concrete apartment blocks on the hills are home to many who served in the navy or have friends or relatives who still serve. For days, they had watched every television bulletin and exchanged endless rumors.
Sergei Ramnev, a sailor who knows how heartless the sea can be, shook his head with contempt when he heard the top brass saying that hope had run out.
"I expected nothing else. If an explosion happened and there was no light, there could have been no other outcome," he said.
Peoples' despair and resignation was mixed Saturday with anger and disgust about how the government handled the rescue effort.
Why, people asked, did the government wait so long before accepting offers of help from Britain and Norway? Help finally arrived Saturday, a week after the Kursk sank.
"It was absurd that they were misleading us for so long. It was clear that if people were not saved in the first two or three days that they're no longer alive," said Galina Klimova, an engineer.
President Vladimir Putin was criticized by the press and many ordinary people for not interrupting his summer vacation to return to Moscow to deal with the crisis.
"Putin's conduct was ludicrous. He looked fresh and well-rested and talked calmly about … that we need to support the victims," Tatyana Volkov said. "As if they could be supported at the bottom of the Barents Sea."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos MUR110-111
 Load-Date: August 20, 2000

 

End of Document
