

From Denver to Madrid, "Bringing the defeated into the system"
June 22, 1997, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 708 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DENVER
Body




Over two months and on two continents, the institutions of world order are changing.
The Denver summit ended Sunday after adding Russia to its ranks. In July, NATO, like a giant amoeba, will absorb another chunk of the old communist empire - the heart of Eastern Europe.
It is a major turn for the western institutions that emerged during the Cold War, and Washington is at the wheel, encouraging the integration of the former Eastern bloc into the center of western security institutions.
The U.S.-led North Atlantic Treaty Organization won the Cold War and has begun transforming old enemies into fast friends. In two weeks NATO will offer Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic a spot under the American security umbrella.
"We are pretty much doing for the Russians what we did for the Germans after World War II," says Paul Heinbecker, a senior Canadian diplomat, reflecting on the changes. "We are bringing the defeated into the system."
Rarely has a single nation so dominated world affairs as the United States today. In the shadows of the eight-nation summit here, officials will privately say that America sits clearly atop the global economic pile, holding forth its successes for all to examine, admire and emulate.
President Clinton lobbied to give Moscow a permanent seat this weekend at the summit of the world's richest nations. Russia also has a permanent voice at the center of NATO through a new Russia-NATO Joint Permanent Council. Indeed, President Clinton bucked some European sensibilities by drawing the line at NATO expansion at these three nations.
"There is one country that dominates the world now, which decides everything," a high-ranking Frenchman said of the United States.
Sighed another European diplomat: "Thankfully, that dominant country is a friend."
Allied foreign affairs specialists would only ruminate about the future anonymously, leaving definitive statements to their bosses. But in the view of all, the way of the world is definitely changing.
"Just watching (Russian Foreign Minister Yevgeny) Primakov listening to what (U.S. Secretary of State) Madeleine Albright and (British Foreign Secretary Robin) Cook have to say is a good thing," said a British official attending the Denver summit.
Whether or not this U.S. dominance is a good thing has yet to be judged. While American leadership is appreciated - indeed often sought by Washington's allies - it can also be overbearing, sometimes seen as bullying. U.S. insensitivity to allied concerns is sometimes resented.
The reason are quite simple. In security matters, the United States holds the nuclear arsenal that protects its friends. It has logistical capacity necessary for any mission - be it military, peacekeeping or humanitarian.
Economically, the figures speak for themselves. It may occasionally annoy the allies, but they cannot deny it.
The $ 7 trillion U.S. economy accounts for 22 percent of world output, nearly double the European members of the Group of Seven. By comparison, annual Russian economic output is one-tenth the size of U.S. output.
The U.S. jobless rate is at a 24-year low of 4.8 percent, while the jobless rate in France is at an all-time high of 12.8 percent and unemployment throughout continental Europe is at double-digit levels.
Nonetheless, some leaders are reluctant to swallow American solutions.
"We shouldn't adopt the U.S. model. Everyone has their own model," French President Jacques Chirac told reporters. "The United States is a great nation … but it doesn't have the same structures and traditions as France."
The 15-nation European Union could be a friendly counterbalancing force, and surely hopes to become one. But the organization had a disastrous summit in Amsterdam last week where member countries failed miserably in their effort to reform the organization's basic charter.
The EU, too, expects to expand to include some of the former Warsaw Pact nations.
"The world is a global village, and the bandleader is the United States," said a European official, scrambling his metaphors. "The major goal of all countries now is to have good relations with the United States."
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Jeffrey Ulbrich, AP's Brussels-based NATO and European Union correspondent, has been writing about foreign affairs for 20 years.
 Load-Date: June 22, 1997

 

End of Document
