

From the sky came salvation
The Associated Press
May 7, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1143 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When the Red Army cut off all access to Berlin, 50 years ago, the American military commander was ready to send an armed convoy along the Autobahn and shoot his way to Berlin. But Washington feared that could lead to war with the Russians.
So, without asking, Gen. Lucius Clay started the Berlin airlift. He decided on his own to fly food to Berlin. He had troops to feed.
And he was responsible for 2 million Germans in the American, British and French-controlled sectors of the divided city. He could not let them starve.
"I did not ask permission," Clay said later. But even he doubted that the airlift could be more than a temporary expedient. Holding thumb and forefinger apart, he said, "I wouldn't give you that for our chances."
The airlift's 50th anniversary will be celebrated throughout this year in Germany. President Clinton will visit the city on May 13 to recognize the steadiness of Harry Truman, the bone-wearying flying of Allied airmen and the perseverance of the Berliners.
As Clay and other Americans saw it, the choice was among three options: Let the city starve. Let the Communists take over. Or try to feed it through the air.
The planeloads of provisions for American troops landed June 24, 1948. Two days later, the full-scale airlift got under way to supply Berliners with everything - food, clothes, medicine, coal to power the city and heat it.
What happened over the next 15 months still has the capacity to amaze.
Planes much smaller than today's behemoths carried 2,326,406 tons of cargo - tons, not pounds - to the Berliners.
They flew 278,228 flights. An average of 599 a day, 25 an hour, lumbered into Berlin, day and night, even during a bad winter in the worst weather city in Europe.
At peak periods, a plane landed once every three minutes at each of the three airlift airfields - Tempelhof, Gatow and, later, Tegel, built by the Berliners themselves from the rubble of war.
Amazed Berliners gathered in clusters to watch the spectacle.
From the sky came their salvation, the greatest humanitarian air rescue in history, a defeat for Josef Stalin at the cruel start of the Cold War. And a Russian propaganda loss so severe that the strong Communist parties in Italy and France said adieu to their chances of taking power through the ballot box.
The airmen called it "Operation Vittles."
"We were on the ground for about 15 minutes," recalls pilot Guy Dunn, 75, then the 25-year-old son of an auto dealer in Bland, Va. "Then you had an hour back at the on-load station, then you flew another trip to Berlin - four flights in 12 hours, then you were off for 12 hours, then you were back flying."
During his tour, Dunn, now retired in Fort Walton Beach, Fla., flew 790 hours, covering about 142,000 miles in short hops between West German airfields and Berlin.
"It was one of the worst, wettest winters in Europe in years," says Dunn. "The temperature was near freezing most of the time, so you had to contend with ice on the ground and in flight. When the weather was real poor, you were flying at rooftop level."
As the airlift got organized, displaced persons, refugees of the war, were brought in to unload the planes.
For a time, the planes flew in five flight levels, each 500 feet apart, and in each level they flew 15 minutes apart. A plane that could not land had to return to its home base before trying again. As many as three in 10 had to go back.
It was not without costs: Through accidents, the Americans lost 31 lives. Some planes overshot the runways; some crashed into each other.
Ground crews in Frankfurt, 275 miles away, worked around the clock to service the two-engine American C-47s, the military version of the DC-3, and later the larger, four-engine C-54s, comparable to the DC-4.
"During the war, I used to run into my buddies in fighter units," recalls retired Brig. Gen. Sterling Bettinger, 82, of Colorado Springs, Colo., the chief airlift pilot. "They'd say, 'You guys are allergic to combat.' We weren't too highly respected in the air transport business. But after the Berlin airlift, we gained a lot of respect."
The crisis had been sown in the closing weeks of World War II when the Allies agreed to let the Red Army take Berlin. The old German capital, 110 miles inside the Soviet occupation zone, was divided into four sectors: East Berlin controlled by the Russians and West Berlin by the British, French and Americans, a free enclave in a sea of communism.
Three years later, the Russians blockaded Berlin with the intention of forcing the Western powers to abandon their half.
The airlift was small potatoes at first: A scratch force of C-47 cargo planes flew in 80 tons on the first day.
Clay estimated that in "a very big operation," 700 tons could be ferried in per day - pathetically short of the 4,500 tons of supplies that would be necessary to sustain the city.
In retrospect, it was "a rather desperate expedient," says diplomatic historian John Gaddis of Yale.
Truman wrote in his memoirs: "Even the Air Force chiefs themselves at first had serious doubts it could be done."
Stalin, the Soviet dictator, should have known better than playing to American strength - the ability to move mass amounts of cargo.
During the war, the Americans had flown tons of war materiel to Russia, sustaining the Red Army while it drove the Nazis out.
And, in Asia, American planes had demonstrated their delivery capabilities by flying "the Hump" over the Himalayas to supply the Chinese nationalists in their fight against the Japanese - "the most hazardous flying in the world," according to Air Force historian Roger Miller.
So it was only natural for the Americans to send for Maj. Gen. William Tunner, who had orchestrated the "Hump" operation.
"General Tunner transformed this chaotic improvisation into a model of efficiency," says historian Douglas Brinkley. "His goal was to reduce the airlift to a steady, even rhythm with hundreds of planes doing the same thing every hour of every day. It became a perfectly learned routine."
Brinkley says three factors made the airlift a success: "Truman's ability not to overreact; the Berliners, who had the fiber to tough it out; and Tunner."
On May 12, 1949, the Russians threw in the towel and lifted the blockade. The airlift continued through September, to make sure Berlin had ample supplies in case the Russians blockaded again.
Berlin remained a flashpoint until 1989, when the wall erected in 1961 to keep East Berliners from fleeing was torn down.
But the airlift gave impetus to the creation of NATO and the establishment of West Germany as an independent nation. It cemented America's commitment to the defense of Europe.
"It changed the American public's perception of the Germans," says Robert van der Linden, historian at the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum. "They no longer were Nazis; they were allies. And the Americans were no longer conquerors, but friends."
 
 Load-Date: May 7, 1998

 

End of Document
