

Gardening: The Tudor Garden Sweet
The Associated Press
February 22, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1136 words
Byline: AUDREY WOODS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




A cottage garden of haphazard blooms and rampant climbers, or a summer border in a patchwork of colors spiked with blue delphiniums: these are the gardens that seem as much a part of England as a pot of tea.
But English gardeners were not always so relaxed.
In fact, for a century or two they were tied up in knots - colorful, fragrant and intricate knots of herbs, box hedge and flowers.
The knot garden, developed in Tudor times, is orderly and meticulous, laid out within a square. Low-lying ribbons of hedge intertwine in a formal, usually geometric, pattern, and the spaces in between are often planted with flowers or herbs.
It may sound rigid to those who love flowers in profusion. But knot gardens charmed Tudor hearts.
In the early 1500s, George Cavendish, biographer of Cardinal Wolsey, put his passion for a knot garden in verses that speak across the centuries to all garden lovers:
"My garden sweet, enclosed with walles strong,
Embanked with benches to sytt and take my rest:
The knotts so enknotted, it cannot be exprest,
With arbors and alyes so pleasaunt and so dulce,
The pestylent ayers with flavors to repulse."
He was writing about Wolsey's gardens at Hampton Court, admired greatly by King Henry VIII. Wolsey, the Lord Chancellor, made a gift of the palace to Henry in 1526.
There the king built elaborate formal gardens to impress the nobles and foreign potentates who sailed up the Thames from London to visit his country home.
It was in Henry's time that the modest charms of the walled medieval garden, with its herbs and arbors and turf seats, gave way to grander things.
One very dramatic feature - the mount - was popular for a couple of centuries. These manmade earthen hills, planted with fruit trees, offered views over the garden wall and into the world beyond. Paths lined with fragrant flowers led to the summit and often to an arbor.
From continental Europe, topiary found its way into English fashion, with trees and shrubs clipped neatly into geometric shapes. Topiary, so tidy and green, was the perfect decoration for knot gardens, which were very popular by the middle of the 16th century.
A large formal garden required careful maintenance to have the best effect. And not everyone was so fortunate as the 5th Earl of Northumberland.
His account books for 1502 show he employed a gardener to "attend hourly in the garden for setting of erbis (herbs), and clypping of knotte, and sweeping the said garden cleaner hourly."
Low hedges of rosemary, lavender or hyssop were planted as the outlining hedge. Box was unpopular until the 17th century because earlier gardeners weren't too keen on its smell: "Very hurtful for the brayne when it is but smelled to," wrote herbalist Henry Lyte in the 1570s.
Within the boundaries were planted beds of herbs or brightly colored flowers: auricula, bachelor's buttons, cowslips, daisies, wallflowers.
The border, be it rosemary, lavender or box, was ideally about 18 inches broad at the base, clipped close and level.
Gervase Markham, a garden writer of the early 17th century, advised great precision in setting the foundation of the knot.
"You are to keep your level to a haire," he warned, "for if you faill in it, you faill in your whole wirk."
Less troublesome was an artificial border.
"Whiteish or blewish pebble stones … make a pretty handsome shew," wrote John Parkinson in the mid-17th century. Some people used tiles or oak boards - or even the shank bones of sheep, stuck small-end-first into the earth - to border the pattern.
The unpredictability of horticulture could be further reduced if colored sands and earths were used to make the patterns, instead of flowers.
One of the country's great formal gardens was at Hatfield House, north of London, where the most famous of England's early naturalists - John Tradescant - worked for the Cecil family.
Tradescant, who became gardener to King Charles I, is buried in the London parish church of St Mary-at-Lambeth, on the south bank of the River Thames, about 10 feet from one of the finest knot gardens in Britain.
The churchyard and the church - adjacent to the Archbishop of Canterbury's home at Lambeth Palace - were saved from demolition in 1977 and became The Museum of Garden History.
Here, tucked behind a stone wall, with the sounds and smells of urban traffic swirling beyond, Anne Jennings lovingly tends a replica 17th-century knot garden, about 10 yards square.
Even in winter, the deep green of the dwarf box border looks lush and beautiful with the background of stone walls, and benches set out along the surrounding path.
Roses, tulips, and herbaceous plants of the 17th century are planted within the knot, and a topiary spiral of variegated holly forms the centerpiece.
Ms. Jennings, the museum's garden director, teaches two-day courses in knot gardens twice a year and has written a book about them with garden historian Robin Whalley, describing how to plant them.
Interest seems to be growing.
"When I started the course a few years ago. I thought people would come out with a general interest in design or garden history," she said. "But almost everyone taking the course is making a knot garden.
"By the end of the two days, people have got a design they're happy with and can hopefully make," she said.
Some use woody herbs like rosemary to make the edge, but she prefers box.
"As long as you care for it, it is almost indestructible," she said. "It will go on for decades and decades, whereas the woody herbs are quite short-lived."
It takes quite a lot of box to lay out the design, and cost can be an issue.
"If you're making a garden of this size, it's very expensive to buy all these plants," Ms. Jennings said. "But if you plan in advance, you can buy a half-dozen big stock plants and take cuttings."
In four years, she noted, you would have substantial-sized plants to set out.
And although the hedge-trimming requires meticulous work, it only needs to be done once a year, with a bit of a trim in late summer if the weather has been wet.
"It's certainly no more work than any mixed border and, in some ways, less," Ms. Jennings said.
The museum, open from March through mid-December, attracts visitors from around the world - even sightseers from as far as Australia, who come to see the tomb of Capt. William Bligh of HMS Bounty and find themselves in the Tradescant Garden.
Bligh, too, is buried near the knot garden in an urban oasis of peace and greenery just down the street from his London home.
 
 ---
"Knot Gardens and Parterres," (Barn Elms, 25 pounds, or about $ 40, hardcover), by Robin Whalley and Anne Jennings, is published in association with the Museum of Garden History. Though not available in the United States, it can be ordered by credit card from the museum, (44) 171-401-8865. Mail address is Lambeth Palace Road, London SE1 7LB. Shipping and handling are extra.
 
 Load-Date: February 22, 1999

 

End of Document
