

Gennady Zyuganov: Toeing the Hard Line, Groping for the Center
July 3, 1996, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 530 words
Byline: By JULIA RUBIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Gennady Zyuganov, the man who could take Russia back to communism, was thrown on the defensive as the presidential race came down to the wire.
A confident poll-leader just a few months ago, Zyuganov was left desperately trying to soften the chilling portrayal spread by President Boris Yeltsin's campaign that he is a dangerous reactionary who would drag Russia back to the worst of Communist days.
The trouble was, every time Zyuganov started to sound moderate he undercut himself by swinging to the hard line - urging the restoration of the Soviet Union, fuming about world conspiracies or calling Yeltsin a beast of Satan. And if he didn't, one of his rabble-rousing allies like Viktor Anpilov did, frightening many centrist voters.
Zyuganov still has strong support and a serious shot at the presidency in today's runoff against Yeltsin. In the first round, he won 32 percent to Yeltsin's 35 percent.
But his 24 million votes weren't much more than the Communists got in other recent elections, and Zyuganov must expand that base to win.
His cash-short campaign has lacked spark, and the beefy 52-year-old candidate, 13 years younger than Yeltsin, is not much sprightlier.
Zyuganov was an obscure party ideologue when the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991. The party was banned, but he revived and revamped it two years later, and the Communists finished first in December's parliamentary elections.
Blending communism with Russian nationalism, Zyuganov brought together an often contradictory mix of hard-liners in the Communist-led Peoples' Patriotic Bloc. They are united by a sense of betrayal at the Soviet collapse and anger at Yeltsin's free-market reforms.
Speaking to businessmen, Zyuganov sounds like a moderate who only wants to ease the impact of market reforms on ordinary Russians.
But he believes unapologetically in the superiority of the old Soviet system, and says so to the party faithful. He accuses the West of destroying the Soviet Union and of "occupying" Russia, keeping it a poor, weak market for Western goods.
Zyuganov promises there would be no Soviet-style repressions if he were president, but at the same time, he plays down those repressions and praises dictator Josef Stalin.
He calls for more state control of industry, cradle-to-grave social support, tougher restrictions on private property, and the "voluntary" restoration of the Soviet Union.
In Moscow, Zyuganov's rallies are attended mainly by down-and-out pensioners, Stalinists and anti-Semites. But in small towns and the countryside, he has wide support among farmers and factory workers driven by anger at Yeltsin.
Born in 1944 in the central Russian village of Mymrino, Zyuganov taught math before joining the army and the party. He moved from regional propaganda work on to Moscow in 1989 as deputy head of the Central Committee's Ideology Department.
He joined party conservatives in 1990 to oppose Mikhail Gorbachev's reforms, and dabbled in nationalism, sitting on the board of the ultranationalist newspaper Dyen.
He reveals little of his personal life. During the campaign, he played volleyball and did some folk dancing. He says he reads a lot and drinks a bit. He is married with two children.
 Load-Date: July 3, 1996

 

End of Document
