

Georges goes down in history as 'the hurricane that wouldn't die'
The Associated Press
October 4, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1172 words
Byline: By JAMES ANDERSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico
Body




It plowed over and past 17 Caribbean islands, crashing into the lives of more than 30 million people.
As each island fell prey to Hurricane Georges' battering winds, the casualties mounted.
They are mounting still. And as they do, island nations are coming to grips with lost harvests, wrecked government buildings, lost tourist income and sudden populations of newly homeless.
Many past hurricanes damaged only a few islands. Repairs were often quick.
Georges was different. It swept past island after island in the northern Caribbean, causing billions of dollars in destruction and killing at least 400 people.
In some nations, like tiny St. Kitts, Georges ruined the crucial winter tourism season and sugar crop on which the islanders stake their lives.
In the Dominican Republic, the immediate concern is survival. More than a week after Georges' 110 mph winds hit, searchers were still looking for survivors in towns swamped by flooding, or combing through deep muck in the grim task of finding the dead.
The numbers of homeless are staggering: More than 100,000 in the Dominican Republic, 18,000 and counting in Haiti, at least 17,000 in the U.S. territory of Puerto Rico, and 3,000 in St. Kitts - a tenth of that island's population.
Along with shelter, the refugees need food, water, ice, clothing - needs that have overwhelmed the region's small economies and taxed the disaster response capabilities of the United States, France and other donor nations.
Damage to popular hotels like Puerto Rico's bluff-top El Conquistador Resort, and splintered windows in oceanfront condominiums, underscore a physical and economic vulnerability that the Caribbean's people know but would rather forget.
There was a surprise bright spot: The U.S. Virgin Islands - battered by Hurricane Hugo in 1989 and 1995's Marilyn, which destroyed 80 percent of the homes on St. Thomas - emerged relatively unscathed despite being in Georges' path.
"It's a miracle," crowed Elizabeth Armstrong, general manager of the Buccaneer Hotel on St. Croix.
Still, Armstrong worries tourists will be scared away from the Virgin Islands by Georges' rampage elsewhere. "It was such a big storm that I'm afraid people will believe the whole Caribbean was damaged," Armstrong said.
Much of it was. Airline service and shipping were disrupted. Entire islands plunged into darkness - including Puerto Rico and its 4 million people - and thousands of businesses closed.
The storm's economic cost has yet to be calculated. In Puerto Rico alone, property damage has surpassed $ 2 billion.
Without power, food spoiled in refrigerators, and fights broke out in hours-long ice lines. Beneath a canopy of suddenly bright stars over San Juan, candles flickered in windows and drivers negotiated streets made unfamiliar by fallen trees and the enveloping dark.
Given the Caribbean's dependence on tourism - it earns $ 14 billion a year and employs half a million people - promoters are emphasizing the rapid rebuilding in such places as Puerto Rico and Antigua. And they note that in the Windward Islands in the southeastern Caribbean and in Jamaica, it is business as usual.
In San Juan, giant white cruise ships, their lights blazing across San Juan Bay, have resumed their weekly visits. Spectacular pink and purple sunsets have returned, a dramatic backdrop to the committed navy of surfers and boogie boarders riding the waves off Condado beach. Old San Juan's blue cobblestone streets are bustling again with strollers and shoppers.
Still, Antigua, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico and St. Kitts could lose tourism in coming months, said Michael Spinks of the Barbados-based Caribbean Tourism Organization.
Last year, more than 1.7 million non-cruise tourists visited the Dominican Republic, and Cuba and Puerto Rico welcomed more than 1.1 million each. St. Kitts and Nevis earned more than $ 25 million from tourists.
Things could have been worse. Georges flirted with catastrophic 150 mph winds over the Atlantic, but entered the Caribbean near Guadeloupe in a somewhat diminished state.
Still, by the time Georges left Cuba four days and 1,200 miles later, even the usually stoic National Weather Service was calling Georges "the hurricane that just won't die."
A high pressure system dubbed the Bermuda High kept Georges on its destructive east-to-west track, said meteorologist Jim Lushine at the U.S. National Hurricane Center in Miami.
So instead of striking an island or two and then spinning northward out of the region as hurricanes generally do, Georges hit again and again.
It smashed public housing in Antigua, swamped the beaches of Guadeloupe and splintered the glass walls of St. Kitts' new airport terminal.
"Hurricane mash up my life," Verna McHenry said through tears while she picked through the soiled, sodden remains of her home on Antigua.
In Puerto Rico, where three people were killed, the squatter community of Diamond Point kept its dazzling hilltop view of the sea but little else. Georges smashed its dozens of squatter homes. In its wake, strangers and neighbors banded together to clear debris, stand in tedious lines for ice, water, propane and batteries and carry food to the needy.
Crossing the Mona Passage, Georges bore down on Hispaniola, an impoverished island of 15 million shared by Haiti and the Dominican Republic. Its substandard housing proved no match for 110 mph winds, and emergency officials seemed unprepared for the disaster.
Fed by up to 20 inches of rain, rivers swelled into mile-wide torrents that swamped villages, entombed dozens of people under tons of mud in a Dominican shelter and left thousands stranded for days. Helicopters had to drop food rations to survivors.
In Santo Domingo, the Dominican capital, officials opened some shelters only after Georges was pelting the city with sheets of rain and dangerous flying debris.
"They were overconfident," said Hugh Parmer, head of disaster relief for the U.S. Agency for International Development. "When the thing hit, they were totally unprepared to respond."
The United States shipped more than $ 500,000 of supplies, including plastic sheeting to roof thousands of homes. U.S. helicopters are helping deliver supplies to victims.
Authorities also seemed unprepared in Haiti, where heavy rain flooded the Artibonite Valley, the country's breadbasket.
"We're trying to save what we can," said farmer Jean Roberto Jean-Baptiste, working in a flooded rice paddy.
Georges left Haiti, the Western Hemisphere's poorest nation, utterly dependent on foreign aid to help storm victims. The Dominican Republic, considered one of the region's up-and-coming economic and political players, suffered a blow to its development.
Fidel Castro seemed relieved in Cuba, where only five people were killed after evacuations to safe zones. "The first victory was to reduce the losses," Castro proclaimed.
The same can't be said for the Dominican Republic.
Asked how many people died in his country, the Dominican health undersecretary, Victor Terrero, replied: "I'll confess something to you. I have no idea."
 Load-Date: October 4, 1998

 

End of Document
