

Hardly the Hilton: One American, two Russians about to check in
The Associated Press
October 28, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1833 words
Byline: By MARCIA DUNN, AP Aerospace Writer
Dateline: SPACE CENTER, Houston
Body




It's hardly the Hilton. In fact, it's barely a budget motel.
The soon-to-be-occupied international space station lacks such amenities as a kitchen table. It's noisy because of clattering equipment. And it will have three men, but only two bunks.
In order to see who gets a sleeping compartment and who gets the aisle, Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev says he and his crewmates may have to flip a coin. "It's not going to fall, though," he wryly notes.
While the space station has three rooms, there's only enough power for two, at least for the first month - as luck would have it, the two noisiest rooms.
"We have ear plugs," says American astronaut Bill Shepherd, the space station's commander. "It's uncomfortable, but it's safe."
Welcome to NASA's infant space station, home to Shepherd and cosmonauts Krikalev and Yuri Gidzenko for four months beginning Thursday. They're scheduled to blast off from Kazakstan aboard a Russian Soyuz rocket on Tuesday, after years of agonizing delay. The trip to the space station will take two days.
Once they check in, they'll quickly be reminded they're not tourists in space but trailblazers, test pilots, the shakedown cruise's crew.
Forget the folks pining for deserted islands, wild outback adventures and joy rides to Mir. These three guys are the ultimate survivors.
Until another Russian supply ship arrives, Shepherd, Krikalev and Gidzenko will do without a table on which to cook, eat and work. The table is supposed to be delivered in mid-November, but may end up on a later shipment.
NASA's space shuttles and the Russian Space Agency's cargo capsules can carry up only so much. So the most important stuff - medical kits, water, food, food warmers, clothes, sleeping bags, batteries and those ear plugs - went up first.
Until space shuttle Endeavour arrives with electricity-generating solar panels in early December, the three men will be confined to two rooms. By keeping the spacious Unity module sealed and unheated, they'll save power and also prevent condensation.
And though they will have regular contact with flight controllers in Houston and Moscow, it will be rather infrequent and akin to a slow modem. And they never will be able to beam down a steady stream of live TV pictures. The computer system needed to run the space station's 6 1/2-foot satellite dish will arrive just as they're leaving.
Even normally stoical NASA managers are sympathetic.
"More or less an industrial environment as opposed to a comfortable home environment," is how space station manager Jim Van Laak describes it.
Of all the astronauts and cosmonauts who will live on the international space station over the next 15 years, Shepherd and his crew - NASA's so-called Expedition 1 - will have the most spartan existence by far.
They've been training for this hardship mission for almost five years.
Russian delays in launching the space station's living quarters had everything on hold. When the module finally soared in July, the assembly picked up again after two wasted years and the push was on for a late-October launch for the crew.
NASA is almost as relieved as Shepherd now. It's the space agency's first space station in 26 years - succeeding Skylab. It's also the direct descendant of President Reagan's proposed space station Freedom from way back in 1984.
One glaring difference: The former Evil Empire is on board.
"It's maybe one of the real ironies of where we are in modern times," says Shepherd, 51, a Navy captain and former SEAL. "The Cold War's over and we have this huge international cooperative effort with the Russians. I think it's great."
The whole point of this $60 billion-plus, 16-country enterprise is scientific research, but Shepherd's crew will conduct only a couple of bare-bones experiments. They won't have time for more, given all the repair and maintenance work awaiting them. The most pressing problem: two bad batteries in the Zvezda control room, which doubles as the living quarters.
That's why NASA wants the three men up there as soon as possible: to fix things when they break.
Kathryn Clark, a NASA senior scientist, doesn't mind that there's not a single scientist on the first few space station crews.
"Right now, what I want is the kind of person who says, 'Grrrr, this wire isn't connecting the way I want it to. How do I figure that out?' " Clark says. "When things don't work, that's when you want your engineer up there."
Shepherd, a home mechanic with three shuttle flights behind him, fits the bill.
"If you want somebody to go up there and put things together, to build a station and to move things and leave it a tight ship that's not going to leak and really sail, Shep's the guy," says Dr. Michael Barratt. He was the crew's surgeon until NASA chose him as an astronaut a few months ago.
"There's no question," Barratt says. "You can take one look at his home shop and some of the things that he's built."
All three men are accustomed to space and to adversity. Krikalev, in fact, was saddled with back-to-back Mir missions during the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. He was on Mir for 10 consecutive months.
For Krikalev, being on call 24-7 is the hardest part of space station life.
"We are staying basically kind of in our job site and offices for 24 hours a day," he says. "So even if you sleep, you're monitoring what is going on. If noise on the station changes, it can be not loud, it can be not quiet, just change sound little bit, you wake up and try to see what's going on. You're kind of on duty all the time."
For Gidzenko, another Mir veteran, holidays are rough. That's when he especially misses Earth.
Expedition 1 will spend U.S. Election Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Year's and Valentine's Day in space.
Shepherd has already cast his absentee ballot, so that's not a problem. But he'll miss his fifth wedding anniversary. Gidzenko will miss the birthdays of his wife and one of his sons, and Krikalev will miss the birthday of his daughter.
Shepherd and his crew are scheduled to return via space shuttle Discovery at the end of February. One Russian and two Americans, one of them a woman, will be ferried up on Discovery to take their place.
Shepherd, Krikalev and Gidzenko will see space shuttles dock twice before that - Endeavour delivering solar panels in December and Atlantis bringing the American lab Destiny in January.
Those additions will make the space station a more pleasant place to live. The arrival of Destiny also will mark the transfer of command from Moscow to Houston, and the start of serious science.
By the time the international space station is completed in 2006, it should stretch as long and as wide as a football field, and exceed 500 tons. The 240-mile-high complex currently weighs 80 tons.
The European and Japanese space agencies - and possibly the Russians - will have their own labs by 2005. And a habitation module and a new escape vehicle should be in place by 2006, allowing the resident crew to grow from three to seven.
NASA expects future crews to have DVDs to watch and listen to, Internet access and possibly even a shower - or Full Body Cleansing Compartment, in NASA talk.
Shepherd and his crew will have to huddle around a laptop and a camcorder in order to watch a videotaped film. They can forget about the Internet. And they'll have to settle for four months of sponge baths. What's more, they'll have to live amid clutter; until more modules arrive, supplies will remain stacked in the narrow aisles.
"This isn't the Hilton," flight director Jeff Hanley points out.
Over time, English may also, finally, become the space station's main language. It's the official language now, but you'd never know.
Among themselves, Shepherd and the two cosmonauts speak "Runglish." Shepherd knows Russian, and the two cosmonauts know English. Nevertheless, it will be pretty much Russian-only when they communicate to flight controllers in Moscow.
Flight director Hanley plans to schedule about five hours of "useful work" for the crew a day, at least initially. They'll get Sundays off.
Their first few days promise to be busy: They have to activate the toilet, oxygen generator and other life-support systems that were set up by space shuttle visitors in September.
Within a couple weeks, they should have most equipment set up and be exercising regularly on the treadmill, to keep their muscles and bones strong in weightlessness.
NASA and the Russian Space Agency plan weekly video conferences between each crew member and his family. They'll also have e-mail to keep abreast of how the kids are doing - or in Shepherd's case, the dog. An on-board ham radio will help keep them up with world news.
If he has any spare time, Shepherd will read or listen to 1970s rock 'n' roll.
Gidzenko, a 38-year-old Russian Air Force lieutenant colonel who will fly the Soyuz spacecraft to the station, will listen to the Beatles, the Rolling Stones and Russian pop music. He also packed some Russian novels.
As for movies, he says, "It doesn't matter for me. It would have to be a nice movie, a comedy, action, love story." He pauses. "But maybe I prefer comedy aboard space station."
What about food and drink?
Meals will be half American, half Russian.
"No vodka on either of these menus," notes Krikalev, a 42-year-old civilian engineer.
"We're a dry ship right now," Shepherd says.
It's a sore subject for cosmonauts used to an occasional sip of vodka or cognac aboard Mir. NASA has never permitted liquor on its spaceships.
"There's no authorized supply of alcohol on board," says Van Laak. "It comes up when the handball court comes up."
Krikalev can't understand what's wrong with a glass of wine with dinner.
"People may be afraid. 'Oh, people, can get drunk and do something stupid,' " he says. "But you can do the same here. So if we manage to fly to space, not to ram into some car accident or some kind of problem before, why would we do it later? We are not kids."
In case of minor medical emergencies, Krikalev and Shepherd, the crew's medics, are prepared. "We can do some dentistry. We can pull teeth if necessary."
It would take a life-threatening illness or death - or major space station calamity - for the three men to jump in the attached Soyuz spacecraft and fly back to Earth.
Perhaps the biggest challenge of all is explaining what the space station is all about.
"It's very difficult to quickly express to the average person on the ground why we're doing it, what it means, what the utility of it is," Shepherd says.
In the end, the space station that the shakedown crew will set up is about living the daily routine of life - but on a manmade satellite sailing through space. It's about studying crystals and cells, about learning how the body adjusts to weightlessness to prepare for trips someday to Mars. It's about exploration of a more incremental kind.
"We started the space race in an era where everything that humans, astronauts, did in space was news," Shepherd says, "and we have to get over that."
---
On the Net:
NASA: http://spaceflight.nasa.nasa.gov/station/index.html 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY344-345 of Oct. 23, Graphic INT SPACE STATION
 Load-Date: October 29, 2000

 

End of Document
