

Harnessing the wind in the Southeast
The Associated Press
September 19, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 457 words
Byline: By DUNCAN MANSFIELD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OLIVER SPRINGS, Tenn.
Body




Three tall white spires topped with delicately poised 75-foot-long rotors that point into the wind, waiting to bring a new source of renewable energy to the Tennessee Valley.
"I wanted to see them as soon as we got 'em up," Tennessee Valley Authority Chairman Craven Crowell said Monday as his helicopter landed on Buffalo Mountain, site of the first major wind turbine project in the Southeast.
The turbines, which rise nearly 300 feet into the sky, will provide about 2 megawatts of electricity, enough to power more than 400 homes in a year.
That's small compared to the authority's systemwide demand of some 28,000 megawatts. "But it is a big part of what we are doing with green power," said Jim Keiffer, the TVA's senior vice president for marketing.
The authority's Green Power Switch alternative energy program, launched on Earth Day on April 22, is being offered in a first-year test to customers of a dozen of the authority's 158 local distributors.
So far, some 1,944 homes and 115 businesses have signed up to buy blocks of green power. Residential customers are charged an extra $4 a month per 150 kilowatt-hour block, roughly 12 percent of a household's monthly average.
The authority hopes to have as many as 8,000 residential customers signed up by next spring. Officials have a target of mid-October for connecting the windmills up to its grid.
Locating the turbines atop a 3,300-foot-high reclaimed strip mine was both symbolic and practical. "This was a strip mine and now we have turned it into something that is very friendly to the environment," Keiffer said.
The turbines will be complemented with as many as 12 solar collectors - four are now running in Nashville, Pigeon Forge, Gibson County and Knoxville - and a landfill gas-to-energy facility in Middle Tennessee that should be working by early next year.
The turbines were made in Denmark and installed by enXco, a Palm Springs, Calif., company that manages or owns about 4,400 turbines in California, Texas, Iowa, South Dakota, as well as Costa Rica, Germany, England and India.
The turbines cost $3.4 million and the authority is budgeting about $8 million for this first phase of green power - all of which it expects to recoup through the extra fees charged consumers.
Stephen Smith, director of the Southern Alliance for Clean Energy, called it a "very important move by TVA to begin to invest in renewable energy like this."
The alliance is pushing the authority to move away from coal-fired generating stations that pollute the air. "We hope this is just the first step in a long commitment that TVA is going to make to clean up the power mix," Smith said.
On the Net:
Tennessee Valley Authority: http://www.tva.gov 
Lighten the Load: http://www.ems.org/lighten-the-load 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos TNWP601-602
 Load-Date: September 20, 2000

 

End of Document
