

Has Russia at last reached the end of the line?
The Associated Press
August 27, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 640 words
Byline: By BARRY RENFREW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




As a nervous world watches Russia's latest crisis unfold, there is one overwhelming question: Is Russia finally going to explode?
For a decade, Russians have lived through one upheaval after another. The collapse of the Soviet Union, economic disintegration, failed coups, Boris Yeltsin's health problems and war have buffeted the country time and again.
Through it all, the Russians have reacted with amazing restraint, some might say docility. Even as their lives have crumbled around them, they have done little more than shrug their shoulders.
Nonetheless, there is a growing danger of Russia sliding backwards as the problems mount. Scenarios range from a gradual drift to a right-wing or left-wing authoritarian regime or even a military coup.
Is Boris Yeltsin about to be ousted? Is Russia's ill-starred experiment with democracy collapsing? Will a country bristling with nuclear weapons lurch back to its authoritarian past, threatening global stability?
The economy is in dire trouble, again. The currency is nose diving, the country has stopped repaying foreign loans, the stock market has all but evaporated.
The government does not appear to have any idea how to handle the crisis. Rumors of government shake ups and conspiracies are ricocheting around Moscow, adding to the uncertainty.
In the short-term, Russia's decline is sure to continue and economic reform has, at best, stalled. The collapse of the currency could mean hyperinflation, making life even more difficult for people already struggling to feed their families.
But on the streets of Moscow and other Russian cities there is little sign of crisis. Lines have formed outside some banks as people try to withdraw savings, and it's hard to get foreign currency. Russians talk about the situation, often nervously, but there is no evidence of unrest.
Acting Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, who was brought back after being fired just five months ago, presided over the government that created many of the current economic problems. There is no indication he has any new ideas on how to fix things.
Russia's half-hearted attempts to build a market economy probably will stall, meaning further economic decline and more suffering for the ordinary Russian. A coalition government, including Communists and nationalists, could try to ditch the market economy, which could mean real chaos.
Yeltsin backs democratic and economic reform but has failed to push his policies through Parliament. He has changed courses so many times that he is hopelessly discredited. At best, the president will limp along to the end of his term in 2000, despised by his people.
For most Russians, the current crisis has had little effect because their lives are already dreadful. Millions go months without pay and pensions, and their standards of living have crumbled year after year. Many people live on what they can grow in their gardens; those who have money tend not to put it in banks, mindful of previous collapses; very few people own stocks or bonds.
Russians blame Yeltsin and the government for the unending problems but show little inclination to take to the streets. Demonstrations and strikes are small and infrequent even though workers have been without regular pay for years. There is almost no meaningful popular political activity, let alone unrest.
One explanation is that after decades of Soviet totalitarianism, the Russian people are "de-politicized" - meaning they have no faith in politics or politicians and believe the state can do nothing to improve their lives and there is no point in trying to change things.
Nonetheless, election results and opinion polls show that many Russians, possibly a majority, still support democracy, indicating they are not ready to turn back to the country's authoritarian past.
---
Editor's note: Barry Renfrew is the AP's Moscow bureau chief.
 
 Load-Date: August 27, 1998

 

End of Document
