

Headed For the Political Ash Heap? Try the Silver Screen
August 28, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 626 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




The cunning but scandal-plagued Bernard Tapie was about to be kicked out of Parliament. He faced prison and had lost his soccer team, his yacht and just about everything else.
Far from giving up, the tanned, dimple-chinned leftist recast himself in a new role: movie star.
Some see "Men, Women, Instructions," which opened Wednesday, as a trampoline for the populist to bounce back.
Tapie quit the National Assembly on Monday, a day before a court was set to force him out because of his felony conviction for bribery and tax evasion.
But even the resignation seemed well-timed to pump up box office revenue for "Men, Women, Instructions," in which Tapie cashes in on his outrageous image with the help of Oscar-winning director Claude Lelouch.
With thousands of posters across the country and a media blitz of ads and interviews, the film drew wide coverage as the cinema event of the fall season, and is France's entry in the Venice Film Festival next week.
Tapie, a 53-year-old rags-to-riches politician and businessman who once owned the sportswear giant Adidas, plays to the hilt what many perceive him to be: an unscrupulous manipulator who exemplified the go-go '80s.
"It's an era of rotten people, bandits, gangsters, murderers - and I'm all that," Tapie sarcastically told the conservative daily Le Figaro. "I am the worst of the worst."
Tapie, convicted of throwing a soccer game and evading taxes and held responsible for running at least one company into the ground, blames his downfall on a vendetta by the news media and politicians.
Tapie has received good reviews for his movie debut as hot-shot lawyer Benoit Blanc, who seduces women with dizzying helicopter rides over the Chateau de Chambord.
He's humbled when a former lover - also his doctor - gets her revenge with a bogus diagnosis that he has cancer.
"Whatever you think of him, Tapie is a 'star'," said the leftist newspaper Le Monde. Even Le Figaro allowed that Tapie is "fabulous with his charisma."
Tapie saw the film as a way to save himself from the worst possible sentence for a politician: being forgotten. Part of his felony verdict bars him from public office for five years. He's appealing his jail term.
"When Lelouch proposed the film to me, I was at the bottom of a hole," Tapie told Le Monde. "I felt like the object of an orchestrated operation to destroy me, in the face of which I could no longer react. I accepted the proposal as an escape."
Tapie's resurrection seems possible in a nation where revelations of an illegitimate daughter by the late President Francois Mitterrand brought only Gallic shrugs. In France, political and private life are seen separately.
While clearly aware of Tapie's potential box office draw, Lelouch said the filming involved some risks. "I received thousands of insulting letters," he told the newspaper Le Parisien. "I even received death threats."
The hype seemed to pay off for both Tapie and Lelouch. After the star-studded preview screening Tuesday night, leftist politician Jack Lang commended Tapie for "bringing a lot of energy and expression" to the film.
Even conservative pol Andre Santini offered kudos and called the film Tapie's "chance to rebound."
That's just what kept postal worker Jean-Philippe Gillet away from the theater.
"It may not be an electoral bid, but he's pushing his image," Gillet said. "He has always confused the public by mixing politics and showmanship."
Tapie said he was trying to keep a sober outlook about the film's prospects. "It's two or three days of happiness, and then we'll see."
But he couldn't avoid his usual braggadocio either, playing on rumors that he could be headed for Hollywood, perhaps - newspapers say - to play the role of Che Guevara.
"I'm getting ready," he said. "I'm perfecting my English."
 Load-Date: August 28, 1996

 

End of Document
