

Historic hatreds fuel Russia's latest war in the Caucasus
The Associated Press
August 20, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 874 words
Byline: GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Even in its diminished state, Russia's military still has the firepower to crush a stubborn band of Muslim rebels seeking to carve out an Islamic state along Russia's southern frontier - at least on paper.
Moscow is woefully short, however, of the money and will needed to persuade the impoverished people of the Caucasus Mountains that they have a prosperous future as part of Russia.
All things being equal, Russia should eventually prevail in its battle in the barren mountains of Dagestan. But Moscow is losing the long-term war for the hearts and minds of Muslims and other minorities who have faced centuries of discrimination and second-class status.
More than 1,000 militants based in breakaway Chechnya crossed the mountain border and entered Dagestan on Aug. 7, capturing several isolated hamlets. After two weeks of daily clashes, the rebels still hold the villages despite Russian bombing raids and a troop buildup now believed to number several thousand.
Russia exercised its military might Friday by sending war planes against Islamic rebel units inside breakaway Chechnya, while also raiding villages held by the militants in neighboring Dagestan, the Defense Ministry said.
The airstrikes on two villages inside Chechnya were a rare case of Russian forces attacking the rebellious territory.
Russia has three strong reasons for trying to suppress the rebels quickly: It wants to fence off the chaos in neighboring Chechnya; it needs to protect a key oil export route; and it fears a tide of Islamic fundamentalism washing up from other countries in the volatile region.
Yet these are all massive tasks, not goals the military can achieve in one sweeping offensive.
"Islamic radicalism cannot be uprooted by wiping out several mountain villages," political analyst Andrei Piontkovsky wrote this week in the Moscow Times. "It is a long-term social problem which (Moscow) can only tackle with a great deal of spending and constructive effort."
Russia's politicians and generals insist they learned painful lessons from the 1994-96 war in Chechnya, where the army withdrew in humiliation and the territory descended into anarchy.
Yet Russia's approach in Dagestan, while more cautious and on a smaller scale, still appears to depend almost entirely on the military.
The Kremlin has failed to build strong ties with regional leaders and has not solved any of the simmering political disputes plaguing the Caucasus. The region remains saturated in poverty, receiving little assistance from Moscow. And other Russians frequently utter racial slurs against the darker-skinned people of the Caucasus and routinely blame them for the country's high crime rate.
"Russia has no program for developing the Caucasus," said Alexei Malashenko, an expert on Russia's Muslims at the Carnegie Endowment for Peace in Moscow. "Russia's whole experience in the Caucasus has been one of suppression, not development."
Russia fought repeated wars in the 18th and 19th centuries to systematically bring dozens of ethnic groups into the Russian empire. Moscow was viewed as a conquering power throughout the Caucasus, and both sides harbor deep suspicions of the other.
When the Soviet empire splintered in 1991, three independent states emerged from the region - Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Tiny Chechnya also demanded independence and was refused, only to launch its separatist war in 1994. Chechnya has run its own affairs for nearly three years, but the territory has been rendered ungovernable by heavily armed criminal gangs that include many of the same young men who fought the Russians.
This lawlessness has infected neighboring regions, including Dagestan, which sits on the west coast of the Caspian Sea.
A major oil export pipeline from the Caspian Sea runs across Dagestan and Chechnya, and the current conflict threatens to further complicate security.
Chechen rebels repeatedly sabotaged the pipeline during their war, and the Russians don't want a repeat experience. Dagestan doesn't have oil itself, but the wider Caspian oil development depends on huge investments from major Western companies who don't want to find themselves caught in the cross-fire. In the economically depressed Caucasus, oil transit revenues are a major moneymaker.
Meanwhile, the Russians give daily assurances that the conflict will end soon, but the signs point to protracted fighting.
The militants, made up of Chechens, Dagestanis and other Muslims from the former Soviet Union, have not been able to infiltrate beyond the villages they captured initially.
The Russians have begun to squeeze them from three sides, yet the rebels have made no retreat to Chechnya, the one direction they can move with relative freedom.
The militants were not greeted by a groundswell of popular support in Dagestan, as they might have expected. In Chechnya, the homogeneous population overwhelmingly supported independence from Russia.
Dagestan's 2 million people are a patchwork of more than 30 ethnic groups who often quarrel among themselves. The republic's secular politicians and moderate religious leaders have sided with Moscow, and Dagestani police and civilian volunteers have taken up arms against the rebels.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE: Greg Myre is the Moscow news editor of The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: August 20, 1999

 

End of Document
