

History and the future in Germany's 'new' Reichstag
The Associated Press
April 18, 1999, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 796 words
Byline: ANNE THOMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




What hasn't happened to the Reichstag?
It was burned during the Nazi era, bombed by the Allies, and stormed by Red Army soldiers who scrawled obscenities on the walls and planted the red Soviet flag on the roof, marking the defeat of Hitler.
East Germany built the Berlin Wall just a few steps from its back door. And after the Wall came down, the artist Christo wrapped the Reichstag in a million square feet of silvery fabric, a celebration of the end of communism.
Now the old parliament has undergone yet another transformation.
After a $ 330 million renovation, the Reichstag debuts Monday as the reclaimed seat of German lawmakers, a defining episode in the government's return this year to the prewar capital of Berlin.
More than any other building in the city, the Reichstag (pronounced RIKES-tahg) has symbolized every phase of Germany's turbulent, terrible history over the past 80 years. So it only seems fitting that in his restoration, celebrated British architect Sir Norman Foster has made the Reichstag into a new symbol for the new capital, one of a Germany mindful of the past but moving confidently into the future.
Foster preserved the Reichstag's original 19th-century facade, with its Italian Renaissance-style columns and carvings, and the inscription over the main entrance: "To the German People." But he also gave the parliament a new glass dome that bursts from the top of the old, ravaged building and sparkles like a beacon on the city horizon.
Inside, almost everything is new: the central parliament chamber, the offices and meeting rooms, the five new restaurants, the sleek furniture, the gray decor accented with primary colors and pastels. All the modernness only emphasizes the wartime scars the architect left behind.
Take the east wing, where Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder has an office. Doors along the hallway are bright blue, with shiny steel handles and hinges, but sections of the white, stone walls are still gouged and jagged from bombings and covered with Russian graffiti - names and rude slogans dated "1945."
"A lot of events have passed over that building and left their imprint on the fabric," says Foster, who took journalists on a preview tour last week. "I think it has more integrity to reveal and accept the history, making it tangibly visible for present and future generations."
The architectural mix of old and new in large part embodies the professed spirit of Schroeder's center-left government. His so-called Berlin Republic stresses that enough time has passed for Germany to be powerful without being threatening, that it can remember its crimes without being defined by guilt.
It's an attitude that comes partly from Schroeder himself. The chancellor, 55, is the first from a generation untroubled by memories of Hitler. But it also comes from the government's return to Berlin, scene of Prussian imperialism and Third Reich horrors. In the planning since 1991, one year after Germany's reunification, the move this year sets a major milestone in the success and confidence of German democracy.
Monday's ceremony opening the Reichstag is the first key event in the move from Bonn, the provincial southwestern city where the capital was relegated after World War II. Next comes the election of a new German president in May and the new parliamentary session in September - the first to start in the restored building.
"I remember how from East Berlin, you could see the Reichstag so near and yet so far," parliamentary President Wolfgang Thierse, an east German, told German radio. "Even then it represented a longing for unity, freedom and democracy."
German democracy actually comes full circle with the reopening of the Reichstag, which was built in 1894 to house the first German parliament, an attempt to install elements of democracy under Kaiser Wilhelm. Real democracy took hold - however briefly - after World War I, when the empire was abolished.
"This is a return to the building's original purpose," says historian Brian Ladd, author of a book about Berlin architecture. "Some may see this as an attempt to pretend the intervening years never happened. But I think it shows that German democracy has earned the right to confront its past and live with it. And that includes the Third Reich."
Hitler never governed - never even spoke - in the Reichstag, but the building nonetheless represents the Nazis by association. All the grim history raised concerns about whether Germany should return to Berlin, the seat of power at its most terrifying.
But the transformed Reichstag is as light as its legacy is dark. Glass walls around the central parliament and a viewing platform on the second floor mean visitors can see and hear what's going on inside. The feel is one of openness, of a transparent and accessible government.
 Load-Date: April 18, 1999

 

End of Document
