

HOBBIES 11-29; Stamps In the News: "All in the Family" hailed on new stamp
The Associated Press
November 29, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 379 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH, For AP Special Features
Body




It's "All in the Family," said the American public.
Yes, the television series, "All in the Family," proclaimed the most popular American TV show of the 1970s by the entertainment industry and stamp collectors, is now hailed on a new 33-cent stamp.
In 1972, this situation comedy won seven Emmy Awards and proved extremely popular with viewers nationwide.
The show featured a blustery blue-collar worker Archie Bunker, portrayed by Carroll O'Connor, his wife Edith (Jean Stapleton), their daughter Gloria (Sally Struthers) and son-in-law Mike (Rob Reiner). The program dealt with social and political issues and had a humorous and satirical touch rarely seen on television before its introduction Jan. 12, 1971, on CBS.
"All in the Family" played its final program Jan. 25, 1992.
The new stamp depicts the Bunkers' living room where most of the activity occurred. The title "All in the Family" is superimposed over the illustration.
The stamp is one of the subjects chosen by the public during nationwide balloting as part of the Celebrate the Century commemorative stamp program honoring the 1970s. The U.S. Postal Service program honors some of the most significant people, places and events of each decade of this century.
You may obtain first-day covers of the "All in the Family" stamp with the official first day of issue cancellation from the Postal Service's Fulfillment Service by calling (800) STAMP 24.
---
 
Alderney's new offerings
 
The British Channel island of Alderney is proud of its role during the latter part of the 19th century when British troops were stationed there to protect against possible attacks by the French navy.
Alderney has issued a set of four new stamps to honor this participation. Shown on the stamps are various regiments manning their forts.
These stamps can be obtained from Postal Headquarters, St. Peter Port, Guernsey, Channel Islands GY1 1AB. First-day covers also are available. Your local dealer can provide these offerings as well.
---
 
About postal cards
 
Many U.S. collectors are adding postal cards to their hobby. U.S. postal cards were first issued in 1873. The first U.S. multicolored commemorative postal cards were released in 1956. Several different cards are issued each year. Check your local post office for the different subjects.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY602
 Load-Date: November 30, 1999

 

End of Document
