

HOBBIES 10-16; Stamps in the News: Spain is selected for new World Heritage stamps by the U.N. Postal Administration
The Associated Press
October 16, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 292 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH, For AP Special Features
Body




"World Heritage - Spain" is the theme of six new commemorative stamps and three prestige booklets issued by the United Nations Postal Administration.
The concept of World Heritage focuses on various sites around the world noted for their exceptional nature and culture.
Cultural heritage refers to monuments, buildings and historical locations.
These sites are protected by rules adopted by the United Nations' Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in 1972.
The featured sites in Spain are Barcelona, the Alhambra and Albayzin in Grenada, the Archaelogical Ensemble of Merida, the Historic Walled Town of Cuenca, the Historic City of Toledo and the Old Town of Segovia.
This is the sixth United Nations group of stamps to illustrate World Heritage sites.
The three prestige booklets contain 24 mint stamps depicting the Spanish sites.
You may order the new World Heritage - Spain stamps or the booklets by calling (800) 234-UNPA.
---
 
Bob Hope honored
 
The Commonwealth of Dominica in the West Indies has released a stamp in honor of Bob Hope, the longtime comedian and humanitarian. Hope, now 97 years old, has been cited by the Guinness Book of Records as the most honored entertainer of all time.
Hope made his feature-film debut in 1938 in "The Big Broadcast of 1938," in which he and Shirley Ross sang "Thanks for the Memory." It became his signature tune.
In 1940, Hope joined Bing Crosby and Dorothy Lamour in the motion picture "Road to Singapore." The success of that film led to several other "Road" movies.
He frequently entertained American troops in the Far East during World War II and later devoted more of his life to television work.
Born May 29, 1903, in Eltham, England, Hope was knighted by Britain's Queen Elizabeth II in 1998.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY617
 Load-Date: October 17, 2000

 

End of Document
