

Home of the Yugo Car is on the Map Again - This Time, for Politics
December 6, 1996, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 544 words
Byline: By MISHA SAVIC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KRAGUJEVAC, Yugoslavia
Body




This bleak industrial town was once a showcase of Yugoslavia's semi-market economy. Its factories employed thousands. It even achieved modest fame as the home of the ill-fated "Yugo" car.
Today, the economy is devastated, but Kragujevac (pronounced KRAH-goo-jeh-vahts) has again managed to distinquish itself. It is one of the only towns in the Serb republic of Yugoslavia where the opposition is forming a new local government.
When opposition candidates swept municipal elections last month, President Slobodan Milosevic annulled the results and called a new vote. In Belgrade and other spots, the opposition boycotted the vote. Here, opposition candidates swallowed their pride: They ran - and won again.
Now, the new leaders must try to reverse a ruined economy and years of political corruption. They face not only local problems but also a national government still controlled by Milosevic.
The odds for success are about as encouraging as were sales for the "Yugo."
"It's an enormous and difficult job to fix things here," said Vlato Rajkovic, a 37-year-old dentist and Democratic Party member who is up for the mayor's job. Allied with two other parties, the Democrats won control of the city council.
One reason they won is the economic misery their supporters hope they can change.
Unemployment here is about 70 percent; those with jobs make less than $ 100 a month. Mismanagement and 3 years of strict international sanctions against Yugoslavia for fomenting the Balkan wars nearly stopped the assembly lines that once churned out the Yugo and other vehicles.
U.S. sales of the car peaked in 1988 before plummeting. Although the no-frills Yugo was economical - it began selling for $ 3,990 - it was tiny and had recurring technical problems.
Production at the Zastava car factory peaked at 230,000 vehicles in 1989. This year, it will produce only about 10,000.
"When I had job, I had dignity. Now I have to make do with smuggling cigarettes and chewing-gum, and we still can't make ends meet," said Zoran Milosavljevic, who gets $ 40 a month in welfare for his family of four.
"I voted for the opposition because we need change," Milosavljevic said.
Still, Yugoslavia's discontented working-class still hasn't exactly shed its pro-Socialist inertia. Relatively few have joined daily anti-government protests, started about three weeks ago by intellectuals and urbanites furious over the annuled elections.
The opposition in Kragujevac wants to encourage private enterprise - not only small shops and cafes but also private workshops producing metal and plastic goods.
Leaders know it's an uphill fight.
Rajkovic says he expects arms factory orders from the Yugoslav army will almost certainly dry up as the central government tries to punish the unruly town.
"The Socialists will almost certainly empty city coffers (and) destroy archives that could reveal their shady deals," he said.
During elections, the opposition accused Socialist city leaders of linking land and business permits to political loyalty. Representatives of the outgoing government declined to be interviewed.
Union leader Zoran Nedeljkovic, who led a strike at the Zastava arms factory earlier this year, said there is no guarantee the new leadership will be better. "But," he said, "we have to try."
 Load-Date: December 6, 1996

 

End of Document
