

How the Democrats' Words Measure Up to the Facts
August 29, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 493 words
Byline: By JOHN SOLOMON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




Record exports! A hundred-thousand new officers on the streets! Medicare, beware! Democrats this week trumpeted plenty of accomplishments, and unleashed several attacks, too. Here's how their words measure up to the facts.
The Clinton-backed crime bill enacted in 1994 authorized federal money for 100,000 new officers over six years. But so far, fewer than half of the police slots have been financed by Congress - about 44,000 - and just a fifth - or 20,000 officers - have reached the streets. Many more are in training.
"People forget it takes a year after the funding gets out for an officer to be hired and trained," said Charles Miller, the Justice Department coordinator of the program.
A string of prominent Democrats have accused Republicans of cutting Medicare: "Senator Bob Dole and Speaker Gingrich voted to cut Medicare by $ 270 billion," party chairman Chris Dodd charged.
In fact, though, the Republicans never proposed reducing Medicare benefits.
Both Republicans and Clinton have proposed restraining the future growth of Medicare: the GOP by $ 270 billion over seven years, the president by $ 124 billion over the same period.
Under the GOP plan, Medicare spending still would have risen by 7 percent a year, the Congressional Budget Office says.
In his acceptance speech Wednesday, Vice President Al Gore touted a string of economic accomplishments he attributed to the Clinton administration, including "record exports, wages on the rise."
Although exports have risen under Clinton, the broader measure of U.S. trade performance, the so-called deficit, has sharply worsened each year of his presidency. The 1995 U.S. trade imbalance with other countries was the worst in seven years at $ 105 billion, compared to just $ 40 billion during President Bush's last year.
The trend is holding in 1996, driven in part by a record trade gap with China.
As for wages and income, median family income posted a modest increase during the Clinton administration, from $ 37,905 in 1993 to $ 38,702 in 1994. But both of those figures are still below what families were earning two decades ago - when adjusted for inflation.
On foreign policy, Gore declared one major accomplishment as "nuclear missiles no longer targeted at our cities."
The vice president was referring to an agreement reached in January 1994 between the United States and Russia. Both superpowers agreed to reprogram their long-range nuclear missiles so they were not fixed on specific locations between the two countries, as they had been during the Cold War.
But analysts have since said that the agreement was not a major security coup, since both countries could easily retrain the weapons with little effort. Clinton's own Pentagon spokeswoman even called the agreement symbolic.
In his speech, Gore also pledged to "restore civility to America's political discourse." But just hours earlier on a TV interview, the vice president had referred to Gingrich and Dole as the "two-headed monster."
 Load-Date: August 29, 1996

 

End of Document
