

If Kostunica wins, don't expect Milosevic on the next plane to The Hague
The Associated Press
September 28, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 713 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIENNA, Austria
Body




Even if Vojislav Kostunica prevails in his power struggle against Slobodan Milosevic, don't expect the Yugoslav president to be on the next plane to The Hague war crimes tribunal.
Kostunica, a longtime Serbian nationalist who has claimed victory in Sunday's election, is on the record opposing extraditing anyone - presumably including Milosevic - to The Hague court in the Netherlands, which many Yugoslavs consider a one-sided instrument of U.S. policy.
"I won't push for the extradition of anyone to The Hague because The Hague is not a real court but an American-sponsored organization that is more of a political court than a judicial court," the dour law professor has said time after time in stump speeches.
Instead, Kostunica has left the door open to trying Milosevic and others in Yugoslavia for crimes allegedly committed during the decade-long series of Balkan wars over which the president presided.
That wouldn't go down well with the U.N. tribunal. As a policy, the tribunal encourages local courts to try accused lesser offenders but with senior figures already under indictment, "we want to try them," the U.N. court spokesman Paul Risely said.
That would surely apply to the alleged architect of Balkan wars - Slobodan Milosevic, who was indicted last year for atrocities committed by his troops in Kosovo.
It remains to be seen, however, whether Kostunica would stick by that position, especially in the face of Western offers of restored trade ties and millions of dollars in aid. That was enough to swing virulent Serb nationalists in neighboring Bosnia - such as Bosnian Serb Prime Minister Milorad Dodik and former Bosnian Serb President Biljana Plavsic - firmly into the Western camp.
However, Kostunica may be a tougher sell.
Despite the apparently huge vote against Milosevic, anti-Western sentiment runs deep throughout Serbian society in wake of last year's NATO bombing of Yugoslavia and years of Western sanctions.
Many Yugoslavs resent U.S. policy moves, especially after Milosevic signed the 1995 Dayton agreement to end the Bosnian war, anti-Milosevic vote, which they feel discouraged opposition to the president.
Since many Yugoslavs see The Hague as an American tool, cooperation with the tribunal would surely trigger popular resentment and the feeling that if Milosevic were to stand trial, he should face a local court.
Furthermore, the constitution forbids extraditing Yugoslavs for trial abroad. The constitution could be amended by two-thirds vote of the Yugoslav parliament, which could be tricky because of strong pro-Milosevic parties expected to return to the new legislature and because pro-Western Montenegro is boycotting federal institutions.
Kostunica is a longtime Serbian nationalist, and before the election, Milosevic made discreet overtures to his Democratic Party of Serbia in what appeared to be a strategy to undercut his former allies in the Serbian Radical Party.
That nationalist sentiment was one of the reasons the main opposition alliance chose Kostunica, figuring his credentials and his demeanor would play better among voters than others, including the urbane, Western-educated former Belgrade mayor, Zoran Djindjic.
If he were to take power, Kostunica would have his hands full with numerous pressing issues, including reviving a moribund economy and overcoming political tensions after years of hardline rule. For that, he would need as broad a base of support as possible.
Much would probably depend on the policies of the United States and other Western countries. The U.N. Security Council resolution which established the court made countries which do not cooperate with the tribunal vulnerable to sanctions.
Western leaders - especially the United States and the four other permanent council members - would have to decide whether extraditing Milosevic immediately was more important than cutting Kostunica some slack.
The example of Croatia, which broke away from Yugoslavia in 1991, may offer insights. Under former President Franjo Tudjman, the West shunned Croatia for failure to cooperate with the court.
Since Tudjman died in December and a reformist government was elected this year, the tribunal has been increasingly willing to let the Croats try suspects on its own - except for those already indicted by the court.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BEL115
 Load-Date: September 29, 2000

 

End of Document
