

In Europe's gay capital, the carefree paint the town pink
The Associated Press
August 1, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 666 words
Byline: By WILLIAM J. KOLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMSTERDAM, Netherlands
Body




They're painting the town pink.
Clad in everything from wedding veils to leather G-strings, tens of thousands of homosexuals from 66 countries partied in the cobblestone streets of Amsterdam as the week-long Gay Games got under way Saturday.
But here in Europe's self-styled homosexual capital - where gays and lesbians can marry, are welcomed in the military and are close to winning adoption rights - not even the bare-chested men with nipple jewelry rollerblading through town were drawing many stares.
"We're used to it," Andre Bakker said with a shrug as he and his wife, Florence, craned their necks for a glimpse of a dozen men in Dutch milkmaid outfits dancing on a passing canal boat.
Founded in San Francisco in 1982 as a gay alternative to the Olympics, the fifth quadrennial sports and cultural festival opened amid clear signs that it has come of age.
Organizers said more than 200,000 visitors were in the Dutch capital for the games, which run through Aug. 8 and will bring together 15,000 competitors - half as many as in the mainstream Olympics.
No matter the scattered smirks over the fact that they'll be handing out medals here for such "sports" as ballroom dancing and oil wrestling. Or that a small fringe group of hard-core homosexuals were running their own "Queer Do-It-Yourself Games," featuring purse-tossing and a 200-meter dash in high heels.
The famously accepting Dutch, thousands of whom lined the medieval canals Saturday to wildly cheer on a Gay Games parade of boatloads of transvestites, have rolled out the pink carpet.
"We've certainly made enormous gains in this country, and above all in this city," said Rene Zuidervelt, the editor of Gay News magazine.
"It's not like that in other countries where homosexuals are oppressed," he said. "The Romanians and the Zimbabweans who compete here can get a feeling of solidarity."
Gays and lesbians have been progressively integrated into Dutch culture over the past two decades. This year, lawmakers legalized same sex civil marriage and are leaning toward granting homosexuals the right to adopt children.
About 50,000 people, straight and gay alike, packed a soccer stadium on the outskirts of Amsterdam for the opening ceremonies under the theme "Friendship Through Culture and Sport."
An exuberant Mayor Schelto Patijn welcomed the roaring crowd to Amsterdam, saying it was the "Gayway to Europe."
The crowd cheered as the delegations marched in, the Japanese team wearing traditional kimono, athletes from rainy Holland holding aloft rainbow-colored umbrellas. Men in sailor's outfits danced to rave music.
"Many of us have competed in an environment where we have had to hide a valuable part of ourselves. One by one we have faced these fears," tennis star Martina Navratilova told the crowd via a satellite hookup and giant TV screens.
The main event was a concert by Dana International, the Israeli transsexual pop star who gained notoriety and angered orthodox leaders at home for winning May's Eurovision song contest.
Even so, the 1998 games aren't without controversy. On Saturday, the European Gay and Lesbian Sports Federation called on athletes to wear masks in protest of an International Skating Union decision banning its members from future competitions if they compete in Amsterdam.
Critics accused the ISU, skating's world governing body, of homophobia. ISU officials have denied that, saying it was simply an enforcement of long-standing rules forbidding participation in unsanctioned and unofficial competitions.
None of that, though, came even close to stopping the Games from going on.
"This is certainly adding to our cultural experience," Bill Mayer of Greensboro, N.C., said with a grin as he and his wife, Kathy, watched two gay men in clingy black dresses and pumps walk past.
This year's competition is the first to be held in Europe. New York City was the site of the last event in 1994; Sydney, Australia, site of the Summer Olympics in 2000, will have the first southern hemisphere Gay Games in 2002.
 

 
 Load-Date: August 1, 1998

 

End of Document
