

Inside the 'Steel City,' focus is on defending North America
May 12, 1997, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1068 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHEYENNE MOUNTAIN AIR STATION, Colo.
Body




In this granite-encased nerve center of North American aerospace defense, computer screens flashed. Colorful beams of light leaped across giant video displays. Officers straightened up in their seats.
"Stand by for possible missile event," came a voice in steady, even tones.
Origin: Russia's Plesetsk missile range near the Arctic Circle. Destination: Unknown.
Could this be the Big One, an actual attack on the United States, the start of the apocalyptic nuclear exchange the world feared throughout the Cold War?
No. Just an exercise.
One day, though, it could be real, and thus U.S. and Canadian officers remain at the helm of the one-of-a-kind Cheyenne Mountain defense complex, on alert around the clock to sound the first alarm should North America come under attack from the air.
Of course, there never has been an attack in the three decades Cheyenne Mountain has served as headquarters of the North American Aerospace Defense Command, or NORAD, and the Cold War's end seemed to make the chances even more remote.
Even the job of monitoring test launches of Russian missiles capable of reaching North America is not the strain it used to be. Last year, the Russians launched only six intercontinental ballistic missiles for tests, and their eastward flight path to the Kamchatka Peninsula was not the polar route they would be expected to take in an actual attack.
The launches are no surprise, either. Under a 1988 agreement, both the United States and Russia notify each other in advance of all ICBM flight tests.
So who needs Cheyenne Mountain and its $ 150 million-a-year price tag?
Both Canada and the United States do, in the view of Canadian Lt. Gen. Lou Cuppens, the deputy commander of NORAD. When it comes to defense of the homeland, even in these post-Soviet times, one cannot be too careful, he said.
"They still have a tremendous capability" in missiles and bombers, Cuppens said of the Russians. "I have to be ready to counter that capability."
Prudence, he said, requires NORAD to keep an eye on Russia as long as it maintains a large nuclear arsenal and its transition to democracy is incomplete.
"You're rather naive if you think Russia is stable," Cuppens said.
Russia is not the only country he worries about. China has a small number of ballistic missiles capable of striking North American territory, and Cuppens says NORAD is closely watching North Korea for signs it may be developing ICBMs.
In recent years some have questioned whether the work at Cheyenne Mountain, overlooking Colorado Springs, could as easily be performed elsewhere and the 4 -acre grid of tunneled chambers closed to save money.
U.S. Air Force Gen. Howell Estes III, NORAD's commander in chief, said the military considered that but decided "it's cheaper to operate where we are," even though the security of being buried inside a mountain is no longer needed.
The commander of Cheyenne Mountain, Air Force Maj. Gen. Jeff Grime, says the place is more economical to run than many conventional, above-ground military bases.
"I don't cut grass down here, I don't do windows and the roof doesn't leak," he said in an interview at his command post deep inside the heavily guarded mountain.
On the other hand, Cheyenne Mountain stands alone in having to commit two non-commissioned officers to continually tighten 115,000 bolts that keep the rock walls from weakening. Three people are required to maintain the pair of 25-foot steel blast doors, each three feet thick, inside the main entry tunnel.
Then again, being inside the mountain means no heating bills. All the warm air needed even in the dead of winter is provided as a byproduct of the hundreds of computer terminals.
The "steel city" defense complex was carved out of Cheyenne Mountain in the early 1960s at a cost of $ 142 million. At a time of great fear of a Soviet attack on the United States or Canada, it was decided that NORAD needed an operations center that could survive even a direct hit by nuclear bombs.
The 15 steel buildings inside the mountain stand on rows of huge steel springs, designed to negate the earthquake effect of a nuclear blast. The entry to the buildings branches off from the main tunnel so that in the event of an outside nuclear explosion the blast and heat would blow through the mountain, bypassing the area where about 1,100 Americans and Canadians now work.
By the time Cheyenne Mountain opened in 1966, however, the Soviets had fielded plenty of nuclear weapons with yields higher than NORAD's designers had anticipated.
Security is rarely an issue here. In mid-April, however, Grime temporarily suspended public tours and stiffened security after being warned by the FBI that someone had threatened to attack the complex.
What members of the public see on a tour of Cheyenne Mountain hardly begins to tell the full story of what roles it plays in U.S. and Canadian defense.
Inside the mountain's Missile Warning Center, men and women tap into a worldwide network of satellites and ground-based radars to detect launches of long- and medium-range ballistic missiles and to get the word to military commanders.
Neither the United States nor Canada has any way of shooting down such missiles, but the Pentagon is working on an anti-missile system that could be ready in less than a decade.
U.S. officials see a growing threat to allies in Asia and the Middle East - as well as to American troops aboard - from medium-range missiles being purchased or developed by such nations as North Korea and Iran. They also believe more nations will have long-range missiles sometime early in the next century.
The Space Control Center - one of the most secretive posts inside the mountain - plays a little-noticed role in all flights of NASA's space shuttle. It runs a computerized simulation of the shuttle's planned flight path and warns of any floating "junk" that might endanger the spacecraft. On several occasions, the space agency has diverted the shuttle to avoid a possible collision.
The Air Defense Operations Center commands and controls the air surveillance and air defense network that searches for intruders in U.S. or Canadian air space.
This originally was NORAD's chief role, because the greatest fear before the advent of globe-circling missiles was of a Soviet bomber attack. Now drug-running airplanes are the main target. No Russian bomber has approached North America airspace in years, other than for arranged visits, officials said.
 Load-Date: May 12, 1997

 

End of Document
