

Italy has the numbers for EU, but does it have the will?
The Associated Press
March 10, 1998, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 591 words
Byline: By DANIEL J. WAKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME
Body




When Italy's government insisted on firing three rail workers blamed for accidents, the train unions reacted swiftly. They declared strikes that would paralyze the nation's rail system.
The confrontation is more than just the latest hurdle for the government of Premier Romano Prodi. It also points to a broader challenge for Italy: proving it can adapt to closer European unity and, especially, to a common European currency.
The European Union finance ministers have focused on Italy's state railroad as one of the country's major problem areas, and Prodi has committed himself to bringing the system in line.
Losses last year were $ 2.3 billion. Accidents, derailments and breakdowns have plagued the railway in recent months.
The fired employees, two engineers and an inspector, were blamed for a pair of accidents in November. The railroad agreed late Monday to suspend the firing pending further study.
Train engineers planned to go ahead with a daylong strike Wednesday but after hearing about the suspension, rail unions called off another walkout planned for Friday.
Two weeks ago, Italy announced it had the economic indicators to achieve its goal of joining European nations sharing a single currency and monetary policy. It did so by imposing special taxes, cutting spending and making modest cuts in the pension system.
The final decision on who gets to join comes in May.
But hitting the economic benchmarks is not the end of the story for Rome. Like the railroad dispute, other signs abound that Italian membership in the euro currency club won't be easy.
Italian politicians have begun talking about pouring more money into the chronically depressed south, the kind of economic policy that fuels German mistrust about Italy's participation in monetary union.
"We haven't passed the entrance exam yet, but we are beginning to plan as if the euro chapter could be considered closed," political analyst Sergio Romano said last week in La Stampa of Turin. "Fiscal dicipline is no longer, for many politicians, the first order of the day."
From agriculture to air travel to trucking, Italy and Italians have ignored the bonds of European union.
The European Court of Justice in January upheld a European Commission ruling condemning 1992 tax breaks to truck drivers to make up for higher Italian gas prices.
The commission also found the state-owned airline, Alitalia, had sought to suppress competition.
One of Italy's most durable and intransigent protest movements in recent years came from northern milk producers, outraged at being forced to pay EU fines for surpassing EU milk quotas.
Milk producers splashed police with liquid manure and blocked highways with their tractors. Then olive growers got in on the act late last year. They took to the streets, up in arms over cheaper olive oil imports from EU partners like Spain and Greece.
In other areas, the government is making efforts to catch up to its EU partners. It has announced plans to move toward privatizing the notoriously inefficient postal service.
Italy also announced plans last month to close a loophole in the immigration law that allowed many immigrants to disappear after arriving in Italy.
Observers say Italy - long one of the most ardent supporters of European unity - is not alone in having segments of society out of touch with European Union principles and regulations.
"Italy is not materially different from France or Germany," said Stanley Crossick, chairman of the European Policy Center, a think-tank in Brussels. "Because of Italy's record, there's greater doubts."
 
 Load-Date: March 10, 1998

 

End of Document
