

Keeping the whole family happy in the nation's capital
The Associated Press
July 22, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 364 words
Byline: By CARL HARTMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Dad wants to introduce the family to senators, Mom would like to revisit Arlington Cemetery and 8-year-old daughter Jordan likes music and dance.
How to make everybody happy when the Pelavin family visits Washington? The best known attractions - museums and stately monuments - may not be the best answer.
Tour organizer Sandra Dee Hoffman thinks too many parents visiting the capital want to do things that bore kids - looking at monuments or old Dutch paintings in the National Gallery, for example, when their offspring really want to see the zoo.
Often-overlooked attractions may appeal more: The 60-foot model of the White House at the National Building Museum, complete with tiny twinkling TVs, or the little-known National Cryptologic Museum of code-breaking that the once super-secret National Security Agency has opened to the public in suburban Ft. Meade, Md.
If parents want to see art, there are ways to get young children interested in paintings, Hoffman said, like devising games - count how many of the men in the pictures have mustaches, for example, or see how often the painters use orange, the Dutch national color.
Families planning their visits can get a free booklet, "Family Fun in Washington D.C.," from the District of Columbia Chamber of Commerce. The White House has its own visitors center in the Commerce Building, three blocks away, that also dispenses free information.
Hoffman's service, called "Children's Concierge," gives families long questionnaires on what their children like to do and produces colorfully illustrated, personalized schedules, one for each family member. She charges $65 per planning hour.
Mark Pelavin, associate director of the Washington office of the Reform Jewish Movement, knows his way around Congress but needs some help finding fun sites for his children.
"They both like playing in the dirt and getting dirty," mother Lori Morris Pelavin told Hoffman in a recent teleconference to plan their trip.
"Have you ever visited a dig for dinosaur bones?" suggested Hoffman.
Mom liked the idea.
On the Net:
District of Columbia Chamber of Commerce: http://www.dcchamber.org 
White House for kids: http://www.whitehouse.gov/WH/kids/html/home.html 
 Load-Date: July 23, 2000

 

End of Document
