

Kentucky Fans Go the Distance to Follow the Cats
March 1, 1996, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 785 words
Byline: By MIKE EMBRY, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: LEXINGTON, Ky.
Body




Nineteen years ago, Bob Wiggins traveled to Philadelphia to watch Kentucky play Princeton in the NCAA East Regional. He hasn't missed a chance since then to see the Wildcats in action.
Wiggins has seen Kentucky play in 604 consecutive games. He was in St. Louis when the Wildcats won the national title in 1978. He was cheering for them at Final Four appearances in Seattle in 1984 and New Orleans in 1993.
And he hopes to be with top-ranked Kentucky on the NCAA tournament trail, all the way to the championship at East Rutherford, N.J.
"I feel real good about it," he said from his home in Falmouth, Ky. "We have as good a shot as anybody. This is a great basketball team. Coach (Rick) Pitino has done a good job with them."
Wiggins, a retired construction engineer for the state Department of Transportation, attended his first Kentucky game in 1944. He said he has attended 1,002 games through the years.
"That doesn't count exhibition games," said Wiggins, who also saw the Wildcats win the national championship in Louisville in 1958.
He said he has never purchased tickets from scalpers for away games and only once during his streak, in a game played at Vanderbilt, did he come close to missing tipoff.
"They always seem to print one more ticket and I get that one," Wiggins said with a laugh. He's also attended some games by helping the UK broadcast crew.
His only major health problem during the streak was quadruple-bypass heart surgery, but that occurred in the summer of 1985.
"I didn't think about it," he said of the streak. 'I thought 100 in a row would be something. I've been very fortunate."
Kentucky's unofficial record is 627, held by Steve Rardin, who died before the start of the 1989 season. Wiggins often traveled with Rardin to games.
Wiggins doesn't have any idea where Kentucky will play in the NCAA tourney. And he doesn't care.
"I'm not going to worry about that," he said. "I'll take care of that when the time comes."
Wiggins' attitude is typical of many of Kentucky's devoted fans. Where the Wildcats go, they will follow in droves.
Bill Blount, owner of Commonwealth Travel Agency in Lexington, said his company has received more than 1,000 calls from fans about the NCAA tournament.
"They're saying they're interested, but we don't have anything to offer them," he said. "We stopped taking names about a month ago. We've given some people false hope (about tickets)."
Blount said his company didn't have any trouble booking 1,486 Kentucky fans at $ 695 each for the ECAC tournament in New York last December. And it took about two weeks to sell out 900 packages to next week's Southeastern Conference tourney in New Orleans.
Pitino declared this week that he believes his team will make its first-round stop in Milwaukee.
"I'll still say, 'Go to Milwaukee, young man. Go to Milwaukee,"' he said. "I don't think anything has changed."
That would be bad news for a lot of Big Blue followers since that site is already sold out, according to UK ticket manager Barbara Donnelly.
"Most of the calls we get are from people who are tying to see what we guestimate on where we will go," she said.
Donnelly said the university's share of tickets won't be much at any round - 350 in the first, 1,200 in the second and 2,500 for the Final Four. And the tickets are allocated in thirds to students, administration officials and the athletics department.
If Kentucky does go to the Midwest, the winners from Milwaukee and Dallas will advance to Minneapolis, where approximately 6,000 tickets are still available. That's not a secret to Kentucky fans.
"About half of our calls have been from Kentucky," said Robin Hartman, a ticket clerk for the host University of Minnesota, "a lot more than any other state."
Blount said Kentucky fans will do about anything for tickets.
"They'll call us for two tickets, call the (UK) alumni association for two tickets and call (UK) athletic department for two tickets," he said. "Now we take a list and stop people from doing this to get six tickets. We cross check on requested tickets."
Donnelly recalled the 1993 season when the school decided to offer 250 tickets to the Final Four in New Orleans after the Southeast Regional in Charlotte, N.C.
"We had people camped outside our offices on the Saturday before they went on sale on Monday," she said. "And there were scalpers here from New York to Texas. It was such a bad experience."
Blount believes that if reports are true that scalpers could command as much as $ 10,000 each for prime Final Four tickets, a lot of fans won't make the trip to New Jersey.
"That's a ridiculous price," he said. "I think that will stop people saying they'll go without tickets. I believe they'll let the regional finals be their Final Four."
 Load-Date: March 1, 1996

 

End of Document
