

King Hussein, a voice for peace in the Mideast, dies of cancer
The Associated Press
February 7, 1999, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1324 words
Byline: JAMAL HALABY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan
Body




Through a half-century of turmoil, Hussein bin Talal of Jordan grew from boy king to elder statesman, a symbol of endurance and a voice for peace in a landscape of crisis and war. He died Sunday of cancer at the age of 63.
Crowned at age 17 as monarch of a poor desert realm, King Hussein grew to command the attention of the world, as he did when he interceded, gray and stricken from cancer, at a crucial moment in the 1998 Middle East peace talks at the Wye Plantation to help break an Israeli-Palestinian deadlock.
"There has been enough destruction, enough death, enough waste," he declared that October day in Washington, in the sonorous voice that boomed from somewhere deep in his 5-foot-4 frame.
It had been 50 years since Israel's founding set off the first of the wars between Arabs and Jews, flooding his country with Palestinian refugees, and 45 years since the teen-age prince took on what he later called "the hazardous profession" of king, to rule a nation even younger than himself.
In the years that followed, Hussein steered his kingdom into coexistence with the Jewish state, working to ensure Jordan's survival. But his ties to Israel and the West, and his often uneasy relations with the Palestinians who make up half the kingdom's population, plunged him into crisis after crisis with his fellow Arabs.
It was a lonely and arduous reign, over a tiny nation the size of Indiana, sandwiched between such powerful states as Iraq, Israel, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Syria.
He survived wars with Israel and a civil war, escaped repeated coup and assassination attempts, and twice battled cancer to become one of the world's longest-ruling leaders, one whose reign stretched from Stalin to Yeltsin, from Churchill to Blair, from Eisenhower to Clinton.
A muscular if diminutive man, Hussein was a water skier, sky diver and race car driver. But his favorite escape was to fly, anything from jet fighters to helicopters. One of his first moves after making peace with Israel was to pilot his own plane over Tel Aviv.
Throughout, even as cancer took its toll, the king carried himself with a proud military bearing, legacy of his early training.
Hussein was born Nov. 14, 1935, a descendent of Hashem, great-grandfather of Mohammed, the 7th-century prophet of Islam. He studied in Amman and Cairo, and at Britain's Harrow prep school and Sandhurst Military Academy.
His rule began after his father, King Talal, abdicated because of mental illness. In his 1962 autobiography, "Uneasy Lies the Head," Hussein recalled learning he would be king when a page delivered a message on a silver tray.
"I did not need to open it to know that my days as a schoolboy had ended," he wrote. "One glance at the envelope was enough. It was addressed to 'His Majesty, King Hussein."'
Hussein was crowned May 2, 1953, inheriting a backward land of Bedouin nomads and Palestinian refugees that he eventually built into a nation that exported doctors, engineers and managers to its oil-rich neighbors.
Hussein's mentor was his grandfather, Abdullah, who fought with Lawrence of Arabia in the Arab revolt against the Turks during World War I. Abdullah later was the first ruler of Transjordan, a desert territory carved out by the British that became Jordan in 1946.
"He let me accompany him everywhere," Hussein wrote in his autobiography. "It was he who taught me to understand the minds of my people and the intricacies of the Arab world. … He taught me that above all else, that a leader's greatest duty is to serve."
At 16, Hussein saw Abdullah assassinated outside the Al Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem by a Palestinian incensed at the annexation of the West Bank, historically part of Palestine, by the new Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. The assassin fired a shot at Hussein, but it was deflected by a medal the young prince wore on his chest.
It was the future king's first brush with death, but not his last. Enemies ambushed his cars, sent jet fighters after his plane, put acid in his nose drops, tried to poison his food and shelled his palace.
One of his early enemies was Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser, who branded Hussein a "stooge of American imperialism." But Hussein's admiration of Nasser's Arab nationalism led to one of the king's major blunders.
He allied himself with Egypt just before the June 1967 Arab-Israeli War. That cost Hussein the West Bank, captured by Israel. With it, he lost the Arab half of Jerusalem, including the Al Aqsa mosque, Islam's third-holiest shrine and a potent symbol of Hashemite legitimacy.
The instability stirred by the 1967 war led to the "Black September" civil war in 1970-71, in which Hussein's Bedouin Arab legion crushed Palestinian guerrillas who sought Hussein's overthrow.
In 1974, an Arab summit stripped Hussein of his right to speak for the Palestinians, making the Palestine Liberation Organization their sole legitimate representative. In 1988, during the Palestinian uprising against Israel, the king renounced all rights to the West Bank.
But he retained a role as guardian of Jerusalem's Muslim holy places, the Dome of the Rock and the Al Aqsa mosque. It was a point of pride for the king, whose family had once been the rulers of Islam's holiest city - Mecca in what is now Saudi Arabia - and he financed the replating of the golden dome of the Dome of the Rock.
Some of Hussein's greatest challenges came in the 1990s, with the Persian Gulf War and his peace treaty with Israel.
His alliance with neighboring Iraq during its seven-month occupation of Kuwait isolated Hussein from the West. Kuwait also deported 320,000 Jordanian workers to Jordan, whose moribund economy already was saddled with $ 8.3 billion in foreign debts.
Over the decades, Hussein's Jordan relied heavily on economic aid - first from the British, then from the Americans and the Arab oil monarchies. His 1994 peace treaty with Israel rehabilitated Jordan with Washington.
The king fought an uphill battle, however, to convince his 3.8 million subjects to make peace with a people they had been taught to loathe. "Peace has been a dream for us over the years," he once told his people, "and is becoming with the passing days a reality."
His hopes for peace suffered a setback in 1995 when Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was assassinated. Hussein wept openly at his funeral. The king welcomed the new Israeli leader, Benjamin Netanyahu, but their relationship turned rocky because of Netanyahu's tough stand in negotiations with the Palestinians.
At home, Hussein could be autocratic. After a 1957 coup attempt, he banned political parties. In 1974, he suspended the Jordanian Parliament's operation, not reconvening it until 1984.
In the 1990s, spurred by anti-government rioting, Hussein launched a liberalization drive that he hoped would serve as an example for other Arab states. "Without democracy, Arabs will remain a broken people," he told The Associated Press in an April 1993 interview.
But an Islamic fundamentalist opposition party boycotted the 1997 parliamentary elections, complaining of restrictions on political freedoms.
Hussein's battle with cancer dated to 1992, when he underwent surgery to remove cancer from his ureter and left kidney at Minnesota's Mayo Clinic. In mid-1998, he was diagnosed with lymphatic cancer.
During this second illness, he made a major change in his kingdom's future, designating his oldest son, Abdullah, named for the king's beloved grandfather, as crown prince in place of Hussein's brother, Hassan, who had been groomed as successor for 34 years.
On Saturday, with the king dying, the Cabinet declared Abdullah regent, granting him most political and royal powers.
Hussein's two early marriages to an Egyptian and a Briton ended in divorce. His third wife, Palestinian-born Alia, died in a 1977 helicopter crash.
In 1978, he married Lisa Halaby, the Lebanese-American daughter of an airline executive. She took the name Queen Noor.
Hussein had 11 children as well as an adopted daughter.
 

 

 
 Load-Date: February 7, 1999

 

End of Document
