

Kiriyenko - in the wrong place at the wrong time
The Associated Press
August 23, 1998, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 347 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Sergei Kiriyenko's age and inexperience were both his greatest assets and his greatest liabilities.
But in the end, the 36-year-old Russian prime minister may have lost his job not because of who he was, but because he was in the wrong place at the wrong time.
Kiriyenko was fired unceremoniously Sunday after spending five difficult months trying to keep Russia's economy from collapsing.
President Boris Yeltsin had fought hard to push Kiriyenko's appointment through parliament this spring, arguing strenuously that Russia needed new, vigorous leadership. Not long after Kiriyenko took office, the Russian stock market went into a nosedive, beginning an unremitting series of economic crises.
Kiriyenko represented a new generation of young leaders who are quickly entering the top ranks of politics, business and other fields.
The son of a prominent academic, he was born July 26, 1962, in the Black Sea town of Sukhumi. He graduated from the Gorky Institute of Water Transport Engineering and took a two-year course at the Moscow Academy of Economics, majoring in finance and banking.
After serving in the military, Kiriyenko became a foreman at the Krasnoye Sormovo shipyard in the Soviet city of Gorky, now known as Nizhny Novgorod.
He also served as the first secretary of Gorky's regional committee of the Young Communist League, the Komsomol and was a deputy in the local legislature.
Kiriyenko was just 28 and beginning his career as a private businessman when the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991. The transition to a market economy provided new opportunities to young Russians, and Kiriyenko made the most of them.
In 1994, he became a founder of a commercial bank in Nizhny Novgorod, Garantia, and served as the bank's chairman of the board.
Two years later, Kiriyenko became president of the NORSI oil company and held that job until he entered government as first deputy minister for fuel and energy in May 1997.
In November 1997, he was appointed minister for fuel and energy, a post he held until Yeltsin fired his Cabinet and named Kiriyenko acting prime minister on March 23.
 Load-Date: August 23, 1998

 

End of Document
