

Kohl says he will reveal the names of anonymous donors
The Associated Press
January 23, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 841 words
Byline: By BURT HERMAN
Body



Associated Press Writer
 
BERLIN (AP) - Former chancellor Helmut Kohl announced Sunday that he will reveal the names of anonymous donors to a nonpartisan committee of high-ranking German politicians to help clear up allegations that government decisions were bought during his administration.
In a statement faxed to the media, Kohl said he would turn over the names to a new committee, which will evaluate his statements that the donations did not influence any political decision. The names will not be made public.
"I am grateful to the donors, who have agreed to this process out of their own conviction, to bring the speculation to an end. They are helping me in my duty to clear up these open questions," Kohl said in the statement.
The announcement came as reports emerged of allegations that the French government of Francois Mitterrand paid millions of dollars to ensure Kohl's re-election in 1994.
Kohl identified members of the committee, apparently formed specifically to evaluate whether the donors sought influence, as German President Johannes Rau, parliament President Wolfgang Thierse, former German President Roman Herzog and vice president of the federal Constitutional Court Hans-Juergen Papier. The statement did not say when the committee would convene.
Kohl's refusal to identify the source of anonymous donations has fueled speculation that the money was used to buy political favors. Parliament has launched an inquiry to examine whether bribes or kickbacks influenced government decisions under Kohl, who was chancellor from 1982-98.
Kohl admitted last month that he solicited anonymous donations of $1 million, exploding the party financing scandal swirling around his Christian Democrats. Kohl is also the subject of a criminal investigation by Bonn prosecutors.
Party leaders repeatedly demanded that Kohl name the donors, but Kohl last week refused, saying he had given them his word of honor. Rather than break his word, he resigned as honorary chairman of the party.
Meanwhile, there were new disclosures widening the scandal. ARD television reported Saturday evening that Mitterrand arranged payment of some $15 million to the Christian Democrats, and that the money was transferred as part of alleged bribes totaling $44 million paid by France's Elf-Aquitaine for its 1992 purchase of the former East German Leuna refinery.
The alleged bribes have long been the subject of investigation by prosecutors in Switzerland and France.
Officials in the German chancellor's office have also been searching for missing government files on the privatization deal sought by parliament as part of its investigation. This week, the government said it would appoint a special investigator to track down what happened to the files.
ARD said there was no evidence Kohl was aware of the $15 million transfer, and a spokesman for the chancellor called the allegation a smear campaign.
In a joint report with French Television 2, ARD cited sources close to Mitterrand as saying the money was not bribes but was intended to serve "state interests for Europe."
The TV report said that the French and German secret services met regularly with middlemen in the Geneva hotel Le Richemond to make the payments.
In one 1992 exchange, the report said money was channeled by French businessman Andre Guelfi - one of the figures in the French probe of the deal - to a bank account in Liechtenstein under the name of German businessman and former intelligence agent Dieter Holzer. Another sum also went into a Geneva bank account controlled by French intelligence agent Pierre Letier, the report said.
The chairman of the parliament investigation of the scandal, Volker Neumann of the governing Social Democrat party, told ARD television that investigators have already traced the 85 million marks from Guelfi's company flowed to two further companies. "Then the tracks are lost," he said, because of the missing government files.
Guelfi has acknowledged the transfer of the money that was intended "as a commission" to promote the sale of Leuna, and said he was told by the president of Elf-Aquitaine that Kohl and Mitterrand were aware of the payment.
Kohl spokesman Michael Roik dismissed the new allegations Sunday as an invention and a character assassination on the former chancellor. Kohl and Mitterrand never discussed money during discussions about the Leuna sale, Roik said in a statement faxed to the media.
"The attempt through such slanderous allegations against Mr. Kohl personally to arouse suspicions about his work to ensure the survival of the chemical industry in eastern Germany and to secure jobs in the region is another low point in a character assassination campaign," the statement said.
The Christian Democrats were to meet Sunday to discuss the scandal and examine an audit of the party's finances carried out by accountants Ernst and Young.
In a statement issued Saturday evening, party Secretary-General Angela Merkel said that the audit revealed no new details relating to the Elf-Aquitaine deal. The audit was to be made public Monday.
 Load-Date: January 24, 2000

 

End of Document
