

Lady Di, Cinderella to Superstar, in the end outshone a monarchy
September 5, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1353 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Lady Di lived it all: awkward duckling to Cinderella to Princess Diana Superstar, who took herself to the top with all the grit of the Little Engine That Could. In the end, she outshone a monarchy that struggled to keep her in shadow.
Had she lived, Diana might have drifted from the front pages toward the back, a royal has-been seeking nonstop fun after hard work in the spotlight. Now, it is bad manners even to think that.
An entire nation, and a world beyond it, spent a week saying goodbye. Mourner after mourner said what might for a long time be true: "She was the most popular woman in the world."
Partly, this came from genuine warmth. She hugged and cuddled, not only her own two sons but also anyone else's, whatever their color or class, no matter if they had AIDS or leprosy.
For Britain, Diana was a phenomenon not seen in nine centuries: a touchable royal. For everyone else, she was a novelty: an English noblewoman with a cheerfully unstiff upper lip.
Partly, it was by design. She met obstacles head-on, with a plan. Diana recently told The New Yorker she tried to convince the royal family to hire professionals to soften their image.
"They kept saying I was manipulative," she said of her tradition-bound former in-laws. "But what's the alternative? To just sit there and have them make your image for you?"
From the beginning, friends and family say, Diana's life was dominated by periods of tough determination, with long lapses of self-destructive freefall.
The Honorable Diana Spencer was born on July 1, 1961, to Viscount Althorp, later the eighth Earl Spencer. Her parents wanted a boy and let her know it. When she was 8, her parents noisily split.
Diana endured what she called a wicked stepmother. Gawky and shy, she felt overwhelmed by a beautiful older sister, Sarah. She spent a lot of time alone with the syrupy romance novels of Barbara Cartland, her step-grandmother.
At the end of her teens, she dropped out of Swiss finishing school to live with friends in London, free at last, even though she had to support herself as a maid and nanny.
Her biographer, Andrew Morton, said the turning point came when Diana asked Sarah for a lift to London after a country weekend. Sarah refused, saying an extra person would cost too much in gas.
Diana was through playing Cinderella to two older sisters, Morton wrote in "Diana: Her True Story." And he quoted her brother, Charles: "Suddenly the insignificant ugly duckling was obviously going to be a swan."
Soon after, the Prince of Wales noticed her, and history took over. A year of courtship, tender if tepid, led to the fairy-tale wedding of the century, a grand spectacle of pomp and puffy eyes.
But Prince Charles was aloof on their honeymoon. Photos of his old friend and flame, Camilla Parker Bowles, fell out of his diary. He wore cufflinks she had given him: two "C"s entwined.
Then it got worse - so bad that the frustrated princess flung herself down a flight of stairs and hacked at her wrists with a razor blade. Charles, who was raised to hold emotion in check, dismissed that with chilly disdain.
And Diana was public property. While she fought to conceal pain and fear that brought on bulimia nervosa, hers was the most photographed face on Earth.
All of this emerged later, after eavesdroppers, tattlers and disgruntled ex-servants explained why the royal couple often seemed so hostile in public. Meantime, Diana set about becoming a legend.
Suddenly, the Princess of Wales seemed everywhere. She stooped to comfort a kid in Pakistan, then flew halfway around the world to bolster charities back home.
Only the most curmudgeonly questioned her humanitarian works, which focused on cancer, AIDS, digestive disorders, children in trouble, land mines and widespread poverty in the Third World. Mother Teresa said after Diana's death, and only days before her own, "she was a very good friend, in love with the poor, a very good wife, a very good mother."
Her life after dark was far more controversial.
The old pictures show some happy times with Charles. In Australia in 1983, not long after William was born, Diana and Charles gaze at each other in lust. At polo, they nuzzle tenderly between chukkas. Diana looked like a woman in love.
But the two had separate lives, which grew more separate by the year.
Diana's pals included the biggest stars, singers and artists and bon vivants, who took her out dancing and dining in London while her staid husband preferred his estate in Scotland, just down the road from Camilla.
Though hardly a playgirl, photographers caught her in apparent flirtation with polo players while Charles was on the field. Tender moments with old male friends inspired fresh rumors.
Diana embraced fashion with a passion and wore clothes well. The English, mostly, seemed to like her look. But as with almost everything about her new life and times, the reviews were mixed.
"Her taste was uncertain and spotty," the Paris daily Liberation wrote after she died. One colored boater hat, it said, looked as if a purple oyster had been sick on her head.
Safe inside Kensington Palace, Diana looked for peace in Eastern philosophy, astrology and meditation. She abandoned Cartland for the earthier Danielle Steele, who sent copies of each new novel.
The princess spent long hours on the phone, confiding in old childhood friends and sympathetic new ones. And it was the telephones, finally, which blew scandal into the open.
In 1992, an electronic eavesdropper produced a tape from 1989 in which - if it is real - a male friend calls the princess "Squidgy." Intimacy was implied.
Not long afterward, Camillagate broke. The Daily Mirror printed a telephone transcript, allegedly recorded at bedtime a few weeks before the Squidgy tape, between Charles and Camilla.
"I'll just live inside your trousers or something," the princess told his married friend, and the conversation then grew more explicit.
By then, Diana and Charles had officially separated. A final split was inevitable.
Off on her own in Kensington Palace, Diana was discreet enough to keep people guessing about her private life. But, with lenses pointed from every angle, there was plenty of guessing.
The summer fling with Dodi Fayed had yet to define itself. They'd had fun in St. Tropez, and he had just given her a gorgeous ring. Their fathers were old friends.
And then, all of a sudden late at night in Paris, it didn't matter anymore.
Details about Diana's life and times faded quickly into a blur, a backdrop for something bigger. Modern times needed a perfect princess, a goddess, and she fit.
People who had stopped thinking much about her stood for 11 hours to sign a register at St. James's Palace or added yet more roses to the wall of flowers on the gates of Kensington Palace. Hundreds of millions worldwide are likely to tune in to her funeral.
As might be expected, professional commentators ran the full range, summing up Lady Di's life and times.
For William Pfaff in the International Herald Tribune, she was the well-meaning pawn of royals whose own self-obsession led indirectly to her death.
"She lived by publicity, and died by it," he concluded. "It is that which excites our pity, and our terror."
But, psychiatrists say, that leaves out a symbolic role, which has little to do with the person at hand. Whatever else she did, she showed that royalty in a different age need not be aloof.
Julie Burchill, writing in The Guardian, said the princess might have become a joke had she lived: "Lady Diana Al Fayed, an Arab merchant's bit of posh, endlessly sunning herself on the deck of some gin palace hooked up in the Med, toasting herself until her skin lost its bloom and she lost her husband to a newer model."
But her death, Burchill said, has preserved her forever at the height of her beauty, compassion and power. If the royal family meant to diminish her, they have failed utterly.
"Her brave, bright, brash life will forever cast a giant shadow over … our ruling house," she concluded. "We'll always remember her coming home for the last time to us, free at last, the People's Princess, not the Windsors'. We'll never forget her. And neither will they."
 Load-Date: September 5, 1997

 

End of Document
