

Lebed's the man of the moment - but how long will it last?
The Associated Press
May 18, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 626 words
Byline: By MITCHELL LANDSBERG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KRASNOYARSK, Russia
Body




Alexander Lebed has served notice: He is the big man of the moment in Russian politics.
By winning a Siberian governor's race Sunday, Lebed suddenly became the man whose name is on everyone's lips as they discuss the race that really counts, the one to replace Boris Yeltsin as president in 2000.
But as Lebed acknowledged Monday, he has his work cut out for him in the Krasnoyarsk territory. There is a growing sense that his duties as governor may make him the Gulliver of Russian politics, a big man tied down by the strings of duty.
The Krasnoyarsk race was widely seen as a test for the presidential campaign, with Lebed playing the role of the populist outsider. Few people take Lebed at his word when he says he has no plans to run for president.
"Right now, big, difficult, routine work is waiting for me," the retired general said on national television after defeating the incumbent governor in a runoff Sunday.
"I've got the right to use the power, and I will be using it judiciously, accurately, cautiously, because people are very tired, and I'm the last hope for them," he added.
Lebed, the former national security chief who helped negotiate an end to the war in Chechnya, revived his flagging political career by defeating Gov. Valery Zubov, 57 percent-38 percent.
Krasnoyarsk, a sparsely populated region that encompasses one-fifth of Russia's land area, has a history of mirroring national voting patterns, and the race drew comparisons in the Russian media to the New Hampshire primary in the United States.
By winning in Krasnoyarsk, Lebed joined the top ranks of prospective presidential candidates. Others include Communist leader Gennady Zyuganov, former Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov and liberal leader Grigory Yavlinsky.
There's still a chance Yeltsin could join them. Presidential spokesman Sergei Yastrzhembsky hinted again Monday that Yeltsin might run for a third term in 2000 - a possibility that Yeltsin himself has repeatedly denied.
"If the president doesn't say no, how can I say no?" Yastrzhembsky said in an interview on the Echo Moscow radio station. It was the latest of several contradictory signals from the Kremlin apparently aimed at testing public attitudes to a Yeltsin re-election bid.
Lebed, meanwhile, has backpedaled recently in talking about his presidential ambitions, insisting he has to concentrate on improving the economy in Krasnoyarsk - a giant task to accomplish in two years.
But he has left himself some wiggle room. "If I will be needed, I will run," he said in a televised interview.
Others think he has left himself too little time for a presidential campaign. By winning Sunday, "he decreases his chances to run for president," insisted Vyacheslav Novikov, who hosts a public affairs television program in Krasnoyarsk.
Novikov noted that Luzhkov, the Moscow mayor whose nationalist constituency would most closely overlap Lebed's, has been preparing for the race for more than two years.
Zubov seemed to say much the same thing Monday. "I also won: I stopped him from running for president."
Lebed first must turn around the economy in Krasnoyarsk, a region rich in timber and mineral resources but ill-equipped to make the transition to a market economy, given its aging infrastructure.
If Lebed fails here, his political career could be ruined.
His constituency here is the unemployed and unpaid, those who are desperate for change and hardly care what form it takes.
Asked what he would do first, Lebed said he would order an audit of the government and shake up its higher echelons.
As he often does, he fell back on the language of the military. "Soldiers are the same everywhere," he said. "Generals need to be changed. It depends on generals whether the soldier wins or loses." l
 Load-Date: May 18, 1998

 

End of Document
