

Libya demands guarantees in the handover of Lockerbie suspects
The Associated Press
August 27, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 980 words
Byline: By SALAH NASRAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi demanded guarantees from the United States and Britain today that they will not play "tricks" if he surrenders two suspects in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jetliner.
Gadhafi, following up on his qualified acceptance of a U.S.-British plan to try the suspects in the Netherlands, said Libya and the Western countries still must work out the details before any trial could be held.
He added that he expected Britain and the United States to try to impose conditions that would "make the trial impossible."
"More details must be clear. You cannot say give us these people quickly. They are not tins of fruit," Gadhafi said in an interview with CNN.
For more than six years, Libya has been subjected to U.N. sanctions aimed at forcing Gadhafi to surrender two Libyan suspects in the 1988 attack of the jetliner over Lockerbie, Scotland, that killed 270 people, including 189 Americans.
On Wednesday, Libya accepted a U.S.-British compromise to try the two suspects in the Netherlands, but also urged that U.N. sanctions against Libya be lifted.
Gadhafi said today he had "no objection" to the proposal to try the Libyan suspects in the Netherlands with a three-judge panel and under Scottish law.
"But I am not sure America and the UK have good intentions to solve this problem. I'm not assured they are serious," he said.
Libya will wait to see the details of the proposal before handing over the suspect, he said, without elaborating.
There are likely to be intense behind-the-scenes negotiations during the coming weeks concerning details of any trial, which could still fall through.
At the United Nations today, the U.N. Security Council considered a resolution that would suspend U.N. sanctions once the two Libyan suspects appear for trial in the Netherlands. A vote was possible later today, diplomats said on condition of anonymity.
These developments became possible after Washington and London agreed to drop their earlier insistence that any trial be in Britain or the United States.
Both sides would see the Netherlands trial as a victory. Libya has long demanded a trial on "neutral" ground, and America and Britain have long sought justice in the terrorist attack.
Libyan defense attorney Ibrahim Legwell was quoted today in Cairo's Al-Ahram Weekly as saying only the defense team could accept or reject the U.S.-British proposal.
He also said the defense team would insist on procedures to ensure the safety of the suspects and to limit access to them "to spare them any pressure by American or British intelligence."
For years, Gadhafi has carried out high-profile acts of defiance of the U.N. sanctions, which bar air travel to and from Libya. He has flown to friendly countries and has allowed Muslim pilgrims to fly to the holy city of Mecca.
But the sanctions have largely held.
Visitors must take a ferry to Libya or fly to neighboring Egypt or Tunisia and drive to Libya, which can take up to half a day. Tourism to the country, which boasts exquisite Roman ruins, is virtually non-existent.
Gadhafi said he had "no objection" to the proposal to try the Libyan suspects in the Netherlands, with a three-judge panel and under Scottish law.
"But I am not sure America and the UK have good intentions to solve this problem. I'm not assured they are serious," he said.
Libya will wait to see the details of the proposal before handing over the suspect, he said, without elaborating.
On Wednesday, Libya accepted the U.S.-British compromise, demanding that U.N. sanctions against Libya be lifted.
There are likely to be intense behind-the-scenes negotiations during the coming weeks concerning details of any trial, which could still fall through.
Meanwhile, the U.N. Security Council prepared today to adopt a resolution that would suspend U.N. sanctions once the two Libyan suspects appear for trial in the Netherlands. A final draft was being considered, and a vote was possible later today, diplomats said on condition of anonymity.
These developments became possible after Washington and London agreed to drop their earlier insistence that any trial be in Britain or the United States.
Both sides would see the Netherlands trial as a victory. Libya has long demanded a trial on "neutral" ground, and America and Britain have long sought justice in the terrorist attack.
British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook said Libya's response Wednesday must be studied further.
"I find it very hard to see how Col. Gadhafi, with honor and decency, can now not comply with an offer he himself recognizes as the one he was seeking," Cook said today in a British Broadcasting Corp. television interview.
Meanwhile, Libyan defense attorney Ibrahim Legwell was quoted today in Cairo's Al-Ahram Weekly as saying "although Libyan officials may wish to deal with the matter with greater flexibility, it is the defense team alone that can decide whether to accept the proposal or not."
He told the paper the defense team would insist on procedures to ensure the safety of the suspects and to limit access to them "to spare them any pressure by American or British intelligence."
For years, Gadhafi has carried out high-profile acts of defiance of the U.N. sanctions, which bar air travel to and from Libya. He has flown to friendly countries and has allowed Muslim pilgrims to fly to the holy city of Mecca.
But the sanctions have largely held.
Visitors must take a ferry to Libya or fly to neighboring Egypt or Tunisia and drive to Libya, which can take up to half a day. Tourism to the country, which boasts exquisite Roman ruins, is virtually non-existent.
Many business leaders have shunned dealing with a country that is on the U.S. State Department's list of nations that engage in state-sponsored terrorism.
Others have been kept back by a U.S. law that imposes economic sanctions against international companies that invest more than $ 40 million in the Libyan oil or gas sectors.
 

 

 
 Load-Date: August 27, 1998

 

End of Document
