

Lockerbie townspeople relive crash from the witness stand
The Associated Press
May 4, 2000, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 649 words
Byline: By JEROME SOCOLOVSKY, Associated press Writer
Dateline: CAMP ZEIST, Netherlands
Body




Lockerbie townspeople on Thursday relived the nightmare they spent nearly 12 years trying to forget, telling a Scottish court of oceans of flame that engulfed their town and corpses that rained down from Pan Am Flight 103.
The prosecution witnesses testified on the second day of the trial of two Libyans accused of planting the bomb that killed all 259 people aboard the New York-bound jetliner and 11 people on the ground.
Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah have pleaded innocent. They accuse Palestinian terrorists in the Dec. 21, 1988, bombing. If convicted, they face life in prison in Scotland.
The indictment said the two were intelligence officers who used Libyan time-bomb techniques to detonate Semtex plastic explosives in the belly of the aircraft.
On Thursday, the witnesses helped set the scene.
"The fire was falling down from the sky," said Jasmine Bell, whose brother lived near the three houses on Sherwood Crescent that were swallowed by a huge crater carved by the plane's wreckage.
"Everything was burning - the driveway, the lawn, the hedges, the rooftops," the 53-year-old social worker testified. "I stepped back and back and back until my back was against the wall, I couldn't go any further."
Bell's brother pulled her to safety in his home. She was not hurt. Later, when she walked out to survey the damage with her son, the stumbled over something.
"I think my son said: 'What's that, Mum?" she told the court.
"My first reaction was: 'It's okay, it's just meat.' Then I registered that, obviously, it was not meat."
The defendants listened through earphones to an Arabic translation of the testimony as Lockerbie residents testified from the witness stand in the center of the bulletproof glass enclosed courtroom at Camp Zeist, a former U.S. Air Force base 40 miles east of Amsterdam.
As prosecutors displayed street maps on video monitors, the witnesses vividly described how houses were vaporized by bright orange fireballs. They recalled engine pods and wing sections hurtling across the sky, skimming rooftops, slamming into the ground. And they told how debris and devastation blanketed the town.
Geoffrey Carpenter, the traffic police superintendent, was off duty when "an almighty explosion" blew open the door to his home.
"There was an inrush of air from the outside. I ran out into the front garden, and … there was a glow in the sky and debris up to between 400-600 feet in the air."
Carpenter, the last of the 11 witnesses to testify Thursday, was the first witness in the trial to be cross-examined by the defense.
Questioned by Bill Taylor, who represents Al-Megrahi, the policeman confirmed that it would have been impossible to secure what the lawyer described as "a crime scene of that size."
Taylor also asked him when the first reporters and investigators arrived on the scene and what "modern and sophisticated equipment" they brought, suggesting the evidence could have been tampered with.
Carpenter saw reporters within 1 1/2 hours and said FBI staff came two or three days later with digital cameras and satellite communications equipment.
Kevin Anderson, 35, a plasterer from neighboring Tundergarth, was working on his car when the cockpit fell intact in the field next to his home. The name of the aircraft, "Maid of the Seas," was still legible on the aluminum skin.
"We went over to the cockpit to see if anyone was alive. I had a torch. We looked inside the cockpit. I could see the pilot."
For many in the Lockerbie community, the trial reawakens traumatic memories.
"It brings it all home," said Carpenter, trembling as he spoke. "I would like to hope that at the end of this court proceeding we'll get back to normality. It's something that affects the rest of our lives."
"I do my best just not think about it," said Stuart Kirkpatrick, who found the body of a young girl a few feet from his doorstep. "It's the easiest way to get through."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos101-122, AP Graphic LOCK TRIAL BOX
 Load-Date: May 5, 2000

 

End of Document
