

Look, up in the sky: Is it Buddha? A supernatural being? No - a balloon
The Associated Press
February 7, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 612 words
Byline: By AYE AYE WIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RANGOON, Burma
Body




Three European balloonists forced to abort their round-the-world attempt touched down Saturday in a rice paddy on the road to Mandalay, greeted by awed villagers who took their silver craft for a deity descending from the skies.
The Breitling Orbiter 2 did set two time records before making a "perfect landing" about 9:30 a.m., 90 miles north of the Burmese capital, Rangoon, flight coordinators said.
The nine-day, 17-hour, 55-minute flight was the longest time spent in the air by a balloon and the longest nonstop unrefueled flight by any aircraft. The crew's bid to be the first to circle the globe was dashed when China balked at opening its airspace.
Belgian crew member Wim Verstraeten described life in the sky as "a beautiful nonstop cinema for 10 days."
"I have flown over amazing sights," said his fellow crewman, Briton Andy Elson. "The best was having breakfast at 5,000 meters looking down through the mist and seeing the Taj Mahal."
The balloon passed into Burma, also known as Myanmar, in the darkness Friday night. At first light Saturday the crew members glimpsed the Irrawaddy River and "the first thing we noticed are the temples," said Swiss crew leader Bertrand Piccard.
"It's fabulous. The white pagodas all over the place are beautiful," he said. "You feel that everything is serene, very calm, very friendly."
On the ground, however, the balloon caused quite a stir.
When villagers first saw the balloon appear as a shiny speck in the sky, they believed a deity was coming among them, a local government official said at the landing site.
He quoted a middle-aged woman as saying "I saw the silver light in the sky and I thought it was Buddha."
"These villagers are very simple and naive people," the official explained, refusing to give his name.
Piccard said that as the balloon descended, hundreds of people on the main road between Rangoon and Mandalay rushed toward them - in cars and trucks, on bicycles and on foot.
The Burmese army was next to arrive, followed by the balloon's support team and journalists.
After landing, the crew cut into the balloon to deflate it, but it was deflating too slowly and started to drift and drag.
An appeal for help to the onlookers - who had been standing by quietly - was taken up with enthusiasm, Piccard said at a news conference in Rangoon, where the crew was flown by helicopter.
People grabbed at ropes and within minutes "everything was torn and destroyed," he said. The gondola - the key part of the craft - was apparently undamaged, however.
The balloon took off Jan. 28 from Chateau d'Oex in Switzerland. Its crew had to overcome problems that included leaks, the loss of one-third of its fuel and the risk of a shoot-down over northern Iraq, where it drifted through a U.S.-patrolled no-fly zone.
On Tuesday, the Breitling team broke the world record for the longest time spent in the air in a balloon. That record was set last year by U.S. balloonist Steve Fossett.
Fossett's world balloon distance record - 10,000 miles - remains intact. The Breitling crew flew 5,258 miles.
Although China belatedly gave the team the go-ahead Thursday to fly through its airspace, by then the balloon had already changed course, missing its chance to pick up the jet-stream winds needed to propel it across the Pacific.
On Friday, the crew broke the record for the longest nonstop unrefueled flight. The team's record flight time betters that of Americans Dick Rutan and Jeana Yeager, who circled the world in nine days and four minutes in December 1986 in the experimental twin-engine light plane Voyager.
The three Europeans say they will take another try at making it around the world - perhaps in November, if weather allows.
 Load-Date: February 8, 1998

 

End of Document
