

Mitchell report could find its way into 'IOC of the new millennium'
The Associated Press
March 2, 1999, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1086 words
Byline: By LARRY SIDDONS, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




An ethics report that criticizes the International Olympic Committee could help the panel rebuild in the wake of its worst corruption scandal.
The IOC's chief investigator said Monday that he generally favored many of the recommendations by the U.S. Olympic Committee commission, including outside elections, term limits for members and strict rules on travel, expenses and gifts.
Vice president Dick Pound argued with the report's characterization of the IOC as a "culture of improper gift giving" and stressed that he had not seen the report, issued as he was flying back from Switzerland earlier in the day.
But he said the IOC was committed to radical change in the wake of the million-dollar Salt Lake bribery scandal.
"We are going to reinvent ourselves for the new millennium," Pound said from his Montreal office.
The ethics committee blamed the scandal on leaders who turned a blind eye to corruption that was "flourishing" even as the games grew into a billion-dollar empire.
The panel, headed by former Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, said the IOC was an inbred, unethical group that needed to change into a modern, open business.
It said the conduct "tolerated by the IOC is potentially illegal and inevitably corruptive."
"The IOC should no sooner tolerate improper gifts by candidate cities to its members than it would tolerate such gifts by athletes to judges," the report said.
Mitchell said he would watch the IOC's special assembly March 17-18 to see if the committee is committed to reform. The Senate Commerce Committee, meanwhile, has scheduled hearings on the Olympic scandal next month and will consider stripping the IOC's tax exemptions.
Some of the Mitchell panel's recommendations, such as financial audits and open books, have been suggested by others, including Pound.
But the report contained unusually harsh language for the international sports hierarchy. It said the IOC helped create "this mess" that shifted the focus of picking Olympic cities from sports to ever-bigger presents for committee members.
"We called this 'gift-creep,"' Mitchell said at a news conference. "Gradually, what started with small, legitimate items evolved into scholarships and then direct payments."
The report said the whole system should be reformed, and that there was no need for Juan Antonio Samaranch to resign as IOC president if no fundamental changes in operations were made.
"If President Samaranch and the entire leadership of the IOC retires tomorrow and there were no other changes, the problems of the IOC would continue, " Mitchell said. "If they continue in office, then everyone … has a right to expect they will institute structural change promptly."
The Mitchell report was the third on the scandal, in which members of Salt Lake's bid committee offered $ 1.2 million in cash, scholarships and other gifts to IOC members and their relatives in exchange for awarding the 2002 Winter Games to the Utah city.
Unlike earlier findings by the IOC and the Salt Lake Organizing Committee, it delivered no blockbuster revelations, focusing instead on what needed to be changed.
The panel said Olympic leaders at every level are responsible for the scandal and said reforms were needed from top to bottom to avoid a recurrence.
But the commission blasted the IOC.
Salt Lake's misconduct, Mitchell said, was "part of a broader culture of improper gift-giving in which candidate cities provided things of value to IOC members in an effort to buy their votes.
"This culture was made possible by the closed nature of the IOC and by the absence of ethical and transparent financial controls of its operation."
Jeff Benz, a commission member and former champion figure skater, said the Mitchell panel was especially disturbed by "the prevalence of a culture in which it was acceptable to request things of value while making a decision involving the people from whom you were requesting things of value."
"It became apparent that the objectionable conduct was inextricably intertwined with the system," Benz said in an interview. "That system led bid cities to gift-giving that made the strengths of their sports system secondary to caring for the preferences of individual IOC members."
The IOC had no formal comment on the report. The U.S. Olympic Committee, which uses Mitchell's panel as an ethics watchdog, is scheduled to release its response at a news conference on Wednesday in Washington.
Pound's investigation has led to nine IOC members resigning or being expelled, at least 13 more are expected to learn their fate this week. The Canadian said his commission was finalizing recommendations and would send them to the IOC leadership soon.
The five-member commission was trying to reach a consensus on all of the cases and was now dealing with an additional six IOC members linked to the scandal by the Utah ethics report, Pound said.
The Mitchell report suggested a series of changes, from severe limits on bid-city gifts and expenses to opening the IOC's books and having the bulk of its members elected to limited terms by others in the sports community. The IOC traditionally picks its members to virtual life terms.
The report also called on the IOC to require that any country bidding for the games sign the international treaty against bribery. And it urged the White House to bring the IOC under coverage of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which prohibits bribing of foreign government officials.
The Mitchell commission, working mostly from public records and news reports, did not examine Olympic bids other than Salt Lake's, and Mitchell pointedly refused to comment on possible improprieties in successful Summer Games bids by Atlanta for 1996 and Sydney for 2000.
But he said the IOC should have paid more attention to a 1991 report from Toronto's losing bid for the 1996 Games, which detailed abuses of the gift and travel rules by a string of unidentified committee members.
"In strikingly prophetic language, they warned of the consequences of such improper behavior," the report said. "The Toronto prophesy has come true. As a result, credibility of the Olympic movement has been gravely damaged."
Benz said the Toronto report "provided notice to the IOC. … It showed the IOC had knowledge."
Pound said some of the recommendations in the Toronto report were adopted by the IOC, including coordination of travel to bid cities. But he conceded that the committee could have been more alert to signs of trouble.
"Now we're paying for that," he said. "We're going to get the genie back in the bottle."
 Load-Date: March 2, 1999

 

End of Document
