

Mysteries plague investigators: Could the Concorde crash again?
The Associated Press
July 28, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 750 words
Byline: By GLENN McKENZIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Why did the supersonic jet catch fire? Why couldn't the pilot extinguish the blaze by remote control? Did mechanics who worked on the plane shortly before takeoff contribute to the first-ever Concorde crash? Or was it a tire-burst that triggered the blaze?
Serious, unanswered questions faced French officials who pored over data Thursday collected from the doomed needle-nosed luxury jet's two black boxes to determine what caused the crash that killed 114 people - and prevent it from happening again.
Experts were not ruling out human error by mechanics or the two pilots. Potential flaws in the design or construction of the plane also were a concern. Late Friday afternoon, the French Transport Ministry said at least one wheel exploded, which could have damaged the plane's structure, triggered a fire and caused one of the engines to fail.
Some had speculated earlier that the debris from an exploded tire might have been sucked into the engine's air duct.
The last theory emerged after the Transport Ministry's Accident Inquiry Office published its first assessment of what went so catastrophically wrong Tuesday afternoon at Paris' Charles de Gaulle airport.
Its report made grim reading, describing a plane plagued by problems from the moment it taxied down runway 26.
The pride of French aviation left behind a trail of debris, including tire parts on the runway, as one engine caught fire and failed and another lost power.
During takeoff, the control tower told Capt. Christian Marty about the flames shooting out of the left side of the plane but he was already going too fast to abort. Marty replied that he had problems with engine No. 2, which is under the left wing, and that he could not lift the landing gear.
After takeoff, engine No. 1 malfunctioned, losing power. The plane, now trailing long orange flames and thick black smoke in its wake, banked left and dived into a small hotel near the town of Gonesse. All 109 people on board and five on the ground were killed.
Officials say it is too early to ascertain exactly what happened, and Air France, which owns the Concorde that was carrying mainly German tourists on a charter flight to New York, declined to comment Thursday on reasons behind the crash.
The Transport Ministry's inquiry office said a preliminary report would be published at the end of August.
Former pilot and aviation expert Germain Chambost said the possibility that a tire-burst contributed could not be ruled out.
"We can surmise that a tire or several tires on the landing gear exploded, that the debris from the tires got into the air duct of one of the engines," he told France's LCI television.
"At full takeoff speed, it's clear that a motor like Concorde's absorbs an enormous amount of air … a tire that penetrates at that moment in the engine could … cause very serious damage," he said.
A big question rested on why the pilot was unable to put out the blaze that started in engine No. 2 shortly before takeoff.
Andre Turcat, the first pilot ever to fly the Concorde when it was still being developed by Britain and France in 1969, said the extinguishers may have been cut off by the blaze, which raged at hundreds of degrees.
"It's really incredible," Turcat said. "We know there are some bewildering and exceptional events that occurred (before and during the crash) but we don't have explanations yet."
In seeking the cause of the blaze, some focused on the fact that just before takeoff two mechanics replaced a thrust reverser on engine No. 2.
Turcat questioned whether the mechanics left something that could have obstructed the engine's turbine. "In principle, the (mechanics) are good. But the blades may have been blocked. We don't know by what," he said.
A spokesman for France's National Airline Pilots Union, Erick Derivry, said he was concerned about the prospect of faults that could mean other Concordes are at risk. After the crash, France took the exceptional step of suspending all Concorde flights. British Airways, which owns several Concordes, briefly grounded them but allowed them to resume flying shortly afterward.
If "specific risks" in the Concorde were identified, Derivry said, the pilots' union would support continuing the French flight ban.
Turcat expressed confidence that Air France would discover what had caused the crash, which has threatened the very existence of the Concorde, a potent symbol of French national pride.
"It is inconceivable that they won't (find answers). If they don't, then it is all over (for the Concorde)."
 Load-Date: July 29, 2000

 

End of Document
