

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
January 10, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 788 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - Magic Johnson has signed up for another two years with the Swedish club M7, the Stockholm newspaper Aftonbladet reported Monday.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Johnson, due to return Wednesday to Sweden, was scheduled to play five games, the first one on Friday.
He played his first pro game since leaving the NBA for good in 1996 last October when M7 beat Sallen of Uppsala, 84-60. The game at M7's 3,300-seat arena in the west coast city of Boras was a sellout.
On Friday, Johnson was to play at a 12,000-seat arena in Sweden's second largest city, Goteborg.
Johnson helped the Los Angeles Lakers win five NBA titles. He tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS in 1991 and retired just before the start of the 1991-92 season.
He made a brief comeback before the 1992-93 season.
In January 1996, he played the last half of the season and retired again after the Lakers were eliminated from the playoffs.
---
BERN, Switzerland (AP) - The head of the International Olympic Committee is to meet with Swiss ministers to clarify relations with the IOC's host country.
Juan Antonio Samaranch will meet Tuesday in the capital, Bern, with Swiss President and Sports Minister Adolf Ogi, Finance Minister Kaspar Villiger and Foreign Minister Joseph Deiss, Ogi's department said.
Local officials from Lausanne, where the IOC has been based since 1915, also are invited.
Issues for discussion will include the IOC's reforms in the wake of last year's bribery scandal and the struggle to combat doping in sports. The meeting comes ahead of Thursday's first meeting of the World Anti-Doping Agency.
In the light of reports of corruption and bribery among IOC members, Swiss lawmakers were divided on whether to grant a government-backed tax exemption to the organization. The IOC finally withdrew its request.
---
NEW ORLEANS (AP) - Charley Casserly, architect of the Washington Redskins' playoff team, has talked to the New Orleans Saints about the team's top front-office job.
"And we're going to talk again in the next couple of days," Casserly told The Times-Picayune while en route to the East-West Shrine Game in Palo Alto, Calif.
Casserly also said he has been talking with Bob McNair, owner of the NFL's expansion franchise in Houston. Although several other teams have expressed interest in him, New England is not one of them, he said.
"Drop New England. I've never talked to them," Casserly said. "That's the news brief for the day."
The Saints are looking for a replacement for president-general manager Bill Kuharich, who along with Mike Ditka and his entire coaching staff, were fired last week after a 3-13 season.
Casserly was forced out as Redskins GM under new ownership. One of his last major acts was engineering the draft-day deal in which he obtained the Saints' six remaining selections in the 1999 draft and first- and third-round picks this year so the Saints could pick running back Ricky Williams.
---
MUNICH, Germany (AP) - BMW and the Williams racing team Monday unveiled their Formula One car for the season.
The sleek car driven onto the stage bore BMW's colors of white with blue racing stripes and marked the return of the German auto manufacturer to the circuit after a 12-year absence.
But the new car wasn't emblazoned with the logo of a main sponsor, leaving the Williams team boss to deny reports of a $40 million budget gap.
Frank Williams said the new sponsor would be announced in Barcelona at the end of January.
German press reports had circulated claiming sponsors had been scared off by BMW's insistence the blue-and-white body remain unmarred by the colors of other logos.
Williams said the team hadn't settled on a second driver behind two-time world champion Michael Schumacher's younger brother, Rolf. The team is still negotiating with last year's driver, Alex Zanardi.
---
ROME (AP) - Dino Baggio was barred Monday from Italy's next national team outing for yelling, gesturing and spitting at the referee during a Serie A game.
National soccer federation president Luciano Nizzola informed Italy coach Dino Zoff of the decision to prevent Baggio from suiting up for the Feb. 23 friendly against Sweden, federation spokesman Stefano Balducci said.
Baggio, a member of Italy's 1994 and 1998 World Cup squads, was ejected by referee Stefano Farina for a rough tackle with 13 minutes left in AC Parma's 1-1 draw against Juventus on Sunday.
Before leaving the field, Baggio screamed at Farina, spat in the referee's direction, and rubbed his thumb and index finger together - a gesture widely interpreted as referring to money.
Baggio, who moved to Parma from Juventus in 1994, could face a lengthy suspension from league action. Serie A's disciplinary panel is expected to rule Wednesday.
 Load-Date: January 11, 2000

 

End of Document
