

Names In The Game
April 25, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 830 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




How about a sequel: Recently Given Up for Dead Men, Skating?
Academy Award winner Susan Sarandon offered her Oscar to the New York Rangers as inspiration in their quest for the Stanley Cup.
"They seemed to think they'be be OK … maybe they don't need it," Sarandon said of her best-actress Oscar for the 1995 film "Dead Man Walking."
"I offered it to (Rangers captain Mark) Messier and the team to keep in their locker room if they could keep it safe, to bring them luck," Sarandon said in an interview reported by the Daily News of Los Angeles Thursday.
After losing two home games to Montreal in a best-of-7 opening series of the NHL championships, the Rangers won twice in Canada to even the series. Game 5 is Friday night in New York.
---
EASTBOURNE, England (AP) - In a change of her routine, Steffi Graf has entered the Eastbourne grass-court tournament the week before Wimbledon.
Graf, who has won Wimbledon six times and is the reigning champion, played in Eastbourne's under-21 event in the mid-1980s but has never played in the main tournament.
Normally, Graf avoids playing the week before Wimbledon, instead practicing away from the spotlight of tournament tennis.
Graf, whose father Peter is in jail in Germany on tax evasion charges, remains under investigation herself.
---
MADRID, Spain (AP) - The chairman of Atletico de Madrid's soccer team was suspended for ten months by the Spanish Federation Thursday for punching the manager of another team last month.
Jesus Gil punched Compostela manager Jose Gonzalez Fidalgo in the head in March during a heated argument following a league meeting to discuss how to divide revenues from televised matches.
Fidalgo and Compostela chairman Jose Maria Caneda, who participated in the shouting match, were suspended for four months each.
The suspension bars Gil from sitting in the chairman's seat of honor during matches, but club spokesman Jose Luis Chacon said that will not be a problem for Gil, because he also is mayor of the southern Spanish resort town Marbella.
"He will preside over future games," Chacon said. "Maybe not as club chairman, but as the mayor of Marbella. We want him to preside if he wants to."
During his nine years as Atletico chairman, Gil has been suspended a total of 42 months for various league infractions.
 
 LONDON (AP) - Americans Kevin Cadle and Tony Dorsey won the top honors at the British Basketball League's All-Star Awards Thursday.
Cadle, 41, was voted coach of the year for the sixth time after guiding the London Towers to the league title, as well as two cup championships. The Towers can win a fourth title at the season-ending championships at Wembley Arena next week.
Cadle, born in Buffalo, N.Y., is the most successful coach in British basketball history. He has coached here since 1983.
The Atlanta-born Dorsey was voted player of the year. A forward with the Birmingham Bullets, he averaged 27.94 points and 9.5 rebounds per game and led the club to third place in the league and to the semifinals of both cup competitions.
Dorsey, who played at North Alabama and Southern Tech, came to England in 1994 after playing for San Martin in the Dominican Republic and Atlanta in the U.S. Basketball League.
---
AUGSBURG, Germany (AP) - After a 30-year wait, it looks like England will finally get back the famous orange ball with which English star Geoff Hurst scored a hat trick to win the 1966 World Cup final against Germany.
The whereabouts of the ball were in dispute until Tuesday when the son of German player Helmut Haller said he had found it in his basement.
"British people have been pestering me. They had been phoning me for the last three days. They kept saying the ball belonged to England," Helmut Haller said.
Her spirited the ball away at the end of England's 4-2 victory, and ignored Hurst's request that he turn the ball over. At one point, he said the ball had disappeared.
Haller said when the match ended, he stuffed the ball in his shirt and ran off the field, despite demands by Swiss referee Gottfried Dienst that he turn the ball over.
He gave the ball to his son Juergen, who was then 5 years old. He told Press Association that he had become confused over the ball's whereabouts because he had divorced his first wife, with whom Juergen went to live.
"It was in a box in the cellar, along with another ball my father gave me. I shall treasure this one too because the famous Brazilian star, Pele, played with it," Juergen Haller said.
---
EDMONTON, Alberta (AP) - Free agent kicker Sean Fleming is off to Washington where he hopes to land a job with the Redskins.
Fleming, who spent the last four seasons with the CFL's Edmonton Eskimos, has signed a one-year deal worth $ 131,000. That's almost triple what he earned last year.
Fleming said he will go to Virginia next week for a month-long mini-camp where he'll be competing against three other kickers for the starting job to replace Eddie Murray.
Fleming can re-sign with Edmonton or another CFL team if he doesn't make it in the NFL.
 Load-Date: April 25, 1996

 

End of Document
