

Names In The Game
May 3, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 716 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: DALLAS
Body




The Byron Nelson Classic is on the verge of selling out for the first time in its 30-year history. Credit Tiger Woods.
Nelson officials, concerned about overcrowding at the May 15-18 tournament at the Four Seasons at Las Colinas' TPC course, said they won't print extra tickets and won't sell tickets at the gate. Once the remaining 1,500 full-tournament badges and 2,500 one-day badges are sold, sales will end.
Ticket sales already were brisk when Woods said March 16 that he would enter. Then, Woods won the Masters by a record 12 strokes last month, and interest in the Nelson zoomed. Woods hasn't played since the Masters.
Woods still hasn't formally committed to the Nelson, but he probably will next week. His father and agent both have said he'll be there.
Earlier this week, Houseman said the Nelson could have its first 100,000-spectator day, breaking the previous estimated single-day record of 75,000.
---
BUCHAREST, Romania (AP) - Former Olympic and world gymnastics medalist Dan Grecu is reported to be seriously ill in a hospital
"He has liver, kidney and breathing deficiencies, and is unconscious," said Ioan Stan, the doctor who has been treating him in Resita. "He may not get better."
Grecu, 47, who specialized in the rings, is considered Romania's greatest male gymnast of all time, and has been a trainer for the mens' national gymnastics team.
He won a bronze medal at the 1976 Olympics in Montreal and finished sixth in the 1980 games in Moscow.
Grecu was hospitalized because of food poisoning during the Orthodox Easter holiday last weekend.
---
EVANSTON, Wyo. (AP) - Local officials are working to bring a slice of the Caribbean to a small town in southestern Wyoming, about a 90-minute drive from Salt Lake City, home to the 2002 Winter Olympics.
The Jamaican national bobsled team is visiting next week and officials hope members like it enough to call Evanston home during the games.
"It's a terrific opportunity to realize Evanston's potential as a host city and possible training ground for Olympic athletes," said attorney Paul Skog, who helped organize the trip.
During the May 8-12 visit, the bobsledders will meet with town government and business officials and conduct several youth sports clinics
On May 10, Devon Harris, an original member of the 1988 Jamaican national bobsled team, and his teammates will conduct a soccer clinic as part of the Uinta County Safe Kids Coalition's "Gear Up Games."
The Jamaican bobsled team gained fame during its first Olympic appearance at the 1988 Calgary Games as one of the most unlikely athletic group in Olympic history.
Competing in a sport many considered impossible for a tropical nation, the Jamaicans finished 14th-place in the four-man event during the 1994 games at Lillehammer, Norway.
----
DENVER (AP) - Former Phoenix Suns coach Paul Westphal is scheduled to be in Denver on Monday to interview for the vacant Nuggets head coaching job.
Westphal, who coached the Suns to the 1993 NBA Finals, would be the second candidate to interview with Denver since the Nuggets fired Dick Motta at the end of the season.
Former San Antonio and Philadelphia coach John Lucas met with the Nuggets last Monday.
Westphal had a 191-88 record when he was fired by the Suns in January 1996 after the team struggled in the first half of the season.
The leading candidate, however, is believed to be Atlanta assistant coach Bill Hanzlik. Bristow said he will not talk to Hanzlik until the Hawks are out of the playoffs.
 
 LONDON (AP) - Gianfranco Zola, whose match-winning goal for Italy last winter could knock England out the the World Cup, was voted Footballer of the Year by the English soccer writers Saturday.
He is the third foreign player in a row to win the award after Germany's Juergen Klinsmann and Frenchman Eric Cantona.
Zola, who joined Chelsea in November from Parma, made an instant impact on English soccer and will line up for the west London club in the prestigious F.A. Cup final against Middlesbrough at Wembley May 17.
He will also be remembered for the only goal of the match in February when Italy became the first team to beat England at Wembley in a World Cup game.
Because the Italians have a four-point lead in the qualifying group, England may well have to rely on the runnersup playoffs to get into next year's finals in France.
 Load-Date: May 3, 1997

 

End of Document
