

Names In The Game
October 28, 1996, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 850 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Britain's first all-gay rugby club has received official recognition.
The King's Cross Steelers have been accepted as a full member of the Surrey Rugby Football Union.
The club was formed a year ago in the Central Station pub in King's Cross, London. The team has played three matches and lost them all.
"We are pleased to be formally affiliated to one of the county rugby unions," said club chairman Rob Hayward, a former Conservative Party MP from Kingswood in Bristol. "Despite predictions that we would face difficulties, there has been no shortage of teams willing to field a full side against us."
Hayward said some people had suggested that players would be afraid of contracting AIDS in the sport where bloody injuries are common.
"Some of the people we have played against have admitted they raised the question amongst themselves and came to the conclusion there was not a problem," he said.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Roger Bannister breaking the four-minute mile barrier has been chosen the single greatest monent in track and field history by Runner's World magazine.
"The ease with which runners now break the four-minute mile 'barrier' obscures the impact of Roger Bannister's run in 1954 - the run of all time," the magazine said. "No single run ever counted for more. Certainly, none has been as hypnotic, as captivating, as dreamlike as Bannister's 3:59.4, achieved May 6 in Oxford, England."
The magazine is celebrating its 30th anniversary and recalling 100 years of running. Many of the sport's greatest performers, including Bannister, will attend a dinner Saturday night to help recall the most memorable moments of the past century.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - New York Yankees manager Joe Torre and owner George Steinbrenner will ring the opening bell at the New York Stock Exchange Tuesday.
Later Tuesday, the Yankees will receive a ticker tape parade from the city to celebrate their World Series victory over the Atlanta Braves.
 
SAN MARCOS, Texas (AP) - When one of Nicholls State's two team buses broke down before the game against Southwest Texas State, the players might have suspected they were in for a long day.
They probably never guessed that they would become involved in a five-overtime battle under a brutal Texas sun before outlasting Southwest Texas 49-36 Saturday.
"I've never been involved in anything like that," Nicholls coach Darren Barbier said. "Few football games … become more than a game. This one did. It was absolutely incredible."
The game was tied 20-20 after regulation. The teams matched field goals in the first overtime, touchdowns in the second overtime and field goals again in the third and fourth overtimes. Nicholls State got another touchdown in the fifth overtime, then intercepted a Southwest Texas pass and returned it for a touchdown, clinching the victory.
"The five overtimes were like a game in themselves," Southwest Texas coach Jim Bob Helduser said.
 
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Eighty years still hasn't wiped away the trivia question that pops up when Cumberland's name is mentioned. So if history can't be erased, how about adding a new chapter?
That's exactly what the Cumberland baseball team wants to do starting Friday as the U.S. representative in the Club World Championships in Mexico. The Bulldogs' goal? Reach the final round and play for a medal.
That could be difficult for the school with an enrollment of 1,100 whose players are hardly world travelers, much less veterans of international competition.
Cumberland is best known for the worst loss in college football - 222-0 to Georgia Tech in 1916. That game was so bad that the small school dropped the sport for years.
In baseball, however, Cumberland's reputation is different.
The Bulldogs have played in three of the past four NAIA World Series, finishing second in 1995 and third this year.
Cumberland, as the U.S. team, has been grouped into Pool A with Honduras, Columbia, Argentina, Spain, Mexico and the Dutch Antilles for the round-robin start to the tournament. Pool B features Cuba, Brazil, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Ecuador, Panama and the Banamas.
 
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - The party for Romario's return lasted 39 minutes.
The 1994 FIFA player of the year had a disappointing debut for Flamengo Sunday, leaving the game with an injury in a 2-1 loss to Internacional.
Romario, who transferred Friday from Spain's Valencia, was out of shape and hampered by the heavy, rain-soaked field and three Internacional defenders who took turns covering him.
He didn't touch the ball for the first nine minutes. There were few of the expected hookups with Bebeto, his linemate on Brazil's 1994 world championship team.
In the 40th minute, Romario was chasing a defender when he suddenly pulled up short, put his hand to the back of his thigh and limped off the field. He said he had a twinge.
"I haven't played in 17 days," he said.
The crowd of nearly 40,000 that turned out at Rio's Maracana stadium to cheer for Romario saw Internacional erase Flamengo's 1-0 lead with two goals by Fabiano in the final six minutes.
"Fla's frustrating fiesta," read a headline Monday in the Rio daily O Globo.
 Load-Date: October 28, 1996

 

End of Document
