

Names in the News Slaney and the rock group Phish.
The Associated Press
January 1, 2000, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 550 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Proving once again there ain't nothing like a dame, Elizabeth Taylor didn't mince words in reacting to the honor bestowed upon her by Queen Elizabeth II.
The British-born actress was on Friday designated a dame, the female equivalent of knight, on the queen's coveted New Year's list of titles and awards.
"Well, I've always been a 'broad,' now it's a great honor to be a dame!" Taylor said in a statement issued through her publicist in Los Angeles.
Among the 2,000 other names on the list, which included sports heroes, milkmen, crossing guards and tycoons, were the new Sir Sean Connery and Dame Julie Andrews.
---
WAILUKU, Hawaii (AP) - A woman was held on $5,000 bail after being arrested inside the Maui estate of former Beatle George Harrison.
Cristin Keleher is scheduled to be arraigned on Jan. 11 on charges of first-degree burglary and fourth-degree theft.
Prosecutors said at a preliminary hearing on Wednesday that Keleher was stalking Harrison, who was not at the residence.
Harrison was stabbed in the chest by an intruder in his mansion near London early Thursday. He was treated for a collapsed right lung.
Keleher told officer Jeffrey Hunt she had entered the main home on the property in Nahiku in remote east Maui last week through an open sliding glass door.
"She said she had cooked a frozen pizza, drank a root beer soda, she was doing her laundry and she had made a long-distance call to her mother in New Jersey," he said.
According to Don Carroll, caretaker and manager for the estate, Keleher had approached him in October and said she wanted to run into Harrison, who lives on Maui part-time.
---
EUGENE, Ore. (AP) - Track star Mary Slaney was kicked in the leg by a man on a bicycle while she running along a bike path.
Slaney suffered cuts and bruises, but the extent of the damage won't be known until the swelling subsides, Slaney's husband, Richard, said.
Although she was able to walk home after the incident Thursday afternoon, she won't be able to run for a while, he said.
Slaney was running when the unidentified man riding a bicycle approached her. As he passed, he kicked her in the left thigh without saying a word, according to police.
Slaney won world titles in the 1,500 and 3,000 meters in 1983, and has held several world and American records. She hopes to qualify for the 2000 Olympics in Sydney, Australia.
---
BIG CYPRESS SEMINOLE INDIAN RESERVATION, Fla. (AP) - The year 2000 may have begun, but as the rock band Phish played an outdoor concert for 75,000 spectators, it seemed more like the 1960's.
Young women with flowers in their hair danced barefoot in the mud as people talked of peace, love and happiness.
Then again, the automatic teller machines broke down and cellular phones did not work.
Even so, most fans were more than happy to fork out $175 each to hear Phish perform five sets.
"The (guitar) riffs fill my body. I'm just so thankful to be right here. There is no where I would rather be for New Year's Eve," said Steve Santini, 22-year-old mason from Rochester, N.Y., who travels the country following Phish.
The two-day concert was held on the Seminole reservation in the Everglades, about 40 miles west of Fort Lauderdale, and caused huge traffic jams Friday on the Interstate 75 section known as Alligator Alley. The event was scheduled to end at dawn today.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY14 Taylor and Slaney
 Load-Date: January 2, 2000

 

End of Document
