

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
April 5, 2000, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1040 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




TULSA, Okla. (AP) - The Atlanta Hawks center with the big name and big plays will be honored in Tulsa for his big heart.
Dikembe Mutombo Mpolondo Mukamba Jean Jacque Wamutombo is the 2000 recipient of the Henry P. Iba Citizen Athlete Award.
The award, which will be presented June 19, honors athletes who have excelled in their sport and have shown a desire to help others. The award is named after the former Oklahoma State and U.S. Olympic basketball coach.
Mutombo, a 7-foot-2 center, is a three-time NBA defensive player of the year and leads the league in rebounding.
He gave more than $2 million to a $15 million fund-raising drive to build a hospital in the Democratic Republic of Congo, his native country. He also created the Dikembe Mutombu Foundation, which is dedicated to improving health, education and quality of life there.
"In Central Africa, there is an old proverb," he said. "'When you take the elevator up to reach the top, please don't forget to send the elevator back down so that someone else can take it to the top.' This is my way of sending the elevator down."
Mutombo will receive $10,000 from the Rotary Club of Tulsa to donate to a charity of his choice.
---
LONDON (AP) - No meat please, we're British.
That could be the motto of the Linda McCartney cycling team, founded by the late wife of former Beatle Paul McCartney, which has become the first British team to qualify to compete in the Tour of Italy race.
During the three-week Giro D'Italia, starting May 13 in Rome, the all-vegetarian team will abstain from the local meat dishes. The Guardian newspaper said it will be the first cycling team to take part in a major tour without meat in its diet.
The team, which includes Olympic champion Pascal Richard of Switzerland, hopes to gain a place in the Tour de France, the sport's premier event, in the next two years.
The team's manager is Sean Yates, who competed 12 times in the Tour de France.
---
GREENVILLE, N.C. (AP) - Wayne Gretzky and John Elway will join fellow retiree Michael Jordan for this year's Celebrity Skins Game.
Officials with the Michael Jordan Celebrity Classic announced Tuesday the former NHL great and retired Denver quarterback will play June 23 in an expanded version of the event that features eight players instead of four.
The regular tournament will be played June 24-25 at Greenville and Brook Valley country clubs.
Former NHL stars Mario Lemieux and Dan Quinn, and baseball Hall of Famer Joe Morgan also are expected to play.
County music singer Vince Gill will play, and he and his wife, singer Amy Grant, will perform in the Celebrity Jam concert the day before.
The classic events raise money for Ronald McDonald Houses in North Carolina.
---
QUEBEC CITY, Quebec (AP) - Athletes and high society gathered at the Pepsi Colisee to celebrate its 50th anniversary.
Former NHL stars Peter Stastny, Michel Goulet, Jean Beliveau and Guy Lafleur were among several hundred guests at a banquet held prior to the Quebec Citadelles' AHL hockey game.
The Pepsi Colisee, as it is known today, was built in 1950 after the original building burned during construction in 1949.
The Quebec NHL franchise was sold to a group in Colorado, where the franchise won a Stanley Cup in its first season in Denver. The Colisee became home to the Quebec Rafales of the IHL then the AHL Citadelles and the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League Quebec Remparts in 1999-00.
---
TOKYO (AP) - Former Anaheim Angel Darrell May pitched a one-hitter and struck out 14 over seven innings as the Yomiuri Giants blanked the Central League's defending champion Chunichi Dragons 8-0 Wednesday.
American Nathan Michey allowed five hits over five innings as the Hiroshima Toyo Carp beat the Yokohama BayStars 6-0.
Nigel Wilson had a home run in a four-run fourth inning as the Nippon Ham Fighters edged the Orix BlueWave 5-4. Kevin Ohme, a former Triple-A pitcher, was the winner.
---
CLEVELAND (AP) - Three years after being diagnosed with a rare liver disease, Malone College men's basketball coach Hal Smith received a partial liver transplant from a living donor.
Smith, 55, has been head men's basketball coach and athletic director at Malone in Canton for 17 years. The donor was Sharon Looney, 45, an assistant women's basketball coach at Malone from 1986-91.
Smith and Looney were listed in stable condition Wednesday after more than 16 hours of surgery at the Cleveland Clinic, spokesman Scott Tennant said.
The live donor procedure involves taking the right lobe of the liver, about 60 percent of the organ, from the donor and transplanting it to the recipient. Because the liver is able to regenerate itself, Looney's organ is expected to return to full size within a month, said Lou Farquhar, liver transplant coordinator at the Cleveland Clinic.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Pele, a name synonymous with Brazil, says he is ashamed of his country.
Soccer's greatest player said he was outraged at the drug-related violence and corruption scandals that dominate the news.
"I am ashamed of Brazil," Pele said in an interview Wednesday with the Rio daily Jornal do Brasil. "All you hear about is budget skimming, theft, crooked politicians."
Pele said he was particularly incensed at a scandal involving Sao Paulo Mayor Celso Pitta, who was convicted of misusing public funds but remains in office pending appeal. Pele cited the United States as an example for Brazil in punishing abuses by public officials.
"How can the mayor of one of the world's biggest cities, like Sao Paulo, be accused of so many irregularities - and nothing happens?" he said. "The guilty must pay for their acts."
Reiterating a famous and often misquoted phrase, Pele said Brazilians must learn to choose their leaders better. The first time he said it, during the 1964-85 military dictatorship, it came out as "Brazilians aren't ready to vote," and he was accused of being a regime sympathizer.
"It's time for the people to react, and the best weapon is the vote," he said. "Don't expect politicians to change. The people have to make the change, voting for those who don't betray them after the election."
Pele, 59, retired from soccer in 1977. He later was minister of Sports and often has said he would like to be president, although he has never run for office.
 Load-Date: April 6, 2000

 

End of Document
