

NATO strikes downtown Belgrade for the first time
The Associated Press
April 2, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1277 words
Byline: GEORGE JAHN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BELGRADE, Yugoslavia
Body




NATO fired cruise missiles into the heart of Yugoslavia's capital early Saturday, blasting the headquarters of security forces accused of waging a terror campaign to eradicate ethnic Albanians from Kosovo.
The strikes - coming as Serbs gathered evidence against three captured U.S. soldiers - signaled a promised escalation of the NATO air campaign intended to force Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to accept a peace plan in the separatist province. Air raid sirens also blared in Nis and Novi Sad, the two other major cities in Yugoslavia.
"We're striking at targets he (Milosevic) uses to control the forces responsible for the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo," Pentagon spokesman Kenneth Bacon said in Washington.
Three loud explosions shook a government district in Belgrade near residential areas and the city's main medical complex just before 1 a.m. (6 p.m. EST Friday). Flames burned out of control from the Yugoslav interior ministry and the Serbian interior ministry, which is the republic's police headquarters.
"Tomorrow is Easter. Belgrade is in flames," Deputy Prime Minister Vuk Draskovic said on CNN after the attack. Serbian television announced the strikes by saying: "Criminal aggression hit the heart of Belgrade."
Residents living in the area said they heard the sound of incoming missiles followed by strong explosions that shook their houses and windows. Serbian television broadcast video footage of women clutching babies evacuating the maternity ward of a nearby hospital.
The intensity of the flames that lit the night sky orange indicated severe damage. Blue lights of emergency vehicles flashed at the scene and firefighters tried to attack the inferno.
Two hours later, the fire in the federal ministry was mostly extinguished, but the republic police building still burned, the independent Beta news agency reported.
Belgrade's independent FoNet news agency reported 20 firefighting teams were at the scene, along with ambulances.
Dragan Covic, head of the Belgrade civil protection headquarters, said no one was injured in the missile attack.
Several policemen at the scene said the Serbian republic interior ministry building was "evacuated on time," FoNet said.
Several NATO countries, including the United States - have embassies on the same street as the buildings that burned.
Serbian television also reported NATO missiles hit earlier on the slopes of Fruska Gora hill northwest of the city, with the Beta agency saying three villages were hit.
Shards of glass from shattered windows along the tree-lined Kneza Milosa boulevard littered the pavement in some places, the Tanjug state news agency reported.
The NATO air war had been targeting military and security units directed by the Defense and Interior ministries. For the last few days, the Western alliance warned it would expand its targets, saying no place in Yugoslavia would be immune from strikes.
The strikes came after a NATO spokesman said earlier Friday that despite 10 days of missile and bombing raids on Yugoslav targets, Milosevic's forces continued a terror campaign that so far has driven more than 200,000 ethnic Albanian refugees from Kosovo. Officials said the refugees are among 634,000 people that have now been driven from their homes.
NATO launched the air attacks on March 24 to try to force Milosevic to accept a peace plan for Kosovo that would include NATO peacekeeping troops on the ground in the province.
Thousands more refugees fled the embattled province Friday, leading to chaotic scenes of masses overwhelming local communities and relief agencies struggling to supply food, medicine and blankets.
NATO spokesman Jamie Shea announced that 36,500 ethnic Albanians were forced out Thursday alone, compared to 21,000 the day before, causing a refugee crisis he described as "extremely grave, getting graver by the hour."
"We are no longer facing an internal Yugoslav crisis. We are facing a crisis of the entire region with far-reaching consequences," Shea said.
Air raid sirens sounded Friday night in Belgrade, Novi Sad, Nis, Kragujevac and Bor. Earlier, NATO officials blamed bad weather for hindering the strikes of the previous night and early Friday morning.
State television reported NATO missiles hit an army barracks in Vranje in southeast Serbia, while the Tanjug state news agency said NATO jets struck targets near the western Kosovo town of Klina, 30 miles west of Pristina, the Kosovo capital. It was the first reported attack near Klina, located along a major highway junction used by Serb forces.
Shea and Wilby said the airstrikes were methodically chipping away at the military capacity of Yugoslav and Serb forces, cutting off their fuel supplies to prevent them from deploying at will.
"We recognized when we started that this air campaign would not be a week or two proposition," President Clinton said Friday. "We must be determined, we must be persistent, we must be patient if we expect to see this mission through."
The Serbian government announced it would start rationing gasoline and diesel fuel. It said Serbian vehicle owners could collect coupons from police beginning Saturday, while foreigners would get coupons from the Yugoslav foreign ministry. their safety.
Also Friday, Tanjug quoted an investigating judge as saying unspecified court proceedings began in the case of three U.S. soldiers captured this week by Yugoslav forces. It was not clear if the soldiers attended the proceedings, which were described as a gathering of evidence to decide what charges, if any, would be filed.
U.S. officials said they opposed any trial for the three and warned that they held Milosevic and his government responsible for their safety.
Early Saturday Foreign Minister Zivadin Jovanovic called the three soldiers prisoners of war, the most authoritative reference yet by a top Yugoslav official to the term which confers on them protected status under the Geneva Conventions on the conduct of war.
"I can tell you for sure … that (the) American prisoners of war, the three American soldiers, are safe and treated in a civilized manner," Jovanovic said in an interview on CNN's Larry King Live.
The United States initially hesitated to use the term, which could mean they would stay captive for the duration of the conflict, but Pentagon soon started calling them prisoners of war. U.S. officials noted that status strictly limits any trials that can be conducted against them.
Lines of refugees stretched for miles at border crossings into Albania and Macedonia.
Western leaders call the Serb offensive in Kosovo a campaign to alter forever the ethnic makeup of the province, while Yugoslav and Serb officials say the NATO attacks are driving out the refugees.
But those crossing the borders, often with little more than the clothes they wear, say they were forced out at gunpoint. They describe scenes similar to Nazi forced removals in World War II, such as people crammed into trains and buses and sent away.
More than 20,000 refugees arrived Friday to a harsh reception at neighboring Macedonia, stranded in a no-man's land between two borders with little food and no shelter available.
Kosovo has been wracked by war since Milosevic launched a campaign against separatist ethnic Albanian rebels in February 1998.
A Russian warship headed to the Mediterranean on Friday to spy on NATO ships involved in attacking Yugoslavia, but Moscow said it would stay out of the conflict and not share intelligence data with Belgrade. Russia has warned that six more ships were on standby for deployment in the Mediterranean.
A crackdown on independent media continued Friday with police shutting down B-92, Belgrade's most popular independent radio station.
 Load-Date: April 3, 1999

 

End of Document
