

Nazi horror uncovered in the bewildered sorrow of the bereaved
The Associated Press
July 30, 1999, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 658 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The death notices appeared in German newspapers in suspicious numbers in the fall of 1940, twenty-two in two weeks, and the families placing them used strikingly similar phrases about the fates of their loved ones, patients in mental asylums.
"After days of uncertainty we received the unbelievable news of the sudden death of my beloved wife, the mother of our little Christa," said one.
"After anxious uncertainty, I received from Grafeneck in Wurttemberg the unbelievable news that my beloved husband, our dear son-in-law and brother-in-law, the glass handicraftsman … closed his dear eyes forever," said another.
On they went, "unbelievable" deaths after periods of "uncertainty."
In their bewildered sorrow, these families were uncovering a Nazi horror. They were signaling to fellow citizens that terrible acts were going on in the sanitariums of southern Germany. The U.S. vice consul in Leipzig, Paul Dutko, understood what was happening and cabled superiors.
But recently declassified documents do not show anything was done about that warning and others in the months before Germany's "euthanasia" programs became undeniably known and the full weight of the Holocaust descended.
"Details so far gathered concerning these notices give them a 'Frankenstein' setting; their attendant circumstances, described in this despatch, are fantastic and gruesome," Dutko wrote in his October 1940 cable.
"Opinion has been expressed that incurable mental patients of Germany are being eliminated in this manner to reduce mouths to feed and that this is but a beginning."
Documents found in the National Archives by the Simon Wiesenthal Center, a Los Angeles research organization named after the famed Nazi hunter, point to a series of early communications by U.S. officials about Nazi Germany's systematic killing of its own mentally ill or deformed citizens.
In one German letter, an anonymous correspondent wrote to NBC in New York saying thousands of mental patients were being killed monthly in southern Germany.
Hurry, the correspondent wrote, "and with your expressions of horror prevent further murders!"
"Humanity will thank you."
The letter ended up a month later in high offices of the War Department, along with a U.S. military intelligence officer's written opinion that the correspondent was right. But again no evidence of further action was found in the record.
Historians are divided on whether the United States could have saved many victims of asylum killings before entering the war in December 1941, either by sending diplomatic protests to Berlin or by disclosing what it knew earlier and mobilizing public opinion against it.
Rabbi Marvin Hier, founder of the Los Angeles center, said Thursday a strong condemnation from the United States "would have possibly changed Hitler's approach to how much he could get away with. … Hitler may not have been able to put across his Final Solution."
Washington knew early in 1940 that Germany was deporting Jews to Poland and did not believe they were going to labor camps as claimed, Hier said. But officials decided not to protest because they did not want to drag the United States into war.
Hier said the same attitude apparently prevailed when evidence of asylum murders came in, before the publication of eyewitness reports in the summer of 1941.
Suspicions about what was going on in asylums spread through much of Germany, in part because even Catholics were being cremated, despite opposition to cremation by bishops.
The asylums would cremate the bodies before the families were notified of the deaths, then give them the ashes.
Dutko in his cable wrote about the "dark and deep secrecy surrounding the Castle of Grafeneck," one of the asylums secured by the Black Guard - Hitler's notorious SS.
Delivery trucks would drive away at breakneck speed, he said. Leipzig was awash with fears fed by the death notices in the three local papers.
"A feeling of horror and complete insecurity has begun to set in."
 Load-Date: July 30, 1999

 

End of Document
