

No Behind-the-Curtains First Lady, Mrs. Dini Takes The Stage
April 12, 1996, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 420 words
Byline: By FRANCES D'EMILIO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME
Body




She's not the sort to stay in the shadows, as Italy's other first ladies have done. So it's no wonder people are comparing Donatella Dini to Hillary Rodham Clinton.
But Mrs. Dini notes she's not the sort to follow anyone else's shadow, either. "I admire Mrs. Clinton very much," she says. "But I'm not taking anybody as a model."
No, Donatella Dini, wife of Premier Lamberto Dini, is bringing something entirely new to the world of Italian politics.
By tradition, wives of Italian premiers are practically invisible. During Bettino Craxi's four years as premier, his wife, Anna, mostly stayed in Milan while he lived in a Rome hotel. The modest wife of Giulio Andreotti, Livia, accompanied her husband to few public events except for early morning Mass.
Educated in London, fluent in English and experienced in business and life outside of Italy, Mrs. Dini has become a highly visible public figure.
She was at her husband's side in February when he formally unveiled his new party's name, Rinnovamento Italiano (Italian Renewal). Dressed in a camera-ready pink suit, Mrs. Dini, 53, added a vital touch of color and warmth to the image of her balding husband, a 65-year-old career banker.
With the approach of April 21 parliamentary elections, Signora Dini has broken tradition by actively campaigning for her husband's party, strolling through the piazzas of Florence and chatting with street urchins in a Palermo juvenile detention center.
As with Mrs. Clinton, Mrs. Dini's presence on the political front-line has received mixed reaction.
The Italian press has taken to calling her "Generalessa," and the family is labeled as "Dinisty," a comparison to the flashy, oil-rich family on the American television show "Dynasty."
Nonetheless, her apparent savvy has earned her a place on the political stage. The news weekly L'Espresso said she is "the most powerful and listened-to adviser" on the Dini team.
Like Dini, who spent years in Washington while an International Monetary Fund official, Mrs. Dini has lived much of her adult life abroad. She's a take-charge kind of person who took over the Central American agribusiness empire of her first husband, Renzo Zingone, when he died in 1981.
Countess Donatella Pecci-Blun, who introduced the Dinis to each other at a dinner party, knows Mrs. Dini well and warned her she could face trouble.
Mrs. Dini "has always been a career woman. She doesn't like to stay in the shadows," the countess said. "I said to her, 'Be careful. In Italy, the wives of politicians aren't very active."'
 Load-Date: April 12, 1996

 

End of Document
