

Nuclear meltdown tests: Is data worth the money and the risk?
The Associated Press
January 28, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 760 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CADARACHE, France
Body




A nuclear plant nestled amid the pines, oaks and olive trees of Provence has suffered a meltdown. Twice. On purpose.
To learn more about avoiding Three Mile Island-style nightmares, scientists plan four more meltdowns at the Phebus plant by 2004.
Environmentalists have tried to kill the program with warnings of a French Chernobyl. So far, they have been unsuccessful. Now, the budget ax may do what their warnings could not.
On Tuesday, a French-led team of international scientists unveiled results of the first two tests, which showed that the meltdowns in the small reactor occurred at lower temperatures and produced more explosive hydrogen gas than expected.
The results from December 1993 and July 1996 tests, they say, could lead to modifications in current and future nuclear plants. France has more than 50 of them, generating about 80 percent of its electricity.
The Phebus program, unique in the world, "has confounded its critics with success," said Briton David Wilkinson, co-chair of the Phebus pilot committee. Not everyone agrees.
The state Electricite de France and the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, project participants, say while the results confirm their computer models, they show no significant new data.
The results "tend not to be earth-shattering," Charles Ader, the NRC's chief of accident evaluation, said in a telephone interview from Washington. "There are still issues out there, but it is an expensive program."
That is the rub. Behind the fanfare for the invited press, behind the double electric fences surrounding the Cadarache compound in the rocky countryside 30 miles east of Aix-en-Provence, officials are worried about funding.
France, which provides at least 55 percent of the funding, is under pressure to hold down its budget to qualify for next year's introduction of the euro, Europe's single currency.
"We have to fight to demonstrate the need," acknowledged Adolf Birkhofer, managing director of Germany's Reactor Safety Association, another participant in the program.
The researchers at Phebus says theirs is the only plant currently staging meltdowns, although the United States conducted similar tests in Idaho in the 1980s. The reactor consists of 20 nuclear fuel rods; a large reactor can easily have 5,000.
In the first five-hour test, coolant was drained from about 44 pounds of uranium, triggering a meltdown watched by hundreds of sensors attached to the reactor; in the second test, the fuel had been partially used.
Subsequent tests will look at different phases of the meltdown or different conditions under which an accident can occur. The next two are set for June and December 1999, Two more are planned for between 2001 and 2004.
Phebus scientists say their work will help in designing "recombiners" to fight the buildup of explosive hydrogen gas and support European efforts to design its next generation of nuclear plants.
But Electricite de France, providing about one-fourth of the funding, was reconsidering the need for all six tests, a researcher with the company said on condition of anonymity.
EDF officials declined comment, but a spokesman noted that the issue was contentious. The Environment Ministry, which has power over the project, did not return phone calls Wednesday.
The project began in 1988 with a budget of $ 170 million. The final figure could reach $ 250 million, said Michel Livolant, head of France's Institute for Nuclear Safety and Protection, although other officials saw it closer to $ 200 million.
The cost rose because more time than anticipated is needed between tests, partly because of unexpectedly high radioactive contamination, officials said. Phebus also required reinforcement to meet tougher earthquake standards and more sensing instruments.
The added cost, Wilkinson said, "would be entirely borne by France." It would be higher if not for in-kind aid such as instruments and technical assistance from the United States and other countries.
Before the first test, European groups protested that the test could go awry.
"When you do a lab experiment, it's never the same as on full scale. It can give indications but it would be a grave scientific mistake to accept it as the real conditions," said Bella Belbeoch, a former researcher for France's Atomic Energy Commission, or CEA, and now an anti-nuclear activist.
But the opposition has died down, and despite a small leak of radioactive water after the first test, officials insisted that the reactor held up to safety standards.
"The Phebus experiments didn't put in question the safety of reactors," said Birkhofer.
 
 Load-Date: January 28, 1998

 

End of Document
