

On the Internet beat: Germans fight neo-Nazis in cyberspace
The Associated Press
September 11, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1513 words
Byline: By PAUL GEITNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MUNICH, Germany
Body




Leopold Klima, a tall, mild-mannered policeman in white jeans and polo shirt, squints at the search engine he has just opened on his computer, and types in the word "Kameraden."
The German word for "comrades," which neo-Nazis use to address each other, returns 20,559 hits.
"Most are nothing," Klima says, but he starts patiently scrolling through the listings, 10 at a time. There's a Swiss fire department. A catalog of German folk songs.
Then Klima clicks on a listing titled "info for comrades" in German and up pops a picture of a crowd of shirtless, heavily tattooed skinheads dancing wildly.
"Whoa," the chief superintendent exclaims, sitting upright.
"Hallo on this site I'm trying to inform you all everything about demos, K-evenings ...! If you have infos that I don't then just mail them to me!"
At the bottom of the German-language page, one other sentence: "By the way, that picture is from a hot OI-party in … unfortunately I can't say(COPS)"
"Oi!" is the battle cry of the skinhead music scene. "K-evenings" are meetings for Kameraden. And cops like Klima, prowling the Internet in pursuit of a steadily increasing neo-Nazi presence, would dearly like to know where the meetings are happening.
The site lists an e-mail address of "dr.doom" and a contact form.
"There's nothing illegal here, no possibility now to bring any charges," Klima says. "But the photo, the fact that you have to register, the whole thing sounds a little suspicious.
"There we've found something I'd like to print out."
---
Like the oil stain on the wall of a German synagogue hit by a crude fire bomb this spring, neo-Nazi stirrings never seem to completely go away, even 55 years after World War II ended with Adolf Hitler's suicide.
Other countries struggle with the maladies of xenophobia, nationalism, racism and anti-Semitism, from the Allied nations that defeated Hitler to the lands his army invaded. Germany, burdened by its dark 20th century history, tries to crack down the hardest.
"The excuse that one finds the same or similar elsewhere doesn't apply for us," Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder reminded Germans last month after touring the former Mittelbau-Dora concentration camp, where some 20,000 people perished working in underground arms factories.
Making things harder now is the Internet, which Germany's domestic security agency notes has gained in importance as "an agitation and communication means for right-wing extremists."
The number of home pages operated by German right-wing extremists - usually posted anonymously on U.S.-based Internet servers to escape the reach of German law - soared to about 330 from about 200 in 1998.
And, the agency said in a report this year, they're making "full use of the multimedia spectrum," including video and the MP3 music format, which enables hate-mongering bands to reach their audience even when their CDs and concerts are banned.
"The aggressive lyrics of right-wing extremist skinhead music are likely to have also contributed to an increase in the propensity to use violence," the report said.
An example from an anti-foreigner song by the band "Die Haerte" (The Hardness):
"It's getting dark; the time for it has come again. Let's play bonfire games, and that swine goes up in flames."
---
 
The fire bomb thrown at the synagogue in Erfurt on April 20, Hitler's birthday, was the first such attack on a Jewish house of worship in years. Mosques in Germany have been targeted this summer as well.
In Dortmund in June, a man with alleged neo-Nazi ties was stopped for not wearing a seat belt and fatally shot three police officers.
A still-unsolved bomb blast at a commuter train station in Duesseldorf in July injured 10 recent immigrants from the former Soviet Union, six of them Jewish.
In August, an unexploded bomb was found outside the home of a Jewish family in the Bavarian city of Bamberg.
Police have yet to classify that case as a neo-Nazi attack. But as the vice president of Germany's Central Council of Jews, Charlotte Knobloch, put it: "Bamberg is a big city and nowhere else was a bomb found."
---
 
"The very first essential for success is a perpetually constant and regular employment of violence," Hitler wrote in his demagogic manifesto, "Mein Kampf" (My Struggle).
Germany's democracy today is well rooted, and far-right parties barely register in national elections.
But German officials say they must remain vigilant.
Across town from Klima's office in Bavaria's state police headquarters, a stylish young woman sits in a neoclassical, 19th century palace, its vaulted stairways and halls strikingly decorated with modern art.
A Finance Ministry official dealing with state-owned property, her duties also require her to surf regularly through cyberspace in search of Hitler's manifesto, and make sure unauthorized copies stay out of print.
New editions of "Mein Kampf" are banned in Germany, but in the past year or so, editions have shown up in Croatia, Hungary and the Czech Republic. Whenever one surfaces, Germany mobilizes its diplomats and justice officials to try to get it pulled from shelves.
"It's barely readable," the Bavarian official says. "Yet there's still a legend about the book. People have all kinds of illusions about it."
The book is kept out of print here so as not to encourage neo-Nazis, she says. "But it's also out of respect for the victims. It's still a terrible symbol of what they suffered through, so it's incomprehensible for it to be handled like just any other book."
Her ministry asked that her name not be used - lest people from "radical right-wing circles" find out about her and harass her, spokesman Jochen Holdmann said.
---
 
Hitler wrote his muddled musings - 694 pages in English translation - in the 1920s, when he was a little known rabble-rouser. After he became the Fuehrer of Germany in 1933, it became a best seller, replacing the Bible as a traditional gift to newlyweds.
No good Aryan home was complete without it, even though studies found that few people ever bothered to read it.
Bavaria's state government acquired the rights to "Mein Kampf" pursuant to a 1948 Allied confiscation order - except for the rights in the United States and Britain, which the original publisher sold in 1933.
That means the English-language editions can still be printed and sold legally, including by Internet booksellers Amazon.com and Barnesandnoble.com. When German officials realized the book could be ordered online and shipped anywhere, they got the companies to promise not to accept orders from Germany.
But "Mein Kampf" can now be downloaded from the Internet, and the authorities admit there's little they can do about that if the server where it's stored is outside Germany.
"Many legal questions remain unresolved," the Finance Ministry official says.
---
 
Klima, 52, helped establish the "Info-Bewaeltigung" - literally "Info-Coping" - division in 1996 for the Bavarian state police department that deals with politically motivated crimes.
His office is worn, institutional plain and sweltering, the broken window blinds letting in a stream of sunshine. There's a ficus on its last leaves in the corner, photos of his three grandchildren on the desk, an ad torn from a newspaper stuck on the wall reading: "Computers are stupid."
Klima, a police officer since 1971, has been interested in the new technology "since the first home PCs came out."
His colleagues knew nothing about home pages and search engines when he sought approval to install a modem and telephone lines to keep up with the criminals on the Net.
"It took a long time, but I built it up myself," he says proudly of his team. "Now we have a head start."
Federal and other state agencies have since followed Bavaria's lead.
Klima won't say how many officers work with him. It's an "operational secret" that he doesn't want his "opponents" - the extremists - to know.
But he chuckles at the spectacle of outraged politicians demanding "to monitor everything, ban all the sites."
Of the millions of Web sites out there, only a tiny percentage contain criminal neo-Nazi content. Finding them is the key, and even then, the police often run into a brick wall.
"Ninety to 95 percent of the sites go over to America, and there our power is at an end," Klima says.
U.S. law enforcement can't do anything because speech - even Nazi bile - is protected under the U.S. Constitution, he notes.
American Internet servers say they have contracts they can't break as long as the rent is paid. When it comes to trying to shut down sites across the Atlantic, "we've practically thrown in the towel," Klima says.
So what he does is try to "rattle the 'Kameraden' a little."
"Just the fact that they know the police are out there frightens some away," he says. "And it does accomplish something."
By searching the Web, his team can get wind of gatherings being planned, even if the exact location is kept secret until the last minute, then spread by short text messages to mobile phones.
"The police can go out and stop it before the scene gets too strong," Klima says. "That's perhaps more important than arresting one person or another."
End Adv for Sunday, Sept. 17
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY393 of Sept. 11
 Load-Date: September 18, 2000

 

End of Document
