

One year after the bombing, Kosovars live a life in the dark
The Associated Press
March 24, 2000, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 622 words
Byline: By DANICA KIRKA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PRISTINA, Yugoslavia
Body




Sevdie Ahmeti can stand everything but the darkness.
It reminds the human rights activist of the war in Kosovo last year, the decade of ethnic oppression before that - the years she simply waited in the night to be beaten to death.
Friday marked one year since NATO launched a 78-day bombing campaign to end Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's violent crackdown on ethnic Albanians like Ahmeti. For nearly nine months now the alliance and the United Nations have been running the show, but basic services like power and water have yet to be fixed.
Slowly, ethnic Albanians are waking up to the fact that NATO and the West are hardly all-purpose saviors: They can't even keep the lights on. Worse still, ethnic Albanians say these outsiders are starting to blame them for the province's lack of peace.
After all they've been through, many Albanians see this as utterly unfair.
"We're good survivors," Ahmeti said. "As good survivors, we need to be given a chance."
Last week, the U.S. State Department sent spokesman James P. Rubin to drive home the message to Kosovo's predominately ethnic Albanian population that the world didn't act to save them to make it easy for them to exact revenge on the Serbs.
Thousands of Serbs have fled the province in the last year, unwilling to risk their lives despite promises of NATO protection.
Rubin's message made an impression, though not necessarily the one he wished. Those working with the war's survivors warn that the West is misjudging the depth of anger and frustration people here feel at the lack of progress in bringing those responsible for war atrocities to justice.
A system of justice has yet to be established in Kosovo to deal with even common crime, never mind anything at all more complicated. U.N. officials consider this one of their primary tasks, but plead for more time, noting that judges, prosecutors - and even courtrooms - are not easy to find.
Human rights activists like Kosovare Kelmendi suggest the new plea for responsibility is unrealistic in a place so accustomed to repression.
"They are asking for Albanians to forgive. They are asking for stability and peace and they are doing nothing about justice," she said. "It is too much."
Normal people are even more baffled, certain that they are once again subject to forces beyond them. Take Ajnishahe Ademi, 45, a mother of three from northern Kosovo who lives in the skeleton of an apartment building in the capital, Pristina. Her windows are sheets of plastic. Most of Pristina receives water sporadically: She gets almost none at all.
Even so, she hopes one day to rebuild her home in the village of Dumnica, 18 miles north of Pristina, yearning to go back to a life with cows, fields and quiet nights.
"I know miracles don't happen overnight but here everything is moving so slowly," Ademi said. "We have shortages of electricity - of water. There are no jobs. No aid. We are struggling with life."
Even the top U.N. administrator for Kosovo, Bernard Kouchner, acknowledged Thursday that many in Kosovo were disappointed.
"The people, they were looking for more," he said. "They were looking for a fast solution. Was it possible? I don't know."
Kouchner estimates it could take as long as 30 years to restore Kosovo to civil society and normalcy.
"This is very difficult to change the way the people behave," he said. "It is very difficult to change, to build confidence, to change the spirit, the behavior of the people - to open their hearts when they have to open mass graves."
Still, despite the troubles, people haven't totally forgotten the lives they left behind.
"It is true that this whole process is moving like a turtle," Ademi said. "But again, it is 100 times better - and safer - than when the Serbs were here."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo XDV106
 Load-Date: March 25, 2000

 

End of Document
