

Out of the cold, into the spotlight: Mossad chief defends agency - and peace
December 22, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 617 words
Byline: By LAURIE COPANS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HERZLIYA, Israel
Body




The man on the podium looked professorial, barely lifting his bespectacled eyes from his notes as he delivered his Hebrew oratory in a soft-spoken, English-accented monotone.
But Ephraim Halevy is no professor, and both his presence and his words were exceptional: In what was billed as the first public speech by the head of the legendary Mossad intelligence agency, he seemed to defend - however indirectly - the concept of trading land for peace with the Palestinians.
"When we survey the map of threats facing Israel in the coming decade … these are not threats against territory or borders," Halevy told academics, security officials and journalists at a symposium. "The battle between Israel and its neighbors … is not essentially geographic but historical-existential."
The important thing, he said, is "to reach recognition and acceptance by our rivals of … Zionism."
Such comments by security officials, who are highly respected in the Jewish state, could help Prime Minister Ehud Barak sell any peace deal reached with the Palestinians in talks currently under way in Washington. Barak faces a re-election battle Feb. 6 against the hawkish Ariel Sharon, who is less inclined to make concessions to the Palestinians.
Despite continuing obstacles, there appeared to be progress at the talks. An emerging deal envisions a transfer of most of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, as well as Arab-populated parts of Jerusalem, to a new Palestinian state.
The Mossad, whose name means "Institution" in Hebrew, built its reputation on operations such as the 1960 kidnapping of Nazi Adolf Eichmann, who was snatched in Argentina and spirited to Israel for trial for the murder of millions of Jews. He was convicted and hanged.
In the early 1960s, the Mossad positioned Eli Cohen in Damascus, Syria, where he smuggled out documents describing troop and tank deployments before being caught and hung in 1965. Between October 1972 and August 1973, Mossad agents assassinated 12 Palestinians connected with the group Black September, which had killed 11 athletes at the Munich Olympics.
But recent years have seen a string of embarrassing and well-publicized failures.
In 1997, Mossad agents injected Khaled Mashaal, a leader of the militant Islamic group Hamas, with poison in Jordan. But they were caught, and Israel was forced to save Mashaal with an antidote and to free Hamas' founder and 20 other Arab prisoners to bring the agents back home.
In 1998, a retired agent was indicted on charges of fabricating reports that Syria was preparing for war. And five months ago, a court in Lausanne, Switzerland, indicted a Mossad agent caught setting up wiretapping equipment and gave him a one-year suspended sentence.
The British-born Halevy - only the second Mossad chief to be identified by name - seemed to try to restore some of the luster to his fabled, feared but somewhat fallen agency. And without mentioning specific instances, Halevy defended Israel's right to operate abroad.
"The security of Israel includes within it the responsibility for the lives and safety of Jews wherever they may be," he insisted. "Zionism enlisted the institutions of the state to act behind the curtains of iron and sand."
Born in England, Halevy immigrated to Israel with his parents as a child. He became ambassador to the European Union and a key architect of peace talks with Jordan. During more than three decades with Mossad, Halevy reportedly supervised the airlift of Ethiopian Jews to Israel.
Until recent years, Israel's military censor prohibited publication of the chief's name or photograph - each one was cryptically referred to by initial. In reports, Halevy was called "Aleph," the first letter of his first name in Hebrew.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo pursuing
 Load-Date: December 23, 2000

 

End of Document
