

Peacekeepers in the Air Watching the Foes From Above
March 3, 1996, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 926 words
Byline: By GEORGE ESPER, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: OVER BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA
Body




The three U.S. Army helicopters strain to climb above the snowy peaks, breathtakingly beautiful in the backlighting of a golden sunset.
Their engines seemingly out of breath after the risky maneuvers of following the slopes upward, they reach more than 4,000 feet, just above the tops of the mountains.
They hover, then surge downward to 200 feet above a valley of destruction - rows of roofless buildings sliced open as if by a can opener, a blur of bunkers and trenches.
They are peacekeepers in the sky, the eyes and ears of a NATO-led operation to enforce the Bosnian peace agreement. Their job is to monitor zones of separation designed to keep the warring factions of the former Yugoslav republic apart.
The helicopters are from the 227th Aviation Regiment, 4th Brigade, 1st Armored Division. They are heavily armed with missiles, cannon and machine guns to fire if they are threatened. Their rules of engagement give them that option, unlike the U.S. mission in Somalia where American troops had to wait until they were fired on before they could fire.
But the only shooting on this mission is done with a camera to survey and record compliance or violations. No troops or heavy weapons are allowed in the zones of separation, or "ZOS" to the soldiers.
"We have what used to be called a gun tape," explains one of the Apache pilots, Chief Warrant Officer 2 Vance Paul, 31, of Longmont, Colo. "It's a video system that's hooked into all of our optics.
"The same sequence of events that we go through in engagement … can be used as a reconnaissance tool to look at a target rather than shoot it. You just take pictures of it. It shows the distance where it is, the grids that it's at, everything that a commander would need to know."
For the most part, what the reconnaissance helicopters are finding are groups of 20 to 30 soldiers separated from their commands, and disabled vehicles including tanks that cannot be moved.
"But nothing threatening so far," says Paul.
If the Bosnian government or the Bosnian Serbs try to deny violations, all U.S. commanders need to do is roll the tape, which they have on several occasions, Paul says.
"When a faction leader says, 'All of our equipment is out of the ZOS,' then the commander has the ability to turn on a TV and say: 'This is in your sector. Right here. The cross hair of the weapons system is on it. This is the grid it's located at. This is the date and time it was there. So you've got 36 hours' - or however long they set - 'to move this piece of equipment.' And there is no room for argument."
Nothing unusual on this day. Darkness is falling and shadows are setting in. It is getting colder. Time to head home.
Paul's Apache lands at Tuzla Air Base, the U.S. headquarters, with tapes of areas outside the ZOS where the Bosnian opponents could be gathering equipment and of a major bridge crossing and intersections. These are possible staging areas for trucks and supplies west of Tuzla that are of interest to U.S. intelligence.
"We didn't notice anything specific," says Paul.
There were less weapons in the ZOS surveyed today than in the past, he says. "There was almost nothing. For the most part they are complying."
For Chief Warrant Officer 2 James Papp, 28, of Woburn, Mass., the reconnaissance missions are starting to become routine.
"At the beginning, it was kind of exciting as a new environment," he says. "The destruction and devastation that we witnessed from our copter was kind of overwhelming in the beginning, Now it's starting to get a little bit old or mundane. The biggest thing that impressed me about the ZOS was the bunkers and the trenchwork and also the terrain. The terrain is incredibly rugged."
No troops have shot at the helicopters, and that's just fine with 1st Lt. Karen Tussing, 25, of Williamsburg, Va., another pilot who is doing mostly administrative work but who flies on occasion.
"I'm learning a lot," she says. "I'd like to see the peace process come about and accomplish the mission we set out to accomplish. I'm not looking for the kind of excitement that's usually associated with combat, so I'm perfectly happy with the way things are."
While no combat units have fired at the U.S. helicopters, a few angry farmers or drunken villagers have, says Chief Warrant Officer 2 Nathan Wriston, 31, of Mount Holly, N.C.
"They're just isolated incidents, but we get that anywhere you go," says Wriston, who spent six months in Somalia and three months in Macedonia on similar missions. "I think a couple (of helicopters) might have got scraped but nothing serious. Half the time, we don't even know it until we're on the ground."
Paul, who also served in Somalia, says that mission and the one in Bosnia have a lot of similarities.
"When we arrived in Somalia, especially with the aid packages, the people and the organizations that were there to help them were really glad to see us," he says. "Then after we had been there for a while - once everybody was getting fed, the roads were getting built - then people were a little less happy about our presence. I think we're probably seeing the same thing here."
When the Americans first began flying, the people on both sides of the trenches were waving at them.
"I've flown all over this country and everywhere we've landed people have been glad to see us," says Paul. "As our presence continues to dominate, then people can be a little more angry about helicopters flying over their towns all hours of the day, flying low, stampeding cattle, stampeding sheep. Most of it is accidental. It's a big machine. It makes a lot of noise."
 Load-Date: March 3, 1996

 

End of Document
