

Peace Force's Hidden Force: The Officer with the Kangaroo Insignia
May 9, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 470 words
Byline: By LIAM McDOWALL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VISEGRAD, Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




The NATO-led peace mission in Bosnia has a hidden force.
Although missing from the official list of 33 nations contributing to the 60,000-member mission, Australia has a small military presence in the shattered Balkan nation.
Look hard, and you'll see it.
Amid a crowd of khaki-camouflaged, mainly British soldiers posted temporarily to this Serb-held southeastern town, a sole sand-colored uniform stands out.
On the officer's arm is a patch with a bright red kangaroo. On the bush-style slouch hat sitting at a jaunty angle on the officer's head shines the rising sun emblem of the Australian army.
The gentleman in question is Maj. Mark Thorek, a 36-year-old Australian officer in command of one of NATO's slickest and most strategically vital outfits in Bosnia - the forward tactical headquarters of Lt. Gen. Sir Michael Walker, the ground commander of NATO ground troops in Bosnia.
Officially, Thorek is here as part of the British 7th Signals Regiment. But he hasn't let that affect his appearance, or his attitude.
A native of Ringwood, near Melbourne, Thorek flies the Australian flag from the long radio antenna at the front of his armored Land Rover.
"It's great to be here in the middle of things," Thorek said.
He is participating in an exchange with British officers serving with his own Royal Australian Corps Signals in Melbourne. On assignment to the British army for two years, Thorek probably will spend most of his first year in Bosnia.
Thorek is responsible for making sure the mobile base functions smoothly during its six-day trip to Visegrad, 50 miles east of Sarajevo deep in Serb territory. Walker said he took his headquarters on the road to shift some of the focus in Bosnia's reconstruction away from Sarajevo, the capital.
Thorek's tasks include finding suitable sites for the command; ensuring security of the base; seeing to it that secure communications are up and running; and overseeing general administration.
Some of his responsibilities are fairly unsavory. Top on his list was working out a system for removing sewage from the site, home to 172 soldiers.
"We don't just leave it here. We think about the environment," Thorek said. "We are working on getting someone down from Sarajevo to suck it out as we don't really want to drive back with it."
Thorek's humor goes down well with the other soldiers in his corps, which includes Americans, Greeks, Germans, Portuguese, Belgians and French.
He has no problems being one of only three Australians in the NATO-led force - not with fellow soldiers, and not with Bosnians. He arranged a soccer match between soldiers from the base and a Visegrad team.
"No one hates an Australian," he said, then paused. "Except, perhaps, a Kiwi."
Grinning, Thorek indicated he was relieved that he would not serve with any of the 15 New Zealand soldiers in the peace force.
 Load-Date: May 9, 1996

 

End of Document
