

People in the news
The Associated Press
October 11, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1397 words
Dateline: ST. PAUL, Minn.
Body




Snoopy will soon have a whole arena instead of just a frozen birdbath to skate on.
The Ramsey County Board voted Tuesday to rename an ice arena after Charles Schulz, the late "Peanuts" cartoonist who grew up in St. Paul.
Park officials expect to put up a new sign within a month. They also plan to redecorate the arena with comic strip characters.
Schulz, a hockey enthusiast, was inducted into the U.S. Hockey Hall of Fame in 1993. He died earlier this year of colon cancer. He was 77.
---
FLORENCE, Ala. (AP) - Patty Duke says she has found inspiration during her battle with depression in Helen Keller, whom she portrayed in an Oscar-winning performance in "The Miracle Worker."
The 53-year-old actress met with mentally ill clients Tuesday and attended a reception at Keller's birthplace before giving a speech at Riverbend Center for Mental Health.
"You are the true unsung heroes of our society," Duke said. "Unsung, because most of us with mental illness don't go around the neighborhood telling everybody."
Duke, who was diagnosed with depression as an adult, said she thinks of Keller's accomplishments when she has had down periods. Keller was deaf and blind, but learned to speak, read and write as a child with help from Annie Sullivan in the late 19th century.
---
NORFOLK, Va. (AP) - Walter Cronkite is berating television executives for scaling back their coverage of events overseas.
"The networks have almost deserted foreign news," Cronkite, 83, said Tuesday before more than 2,000 people at the Norfolk Forum's speaker series.
After closing news bureaus throughout the world to save money, the networks "expect to parachute a correspondent and a cameraman into a crisis," said Cronkite, who served as anchor of "CBS Evening News" from 1962 until 1981.
Troubles in the Persian Gulf, Bosnia and Kosovo might have been resolved more quickly had they been covered more aggressively by American networks, Cronkite said.
Instead, "we weren't paying attention until the shooting started," he said.
---
CHICAGO (AP) - Styx singer Dennis DeYoung is suing his former bandmates for going back out on the road without him.
"This is the most painful decision of my professional career," said DeYoung, who helped found the band 35 years ago in Chicago. He wrote and sang such hits as "Lady," "Come Sail Away" and "Babe."
DeYoung said a partnership contract he renewed in 1990 with Tommy Shaw, James Young, Chuck Panozzo and Panozzo's brother, John, required all five to agree on matters concerning the band and the Styx trademark. John Panozzo died in 1996.
"Now they have taken the band's name and excluded me from the decision-making process," said DeYoung, who filed the federal lawsuit Tuesday claiming misuse of the Styx trademark.
DeYoung joined the 1997 Styx reunion tour but asked the others to delay their 1999 tour because he had chronic fatigue syndrome.
Shaw and Young, the only original members on the current Styx tour, are performing in Canada this week and had no comment.
---
ERIE, Pa. (AP) - Billy Blanks became a millionaire by throwing punches and kicks that never land.
But the creator of Tae-Bo workouts has been connecting with his hometown, donating money earned from his exercise videos to various charities, including one which housed his wife when she was a pregnant teen-ager.
Billy Blanks and his wife, Gayle, were in Erie recently to deliver donations from Blanks' foundation. Since last fall, the foundation has donated $140,000 to charities in Erie and $60,000 to charities in Los Angeles.
Blanks' Tae-Bo is a workout that blends moves from martial arts, boxing and aerobics. His "Tae-Bo Workout" video has been near the top of the video sales charts for 92 weeks, according to Billboard magazine.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Laura Schlessinger said the Jewish holidays prompted her to apologize to gays and lesbians for her "poorly chosen" words.
"On the Day of Atonement, Jews are commanded to seek forgiveness from people we have hurt," said the radio and TV talk show host, who is Jewish. Yom Kippur, during which Jews fast and seek forgiveness for sins, was Monday.
Schlessinger, who calls herself Dr. Laura on the air, has been criticized by gay rights activists for referring to homosexuality as a "biological error" and "deviant."
Schlessinger offered the apology in an advertisement in a special "Gay Hollywood" edition of the Daily Variety trade newspaper.
"I deeply regret the hurt this situation has caused the gay and lesbian community," Schlessinger's letter said.
She also apologized in March, but gay rights activists have tried to stop TV stations from broadcasting her new talk show, which debuted in September. Several top advertisers dropped sponsorship of the show, which has gained lackluster ratings.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Ben Stiller admits he was a bit intimidated by his co-star in the comedy "Meet the Parents."
In the movie, Stiller plays a jittery prospective son-in-law opposite Robert De Niro as his girlfriend's overprotective father.
"The intimidation factor remained throughout the movie. Bob really is one of my favorite actors," Stiller said in Entertainment Weekly's Oct. 13 edition. "I never got used to being in the same room, and that was a good thing."
Things went a bit more smoothly following the first day of shooting.
"It killed my strategy," said director Jay Roach, who also directed the "Austin Powers" movies. "I wanted them to be nervous around each other. But they were busting each other up all the time."
The flick debuted as the top film last weekend with $28.6 million.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Prosecutors have decided not to file charges against Rick Springfield, who was arrested last month for allegedly striking his wife.
"The case is not provable because the only evidence that the victim was assaulted is the hearsay statements made to her sister," prosecutors said Tuesday.
Springfield, 51, was arrested Sept. 18 at his Malibu home after his sister-in-law told authorities he had struck his wife, Barbara, and thrown her to the floor during an argument.
Prosecutors say Springfield's wife denied being hit or knocked down but said Springfield grabbed her by the arm. Springfield told sheriff's deputies he grabbed her in self-defense after she threw a jar at him.
The entertainer, whose best-known song is "Jessie's Girl," captivated soap-opera fans in the 1980s with his portrayal of Dr. Noah Drake on television's "General Hospital."
---
MONTPELIER, Vt. (AP) - Phish has apparently decided to take a break.
The Burlington-based rock band has split up for a while in the midst of the biggest year of its career.
The group has no concerts scheduled, no albums planned. The band members plan to go their separate ways, The New York Times reported Tuesday.
The band's manager, John Paluska, said "everybody just hit an undefinable point of exhaustion at the same time" and wanted to be with their families.
The band performed their last concert - at least for now - in Mountain View, Ca., on Saturday.
Members of Phish declined to comment on the temporary breakup.
The quiet goodbye was a surprise coming from a group that loves grand events, from its annual New Year's Eve shows to its sleep-over summer concerts for tens of thousands of fans.
Phish held the largest New Year's Eve concert in the world this year, drawing 80,000 people to Florida's Everglades.
"Everyone likes to see people step aside when they're at the top of their game instead of dragging it out until they're finished up," Paluska said. "It's the old idea of leaving them wanting more."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - A $100 million endowment has been established for the Autry Museum of Western Heritage in an effort to help the institution become more self-supporting.
"These secured funds will allow the museum to cover its basic operations, which in turn will provide it the freedom to focus on raising funds for the ambitious projects that have been set by its staff and board of trustees," said Jackie Autry, widow of museum namesake Gene Autry.
Jackie Autry also serves as head of the board.
Hollywood's first singing cowboy, Gene Autry made 95 films and starred in a TV show from 1950 to 1956. He cut 635 records, including "Rudolph the Red-Nose Reindeer" and his signature "Back in the Saddle Again."
Autry was sole owner of baseball's Anaheim Angels from their inception in 1961 until 1995, when he sold a part interest to The Walt Disney Co. He died in October 1998 at the age of 91.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY44 of Sch5'z, Cronkite, Phish, Stiller
 Load-Date: October 12, 2000

 

End of Document
