

People in the news
The Associated Press
September 18, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1368 words
Dateline: MEMPHIS, Tenn.
Body




Former astronaut Rhea Seddon says one of the toughest things about being a woman in space was the ill-fitting suits.
At 5-foot-3, the 52-year-old Tennesee native was the smallest NASA astronaut and had trouble fitting into her flight gear, which was designed for the average man.
"I called it suit-wrestling. I hated it," she said in Monday's Commercial Appeal. "I would come back home sore, bruised, dehydrated, depressed and everything else, but it was one of those things you've got to do if you want to do the job."
Seddon orbited the Earth 589 times in three missions during a 20-year NASA career that began in 1978. She was one of six female astronauts at the agency and now works as a health official in Nashville.
Seddon said the memory of liftoff is still a thrill.
"A lot more vibration and a lot more movement and a lot more noise than I expected," she said. "It was pretty sporting, as they say in our field.
ROCHESTER, Minn. (AP) - The Rev. Billy Graham headed home for North Carolina on Monday after being treated at the Mayo Clinic for Parkinson's disease and fluid around the brain.
The 81-year-old evangelist said that during his treatment that he had a lot of time to think and pray.
"I've discovered I have just as much zeal for preaching the gospel as ever, but I have had to realize that I am limited physically and must drastically reduce my schedule," he said. "But I do look forward to several more years of ministry as a result of my time here."
Graham underwent several surgical procedures in June and had remained in Rochester for outpatient therapy.
"I have been in Rochester so long that it's beginning to feel like home," he said.
DETROIT (AP) - It's not my Mustang, says Jay Leno.
The "Tonight Show" host telephoned a car collector to tell him he may have overpaid for a garnet 1973 Ford Mustang.
Alan Pedron, a 49-year-old Ford engineer, paid $15,000 for the car, thinking it had once been part of Leno's huge collection.
Leno called Pedron to tell him the sad news.
"I never owned a '73 Mustang. That was the worst year," he said in Monday's Detroit News.
Pedron, who was steered to the car by an Internet site, said he is not entirely devastated. He said the car has very few miles on it, and Leno's condolence call didn't hurt.
"All the guys at work thought it was cool," he said.
WARSAW, Poland (AP) - Britain's Prince Andrew has given Poland's leader a World War II-era encoding machine, thanking the country for helping crack Nazi Germany's Enigma code.
"The Enigma codes would not have been broken if it were not for the knowledge of Polish mathematicians," the prince told Prime Minister Jerzy Buzek as he presented an encoder taken from a captured Nazi submarine.
Poland has long said its mathematicians broke the Enigma code used by the Nazis to send secret orders and messages. Until the mid-1970s, the British had claimed it was solely their achievement, a version that still appears in the respected Encyclopaedia Britannica.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Jon Bon Jovi says he had to take his shoes off and unplug his guitar to make an impression.
The rock star, who has been touring and making hit records for nearly two decades, said he was terrified of disappointing a celebrity-packed audience at the MTV Video Music Awards in 1987.
"All I could think of was, 'How are we going to make Madonna and Bob Seger and David Lee Roth stand in their chairs and applaud?"' he said in an interview. "The guys were like: 'Don't. … Sit down with two guitars and play the way you wrote the song.'
"So, I went out there barefoot with two acoustic guitars. … I thought it was a complete failure until I read the papers the next day."
MTV said the performance led to their prize-winning show "Unplugged," which features top bands in acoustic settings with small audiences.
RADNOR, Pa. (AP) - William Shatner says his grief over the death of his third wife last year inspired him to write "Star Trek Preserver," the best-selling novel released in July.
In the book, Capt. James T. Kirk, the character he played on television and in the movies, struggles to save his dying wife.
"When someone dies, for a while you want to make some meaning out of a life," Shatner said in the latest issue of TV Guide. "You go on a spiritual journey. And hopefully, you don't stop."
Shatner's wife, Nerine, drowned in the family's swimming pool in August 1999. The coroner ruled that alcohol and Valium contributed to her death.
"The loss of someone you love is horrible enough. But to do it with the public, with the media at your heels, is almost unendurable," Shatner said.
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) - Despite his notoriety as a television figure, Jack Hanna doesn't like to be referred to as a celebrity. The term zookeeper fits him fine.
"I'm still the same Jack Hanna that I was when I started," Hanna, 53, said Friday.
Though Hanna may no longer run Columbus Zoo and Aquarium on a day-to-day basis, his role as its ambassador and director emeritus has never been stronger.
Since Hanna's first appearance on national television 17 years ago as director of the then-little known zoo, he has become a regular on "Good Morning America," "The Late Show With David Letterman," and "Larry King Live" - usually accompanied by spider monkeys, baby cougars, hissing cockroaches and other critters.
His zoo connection is always mentioned in his TV appearances, and many of the animals he displays come from Columbus. The national exposure has helped attract more than 1.2 million visitors and $30 million in revenue last year for the zoo compared with 351,000 visitors and $1.4 million when he arrived in 1978.
"Animals in captivity are ambassadors to their cousins in the wild. When people see a living creature, they can relate much easier to the problems of endangerment and the need for conservation," he said.
RADNOR, Pa. (AP) - World Wrestling Federation superstar Chyna says she's proud of her photo spread in the November issue of Playboy.
"A body like mine has been rejected for so many years," the muscular wrestler tells the Sept. 23 issue of TV Guide. "Not the ideal beauty. Ugly, masculine. But doing Playboy for me is the pinnacle. And I'm very proud."
Chyna says the Playboy spread is not a "sexual thing."
"It was, 'Look at me. Here I am.' Now people love the body. It's about damn time."
Chyna is also featured in the WWF's first workout video, out this month. And her autobiography is due in January.
---
GENEVA (AP) - A 19-year-old Swiss-New Zealand woman proud of her indigenous Maori roots was crowned the new Miss Switzerland over the weekend.
Mahara McKay, who holds dual citizenship from her Swiss mother and New Zealand father, immediately spoke out for Switzerland to improve its treatment of immigrants.
She said that one of her top goals if she were a Swiss politician would be to "ease naturalization for every one who was born here (to foreign parents) or who has spent half their life here."
Switzerland has one of the lowest naturalization rates in Europe. Applicants for a Swiss passport must live at least 12 years in the country and meet other requirements.
The county will have another referendum on the issue next weekend when voters are asked to accept or reject a citizens initiative to limit to 18 percent the number of non-Swiss residents. The country now has a foreign population exceeding 19 percent.
"I'm very proud that I'm half Maori," said McKay, who lived in Auckland until she was 10. "The Maori culture is unique. I like the beliefs and the closeness to nature."
McKay was selected over 15 other contestants Saturday night.
---
RADNOR, Pa. (AP) - Tim McGraw isn't worried about losing Entertainer of the Year honors to his wife - fellow country music sensation Faith Hill - at the Country Music Awards later this month.
Either way, the award goes on the mantle.
"We're not speaking until it's over," McGraw joked to the Sept. 23 issue of TV Guide.
In August, Hill received eight award nominations, while her husband snagged nods for male vocalist of the year and vocal event of the year for "Let's Make Love," a duet with his wife.
The Entertainer of the Year honor "goes to our house if either one of us wins. And next year, no one will remember who won it, so when friends come over, I'll say it's mine," McGraw said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WAR150, NY44 of Andrew, Graham
 Load-Date: September 19, 2000

 

End of Document
