

People in the news
December 28, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1403 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Michael J. Fox, who left TV's "Spin City" to focus on Parkinson's disease research, is US Weekly's celebrity of the year.
The 39-year-old Fox, who grew up in front of the camera on the TV show "Family Ties" and in the "Back to the Future" movies, suffers from the progressive neurological disorder. He left the ABC comedy in May and created the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research.
The Emmy-winning actor said he is confident about finding a cure.
"I have this feeling of anticipation," Fox says in the magazine's latest issue. "I really do wake up every day saying, 'What can we do to get us a little bit closer?"'
---
UNIVERSAL CITY, Calif. (AP) - Steven Spielberg is to be knighted by Great Britain, an honor conferred on those who have made an important contribution to relations with the country.
"The award of an honorary knighthood recognizes Steven Spielberg's extraordinary contribution to the entertainment industry and the British film industry over the last 25 years," the British Embassy said Thursday.
The director will receive the honor from ambassador Sir Christopher Meyer on behalf of Queen Elizabeth II at a Jan. 29 ceremony in Washington.
Spielberg's credits include "Saving Private Ryan," "Schindler's List," "Jaws" and "E.T. The Extraterrestrial."
Spielberg was on vacation Thursday and couldn't be reached, but his spokesman at DreamWorks SKG said he was honored.
"He was enormously pleased and really humbled by this. He has always had such wonderful feelings for the UK and the British film industry," Spielberg publicist Marvin Levy said.
Americans admitted to membership of British Orders of Chivalry are not called "Sir," but Spielberg can place the letters KBE after his name.
---
LEXINGTON, Ky. (AP) - Backstreet Boys member Kevin Richardson is forming a foundation to raise awareness of environmental issues.
Just Within Reach: An Earth Foundation will begin in Richardson's home state of Kentucky and expand globally, the 29-year-old said Wednesday.
Richardson said the organization's abbreviation - JWR - is taken from the initials of his late father, Jerald Wayne Richardson, who died of cancer in 1991.
"I feel like our environment ties in to a lot of problems we have with our health today," Richardson said.
During the news conference, experts briefed Richardson on environmental problems in Kentucky, including an October spill of 250 million gallons of coal sludge.
Richardson said he will post information about the foundation on the Backstreet Boys' Web site, www.backstreetboys.com. 
---
MADRID, Spain (AP) - Argentine tenor Jose Cura apologized for launching a tirade against an audience that booed him.
Cura flew into a rage Tuesday when he was booed during the curtain call for the final performance of Giuseppe Verdi's "Il Trovatore" at Madrid's Teatro Real theater.
"I sing for all of you, not just for the part of the audience that smells bad," the newspaper El Mundo quoted Cura as saying.
The daily El Pais said Cura's diatribe lasted four minutes.
The Spanish media heavily criticized Cura, and even Culture Minister Pilar del Castillo said Cura had gone overboard.
Cura issued a statement of apology Wednesday, but said it was unfair to heckle a performer from the safety of a seat in a darkened theater.
"I respect and approve of the democratic right to free opinion. But at the same time I demand that this right be exercised in broad daylight and with honest criteria," Cura said.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Making a cat talk may look like magic, but it's a lot of hard work for Nick Bakay.
Bakay is the voice of "Salem," the smart-mouthed black cat on "Sabrina, The Teenage Witch." He's also a regular correspondent on ESPN's "SportsCenter" and writes a weekly column for espn.com.
Salem's role has expanded since "Sabrina" moved from ABC to the WB network this fall, Bakay said this week.
"At the beginning, the network (ABC) - and I really can't argue - wasn't crazy about the animatronic cat," he told the New York Post. "So, the emphasis was really more on, 'Let's not give the cat too much dialogue and as often as possible, let's use one of the live ones.'
"But the character really did get popular."
---
HELSINKI, Finland (AP) - Linux computer operating system creator Linus Torvalds has been chosen as the European of the Year 2001 by European editors of Reader's Digest magazine.
In its January edition, the magazine describes Torvalds, 31, as a "lonely, modest genius … who transformed the whole landscape of computer use."
"Long before any of us knew the Internet existed, he (Torvalds) saw its potential and used it to launch an operating system that people could adapt and use free of charge," said the worldwide edition's editor-in-chief, Eric W. Schrier.
Torvalds, a Finn who lives in California and works for Transmeta Corp., developed the Linux system in 1991. The system has challenged Microsoft's dominance, but Torvalds said he has no animosity for the software giant.
"I'm a big believer in Darwinism. I believe that the better system will prevail in the end," he told the magazine.
Torvalds is the sixth winner of the European of the Year award, worth $10,000.
---
HELENA, Mont. (AP) - The longtime secret mistress of late CBS correspondent Charles Kuralt has won her legal battle for ownership of his Montana fishing retreat.
The Montana Supreme Court on Wednesday unanimously upheld a lower court's ruling that the property belongs to Patricia Shannon, not Kuralt's daughters.
A letter Kuralt wrote to Shannon two weeks before he died in 1997 was a valid, informal will expressing his wish that she have the 90 acres along the Big Hole River, the court said. The property is worth about $600,000.
Kuralt and Shannon had a "close personal relationship" for 29 years and the newsman was the major financial supporter of Shannon and her children during that time, the court said.
The fight over the property began after Kuralt died at age 62 of complications from lupus. Kuralt's daughters had argued that the June 18, 1997, letter to Shannon was not a legal document.
Shannon said she met Kuralt, the traveling correspondent known for his folksy reports about quirky Americana, in 1968.
Kuralt's widow did not learn of the lengthy affair until her husband's funeral.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Chicago sports magnate Jerry Reinsdorf is being sued by his ailing sister, who says he cut her off financially.
The $5 million breach-of-contract suit filed Wednesday in Superior Court said Reinsdorf broke an agreement under which he provided Judith Reinsdorf $10,000 a month.
The payments stopped in 1998 because Judith Reinsdorf refused her brother's demand that she stop seeing their elderly mother, the suit said. Marion Reinsdorf died in 1998.
The nature of Judith Reinsdorf's health problems weren't disclosed. Attorney Marvin Mitchelson would say only that the 59-year-old Los Angeles woman was in poor health.
Reinsdorf, the managing partner of the Chicago Bulls and Chicago White Sox, didn't return a telephone message left at his Chicago office.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Scott Glenn is no stranger to adventure movies, but he is scaling new heights in the new thriller "Vertical Limit."
"I'd never climbed anything in my life before," Glenn told Newsday.
The 58-year-old actor faced the challenge of becoming a master mountain climber for the film, in which nature gobbles up a team of would-be conquerors of the world's second-highest peak.
Glenn said he underwent rigorous training to prepare for the movie, which stars Chris O'Donnell.
"We trained a month, six days a week from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m with seven of the best climbers in the world. And the added neat little bonus is I fell in love with ice climbing," Glenn said.
Glenn's other credits include "Backdraft," "Silence of the Lambs" and "The Right Stuff."
---
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) - Boris Becker reportedly has sought custody of his two sons, who have been staying with his estranged wife in Miami.
The former tennis star filed for custody in a Munich family court, German newspapers reported Wednesday. A court spokesman could not be reached for confirmation.
Becker's lawyers contend that Barbara Becker's sudden departure for the couple's home in Miami uprooted the children. The couple lived in a villa in Munich until their separation this month.
The three-time Wimbledon champion has filed for divorce in Munich. His wife has sued for alimony and child support in Miami but has not filed for divorce.
The couple have two sons, ages 6 and 1.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY43 of Fox, Richardson, Reinsdorf, Shannon
 Load-Date: December 29, 2000

 

End of Document
