

Pigeon racers fear sport may be going the way of the dodo
The Associated Press
September 22, 1999, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 758 words
Byline: By LAURA VOZZELLA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WEYMOUTH, Mass.
Body




After centuries of glory in battle and sport, it has come to this in Weymouth: The storied homing pigeon is roosting once a week in a storage locker.
A dispute between the "pigeon people" and the rest of the Weymouth Sportsmen's Club - which includes shooting enthusiasts - has suddenly put the clubhouse off limits to the racers.
And so, 300 prized birds and their handlers find themselves these days at ABC Storage in the east part of town, carrying out pre-race formalities in a cramped 10-by-20-foot locker.
The flap is the latest indignity in the ancient sport of pigeon racing, which has struggled to hold its own nationally and is fading particularly fast in the Northeast.
The average pigeon racer, after all, is no spring chicken.
Even enthusiasts concede that the sport, which requires a substantial investment of time and money, just can't compete with the vast array of other hobbies and sports available today.
"I think it's dying," said Ronald Cuthill, 59, who got involved in the sport as an 8-year-old but can't interest his own grandchildren, who'd rather kick soccer balls or fiddle with Nintendo.
"The young kids aren't getting into it like they used to," he said.
Though the sport is still growing in Europe and Asia, the number of U.S. enthusiasts has remained flat at about 15,000 for the past decade, said Rick Phalen, executive director of the American Racing Pigeon Union in Oklahoma City.
Gains in Sunbelt states have largely made up for losses in the Northeast, where there are about 3,000 racers today, down by about 20 percent from its 1950s peak.
"I hate to admit it - we have seen a substantial decline in numbers," Phalen said. "I genuinely and sincerely feel it's regrettable that we are losing numbers in the Northeast because that's the area of tradition."
The average pigeon racer is 56 years old, Phalen said, and barely enough new enthusiasts have stepped up to take the place of retired fliers.
The pigeons themselves are not the fine-feathered friends who are fed bread crumbs from park benches. Racing pigeons are muscular beasts that zoom at speeds of more than 70 mph for up to 15 hours a day.
Racers can trace their lineage as far back as the ancient Egyptians. Even modern warriors have enlisted their help: One bird is credited with saving 1,000 British troops in World War II, flying a mile a minute, carrying orders to call off the bombing of an Italian village because Allied ground troops had just taken it.
Racing took off in America in the postwar years, luring people like Peter Hultman with the thrill of competition and the mystery of the birds' uncanny sense of direction. There was special pull for him: His parents met in a pigeon loft.
Hultman has stuck with the hobby since childhood, and today has more than 60 birds. He pampers them like thoroughbreds, giving them baths with salts, medical care, even water spiked with herbal tea and honey.
"These racing pigeons get better care and are better treated than probably 80 percent of the planet," he said.
Hultman happily spends about $ 2,000 a year, and at least 20 hours a week, caring for and training birds that can fetch prices of $ 1,000 or more.
Lately, though, the hobby has given him some headaches. Hultman, 52, was one of the 30 flyers ousted from the Weymouth Sportsmen's Club last month.
For 25 years, he and the rest of Braintree Racing Pigeon Club were welcome at the nearby club. The enthusiasts used to take their birds to the clubhouse on the night before each 200- to 600-mile race.
They would record which pigeons were competing, inspect them and place numbered bands on their legs.
The birds are loaded into a special truck, driven hundreds of miles away and released. Relying on their homing instinct and incredible stamina, the pigeons fly directly to their lofts, where their times are recorded and later compared to determine the winner.
Some in the Weymouth club complained that the birds didn't belong in a building, much less a room where members sometimes dine. The town Health Department weighed in against the racers, saying the birds could spread disease.
The racers have promised to fight their ouster. They hired lawyers and still try to crash club meetings. Seven police cruisers had to be dispatched when tempers flared at a meeting two weeks ago.
Hultman is optimistic that the flyers can fight their way back into the club. He's less confident that his beloved sport will find its way back into the imaginations of many Americans.
"Society is different today," he said. "It's one of those things where there is so much more to do."
 Load-Date: September 22, 1999

 

End of Document
