

Poll: Most Britons want the queen to remain the monarch
The Associated Press
November 9, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 324 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Most Britons do not think Queen Elizabeth II should abdicate the throne to allow her oldest son, Prince Charles, to become king, according to two polls released Monday.
A MORI poll commissioned for the Daily Mail tabloid and GMTV found that 67 percent believe the queen should remain the monarch for the rest of her life, the paper said.
The poll also found that Britain is more supportive of the relationship between the prince and his longtime love Camilla Parker Bowles. Only 10 percent said they should split up, the newspaper said.
"The good news for Charles and Camilla is the highest-ever level of support for them to conduct their relationship in public - and eventually to marry," the Daily Mail said.
But the tabloid also reported that eight of ten Britons do not want Parker Bowles to become queen.
The prince, who celebrates his 50th birthday on Saturday, has enjoyed increased popularity in the year after Princess Diana's fatal car crash in Paris.
Recently, however, he has been at the center of some controversy. A television documentary that aired Sunday quoted an unnamed "senior royal aide" as claiming that Prince Charles would be "privately delighted" if his mother, 72, abdicated.
The prince issued a strong denial on Friday, following publicity about the London Weekend Television program. The producers have said they stand by their report.
And two weeks ago, Prince Charles and Parker Bowles were forced to issue a joint statement that they were not involved "in any way" in a new book that criticizes Princess Diana and purports to be based on interviews with his friends, family and aides.
The MORI poll was based on interviews with 1,019 adults between Nov. 5-6. The newspaper did not give a margin of error.
Meanwhile, another poll published Monday by The Daily Telegraph mirrored these results. It found that 66 percent of Britons were against the idea of the queen abdicating. That poll was based on interviews with 1,036 people.
 Load-Date: November 9, 1998

 

End of Document
