

Presidents on the mend make for odd moments at the summit
March 20, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 426 words
Byline: By NANCY BENAC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HELSINKI, Finland
Body




It's a different Bill Clinton and Boris Yeltsin at this summit.
With both presidents on the mend, they're calling it the "Summit of Invalids," and joking about Clinton riding around in "Wheelchair One."
Yeltsin is a paler, thinner version of the old Boris. A lot more stiff than the man who boogied with the band during his re-election campaign.
When Clinton emerged from Air Force One, there was no jaunty wave and brisk walk down the stairs this time. Instead, he had to be lowered to the tarmac on the hydraulic lift of an airline catering truck.
From there, he was loaded into a specially equipped van flown in from Washington. The presidential limousine led the way - sans president.
Clinton had surgery last Friday to repair a torn tendon in his right knee; Yeltsin had quintuple heart bypass surgery in November and a serious case of pneumonia in January.
The medical conditions of the two presidents made for some odd moments as the two-day summit opened Thursday.
White House press secretary Mike McCurry found himself taking time out from commenting on the latest arms control proposal to deny Finnish television reports that Air Force One had to be outfitted with a special toilet for Clinton.
But he did acknowledge that several doors on the jumbo plane had to be widened to accommodate Clinton's wheelchair. And a collapsible set of parallel bars was brought on board for in-flight physical therapy.
Yeltsin's spokesman, meanwhile, found himself denying rumors that the Russian leader's new plane is actually a flying hospital equipped with an intensive care unit.
Spokesman Sergei Yastrzhembsky insisted it was simply "a VIP plane" equipped with everything the president and his team need for work.
With Yeltsin's health a touchy matter back home, Clinton went out of his way to speak encouragingly of his Russian counterpart's condition.
"I'm glad to see President Yeltsin looking so fit and well," the American president volunteered to reporters when questioned about differences over NATO expansion.
McCurry, however, described Yeltsin as fully engaged but looking "a little ashen-faced" and "not so vibrant as I've seen him in the past."
Clinton, for his part, tried to reassure reporters about his own condition.
"My knee and I are getting around pretty well," he said.
At the same time, Clinton wanted to make sure his condition didn't hinder his ability to be a tough negotiator.
McCurry said Clinton opted for a wheelchair over crutches upon his arrival in Helsinki in part because "he wants to conserve some energy for the meetings that he's having."
 Load-Date: March 20, 1997

 

End of Document
