

Presidential Candidates: On the Issues
February 11, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 4883 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Day by day, bit by bit, presidential candidates have gone beyond the central message of their campaigns to visit a range of issues as broad as the country they want to lead.
The Associated Press is asking major Republican candidates and President Clinton to respond to one question each weekday during the primary season.
Here are questions and answers from the first four weeks of the series. Some questions are from a survey by the nonpartisan group Project Vote Smart. Only Steve Forbes, repeatedly invited to take part, has not responded.
---
ISSUE: DAY 1
After the inauguration ceremony, what would be your first action as president?
Clinton: "My first action after inauguration, 1997, will be to continue our policies of economic growth consistent with our values, and investing in our future, ensuring that America will meet the challenges of the 21st century."
Alexander: "After insuring that we are on a path to a balanced budget, I would send to Congress a proposal to completely reform the federal income tax system: simplifying the rules, rolling back the tax hikes of 1993 and 1990, eliminating the capital gains tax, increasing the exemption for working families, and limiting deductions."
Buchanan: "Signing executive orders abolishing quotas, set asides and affirmative action in government, and reversing Bill Clinton's pro-abortion decrees."
Dole: "I will call upon Congress to pass a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution."
Gramm: "As president, my first official action will be an executive order abolishing all quotas, set asides and hiring preferences in the executive branch of the federal government."
Lugar: "I will call the Russian president to emphasize my desire to work with him to ensure the security of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and fissile materials. We must not allow such weapons to fall into the hands of terrorists or hostile states. As commander in chief, I would also meet with defense and military leaders in our own government to emphasize that this is our most urgent priority."
 
 ISSUE: GAMBLING
Should Washington increase taxes on the gambling industry or impose restrictions on its growth?
Clinton: "Regulation of gambling has been primarily a state and local issue. I support establishment of a national commission which will examine the gambling industry and make recommendations for national policy."
Alexander: "No. This is an issue to be decided by states and communities."
Buchanan: "Gambling should be banned on federal property and the president should use the bully pulpit to reverse the spread of legalized gambling in the states."
Dole: "I support legislation establishing a national commission to examine the gambling industry and its impact on local communities. As a general matter, the regulation of gambling is a responsibility of state and local government. I do not support any additional federal tax increases."
Gramm: "States and local governments should decide their own policies towards the gaming industries in their jurisdiction."
Lugar: "Not until we know much more about this dynamically growing industry. The most urgent action related to gambling should be to provide state and local governments with an unbiased and authoritative federal study on the economic and social effects of legalized gambling. I am the original co-sponsor of a bill that would establish a national commission to do just that."
 
 ISSUE: PRIORITIES
What should the government's top priority be in 1996?
Clinton: "The government's top priority in 1996 must be implementing sound economic policies, moving to balance the budget, fighting crime and violence, protecting quality education and health care for the elderly, and a safe and clean environment."
Alexander: "After putting the federal government on the path to a balanced budget, the top priority of the federal government should still be to create an environment where millions of new jobs can be created through lower taxes, fewer regulations, more trade, and more incentives to invest and start new enterprises."
Buchanan: "Downsizing the federal government while slashing the tax burden on American families."
Dole: "I will put the federal budget on a seven-year balance budget plan, provide meaningful tax relief for working Americans, and reform our failed welfare system."
Gramm: "Living up to the bold promises we made in our Contract with America in 1994, including the promise to balance the federal budget."
Lugar: "Beyond ensuring the security of the United States, our top priority must be to bring the U.S. economy out of its current period of stagnant wages and low growth and to achieve long-term improvement in productivity, wages and economic expansion. I believe two steps will yield a breakout: restoring fiscal responsibility to the federal government and eliminating federal taxes on income, saving, and investment."
 
 ISSUE: GOVERNMENT TRAVEL
Do you believe government officials, both executive and legislative, should be permitted to go on fact-finding trips paid for by private interests?
Clinton: "Yes, as long as the travel is consistent with all regulations preventing conflict of interest, and so long as full disclosure is made of the costs of travel, all members of the traveling party and, how the trip is paid for."
Alexander: "No."
Buchanan: "No. There should be a ban on free travel for federal officials paid for by corporations and private interests."
Dole: "Last year, the Senate passed new ethics rules that allow privately financed fact-finding trips only to the extent these trips are related to the performance of a senator's official duties and are publicly disclosed. Under the new rules, senators may not accept reimbursement from private sources for participating in events that are essentially recreational in nature."
Gramm: "I support full disclosure of all travel by federal officials. The voters are the best regulators of such activities. Every official must be prepared to be held accountable for the judgment exercised in the conduct of such activities."
Lugar: "Some such trips may be useful in gaining information, but many others may pose conflicts of interest. The most effective deterrent against undesirable trips is requiring full disclosure of the itinerary, purposes, funding source, and activities of such trips. New Senate gift rules, which I supported, prohibit lobbyists from paying for travel expenses for a senator to meetings, speeches, fact-finding trips, or similar events."
 
 ISSUE: SCHOOL VOUCHERS
Do you favor providing parents with vouchers to send their children to any participating public, private or religious school?
Clinton: "I support increased options and quality of education through such projects as: charter schools, public school choice and national standards. I also support efforts to increase parents' participation in their children's education, such as: parenting education, parental resource centers and through Education Secretary Riley's parental responsibility campaign. I do not support using public funds to pay for private schools."
Alexander: "Yes. I support the establishment of a $ 1 billion GI Bill for Kids that would provide scholarships that could be used at any school - public, private or religious - in order to make it easier for middle- and low- income parents to have a choice about where their children go to school."
Buchanan: "I believe parental rights are paramount in choosing a child's education. I would favor a voucher system only if no government strings whatsoever are attached."
Bob Dole: "Yes."
Gramm: "Yes. I believe that you love your children more than some bureaucrat in Washington who doesn't even know their names. I am confident that the more say parents have in how their children are educated, the better our schools will be."
Lugar: "Yes."
 
 ISSUE: LEGAL IMMIGRATION
Would you support legislation further reducing the number of legal immigrants allowed in this country?
Clinton: "I support lowering the level of legal immigration by a moderate amount at this time, as recommended by former Congresswoman Barbara Jordan, Chair of the Commission on Immigration Reform. Legal immigration reform must be based upon principles that are pro-family, pro-work, and pro-naturalization, retaining opportunities for family reunification as the levels are lowered. We must not let this issue become divisive in this country."
Alexander: "No. Legal immigration is not the problem. Illegal immigration, however, is a problem. We must distinguish between the two and avoid treating those who have come to this country legally - those who play by the rules, pay taxes, and obey the law - as if they were criminals. I would consider legislation that redefined our legal immigration criteria so that we can continue to attract the best people from around the world who want to work hard and make a contribution to American life."
Buchanan: "Yes. I would put a five-year moratorium on legal immigration; however, exceptions would be made for the spouses and minor children of American citizens."
Dole: "I believe our system of legal immigration needs to be re-examined. As part of this re-examination, I support a modest, temporary reduction in the annual rate of legal immigration."
Gramm: "I would support legislation that would further limit the number of immigrants allowed into the country to stop illegal immigration."
Lugar: "No, I would give priority, however, to new legal immigrants who bring capital and special talents to our country. Simply mandating that legal immigration be curtailed will do little to solve the major problem, which is our ability to enforce current laws relating to illegal immigration."
 
 ISSUE: WORK INCENTIVES
Do you favor providing tax incentives for companies to hire and train homeless people who want to work?
Clinton: "By creating partnerships between the federal government and local communities, small businesses and ordinary citizens, we can renew economic activity in our disadvantaged urban and rural areas. My empowerment zone initiative offers $ 3.5 billion in tax incentives and flexible block grants to encourage new private investment in 104 economically distressed communities across America. We have also created a national network of non-traditional community banks which uses federal seed money to leverage billions of dollars more in private capital for community renewal."
Alexander: "I favor turning the $ 25 billion in federal job training programs into job training vouchers for anyone changing jobs or out of work."
Buchanan: "I favor the virtual elimination of all taxes on small business, and a lower, flat tax on larger businesses."
Dole: "The fundamental focus of welfare reform must be the promotion of work and personal responsibility. State governments, local communities, churches, and charitable organizations can often be effective at addressing the poverty problem. The federal government must give these institutions the tools they need to get the job done."
Gramm: "Yes. I am in favor of cutting spending, reducing taxes across the board, and putting all Americans to work."
Lugar: "Yes. Private employers should be encouraged to become more deeply involved in the effort to move people off welfare. Such incentives should be monitored closely to ensure their effectiveness."
 
 ISSUE: FOREIGN AID
Considering cuts being allocated by Congress in the foreign aid budget, do you believe it is in the nation's best interest to continue sending almost half of U.S. aid to two countries, Israel and Egypt?
Clinton: "U.S. assistance to Israel and Egypt furthers our national security interests. We must continue to play our historic role in fostering peace and stability in the Middle East. Helping those parties in the region who are striving for genuine peace is one of my Administration's top foreign policy objectives."
Alexander: "Yes. Israel and Egypt receive a large portion of American aid because they are of great strategic importance to the U.S. Israel and Egypt are two allies in a volatile area of the world. The aid we supply is important in assuring stability in the Middle East and demonstrates our support of the ongoing peace process."
Buchanan: "I would phase out foreign economic aid completely and retain only funds for humanitarian aid in the event of calamities and other crises."
Dole (campaign): "Has worked tirelessly to maintain strong relations with the Israeli government, considered the United States' most important ally in the Middle East."
Gramm: "I want to cut foreign aid, but not when it furthers U.S. national security as in the case of aid to Israel and Egypt."
Lugar: "The current commitment to Israel and Egypt should be preserved for the near future. This funding has been an integral part of our Middle East policy during four administrations. With a delicate peace process continuing to make progress in the Middle East, now is not the time to withdraw our support for these two allies."
 
 ISSUE: GRAZING FEES
Do you support raising the fees charged to ranchers who graze cattle on federal lands?
Clinton: "The American people deserve to receive a fair return for the private use of publicly owned resources. However, we must take into account how any changes to the structure of fees would affect the economies of agricultural and cattle-producing states."
Alexander: "No."
Buchanan: "I am against any increase in federal fees or taxes."
Dole: "No."
Gramm: "Yes, to market value."
Lugar: "Yes."
 
 ISSUE: TRADE
"Overall, do you think the world trade agreement and North American Free Trade Agreement have advanced U.S. interests to date?"
Clinton: "Yes, because the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and North American Free Trade Agreement have eliminated tariffs in sectors where the United States is most competitive overseas. As a result, we have opened new foreign markets for American products, boosting U.S. exports; added billions of dollars to our GDP and produced hundreds of thousands of good-quality jobs at home."
Alexander: "Yes. More trade means more jobs and economic growth for America. That creates a lot of turbulence in the economy and forces many people to change jobs. Yet in order to remain the most competitive country in the world, we have to trade. … I believe we should actively work to reduce barriers to trade and subsidies all around the world and pursue more free trade agreements so that we have even greater access to foreign markets."
Buchanan: "In 1995, NAFTA cost the U.S. 300,000 lost jobs, brought us a multibillion-dollar trade deficit and put American taxpayers on the hook for most of a $ 50 billion bailout of Mexico. I favor free and fair trade only with free and fair traders."
Dole: "I supported the North American Free Trade Agreement and the GATT agreements because I support opening foreign markets to U.S. goods and services. At this time, we need to step back and assess whether these agreements have, in fact, benefited working Americans as originally hoped. On the issue of GATT, it is my hope that Congress will soon pass legislation, that I introduced, that would allow us to withdraw from the World Trade Organization if the United States' rights are being abridged by bureaucrats in Geneva."
Gramm: "Yes. Protectionism is the proven path to bankruptcy. Free trade is the only way to ensure continued prosperity of U.S. workers. The passage of NAFTA and GATT, both of which I supported, will over time create vast economic opportunity for the United States."
Lugar: "Yes. The United States stands to gain more than most nations from GATT. … Strong economic growth in this country will not occur without a vigorous export effort. GATT will enhance this effort. During 1994, U.S. exports to Mexico surged. … This was true across virtually every sector, leading to thousands of new jobs. The collapse of the Mexican economy … was not a result of NAFTA, but of mistakes relating to the management of the peso."
 
 ISSUE: CRIME
Do you favor "truth in sentencing" for violent criminals so they serve full sentences with no chance of parole?
Clinton: "The current policy of 'truth in sentencing' is a good policy because it is wrong for violent criminals to get out on parole before they complete their prison sentence. The sentence given to a rapist or murderer should be the sentence they serve. Serious criminals should know that they will be held responsible for the crimes they commit.'
Alexander: "Yes, but I think longer prison sentences should be set by the nation's governors and state legislators. Congress has no business trying to run state prisons."
Buchanan: "Yes."
Dole: "Yes."
Gramm: "Yes. I also believe it is outrageous that anyone incarcerated in a federal penitentiary for five or 10 years doesn't read or have a skill when they get out. I want every person coming out of prison by the turn of this century to know how to read. I want them to get their high school equivalency in prison."
Lugar: "Yes."
 
 ISSUE: CUBA
Should the trade embargo on Cuba be lifted and, if not, under what conditions should that occur?
Clinton: "The trade embargo is the best leverage the United States has to promote democratic change in Cuba. It denies the Castro regime the benefits that U.S. trade, investment and tourism would provide. The embargo must continue until the Cuban government takes real steps toward recognizing fundamental freedoms and respecting human rights for its citizens."
Alexander: "No. The Castro regime has been unwilling to adopt economic reforms, except under tremendous pressure and as a last resort, and it has been unwilling to adopt political reforms at all. To lift the embargo would risk removing the very forces that push him hardest toward economic change. And worse, it would break the link between our economic policy toward Cuba and Cuba's human rights situation."
Buchanan: "A trade embargo should be maintained until Fidel Castro is out of power. HE is the problem."
Dole: "No."
Gramm: "For countries like Cuba that refuse to acknowledge the tidal wave of freedom that has swept the planet, we should hold firm on our trade embargo - tighten it - until that tidal wave drowns Fidel Castro. Then I want to set out the conditions under which a free Cuba could join its neighbors in the Americas in a free trade agreement."
Lugar: "No. There should be a genuine and demonstrable transition to democracy and individual freedom in Cuba before the embargo is lifted."
 
 ISSUE: ARTS
Do you support federal subsidies for the arts?
Clinton: "The National Endowment for the Arts - in partnership with individuals, corporations and foundations - has brought art and culture to communities large and small throughout the country. The arts provide Americans of varied backgrounds an opportunity to share experiences they otherwise may not have. Federal subsidies for the arts - less than 0.02 percent of the federal budget - help attract tourists, stimulate business, and expand the tax base. This small investment expands the education and cultural base of all Americans."
Alexander: "Funding for the arts should come primarily from the private sector. The National Endowment for the Arts has played an important role, especially in children's education, when it has supported the arts at the state and local level. But the NEA has brought on a lot of its own problems by funding projects that are, frankly, deeply offensive to most Americans. I oppose funding such projects with taxpayer money."
Buchanan: "No. Federal subsidies should be phased out and ended."
Dole: "I opposed the establishment of the National Endowment for the Arts in 1965 and I continue to question why the federal government should be actively involved in the culture business. I support the elimination of the NEA."
Gramm: "As president, I will eliminate the National Endowments for the Arts and Humanities. We need to de-fund federal activities where the government is deciding what is culture, what is art, what is history, and what the public should see."
Lugar: "I believe that we should preserve some federal participation in encouraging the arts, especially those that enrich the lives of children and rural communities. However, as we try to balance the budget, funding for the arts, like other programs, must sustain its share of cuts. I support the approach taken by Congress in the Interior Appropriations bill, which was vetoed by President Clinton. That bill continued funding for the NEA, but at a reduced level."
 
 ISSUE: AIDS
"Would you maintain, increase or decrease federal research grants to universities and hospitals searching for a cure or more effective measures against AIDS?"
Clinton: "Preventing HIV infection and finding a cure for AIDS is a top priority. … That is why we have increased overall AIDS funding by 40 percent, including Ryan White CARE assistance for outpatient care. These policies have already achieved remarkable success: Thanks to recent scientific advances, people with HIV and AIDS live twice as long as they did two years ago; the United States now approves AIDS drugs faster than any European nation. We must not slow the battle to fight HIV and AIDS."
Alexander: "Maintain."
Buchanan: "Medical research should be continued at its present level."
Dole: "I believe we must do everything possible to foster and encourage research aimed at stopping the proliferation of this deadly disease. That's why I support the Ryan White Act, which provides federal assistance for AIDS research. American scientists have the brightest minds and the best technology in the world."
Gramm: "I support continued funding for AIDS research at its current level."
Lugar: "Maintain. Funding for research on AIDS and other diseases should be frequently reviewed to ensure that tax dollars are being spent effectively and the opinion of medical professionals is taken into account."
 
 ISSUE: MINIMUM WAGE
What increases, if any, do you favor in the federal minimum wage?
Clinton: "More and more Americans are working hard trying to live on the minimum wage, which has hit a 40-year low in purchasing power and is no longer enough to support a family; $ 4.25 an hour is not a living wage. Raising the minimum wage by 90 cents an hour over two years to $ 5.15 would enable working Americans to provide for their families."
Alexander: "I don't favor raising the minimum wage. Increases in the minimum wage cost jobs."
Buchanan: "Raising the minimum wage would cut off the bottom rungs of the economic ladder. Thus, I oppose such increases."
Dole: "Many economists argue that an increase in the minimum wage will result in fewer job opportunities for those seeking to enter the work force for the first time. I believe we can create more and better-paying jobs by balancing the federal budget, providing tax relief for American families, and reducing the regulatory burden on our nation's small businesses. These policies will spur economic growth and enhance opportunity."
Gramm: "Minimum wage laws tend to cut the bottom rung off the economic ladder. The law is anti-poor and anti-minority."
Lugar: "I do not favor an increase in the minimum wage at this time. Such a step would reduce the number of jobs created. It also could block many young people from employment, thereby hindering the development of job skills and possibly increasing juvenile crime."
 
 ISSUE: PROTECTED HABITATS
Would you support changing the Endangered Species Act of 1973 to limit the number of habitats eligible to be designated endangered?
Clinton: "No, because habitat protection is essential to conserve endangered species and the ecosystem on which they depend. The Endangered Species Act embodies values important to all Americans and we must maintain our commitment to protect our nation's priceless biological heritage. Working together with state and local governments, this administration is minimizing the act's economic impact on the lives of private landowners, while upholding our responsibility to future generations to leave this planet and its species in better condition than we found them."
Alexander: "We need a better, more scientific system of determining whether a species is actually endangered. I think there is a way of reforming the Endangered Species Act that is less onerous to property owners, gives more incentives to property owners to protect endangered species, but still retains federal protections. … Some of the extreme applications of the … act have become somewhat silly, costing jobs and drifting away from the original purpose of the act."
Buchanan: "We all want to see the bald eagle and grizzly bear survive. But under current law, unelected bureaucrats can declare a rat or a bird or an insect endangered and then an unelected judge can shut down economic activity on millions of acres of land. The Endangered Species Act should be revamped. Congress should be forced to vote on every endangered species and property owners should be compensated whenever their land is seized and converted into a protected habitat."
Dole: "Yes."
Gramm: "Yes."
Lugar: "Yes. The ESA needs to be reformed to place an emphasis on providing incentives for landowners to voluntarily assist in maintaining habitat for endangered species."
 
 ISSUE: MEDICAID
Which level of government should have primary responsibility for Medicaid?
Clinton: "The federal government must work together with the states to ensure that all Americans live with security and dignity. We must retain the federal guarantee to accessible and affordable long-term care for seniors and people with disabilities. We should also give states flexibility to work with local communities to provide care within these national guidelines. We cannot abandon our fundamental obligations to the people who need Medicaid."
Alexander: "State government - that is how we get more innovation and reduce costs."
Buchanan: "The states."
Dole: "State government."
Gramm: "It should be block granted to the states."
Lugar: "I believe that Medicaid can most effectively be administered by the states."
 
 ISSUE: WHAT WORKS
Both parties speak of the need for reforming social programs. Can you give one or two examples of a federal social program that, in your view, works as is?
Clinton: "The Earned Income Tax Credit and Head Start program protect and strengthen families, the fundamental building blocks of our society. That is why the administration has expanded the EITC by $ 21 billion over five years, to protect working families from falling into poverty, and Head Start by $ 760 million, to provide thousands more children with their only access to primary education."
Alexander: "The federal grant and loan programs for students seeking higher education work because almost half of all students depend on them. To be sure, the programs have many management problems and a far too high default rate. But providing students with an opportunity to pursue higher education at the college of their choice is part of the reason that today we have the finest colleges, universities and technical institutes in the world.'
Buchanan: "Throughout history the most successful federal undertaking has been the United States armed forces whenever they are sent into battle to defend the interests of the United States. World War II was a successful federal program."
Dole: "Job Corps."
Gramm: "Social Security and Medicare are two effective federal social programs, and I am committed to any reforms necessary to preserve them. The trustees of the Medicare program have warned the president and Congress that unless action is taken soon, the Medicare trust fund will be totally bankrupt by the year 2002. The Social Security system will remain solvent - because of Ronald Reagan and our 1983 reforms - through the middle of the second decade of the 21st century."
Lugar: "The school lunch program. During consideration of welfare reform legislation, I argued that the school lunch program has been a success and should remain a federal responsibility. It provides lunches to millions of low-income children so that they can learn during a school day."
 
 ISSUE: LOBBYING
Is the current one-year cooling off period between the time senior federal workers leave their jobs and the time they may actively lobby former associates adequate?
Clinton: "This administration enacted an unprecedented ban on senior federal workers lobbying anyone in the federal government within one year of leaving office. We also banned top appointees from lobbying their own agencies for five years after they leave, required senior administration officials to pledge never to lobby on behalf of any foreign government, eliminated the tax write-off for special interest lobbying expenses, and mandated all professional lobbyists to disclose fully who pays them and how much. These historic measures taken together constitute the strictest lobbying reform in history."
Alexander: "Yes."
Buchanan: "No. There should be a five-year ban on all lobbying by former members of Congress or their staff and a five-year ban on lobbying by former White House staff."
Dole: "The Senate has passed a comprehensive lobbying reform bill that tightens the registration and disclosure requirements for Washington-based lobbyists. The Senate has also amended its own rules to dramatically limit what senators may permissibly accept as gifts."
Gramm: "I supported the Lobby Disclosure Act of 1995 which requires greater reporting and disclosure by lobbyists."
Lugar: "I would support an increase in the cooling-off period."
 Load-Date: February 11, 1996

 

End of Document
