

Russians raise the roof over government plan to raise the rent
June 8, 1997, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 672 words
Byline: By MAURA REYNOLDS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TVER, Russia
Body




Nina Ladiyena doesn't complain about much. She doesn't mind sharing her two-room apartment with another family, and she's used to struggling up four flights of stairs with her lame left leg.
But a government plan that could triple her rent has the 73-year-old widow furious. "I'll refuse to pay," she says.
As it is, she gets by on a pension equivalent to $ 48 a month, content to make needlepoint pillows and visit the bathhouse once a week. But 110 miles away in Moscow, the Kremlin's liberal economic reformers are pushing a program that would force her - and nearly all Russians - to pay more rent.
On average, Russians pay only a third of what it really costs to maintain, heat and light their homes. In Tver, an industrial city on the banks of the Volga River northwest of Moscow, families spend less than 6 percent of their income on housing and utilities.
The policy is a legacy of the social guarantees of the Soviet system, in which free housing was seen as a right the state had to provide.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Russian government left housing costs more or less alone, using low rents as a shock absorber for soaring inflation and other economic blows.
"It gave some stability to families. Whatever else happened, at least they were secure in their homes," said Raymond Struyk, director of the Moscow branch of the Urban Institute, a U.S.-based housing think tank.
In fact, Russians now pay less for housing as a proportion of income than they did under the communists.
What residents pay in Russia is not "rent" in the Western sense. It's a fee that goes for upkeep and repairs, paid to a local maintenance organization. Everyone pays the fees, whether they are tenants of the state or became homeowners under the government's privatization program.
The government has been raising the fees slowly since 1994. But increases have been outpaced by inflation, and the government eased up last year before the presidential election, in which Boris Yeltsin faced a stiff challenge from communists promising a return to the Soviet safety net.
Now safely back in office for a five-year term, Yeltsin has restarted his program to create a market economy. In late April, he signed a decree ordering an end to government subsidies for housing and utilities by 2003.
Russia's economy has declined for six years, and housing is perhaps the biggest drain on state coffers, taking 30 percent to 40 percent of local budgets.
Yeltsin's plan calls for Russians eventually to pay 100 percent of their housing costs - and since they now pay less than one-third, most can expect rents to triple.
Government officials don't talk about raising rents; they talk about improving efficiency. For years, economic studies have cited housing as the least efficient sector of the Russian economy,
And everyone agrees most of that money is wasted: Garbage goes uncollected; heat seeps out of underground pipes. In Ladiyena's building, the hot water is off half the time, and residents have to clean the hallways themselves.
The housing maintenance organizations - known as "zheks" - work largely outside the market economy, getting most of their revenue from the state. Since they have little incentive to take care of buildings, most are dirty and in disrepair.
What the government wants to do is take the zheks off the government payroll and make them respond to market forces. Residents will pay them directly and hold them responsible for providing the services.
Many residents doubt the zheks can change.
"I know what will happen," said a pensioner who gave her name as Lida. "They will raise the prices and not make any repairs."
Tver's deputy housing director, Igor Smirnov, says raising rents is absolutely necessary - and absolutely impossible when most residents can't afford the basics.
Tver wants to develop a real housing market, where people get what they pay for, he said, but that means changing attitudes.
"We have a Soviet mentality and a market economy," Smirnov said. "We need reform, but our old sins stop us from going forward."
 Load-Date: June 8, 1997

 

End of Document
