

Russia gets ready to bury the czar, but not the past
The Associated Press
July 9, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 740 words
Byline: By MAURA REYNOLDS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




When Russia's last czar is finally put to rest next week, he will be buried in a smaller-than-usual coffin. Instead of a 21-gun salute, he'll get just 19. And instead of a bishop or patriarch, a local priest will do the honors.
In fact, nearly everything about the funeral of Nicholas II and his family that starts Wednesday has been scaled down - but not because it has become less important.
On the contrary, it has been scaled back precisely because the czar retains enormous political and symbolic power in Russia: The question of how to bury and honor him has inflamed emotions across the political spectrum.
It was 80 years ago that Nicholas, his wife Alexandra, and their five children were executed by a Bolshevik firing squad. All but two of the skeletons were exhumed from a roadside pit in 1991.
When planning for the funeral got under way, it was to be a three-day, no-holds-barred affair, presided over by president and patriarch, attended by world leaders and ranks of royalty. The remains were to travel to the imperial capital of St. Petersburg in a special train that would make stops across Russia, collecting tributes from ordinary citizens.
Now they'll be whisked to St. Petersburg in an Aeroflot jet. The cortege will travel straight from the airport to the cathedral. Decorations will be limited to the streets on which the hearses pass. And when Nicholas is lowered into the crypt, the priest won't even refer to him by name.
Of course, though the symbolism is powerful, it is open to debate. Katherine Verdery, an American anthropologist who has studied how ex-socialist countries rebury former leaders, says such events are politically potent because different people give them different meanings.
"What gives a dead body symbolic effectiveness in politics is precisely its ambiguity, its capacity to evoke a variety of understandings," she says.
For some Russians, burying the family in proper graves is an act of national contrition, a way to ask forgiveness for the sins of communism.
For others, it's a way to reclaim history, to bridge the schism between past and present torn open by the Bolshevik Revolution.
For still others, it could be seen as a kind of blessing for the new regime, a way to pass the scepter of Russian nationhood from the czar to the government of Boris Yeltsin.
The fact that the ceremonies are so weighted with symbolism helps explain why the Russian Orthodox Church decided to keep its participation to a bare minimum. No member of the church hierarchy will be present, and the requiem will be said by a respected, but local, priest.
That decision set off a chain reaction that resulted in the president pulling out and invitations being scaled back to ambassadors and relatives.
The church says it's reluctant because society is still divided over the question of whether the bones are those of the czar.
But scientists say the forensic evidence is indisputable. Three separate sets of DNA tests, including one in Britain and another in the United States, have definitely identified the bones as belonging to Nicholas, his wife Alexandra, three of their five children and four servants.
The debate over the bones' authenticity is actually part of a larger battle within the church over how to patch up relations with Orthodox believers living in exile since the revolution.
The exiled church already has canonized the czar, and would take deep offense if the Moscow-based church were to recognize the bones as the czar's but bury them without the formalities of sainthood. The Moscow patriarchate is considering canonizing the family, but the proceedings will take several more years.
So the church has struck an awkward compromise: It will recite a simple requiem for the souls of all the Romanov martyrs, but not say whose bones are in the small, skeleton-sized coffins. Officially, the church will be burying unnamed "believers."
For their part, ordinary Russians don't quite know what to make of the whole spectacle. A recent poll showed that the largest section of the population, 39 percent, expressed no view on the proceedings.
Vika Smirnova falls into that group. Nonetheless, the 20-year-old laboratory assistant made a pilgrimage to the St. Petersburg cathedral where the coffins will be buried, drawn by the sense that history will be made there next week.
"It all happened a long time ago," she said. "But at the same time these things are close to us. This is our czar, our ruler, our Russia."
 Load-Date: July 9, 1998

 

End of Document
