

Sailing in the wake of the Vikings from Greenland to Newfoundland
The Associated Press
June 1, 1998, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 579 words
Byline: By JERRY HARKAVY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PORTLAND, Maine
Body




Oops! There goes the rudder.
Thus came to an end last year's attempt by W. Hodding Carter and his crew to sail from Greenland to Newfoundland in a 54-foot replica of a Viking ship powered by oars and sail.
But Carter will try again this summer to reenact Leif Eriksson's 1,500-mile voyage a millennium ago that is widely accepted as the first contact between Europe and North America.
The vessel went awry last summer because of rudder problems and had to be towed back to Nuuk, Greenland, where it has remained in dry dock awaiting this year's expedition.
The latest attempt to retrace the historic Viking voyage is likely to lure tourists to the out-of-the-way places where the trip began and ended and Carter, the modern-day incarnation of "Leif the Lucky," thinks that may be a mixed blessing.
Tourism promoters in both Greenland and Newfoundland are looking for a boost in business as a result of publicity about the expedition that will begin in July. Carter and his nine crew members hope to complete the trip by September.
Carter, who plans to return to Greenland this month, became familiar with the island last year. He sees it as a wonderful place to hike and camp, but he worries that a surge in tourist pressure could harm the environment.
"You don't want it to become spoiled," he says. "It's not that I want to be selfish, but you want a place like this to stay like it is - pristine."
Carter recalls trails lined with small birches, willows and other dwarf trees, along with beautiful wildflowers and mosses, some of them edible.
"It's an amazing place to hike," he says. "You walk for a couple of hours and then you come to a glacier, perhaps 100,000 years old."
Even without the Viking reenactment, Greenland is poised for a surge in tourism. The number of visitors had been limited to 5,000 in 1993, 10,000 in 1994 and 16,000 in 1995, but the Danish-controlled island, which operates under home rule, has set an ambitious target of 60,000 tourists annually over the next decade.
Newfoundland, too, can expect a spike in tourist interest, especially in L'Anse aux Meadows, a national historic site that marks the only confirmed Viking settlement in North America.
While not as remote as Greenland, Newfoundland is also a place of awesome beauty, Carter says. "It has all these incredible gorges and this unspoiled land in the interior, with beautiful coastal towns and fishing villages."
Carter plans to donate his Maine-built ship to L'Anse aux Meadows, where it will serve as a reminder of the settlement that the Vikings called Vinland because of the wild grapes they found there.
Carter christened the wooden boat Snorri, the name given to the first Viking child born in the New World.
Newfoundland has already started folding the Vikings and the millennium into its tourism marketing for celebrations focusing on the year 2000.
"Come see what life was like a thousand years ago," says one promo. "Attend a Viking feast and a Viking yell-in, meet trader Bjorn and his crew at a Viking encampment, and take a ride along the coast in a replica of a Viking trading boat."
Carter, whose interest in the Vikings dates back to the history books he read as a child, plans to write a book about his adventure.
In the meantime, his journey will be chronicled in his journal on the World Wide Web and in the catalog of Lands' End, the mail-order clothing company underwriting the trip.
 
 ---
 
The Web site for tracking W. Hodding Carter's Viking expedition is www.beyond.landsend.com. 
 Load-Date: June 1, 1998

 

End of Document
