

Sarajevans Want to Save the Tunnel that Saved the City
November 26, 1996, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 501 words
Byline: By SAMIR KRILIC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SARAJEVO, Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




There was a time when the tunnel was spoken of in whispers, when it could be found only through a web of shared secrets.
The dark, cramped tunnel snaked for half a mile under the Sarajevo airport - a lifeline to the outside world for Sarajevans during the 3 -year siege by rebel Serbs.
But at the end of modern history's longest siege, the time came when the tunnel was no longer needed. Unused, it eroded and partially collapsed.
Now, suggestions that it be filled in properly in order to shore up the airport runway have sparked an outcry. Sarajevans want the tunnel preserved as a reminder of the long isolation the city suffered.
"Covering up the tunnel is completely out of the question," Bosnian Prime Minister Hasan Muratovic told the Dnevni Avaz daily on Saturday.
The tunnel is "sacred" and no one has the right to touch it, Minister of Communications and Transport Rasim Gacanovic told The Associated Press.
"The tunnel has to stay as a permanent monument for thousands of generations to come," Gacanovic said. "If it weren't for the tunnel, God knows what would have happened to Sarajevo."
Ordinary Sarajevans dug the tunnel during the summer of 1993. It was only 5-feet-high because the water table kept them from digging any deeper.
Those who made the 45-minute journey had to walk hunched over careful not to bump their heads on the overhead rafters, sloshing through ankle-deep mud and water. If they encountered travelers coming from the opposition direction, they had to crunch up against the dirt walls.
During the war, Sarajevans spoke of the tunnel secretly: Officials refused to acknowledge its existence.
But its presence has become all too obvious: Its cave-in has caused structural problems for the airport runway and on Monday, aviation officials and NATO engineers ordered that 650 yards of the tarmac be closed.
French experts have suggested that the tunnel be filled in, preferably with concrete.
Those who relied on the tunnel for the delivery of food, and even smuggled weapons, say it must be preserved.
"The tunnel fed us, armed us, and saved our wounded when they had to be evacuated," said Atif Smajkic, 35, a demobilized government army soldier. "It has to stay, as a memory of what people are able to do to survive."
Smajkic was one of the soldiers who secured the tunnel, practically living at one of the entrances for more than a year.
"Till the day I die, I will remember what the tunnel meant to us then," Smajkic said. "I would like my children and my grandchildren to see the tunnel and see what we had to go through to save Sarajevo."
Ismet Cengic, the head of the Novi Grad district where the airport and the tunnel are located, said city officials plan to build a 250-room hotel next to one of the tunnel's entrances. Midhat Kulo, the head of a government-owned chain of hotels and restaurants, said his company was prepared to take on the project.
"We are ready because this city needs the tunnel," Kulo said. "Not to mention how much money can be earned from this attraction."
 Load-Date: November 26, 1996

 

End of Document
