

Saving the world through flow charts: Is U.N. reform missing the point?
July 15, 1997, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 679 words
Byline: AP News Analysis, By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




With revised flow charts and promises to slim down, the United Nations hopes to convince a skeptical Congress and public that it is taking seriously Washington's demands to reform.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan plans to announce his reform program Wednesday. It is expected to focus on administrative changes aimed at cutting staff, better coordinating U.N. operations worldwide and allowing the organization to function with a negative growth budget.
Annan hopes to reverse the perception, widespread in the United States, that the United Nations is a bloated, ineffectual organization that wastes American taxpayers' money.
Regardless of its effectiveness, the United Nations already is a smaller organization than it is often perceived.
The annual U.N. operating budget - about $ 2.6 billion - is less than the current two-year budget for the state of North Dakota, which is about $ 4 billion. Counting the U.N. headquarters and staffs of independent U.N. agencies, which maintain their own budgets, the U.N. system employs about 53,300 people worldwide.
By comparison, the state of Hawaii employs 62,500 people, including part-time and seasonal workers.
Some U.N. officials and American supporters believe the United Nations' image problem can be blamed on the notion that it doesn't do anything.
From a distance, it may look like an organization that stands by and watches a coup in Cambodia, allows thousands of Hutu refugees to die in the Congo, fails to bring peace to Somalia and issues empty declarations while those indicted for war crimes in the former Yugoslavia roam free.
The question is who's to blame?
"A lot of what the U.N. can do has to do with what the international community wants it to do," said John Tessitore of the U.N. Association of the United States. "And that has to do with the degree to which the international community is willing to take risks to effect change."
The United Nations is an instrument of the 185 member-states, in particular the 15-member Security Council. The council is dominated by the five permanent members - the United States, Britain, France, China and Russia - each of which can veto U.N. resolutions.
It is the council that dispatches peacekeepers to world trouble spots and decides which crises require U.N. attention.
In the Cambodian crisis, for example, the council met Friday to discuss the ouster of First Prime Minister Norodom Ranariddh by his co-premier, Hun Sen. As the process threatened to unravel, the council simply called for mediation and avoided calling the upheaval a coup. That was largely because two members - China and Japan - insisted on a soft response.
The other council members were not prepared to demand more. Yet it was the United Nations - rather than the individual member-states - left to appear vacillating.
The council also nominates the secretary-general. Last year, the United States used its veto to block a second term for Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, ostensibly because he opposed reform.
Boutros-Ghali's supporters also believed Washington was uncomfortable with his independent stand on issues including the Middle East and Yugoslavia. The message was that a secretary-general should follow the council's lead.
For decades, the East-West conflict stymied the effectiveness of the United Nations since both Washington and Moscow could veto moves in the council that threatened their interests.
The end of the Cold War brought new hope that the major powers could work together through a revitalized United Nations. That meant a more vigorous role for the Security Council in combating world crises.
But the spirit of "multi-lateralism" took a big hit in Somalia, when 18 elite American soldiers were killed in an attack on the stronghold of warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid in October 1993.
Three days later, President Clinton announced that all American forces, which reached a peak of 28,000, would be withdrawn. It also marked the high-water mark in Washington's appetite for strong U.N. action.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Robert Reid is United Nations chief correspondent for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: July 15, 1997

 

End of Document
