

Searchers Recover All Bodies From The Wreckage of Brown's Plane
April 4, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1130 words
Byline: By TONY SMITH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VELJI DOL, Croatia
Body




A temporary morgue was ready today at Dubrovnik airport for the difficult task of identifying the remains of Commerce Secretary Ron Brown and at least 32 others who died when their plane crashed into a hill during a violent storm.
"We have found the last victim," Croatian Interior Minister Ivan Jarnjak told the state HINA news agency today, confirming that no one survived the crash of the U.S. Air Force plane on Wednesday.
But by afternoon, all the bodies except one were still at the scene, U.S. Ambassador to Croatia Peter Galbraith said. A woman crew member had been found alive at the scene, but she died as a NATO helicopter carried her to the hospital.
Dubrovnik's chief pathologist Igor Boric said he expected American pathologists to assist him at the morgue in identifying bodies as they arrived.
Pentagon officials in Washington said 27 passengers and six crew members were aboard the T-43 plane, the military version of the Boeing 737, when it slammed into a hill known locally at Sveti Ivan, or St. John.
But Galbraith said there were 33 to 35 people on the plane, including Americans and two Croatians, an interpreter and a photographer. He said investigators were still trying to determine the number of people on board.
"In travel in this part of the world, and in these conditions, you don't always get a good (passenger) manifest," he told a news conference.
The plane had been cleared to land at Dubrovnik airport, which lies south of the historic Adriatic port city, when it crashed.
Croatia's ambassador to the United States, Miomir Zuzul, said the plane first hit the hill with its right wing, then its right engine. "The aircraft is not completely destroyed," he told Associated Press Television.
Reasons for the crash remained unclear.
"I can simply state two facts: First, the weather yesterday as the plane flew in was terrible. People in Dubrovnik say it was the worst storm in decades," Galbraith said.
"Secondly, the plane was not where it should have been. And it seems to have flown not along the coast, but along the valley. Beyond that point, I don't want to speculate on what might have caused the crash," he said.
He said there was no evidence of hostile fire.
Croatian officials, including Prime Minister Zlatko Matesa and the head of civilian air traffic control, Miljenko Radic, said two boxes were found inside the plane's tail and they had been identified as flight data recorders.
But in Washington, U.S. Air Force spokesman Maj. Robin Chandler said the plane did not have such voice and data recorders, known as "black boxes," but that U.S. officials were checking to see if there was other equipment on board that might have given rise to the confusion.
Besides Brown and Commerce Department officials, the passengers included New York Times correspondent Nathaniel Nash and about a dozen top American executives exploring business opportunities in the Balkans. A Croatian news photographer for the daily Slobodna Dalmacija newspaper was also on board.
In Washington, President Clinton called Brown "a magnificent life force" and urged prayers for those aboard the lost flight.
Croatian newspapers today echoed the feeling of deep shock in a nation just recovering from 4 years of Balkan war and hopeful that resorts like Dubrovnik would lure tourists en masse this summer to its stunning Adriatic coast.
"We mourn alongside America," the Vjesnik daily said in an editorial under banner headlines: "Brown's plane down - our tragedy too."
U.S. military officials said searchers arrived at the crash site at 5:50 a.m. today. They joined three Americans who had been lowered in by helicopter earlier and more than 100 Croatian police and 100 French seamen.
Reporters were able to get close enough to the crash site Wednesday to see the plane, its middle burned, resting on its belly on the top of a craggy hill. The area is said to be laced with land mines from the 1991 Serb-Croat war.
"Only a crazy man would go there," said Zuzul, the Croatian ambassador.
The plane took off from Tuzla in northern Bosnia, the headquarters for U.S. soldiers with the NATO-led peace mission, after Brown had surprised the troops with McDonald's hamburgers and sports videotapes.
There was no indication that any of the former warring partners in Bosnia or Croatia attacked the plane. Residents in the coastal village of Velji Dol - pronounced VEL-yee Dohl - said it crashed during one of the worst storms in decades.
Croatian President Franjo Tudjman announced a top-level commission of inquiry into the plane crash.
However, investigators will be lacking an essential tool. The Air Force said the 23-year-old plane was not equipped with flight data recorder, unlike commercial planes. The devices record voice transmissions and information about the plane's systems.
Zuzul said four planes, including one he was flying on, landed at Dubrovnik shortly before Brown's plane was due, and the landings went normally.
Radic, the head of Croatia's civilian air traffic control, told Croatian state TV that the plane approached Dubrovnik airport "left of the usual route."
"It should not have been there," he said.
The Air Force said because of the bad weather, the plane was making an instrument approach. Air Force Lt. Gen. Howell Estes said the plane veered off course on its final approach but had not reported any problems.
Brown's aircraft disappeared from radar screens at 2:52 p.m. (7:52 a.m. EST) between the tiny island of Kalamota, a few miles northwest of Dubrovnik, and the Cilipi airport, Croatian security sources said. Visibility in the area was no more than 100 yards, they said.
The airport is situated in mountainous terrain about three miles inland from the Adriatic Sea. Planes usually approach it from over the water. Before landing, they encounter hills 300 to 600 feet high before a quick descent to the two-mile-long runway.
Ivo Djuricic was on the hill behind his house when he heard the plane overhead. "It was very strange to hear it," he said, "because planes never fly above here."
He climbed up the hill until he saw the plane was "in large pieces, loosely together." Then he ran back, jumped in his car and raced to the village to call police.
The plane was the same one used earlier this week in the Balkans by Defense Secretary William Perry and for the recent trip to Bosnia by First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and her daughter, Chelsea.
Brown, who had planned to spend three days in Bosnia and Croatia, had said he was "really exhilarated" by his Wednesday visit to Bosnia.
He praised the soldiers in Tuzla, saying that without the NATO-led force, Bosnians wouldn't be returning to their homes, families would not be reunited, and meetings between former enemies would not be taking place.
"So all of the United States says thanks to all of you," he told them.
 Load-Date: April 4, 1996

 

End of Document
