

Serb leader loses the battles, but wins the power
The Associated Press
April 4, 1999, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 685 words
Byline: By DUSAN STOJANOVIC, Associated Press Writer
Body




Slobodan Milosevic has lost every battle he has fought - except the battle to stay in power.
His military campaigns began in 1991 with the intention of expanding his influence throughout Yugoslavia. Instead, the federation crumbled as three republics - Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia - broke away one by one.
Now the Serb-ruled Yugoslav state is smaller than ever, with the prospect of shrinking further.
Yet, despite NATO attacks on his military, and warnings by Western leaders he may lose Kosovo if he doesn't stop his campaign against the province's ethnic Albanians, Milosevic's power at home seems to be growing with every foreign missile that hits.
"Milosevic has decided to go to the very end," Milo Djukanovic, the pro-Western president of Serbia's sister Yugoslav republic, Montenegro, said five days before NATO began its air raids.
"Why do I think so? Because he has realized that the political compromise he needs to make for Kosovo with ethnic Albanians could jeopardize his authority … and his grip on power is the most important thing to him."
Several independent analysts in Belgrade, the Yugoslav capital, predict Milosevic won't fall from power even if Serbia shrinks to a tiny territory as the result of all the military and political losses it has suffered during his 10-year rule.
During that time, Milosevic started four wars within former Yugoslavia: in Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia and now in Serbia's province of Kosovo. He lost the first three, and may lose the latest, amid tremendous suffering for both his enemies and the Serbs.
The NATO campaign is allowing Milosevic, as he always has, to build on Serb nationalist sentiments and the Serbs' historic distrust of foreign influence.
With NATO bombs hitting everywhere, including downtown Belgrade, the West has an impossible task to convince the Serbs that this is only an attack on Milosevic's government and not against their country. And Milosevic knows it.
As soon as the first bombs fell on March 24, Milosevic quickly moved against elements that have jeopardized his autocratic rule: rebel Kosovo Albanians, independent domestic news media and foreign journalists. Opposition leaders, who have been silenced by the NATO attacks, could come next, along with Montenegro's leaders.
Milosevic, 58, was dubbed "Little Lenin" by his Communist Party comrades when he started rising up the party ranks in the mid-1960s.
He was born in Pozarevac, an industrial city in central Serbia, to a father who was a theologian and a mother who was a teacher. Official biographies contain little information on his youth, but some reports say both parents committed suicide.
Milosevic embraced communism only until 1986, when he took control of Yugoslavia in a putsch against his best friend, former Serbian President Ivan Stambolic. With communism collapsing across eastern Europe - and with Serbs wanting to join the revolution - he refashioned himself as an ultra-nationalist.
In 1987, he went to Kosovo, the cradle of the Serbian medieval state, to tell local Serbs worried by ethnic Albanian dominance in the province that "no one will beat you again."
That pledge became historic. In 1989, Milosevic revoked the Kosovo Albanians' autonomy, triggering a chain reaction leading to the Yugoslav wars that killed tens of thousands and forced hundreds of thousands to flee their homes.
Despite the bloodshed - the worst carnage in Europe since World War II - and Yugoslavia's loss of Serb-inhabited territories in Croatia and Bosnia, Milosevic emerged stronger then ever.
He signed a U.S.-sponsored Bosnia peace agreement in 1995, giving him an aura of a peacemaker.
But the Milosevic-created crisis has come full circle, returning to Kosovo.
Many analysts in Belgrade say Milosevic chose war with NATO, over peace in Kosovo, because he knew he would lose the province anyway. This way, he can proclaim he fought the West gallantly and had to give up Kosovo only because of NATO's far superior power, they say.
And with the NATO attacks fueling Serb hatred for anything Western - including democracy - Milosevic is strengthening his iron grip on power in Belgrade.
 Load-Date: April 4, 1999

 

End of Document
