

Serb rebels wins the ear of the Clinton administration
The Associated Press
June 29, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 518 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




As they make headway on the blood-soaked turf of Kosovo, fighters from the rebellious Serbian province are gradually commanding the attention of the Clinton administration.
State Department officials met with members of the Kosovo Liberation Army twice last week, and spokesman Lee McClenny said Monday the rebels merited a seat at the table.
"One would hope they would join the conversations on the Albanian Kosovo side," McClenny said. But with the militants advancing on the ground, taking over roads and villages, there was no indication the negotiations long sought by the administration were in sight.
Richard Holbrooke, the chief American negotiator in the Balkans who is leaving the job to become U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, made several gloomy statements over the weekend.
Holbrooke, who met with KLA fighters in a Kosovo village, said, "I wouldn't want to get your expectations up that we're going to have any breakthrough, because the situation is quite difficult."
Before Holbrooke's meeting with the KLA fighters and a separate, unpublicized session Robert Gelbard, a senior U.S. mediator, had with top KLA officials, the State Department was publicly accusing the KLA of terrorism.
For representation for the ethnic Albanians, who make up nearly 90 percent of Kosovo's population, the Clinton administration has looked to Ibraham Rugova, a moderate whose own tone seems to be shifting from a demand for recovering the autonomy that was stripped away by Yugoslavia in 1989 to independence.
Yugoslavia, which almost disintegrated with the breakaway of Croatia, Bosnia, Macedonia and Slovenia earlier in the decade, is trying to hold on to Kosovo and has used tough tactics to try to suppress the ethnic Albanians.
Scores have been killed by Serb troops and an estimated 70,000 made homeless. Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic has rejected U.S. demands for an unconditional cease-fire and a pullback of the troops.
On Monday, McClenny announced a $ 3.55 million humanitarian contribution. Most of the money, $ 2.6 million, will go to the U.N. refugees commission, and $ 700,000 to the International Red Cross.
Rugova, a pacifist, was elected would-be president of Kosovo in underground elections in 1992. Milosevic's stand on negotiations with him has been ambiguous. At the behest of Russian President Boris Yeltsin, the Yugoslav president agreed in principle to negotiations but apparently not the systematic and substantive talks the Clinton administration has sought.
McClenny said the decision to have U.S. talks with KLA leaders and fighters and to call for a KLA seat in negotiations did not mean the Clinton administration was shifting policy or turning away from Rugova.
"This is a recognition of a reality, a situation on the ground" in which the KLA is gaining influence, the spokesman said. "And by talking to them and by bringing them into the process, we think that improves the chances that the process of diplomacy negotiation will be successful."
He said the State Department was working in close consultation with Rugova's group, and "we don't think it's an either/or prospect."
 Load-Date: June 29, 1998

 

End of Document
