

Serbs in the U.S. sector of Kosovo feel the heat to leave
The Associated Press
June 12, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 731 words
Byline: By DANICA KIRKA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GNJILANE, Yugoslavia
Body




Just the thought of going to school makes Maja Ristic, an 11-year-old Kosovo Serb run away in tears.
Like many other Serbs, who have managed to stick it out since NATO-led forces entered the province after a 78-day air war that was suspended a year ago Saturday, Ristic and her family have had enough.
It gets ever harder to be a Serb in Kosovo.
Serb kids in this town, run by the U.S. Army, are escorted to church-run classes by American soldiers in full battle gear or by U.N. police whose only task is to make sure they get there safely.
Maja's mother Vesna, 28, often tags along with the escort taking her children to school - her only way to safely buy groceries.
Serbs are reviled collectively by most of Kosovo's majority ethnic Albanian population, seen as acting in complicity with Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's decade-long apartheid-like campaign here. Worst still, they are attacked - eight Serbs have died in recent days.
The U.N. refugee agency says that Serbs are leaving some communities in the American sector of Kosovo at such an alarming rate that many cities will have no Serbs living there at all by the end of the year.
"That is apparently where the Serb community is under the most pressure," said Peter Kessler, spokesman for the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. Even though the U.S. sector once had more Serb enclaves than any other sector of Kosovo, Kessler said that in some communities "every single house is for sale."
Serbs have been leaving Kosovo even in the years before the war, uncomfortable with the increasing tension, ratcheted up by Milosevic's regime. Still, after Milosevic lost control of this southern province of Yugoslavia, tens of thousands more have gone.
The exodus began at first because of attacks leveled in revenge for Milosevic's crackdown on ethnic Albanians. Now though, even international officials have joined Serb political leaders in claiming that ethnic Albanians are conducting a concerted campaign to erase non-Albanians from the province to better prepare Kosovo for moves toward independence.
On Friday, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan called the recent violence an "orchestrated campaign" against the Serbs.
The increasing pressure on the Serbs comes at a sensitive moment politically - Monday's one-year anniversary of NATO's arrival. Serbs have grown impatient with their almost virtual isolation in Kosovo and complained to the U.N. Security Council.
All of which is not helping the Ristic family. They've lived alongside a curving back alley in central Gnjilane for 50 years, in three houses embellished with flower pots, a garden patch and wooden benches for sitting in the sun.
They know their past life is gone now. They are among the last holdouts in a neighborhood surrounding the Serbian Orthodox Church that was once almost completely Serb. Everyone else has sold their homes, picked up and gone.
They'd go too, but they want to sell all three houses and leave together and no one has that kind of money. Their homes are the only thing they own.
"The poor are even a burden to God," said Leposava Ristic, the family's grandmother, who has worked all her life as a cleaning lady.
She and her family and seven now live a life of controlled house arrest. Leposava, 70, is afraid to sit in her garden, in case someone tries to cut her throat. The children won't leave the family's yard.
U.S. Army First Lt. Vlad Levichev, who is in charge of this part of city, knows their problems too well. Even though the 24-year-old officer from West Roxbury, Mass., has only been here three weeks, he's learned a lot about the 61 Serb families that live among the some 600 homes in his patch of Kosovo.
He's even mastered the irony of the present situation - that American forces whom the Serbs see as being responsible for the air war in the first place have now become their greatest defenders.
"They know that they are only here because of us," he said, about the Ristics' decision to stay. Yet the Ristic family fear even the Americans in the full battle gear may not be enough to keep them save.
Even though they've had no troubles with their Albanian neighbors, they fear outsiders, especially the young thugs they see wandering the streets. With resignation, they admit that unless something changes, it's only a matter of time before they go, too.
"Just think about it," Leposava says. "There won't be a Serb soul anywhere."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY117-118
 Load-Date: June 13, 2000

 

End of Document
