

Settlement brings the abortion pill closer to market in the U.S.
February 12, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 335 words
Byline: By AMANDA COVARRUBIAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN DIEGO
Body




A lawsuit holding up the introduction of the abortion pill RU-486 in the United States has been settled, meaning the drug could be on the market by the end of the year, its chief sponsor said Wednesday.
The dispute was between the Population Council, the nonprofit organization that holds the U.S. rights to the drug, and Neogen Investors, which was licensed by the council to manufacture and distribute RU-486.
After reaching the licensing agreement with Neogen, the Population Council sued Neogen owner Joseph D. Pike, accusing him of hiding his criminal past - he is a disbarred lawyer accused of forgery - to secure the rights. The Population Council demanded Pike's removal from the project.
Under the settlement reached Tuesday, Pike has sold much of his interest in the project, the Population Council said.
The Population Council said it has established a new company, Advances for Choice, to assume responsibility for distributing the drug.
The pill must still receive final approval from the Food and Drug Administration. The FDA declared the pill safe and effective in September but is awaiting more information on manufacturing and labeling.
The Population Council said RU-486 could be the market by the end of 1997. Just last year, the council said RU-486 could be available to American women by mid-1997.
RU-486 was first used in France in 1988 and has already been taken by 200,000 European women. But its U.S. introduction has been held up for years by anti-abortion forces, with opponents threatening at one point to boycott French manufacturer Roussel Uclaf if it sold the drug here.
Under pressure from the Clinton administration, Roussel Uclaf finally donated the U.S. marketing rights to the Population Council in 1994.
The Population Council had sued Pike for fraud to force him to relinquish control of NeoGen. The council wanted him out of the picture because his background could scare off investors and provide ammunition to abortion foes.
The U.S. rights could be worth $ 100 million annually.
 Load-Date: February 12, 1997

 

End of Document
