

Soft snow turns day on the Austrian slopes into nightmare
The Associated Press
March 2, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1566 words
Byline: By ALEXANDER G. HIGGINS, Associated Press Writers
Dateline: GALTUER, Austria
Body




It started just minutes after 4 p.m.
Near the peak of the 7,900-foot Sonnenberg in the Austrian Alps snow started sliding in two places. The rolling masses picked up speed and joined together, sweeping along rocks, trees and anything else in their path.
The whole side of the mountain turned into a hurtling cloud of snow. By the time it hit the edge of Galtuer it was traveling an estimated 125-185 mph.
"White Death," one of the chief dangers of the Alpine winter, had struck with awesome force.
Seemingly endless snowfall had made skiing unsafe for days, and Tony Palin found other ways to spend his time in one of the prime vacation spots in the Austrian Alps.
On the afternoon of Feb. 23, the resident of Manchester, England, strolled around Galtuer with his son-in-law, videotaping the picture-postcard village with its church spire, hotels and Tyrolean chalets against the backdrop of mountains that line the Paznaun Valley.
Inside one of the houses the pair passed was 27-year-old ski instructor Walter Jehle, wearing jogging pants and an orange sweater. Relaxing in his living room, Jehle zapped through television programs. With the ski slopes shut down because of avalanche danger, there was no demand for his services.
A sledding competition organized by the village had diverted many of the villagers and 3,000 visitors, and they were returning rosy-cheeked to hotels and houses to warm by the fire.
Hanno Heinz, 17, of Rastatt, Germany, was with friends enjoying a warm drink in their hotel.
Tourism director Gerhard Walter was in his office. Avalanches that had closed the valley - cutting off villages and towns - complicated his job of keeping visitors happy, but this is the Alps and avalanches are a fact of life.
The 692 residents of Galtuer pride themselves on their idyllic location, which they advertise as providing year-round health benefits in clean air. And, while avalanches are inconvenient when they interrupt traffic in and out of the valley, the center of the village was considered far enough from the mountains to be out of harm's way.
Sheets of snow and rock had slid down the mountains in the past, but for 300 years there was no record of them going into the "green zone" considered safe for building.
But this year was different. Skiing had been banned for a week and the Tyrolean provincial government had set up a crisis group to deal with the mounting snow. At the meeting the previous Friday, two meteorologists warned that up to 10 feet of new snow was on the way.
That was a particularly dangerous formula - tons of new powder on top of a slippery layer of older snow packed hard by rain and turned to ice by a plunge in temperatures. Warnings went out across the Austrian Alps that the risk of new avalanches was extremely high. In the end, an additional 6 feet fell above Galtuer. That was enough.
The avalanche roared past the church, right into the green zone where Palin had been walking.
"We were back in our room changing clothes when we heard a rattling noise," he said.
Walter said it sounded to him like a "muffled roar."
"I felt something," said Jehle, "and I thought, 'That's not a little one.' I ran from the living room to the kitchen, and I had just gotten to the tile stove when the avalanche came in. It knocked me off my feet."
His mountaineering experience taught him to cover his mouth and nose with his hands to create an air pocket.
"Then everything went black," Jehle said. "It was like I was in concrete. I could only just move my fingers."
Heinz said he thought at first that a huge storm had started. Even though his hotel was some distance from the avalanche, the shock wave blew open the doors and hinged windows and covered the floor with snow.
"We ran outside to help, but there was so much snow in the air we couldn't see three meters (10 feet) in front of us," Heinz said.
Walter and Palin also joined in the desperate search. They knew that every second counts in saving someone caught in an avalanche because suffocation is the major cause of death. Most victims die within the first 35 minutes, after they use up the available oxygen. Even if they have a larger air pocket, people have little chance of living beyond two hours.
"After a quarter-hour I noticed the oxygen running out, and my breathing got faster," said Jehle. "I thought, 'That's it."' He blacked out.
The searchers, with little more than shovels, probing rods and their bare hands, were able to pull some people from the snow. But the avalanche was too large - an estimated 500 yards wide and up to 15 feet deep. Cars were tossed around like toys. Buildings were smashed.
Within minutes the crisis staff at the army barracks in Landeck, 25 miles away, received the first distress call:
"We need search teams, avalanche dogs, doctors and heated tents. Please help us. We need all available resources."
Emergency crews were assembled immediately, but had to stay in Landeck all night because a snowstorm made it impossible to fly helicopters - the only way to reach Galtuer.
In the town, up to 300 volunteers dug through the night. Palin helped pull people from a building whose roof looked ready to cave in. A Belgian woman who gave her name only as Anita said she and her husband found two little girls who appeared to be dead. She said she was unable to find out later whether they were revived.
Jehle's brother, Helmut, his neighbor Rainer Kurz and a tourist dug frantically for three hours until they freed Jehle. His body temperature had dropped to under 95 degrees, and his left leg was broken. His three-year-old house was destroyed.
"I thought it was a 'dry snow' avalanche" - the type known for a destructive shock wave of air, Jehle said from his hospital bed. "But I didn't guess it was such a monster avalanche."
Unable to resume ski instructing immediately, he said he also had learned his insurance would not pay for rebuilding the house.
"But somehow I'll make it. I'm still young. I'll build the house again," he said. "I was just lucky."
 
 Despite the lack of immediate outside help, many visitors in Galtuer were impressed with how smoothly the initial hours went.
"Everything was so organized," said Klaus Graversen of Copenhagen, Denmark, who left his wife, Karoline, and 2-month-old daughter, Hanna, in their hotel room while he helped dig.
Doctors among the tourists joined with the village physician to set up an emergency hospital in the indoor tennis court. They gave initial treatment to six people with broken bones and two with chest injuries. By daybreak 17 people had been pulled from the snow alive and 10 had been found dead. More than 20 were still missing.
The storm abated, and relays of helicopters began taking off from Landeck at 6:50 a.m., flying emergency supplies and rescuers into the narrow valley and flying out victims. But the flights had to be halted at 4 p.m., when a new snowstorm reduced visibility to the danger point.
-----
One helicopter pilot, Walter Strolz, made a last trip to Galtuer despite the risky conditions, intending to stay the night there in case he was needed urgently at that end. As he was flying in, a new avalanche hit a cluster of houses at Valzur a few miles from Galtuer.
Strolz immediately went to Valzur with one rescuer, then flew to pick up more help, including dog trainer Guenther Walser and his 6-year-old brown Muensterlaender, a German breed that resembles a springer spaniel. Walser had been training Arko for four years, and this was his first chance to save people.
Hearing there might be someone trapped in a snow-filled house, Walser sent in Arko, who quickly started wagging its tail and digging with its paws - the signal it had found a human. Two rescuers started digging at the wall of snow. After 1 hour and 45 minutes, they freed 4-year-old Alexander Walter.
His body temperature was dangerously low, and Strolz risked another flight to fly Alexander the short distance to Galtuer, where doctors were able to resuscitate him. One other person would be saved in Valzur, but another person found alive died a short time later. Six others also died.
Among the Valzur victims apparently were the owners of a large black dog. The very cold and frightened German shepherd-Labrador mix was found in the rubble of a house 24 hours after the avalanche. Karl Riemer, an army lieutenant, adopted the dog and renamed him Jacky. The pet has become the mascot of the Landeck barracks.
 
 Weather cleared the next day and larger helicopters from the U.S. Army, Germany, France and Switzerland joined in the airlift. But the sunshine melted snow on the mountains, increasing the risk of more avalanches and preventing the clearing of the road into the valley.
The search for survivors continued in Galtuer, but the number of people rescued stopped at 23 as one missing person after another was found dead. The last, a 10-year-old German girl, was discovered Saturday morning in the snow-packed basement of a house, nearly four days after the avalanche.
In all, 38 people died in Galtuer and Valzur, 12 of them children. Two families were wiped out. The victims were from Germany, Austria, the Netherlands and Denmark.
Jehle said villagers who know the mountains expected the Galtuer avalanche, but nothing that big - the deadliest in the Alps since 1970.
"Avalanches are unpredictable," he said. "There's a lot humans can do. Barriers had been made and trees planted to stop this avalanche. But nature has the last word."
 Load-Date: March 2, 1999

 

End of Document
