

Solti's memoirs reveal the musician and the man
November 7, 1997, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 404 words
Byline: By PRUDENCE HELLER, Associated Press Writer
Body




"Music, First and Last": The title of the final chapter of conductor Sir Georg Solti's "Memoirs" (Knopf, $ 25.95) sums up his life.
And the reader is impressed to learn just how much hard work, talent and luck it takes to become world-renowned in that field.
In America, Solti is most readily associated with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, where he was musical director for 22 years until 1991 and which he loved dearly. But much of his career was in opera. And he started out as a pianist.
Solti was born in Hungary in 1912, when the Austro-Hungarian Empire still existed. He got his major training at the Liszt Academy in Budapest, where Bela Bartok, Zoltan Kodaly, Erno Dohnanyi and Leo Weiner were among the teachers.
Solti's family was Jewish. As the Nazis tightened their grip on Europe, a Hungarian industrialist and music lover persuaded Solti to go to Switzerland.
He found little warmth among the Swiss, but he did win a prestigious piano competition that brought him some fame.
Increasingly, he wanted to focus on conducting. And he got his chance after World War II in West Germany, first as music director of the Bavarian State Opera in Munich, then with the Frankfurt Opera. Then came Britain's Royal Opera. And then, the Chicago Symphony, which he praises highly for its musicians' technical skill and their serious attitude toward music.
Solti mentions just about everyone who was important in classical music during his long life.
But he also reveals a bit of the man. His first marriage, to a Swiss, ended in divorce. His second marriage, to a British journalist, was a happy one that produced two daughters and completed a warm family circle.
Solti died of a heart attack in September. He had just finished correcting the manuscript of his memoirs and was scheduled to give his 1,000th performance with the Chicago orchestra in October.
Knighted by the British, he also cherished other, simpler honors: the one word "bene" ("good") Arturo Toscanini said when he heard the young Solti conduct; and the Chicago orchestra's gift on his 75th birthday - a framed statement, signed by each member, describing him as a friend as well as a maestro.
"I have had an enormously lucky life," Solti wrote in his final chapter. "I have said many times, and believe more every day, that I have a guardian angel who guides me and protects me."
He also wrote: "All my life, I have been preoccupied with trying to be a good musician. ..."
 Load-Date: November 7, 1997

 

End of Document
