

Someone has to lose: the Conservatives, or the pollsters
April 30, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 763 words
Byline: By ROBERT BARR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Someone has to lose Britain's national election on Thursday, the governing Conservatives or the pollsters.
Tony Blair's Labor party ended the campaign with a fat lead in the polls, while Prime Minister John Major gamely struggled to convince voters there was still hope for his Conservatives.
"I understand why some people find the argument for change attractive," Major said Wednesday at the start of a last day of dogged campaigning. "Eighteen years is a long time … and it's easy to overlook the achievements."
Blair told a rally in Stockton-on-Tees: "The pundits may have written this election off and said it's all over, the media may say that, the Tories may have given up, but I tell you, this election is not over until it is over ..."
At six weeks, it was the longest British campaign in memory. Major's calculation was that Labor would crack under the pressure, and that a growing, low-inflation economy would spread cheer among wavering voters.
Throughout the campaign, however, the polls have shown a strong tide running against a Conservative Party that has won the last four elections and dramatically changed the British political landscape since Margaret Thatcher's first win in 1979.
The polls showed Labor ahead five years ago, too, but not on the scale of recent surveys, which mainly have indicated 16- to 22-point leads.
However, a Gallup poll being published Thursday in the pro-Conservative Daily Telegraph put Labor 13 points ahead, a 7-point drop. Gallup, which has been polling for the newspaper daily, interviewed 1,739 people on Tuesday and Wednesday. The margin of error was plus or minus 3 percentage points.
An ICM poll for the liberal Guardian gave Labor a 10-point lead, up from a 5-point lead in last week's ICM survey - the only poll of the campaign to fan Conservative hopes. ICM interviewed 1,161 people in a poll with a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.
Conservative hopes rested with the undecideds, last-minute switchers, over-confident Labor supporters not bothering to vote, and the liars - those who, as in the last election, wouldn't admit even to pollsters that they supported the government.
Major, 54, who seemed relaxed and confident as he roamed the country, scrapped some of the party's prepared television broadcasts to put himself in front of the camera, speaking in the soft tones of a doctor pleading with an unreasonable patient.
Blair, 43, a more edgy performer and nervous at the start, radiated energy and determination at the end.
It was small comfort to the Conservatives that the election largely was fought on their terms: Blair's Labor Party pledged not to raise personal income tax rates and not to exceed Conservative spending ceilings; not to renationalize the industries such as British Airways, British Telecom and the British Rail, which Thatcher and Major sold to private owners; and he promised to be tough on crime.
Labor even swiped an old Tory symbol, the bulldog, for one of its TV broadcasts.
Unlike the disciplined Labor party, more than 200 Conservative candidates publicly dissented from Major's policy. The Conservative campaign also stumbled over the "sleaze" issue, which dominated the first week of the campaign.
One parliamentary campaign pitted former BBC war correspondent Martin Bell as the "anti-sleaze" candidate against Conservative Neil Hamilton, who has been accused of accepting cash-filled envelopes to represent private interests in Parliament. Another Tory MP, Tim Smith, admitted accepting such envelopes and resigned March 26.
The clearest difference was on the future of the nation: Labor promised to give limited self-government to Scotland and Wales, while Major said that eventually would break up the United Kingdom.
Northern Ireland was not an issue, despite Irish Republican Army bombs and false warnings that often disrupted transportation during the campaign.
While the opposition hammered home a message of "new Labor, new Britain," Conservatives abandoned one advertising theme after another: a poster showing Blair with demonic eyes, then an aging lion shedding a red tear over the impact of Labor policies, then a picture of Blair as a puppet on the knee of German Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
As Major grittily struggled on, cynics said it might get worse: he might win - narrowly back in power to be the target of anti-European, right-wing rebels who harassed him throughout his five-year term.
"I hate seeing my little brother so tired, and knowing it's his own bloody side who have done this to him," Major's sister, Pat Dessoy, wrote this week in The Daily Telegraph.
 Load-Date: May 1, 1997

 

End of Document
