

SPECIAL EDITION; Bride: The Beginnings of Tradition
December 11, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1079 words
Byline: By FRANCINE PARNES, For AP Special Edition
Body




It was not only the wedding of the century, but one of the most talked-about fairy-tale ceremonies of all time. Both trend- and tradition-setting, it was publicized around the globe.
No, the front-page bride wasn't Jacqueline Bouvier, Lady Diana Spencer, or Grace Kelly.
When the Britain's Queen Victoria married handsome Prince Albert in 1840, she was all three of those unforgettable women rolled into one, with immense power besides, says Letitia Baldrige, author of "Legendary Brides" (HarperCollins, $50 hardcover).
As progenitor of the white wedding gown, "Queen Victoria was a fashion trendsetter," says Baldrige, whose book pays tribute to the most memorable society weddings of the past two centuries.
"She loved when people talked about her clothes and activities, so she very carefully planned her wedding, probably realizing it would influence the world of fashion at the time."
Be it white dresses or the White House, Baldrige knows the territory. As social secretary in the Kennedy administration, she organized many of the best parties of the Camelot era. A leading etiquette expert, she served as advisor to four subsequent First Ladies and has written 17 books.
Before Victoria's wedding, a bride typically skipped the fuss and married in her "best dress," in a fashionable color. For a middle-class woman, the dress represented a large investment, worn for years, says Baldrige. Lower-class women in Victorian England spiffed up their work clothes for a walk down the aisle.
The upper-class bride typically owned three or four "best dresses;" a courtier, many more. For the bride who could spring for the luxury, the gown was trimmed with the finest of brocades, ribbons, laces, embroidery, even jewels. "One sees it on brides in all the paintings down through the ages," says Baldrige, referrring to French courtier scenes and paintings by Rembrandt, Hans Holbein, and those of the Italian Renaissance.
When Victoria chose a white wedding gown, in lace and trimmed with delicate orange blossom, she became the first royal bride to bypass the tradition of wearing a heavy brocade gown under a velvet and fur cloak.
"She obviously was affected by the symbolism of white, the color of purity and sanctity," says Baldrige. "Her all-white wedding made the rounds of the world through the newspapers throughout the Empire, reports from international travelers, and the gossipy letters that carried her wedding news to every civilized country. Young women obviously said to themselves, as they have since the beginning of time, 'If she can do that, I can, too."'
Even before the electronic age, bridal style carried such mystique that word easily spread. "People were as interested in Queen Victoria's clothes when she was young as they were in Jacqueline Onassis's," says Baldrige. "Today, people transmit fashion trends on the TV and Internet; Queen Victoria had the whole British Navy plus the newspapers carrying her fashion news around the world."
The Victorian bridal gown, with its close-fitting bodice and full skirt and train, remains a classic to this day.
The 1996 wedding of John F. Kennedy Jr and Carolyn Bessette, by contrast, ushered in an era of low-keyed simplicity, says Baldrige. A private-island setting became a preferred place for society weddings, and brides-to-be passed up beaded, bouffant wedding gowns in favor of understated slip dresses.
"Carolyn Bessette's dress was fashion news because it was the opposite of the full-skirted fairy princess kind of wedding gown that was traditionally worn," says Baldrige. "The white see-through long gloves were another fashion statement, and the bouquet of lily of the valley she carried was just the finishing perfect touch. Young women oohed and aahed over the new Mrs. John F. Kennedy's wedding ensemble."
But you don't have to be a Kennedy to borrow the unique flair of legendary brides, says Baldrige. While the cost of some weddings can equal a down payment on a house, a couple can have an appropriate wedding within reasonable cost.
She offers these tips:
- Shop smart for a wedding gown. "The bride buys her dress at one of the twice-a-year wedding gown sales at a bridal shop, where prices can go below cost at times, if the buyer is smart enough to dig deep enough to know when and where to buy her dress," says Baldrige.
- The wedding reception can be held in the church rectory or hall instead of at a commercial location.
- A wedding meal does not have to be served, Baldrige says. "Many people have a kind of cocktail party wedding reception. The food - sandwiches, hors d'ouevre, cookies and ice cream - can be made or purchased by a couple of close friends of the bride's family. Punch can be served, with champagne in it, if the church or synagogue will allow that much alcohol to be served. If the church insists on its own caterer, the expenses of using it are usually nominal."
- To save on flowers, find out if another couple is getting married the same day in that location. You may be able to split the cost of the flowers and bouquets right in two, says Baldrige. Save dollars by cutting the number of blossoms and increasing the greenery.
- For wedding music, the church organist usually does not charge much for his or her services, says Baldrige. If you are going to have dancing at the reception, hire a local deejay, even a savvy one from the local high school.
- Hire only one limousine to transport the bride and her father to the church and to take the newly married couple from the church to the reception, if that will be in another place, she says. Ask good friends to chauffeur the wedding party and any out-of-town friends in their own cars.
- Get friends to do the photography. The bride's family pays for film and prints.
Of course, if money is no object, bring on the caviar, lobster and best champagne. Such a wedding today for a movie star with 1,000 guests can run to $500,000, says Baldrige.
A major money factor is the size of the wedding. Bigger isn't always better.
"Many people want a small intimate wedding, particularly older people and those who already have all the accoutrements for their home and don't need wedding presents," she says. "Many don't want the fuss of a big wedding. Many don't want the expense of it and would rather have the cash instead of a big reception."
Cutting costs is common. Even Jacqueline Kennedy could not afford a top Paris designer wedding gown and instead worked with a dressmaker to create something less lavish without breaking the bank.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY700, NY701, NY702
 Load-Date: December 12, 2000

 

End of Document
