

Stamps In The News: The Postal Service did not forget the Maine
The Associated Press
April 24, 1998, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 416 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body



For AP Special Features
"Remember the Maine" was the cry 100 years ago.
The sinking of the battleship USS Maine in Havana Harbor proved to be the momentum for the U.S. entry into the Spanish-American War in 1898.
To commemorate the occasion, the U.S. Postal Service has issued a new 32-cent stamp. Featured on the stamp is a line drawing of the Maine with the slogan on top "Remember the Maine." Below is "United States of America." The stamp denomination "32" flanks the "United States of America." The Postal Service has printed 32 million of these offerings.
Sent to Cuba in 1898 to protect American interests, the USS Maine was rocked by a mysterious explosion while moored in Havana Harbor on Feb. 15. More than 250 American sailors were killed. Many more were injured. An investigation could not determine the cause of the explosion - but the majority of people blamed the Spanish.
The American press used the popular slogan "Remember the Maine" to support entry into the war. Two months after the sinking, America declared war on Spain.
First-day covers of the stamp are available via the Stamp Fulfillment Service of the Postal Service. Each cover is postmarked with the official first date of issue cancellation. You may call (800) STAMP-24 for more details.
-
Honoring lighthouses
Great Britain's Royal Mail has issued a special set of five stamps honoring all of Britain's lighthouses which will be fully automated in 1999. Five of the lighthouses are seen on the stamps.
The 20 pence shows the beacon at St. John's Point in Northern Ireland. The 26 pence depicts the Smalls Lighthouse in Pembrokeshire, Wales. The 37 pence features the Isle of Wight's Needles Lighthouse. The 43 pence portrays the Bell Rock in Dundee, Scotland. The highest value, 63 pence, displays the Eddystone Lighthouse in Plymouth, England, which has been in service continually for 300 years.
Each stamp also bears the silhouette portrait of Queen Elizabeth II in the upper right corner.
These stamps are available at your local dealer.
-
Contest for children
The U.S. Postal Service is working with international postal administrations on a program called "Stampin' the Future." The new program sponsors a worldwide design contest for children, ages 8-12. Participants will submit stamp designs that express their vision of the future. Winning designs will appear on stamps from each participating country, to be issued in the year 2000.
The U.S. Postal Service says it will have contest forms at all local post offices soon.
 

 

 
 Load-Date: April 24, 1998

 

End of Document
