

Stamps In The News: "Year of the Hare" to be first 33-cent stamp
The Associated Press
January 4, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 429 words
Byline: SYD KRONISH
Body




The first U.S. 33-cent stamp of 1999 will hail "The Year of the Hare." Postal rates increase 1 cent to 33 cents on Jan. 11 - as the hare hops into philatelic history.
The Year of the Hare stamp represents the fourth animal of the Chinese Zodiac and the seventh in the Lunar New Year series of the U.S. Postal Service. The previous three animals were the rat, the ox and the tiger.
The new stamp and the previous Lunar New Year stamps were designed by Clarence Lee of Honolulu, whose special paper-cut style visually ties the entire series together.
According to Chinese legend, the hares are peace-loving, modest and likely to be successful in business.
The new stamp features a multicolored rabbit in the center of a red background. The words "Happy New Year" are printed in English in the upper right corner and the equivalent is printed in Chinese calligraphy along the left side of the stamp.
First day of issue postmarks are available. You may purchase the new stamps at your local post office, affix them to your envelopes, then address the envelopes and place in a larger one addressed to: Lunar New Year stamp, Postmaster, 7001 S. Central Ave., Los Angeles, Calif. 90052-9991. All orders must be postmarked by Feb. 4.
First-day covers also may be ordered through the Postal Service's Fulfillment Service by calling (800) STAMP-24. Also ask for a free catalog.
-
Canada has ambitious program
Canada Post has announced an ambitious stamp program for 1999 and, like its U.S. neighbor, will start with a Lunar New Year stamp honoring the Year of the Hare.
Some other stamps to be released during the year will include one dedicated to the international year of older persons, four stamps depicting orchids. four stamps showing Canadian horses, a continuation of its series featuring masterpieces of Canadian art, and a stamp honoring the 75th anniversary of the Canadian Air Force.
In addition, there will be a stamp recognizing the 50th anniversary of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The U.S. Postal Service also is planning a new stamp honoring NATO in 1999. During the summer there will be an issuance of four stamps coinciding with the Pan-American Games to be held in Winnipeg.
Additional details of Canada's stamp program may be obtained by calling (800) 565-4362.
-
Ghana pays tribute to the ocean
Ghana, a former British colony in West Africa, has issued a tribute to the international year of the ocean heralded by the United Nations. There are 16 stamps and two souvenir sheets featuring various species of the sea.
These stamps are available at your local dealer.
 
 Load-Date: January 4, 1999

 

End of Document
