

SUMMIT NOTEBOOK: Touch the president? Perish the thought
May 9, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 539 words
Byline: By JAMES ANDERSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRIDGETOWN, Barbados
Body




Day wear: short gloves only. At night: long gloves, with arm holes. And please, no white shoes after 6 p.m.
That's the advice for residents of this former British colony, known for its quaint propriety, as they prepare to welcome the Clintons.
"Do NOT attempt to touch him," a local columnist advised those hoping to meet the U.S. leader.
President Clinton, accompanied by his wife, Hillary, and a 1,000-person entourage, was arriving Friday night for a one-day summit with leaders from throughout the Caribbean - except Cuba.
"In case you have the urge to run up and pin a corsage on his lapel, as is done when our own (Prime Minister Owen) Arthur arrives at Parliament - perish the thought," Roxanne Gibbs wrote in The Nation newspaper.
Bajans (BAY-jins), as residents of Barbados call themselves, eagerly anticipated their first visit by a U.S. president since Ronald Reagan toured the island in 1984 as a guest of the late film star Claudette Colbert, who owned a plantation home here famed for its Caribbean sunsets.
 
 One caller to a local radio station expressed sympathy for Clinton for having to use crutches because of a knee injury.
"I'm sorry Mr. Clinton hurt his leg," the woman said. "It pains me to see him walk around like that. He can't get around to see our beautiful island."
Actually, the Clintons will see quite a bit of this easternmost Caribbean island, taking a mini-vacation after official proceedings conclude Saturday.
They'll be staying at Heron Bay, a 1947 beachfront mansion inspired by Palladian villas in Italy and built of coral stone. The 20-acre estate boasts a drawing room with four life-size Nubian ebony figures dating to 1800 and imported from Clarence House, a royal residence in London.
 
 Some senior U.S. officials booked $ 1,200-a-night suites at Barbados' swank Sandy Lane Hotel. Cuban President Fidel Castro also stayed there.
Castro spent an extra day when he came for a U.N. conference in 1994. He played cricket and swam in the Atlantic as dozens of nervous security men hovered nearby.
A young George Washington visited Barbados in 1751 and, according to one local account, contracted smallpox here. Washington noted in his diary that he paid an "excessively dear" rent of 15 pounds sterling a month.
Clinton won't have that problem on Barbados, where villas can rent for $ 90,000 a month, since Heron Bay is being put at his disposal by the owners, the Barbados National Trust.
 
 The jackets of the Royal Barbados Police Force are sharply pressed, glaringly white. Workers have swept the shoulders of the highway leading from the airport to town, and orchids, anthurium lilies, heliconias, ginger lilies and other tropical blooms have been imported from Dominica to decorate the Sherbourne Center, the summit site.
Such gracious hospitality could have repercussions beyond the presidential visit. Barbadians hope it will pay off for their tourism industry, especially if American viewers catch TV pictures of the white sand beaches and cobalt blue waters.
"From a promotional point of view, the Clintons' decision to choose Barbados for a period of rest and relaxation should pay great dividends for the local tourism industry," said Jean Holder, secretary general of the Caribbean Tourism Organization.
 Load-Date: May 9, 1997

 

End of Document
