

SUMMIT NOTEBOOK: Skip the limo, Kohl takes the bus
June 21, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 480 words
Byline: By CHEREKA KEATON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DENVER
Body




German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who came to the Denver summit with a save-the-environment agenda, did his part to cut back on Colorado smog. He'll take home the award for the shortest motorcade: one bus.
President Clinton giggled as Kohl and his delegation - in a charter bus - pulled up to the Denver Public Library for the summit's first formal working session.
"Like his limo? I do," Clinton joked as he posed for photographs with the German leader.
The only drawback so far: the metro-sized bus is too big to negotiate the driveways at some sites the leaders' have visited, so the Kohl contingent has been parking on nearby streets and walking the rest of the way.
---
Musical chairs, anyone?
Inside the library's reference room, which had been cleared of bookshelves to accommodate an imposing round table and photogenic "Summit of the Eight" backdrops, official talks were momentarily delayed when Clinton realized there was no chair at British Prime Minister Tony Blair's place.
"Where's the chair?" Clinton asked. "Where's the chair?" other leaders murmured while aides scrambled to find one.
While global warming and monetary exchanges had yet to be hashed out in the five-hour session, the "chair issue" was resolved in under a minute when a seat was commandeered from an interpreter.
---
Maybe the lemons were imported.
One little boy watching a passing motorcade of leaders Friday night took to heart the message that competition is good in today's global economy.
Standing beside a table, the boy held aloft a sign proclaiming that he offered "The World's Best Lemonade!"
The price was right, too, at 50 cents a glass.
While the boy and his makeshift stand didn't lure the motorcade from its destination - a more lavish dinner spread at Phipps House - the young entrepreneur did not lack for business. He was surrounded by hundreds of people who lined the streets to catch a glimpse of the city's global guests.
---
Eleanor G. Dwight had just about 14 days to turn 350 college kids, office clerks, teachers and retirees into a world-class volunteer force of traffic cops, media liaisons and information specialists.
"It's like 100 political campaigns crammed into two weeks," said Dwight, who works for the Environmental Protection Agency and was in charge of volunteers at the summit's the International Media Center.
All in all, roughly 3,500 volunteers, who had to undergo a background check by the Colorado Bureau of Investigation, helped hold down the estimated $ 20 million cost of playing host to the summit.
"I understood that it cost $ 40 million in Lyons, France," said Dwight, 60, of Denver, said of last year's summit.
Jerry M. Gotlieb, 56, also of Denver, saw volunteering as a way to help visitors enjoy his hometown.
"Denver's been very good to me, and I thought I'd like to give something back to the city," Gotlieb said as he directed traffic around the Convention Center.
 Load-Date: June 21, 1997

 

End of Document
