

Taiaut! In France, more than a millennium later, the hunt is still on
The Associated Press
December 20, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1706 words
Byline: MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: VILLERS-COTTERETS, France
Body




Like a Louis XIV painting come to life, riders in blue velvet reined in their lathered horses behind 60 howling hounds and the magnificent stag they held at bay.
For five hours, there had been furious crashing through the royal forest, trumpet tattoos and booming shouts of, "Taiaut," an ancient French hunting cry the English borrowed as "tally ho."
At the end, for a long moment, nothing moved. The exhausted stag eyed the waiting dogs, its five-point antlers cocked in a noble pose. Then the hunt master dismounted and put a single bullet in its heart.
Some things have changed since the Versailles glory days. The Sun King's quarry never leaped over a Porsche 911 parked in the woods. Commoners by the score did not tag along with their kids in the family Renault.
Otherwise,"la venerie," the French sport of riding to hounds, is much as it was before the Revolution of 1789 or, for that matter, a thousand years before that.
About 10,000 men and women mount up each season, chasing game through 2 million acres of forests scattered across France. Even more come to watch what has gotten to be a spectator sport.
"This is the best there is, anywhere," said Gary Timbrell, a dashing black-bearded Irishman who studies bugs for a living. "It's been fairly unknown, but I'm afraid the secret is getting out."
He hunts foxes in England, but much prefers to ride as a guest in France, where 387 "equipages," clubs with dog packs, pursue stag, deer, wild boar, badger and rabbit, as well as fox.
Some form of riding to hounds goes on in six other European countries but nothing like in France, where it all started a millennium ago and was re-energized after World War II.
"The French do it the old way, preserving a noble tradition in a way that's open to normal people," Timbrell said. "It takes you completely away, as the kings did it, with much less of an entry requirement."
Didier Heilbronn, nearing 73, began hunting half a century ago. German occupiers had just left the lush forests north of Paris, long a favorite royal preserve.
Every Tuesday and Saturday, from October to March, Heilbronn is at it again. An easy hunt takes two hours of hard work. Tougher ones run to six, with horses sliding in snow and branches slashing riders' faces.
Like the others, he blows mightily and often into a circular brass horn carried around the neck. Besides its ceremonial role, "la trompe" serves as field radio to keep hunters and dogs on track.
Partly paralyzed on one side and slightly stiff of limb, Heilbronn laughed when a friend mentioned John Glenn. "I would have liked to have gone to the moon," he said, "but this is good enough."
He became the senior Villers-Cotterets member only recently. Solange Fenwick, heiress to a forklift fortune, just retired at 82, still able to ride all day, then dance on the dinner table.
Heilbronn's eyes glisten when he is asked to explain the passion.
"Some go for the forest, some for the dogs or for the horses, some for the atmosphere and the hunt itself," he said. "Everyone has their own reasons. I love it all."
The main thing, he said, is to get it right. La venerie is governed by strict and ancient rules.
Each November, on St. Hubert's Day, a priest blesses the hunters, the horses and the dogs, and prays to Hubert, the patron saint of hunters, for a successful season.
Dress is immaculate, from the velvet crash helmets to the silver spurs on high black boots in matte finish. Long swallowtail coats are royal blue, forest green, scarlet or black, depending on the club.
Embroidered leather vests cover scarves in white silk or fine linen. Veterans favor a stickpin made from two stag teeth. Most riders carry a scabbard knife and crop.
And no one is without a 16th-century cell phone: the round horn, which consists of a trumpet's mouth at the end of three-and-a-half loops of shiny brass.
Once the hunt starts, dismounting is frowned upon except to change horses. It continues until the quarry is worn out, or has managed to outwit the pack and disappear.
Once a stag is singled out, the dogs follow it alone. If a wily old buck spooks a younger stag out of hiding to take its place, the pack doubles back to pick up the original scent.
Modern times have added new wrinkles; if a stag runs into a village, for instance, it goes free.
Jean-Luc Corroyer, better known by his nickname, Pic Avant (Point Man), handles the club's 100 hounds. The pack wolfs down 220 pounds of meat a day.
Short, stocky, gruffly pleasant, he might be well cast as a sergeant for Napoleon. At full tilt, bellowing at the dogs and herding human stragglers in his ranks, he could be Napoleon himself.
He is a national champion horn blower, a master of the complex calls that signal a quarry's progress, identify different animals, and add a stirring note to the hunt.
Each call is distinct and authoritative. Before one hunt, he played the lilting badger melody at a visitor's request, causing his dogs to nearly turn themselves inside out looking for the badger.
Maurice Velge, who owns much of Antwerp port, is hunt master. Now 62, he started at age 12. Like Velge, many Belgians commute to France for the venerie, which is forbidden at home.
Germans also come to France, frustrated with laws at home that allow them only to chase after fox droppings, hauled at high speed in a leather box by a horseman.
Englishmen ride here to avoid raucous demonstrations by the anti-hunt lobby.
France's hunt also has its detractors. The Society for the Protection of Animals posts its objections on a web site: "When part of our heritage is barbarous, it should be abolished."
But hunting is deeply ingrained in France, where each year 2 million people buy permits for various sorts of game. And la venerie takes the fewest animals while involving the largest numbers of nonhunters.
Clubs seldom fill their quota for stags, and herds must be culled to avoid overpopulation.
Also, the riders are supported by followers who chase behind on bikes and on foot, or who cruise forest lanes for a glimpse of action. Safe from gunfire, parents take kids and pets for a day in the country.
"With rifles, hunters go out alone and each tries to get a deer," explains Jean-Pierre Baudin, a lifelong follower. "Here, two dozen people take one animal, and 100 others get enjoyment from the hunt."
Some people in villages at the edge of forests curse the hunt for more personal reasons.
"I can understand how they feel," said Christian Ferte, an Agriculture Ministry spokesman and a venerie fanatic. "Suddenly, dogs, riders, cars descend on their tranquility. It rattles them."
Recently, he said, a stag bolted between two houses in a village and kept going.
"The dogs thought he had gone into the garage," Ferte said, chortling. "You can imagine someone's reaction, finding his garage suddenly full of 50 yelping hounds."
Baudin, who runs a tool factory, said some people who didn't know better objected for social reasons. "They think it is only a bunch of aristocrats, the idle rich, with nothing better to do."
In fact, he said, followers have as much fun as the hunters. Regulars know each other well. They slow their cars to protect the dogs, and hunters wave as they gallop past.
For instance, there's the retired rider known to all as Pizza Hut. He putters along on a pizza-delivery motorcycle. His son, as it happens, is a Pizza Hut executive.
Jean Duballe, a retired sugar factory worker and local champion all-terrain bike rider, keeps pace with the pack, hurtling down forest paths at blinding speed.
Julien Seigne, 16, graduated from follower to rider this season when someone lent him a horse. He rode admirably, ignoring his mother's wails when a branch tore his lips, pouring blood onto his white ascot.
At lunchtime, while the riders seek their stag, followers look for corkscrews. Elaborate picnics of foie gras and champagne emerge from car trunks.
Each successful hunt ends with a ceremonial "curee." A butcher skins the animal and distributes venison to the followers. The rest goes to charities.
The hide and head are then draped over the remaining innards, and a huntsman moves the antlers from side to side to excite the hounds waiting for their reward.
To a blast of horns, he steps back. Then, as hunters play a farewell concert, the dogs snarl and snap like piranhas in a pool.
An honored guest receives the stag's foot, along with the right to buy champagne back at the clubhouse.
La venerie is not cheap. A good horse costs at least $ 2,000 to buy and that much a year to keep. Many riders have several. Annual club dues can run to $ 4,000.
Nor has it gone totally to commoners. The previous Villers-Cotterets hunt master was Viscount Philippe le Hardy de Beaulieu, descendant of the dukes of Burgundy.
But in France, the passion is far more for the hunt than the folderol around it.
"In England, you stay back and do what you're told," Timbrell said. "Here, they let you take part as an equal unless you're a total fool."
The English value horsemanship, jumping obstacles when they can, he said. "But the French ride around obstacles because they don't want to fall off and spoil someone else's hunt."
And, mainly, there is reverence for the prey.
"Sometimes after a long, hard hunt, when the stag gets away, I'm happy about it," Heilbronn said. "He outsmarted us, and deserved to win. I'd rather lose an animal after five hours than catch one after two."
After an escape or two, a stag becomes too crafty for the dogs to catch. "He might get shot by someone or hit by a car,' Ferte said, with a respectful shake of the head, "but we won't get him."
After finishing off the five-pointer, Velge recounted the stag's tactics with frank admiration.
The pack started near 14 Freres, where a king once hanged a gang of bandits, all brothers, from 14 trees. The dogs scared up three big stags. The one they chose charged for hours through the forest.
Each time the stag reached a highway or too many followers' cars to jump over, it doubled back. It weaved through underbrush and tried to mask its scent in ponds. Finally, it ran out of energy.
"My passion is watching the hounds go after the stag," Velge concludes, eyes sparkling. "We're only there to help them. It's between them and their quarry, a struggle to see which is more clever, more able. That's what life is."
 Load-Date: December 20, 1998

 

End of Document
