

Terrorist 'Carlos the Jackal' to stand trial for the first time
December 10, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 644 words
Byline: By DEBORAH SEWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




On a hot summer night in 1975, a young revolutionary called Carlos shot two French intelligence agents in a cheap fifth-floor walk-up in the Latin Quarter.
It was not one of the most notorious cases tied to the man who became known as "Carlos the Jackal." By his own count, he killed 83 people before his capture in 1994, and was linked to some of the most sensational terrorist attacks of the Cold War, including the 1972 massacre of 11 Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics, the 1975 seizure of OPEC ministers in Vienna and the 1976 hijacking of an Air France jet to Entebbe, Uganda.
But it is the Paris killings that could put Carlos, whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, behind bars for life when, for the first time, he stands trial in person Friday.
"Carlos was a very dangerous, ruthless individual who has shown no evidence of remorse," terrorist expert Paul Wilkinson said.
Security at the trial, expected to last one week, is strict. Each of the nine jurors has been assigned two bodyguards and a chauffeured car.
Defense lawyer Isabelle Coutant-Peyre said the Venezuela-born Ramirez has been learning French and voraciously studying the French penal code in order to play a major role in his case.
"He is going to fight like a lion," Coutant-Peyre said.
None of Ramirez's family or his ex-wife Magdalena Kopp will travel from Venezuela for the trial, Coutant-Peyre said. And none of his colleagues from other terrorist groups, including Germany's Red Army Faction, has been called to testify.
It was Kopp's capture in 1982 by the French that unleashed what Wilkinson called Ramirez's "personal vendetta" - a series of bloody attacks against France, which finally freed her in 1985.
Ramirez's opponents expect him to use the trial as a forum, and he may well welcome the courtroom spotlight following the three years of solitary confinement that followed his capture by French authorities in Sudan.
"I think he loves life," Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani, Saudi Arabia's oil minister at the time of the OPEC hostage crisis, told Associated Press Television. "He's a man who enjoys charming girls and drinking."
Known for his dancing skills and elegance, Ramirez, 48, stands little chance of enjoying the good life in the short term.
He faces two 30-year terms if convicted of gunning down Raymond Dous and Jean Donatini, the two intelligence agents investigating his role in attacks on Israel's El Al airlines at Paris' Orly Airport. In 1992, he was convicted in absentia for the slayings.
He could get another 30 years for shooting Michel Moukharbal, a fellow militant of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine who Ramirez believed might have been co-opted by French intelligence.
Representatives of victims of other attacks masterminded by Ramirez in France say they are preparing more cases against him in the event he slips through French justice.
"This trial is exemplary," said Francoise Rudetzski, a former lawyer and head of SOS Attentats, a group that helps victims of terrorist attacks.
"What is important is that no matter when the acts were committed, a terrorist can be judged," she said. "It could serve as a warning to others."
There are many - including former colleagues, his onetime protectors and even the intelligence services who fought him - who would just as soon see Ramirez keep his secrets quiet forever.
Bernard Violet, author of "Carlos - The Secret Networks of International Terrorism," said Ramirez might use his secrets to work out a deal that could eventually get him out of jail.
Ramirez has the lowdown about other terrorist groups, including Algeria's Armed Islamic Group and Hamas that French intelligence covets, Violet said. Even if convicted, Violet said he thought Ramirez could eventually trade that information for an early release.
There will be some "surprises" in the courtroom, said Violet. "It won't be a dull trial."
 Load-Date: December 10, 1997

 

End of Document
