

TESTAMENTS 9-11; John Stott, the Oxbridge Billy Graham, insists Jesus is the only savior
The Associated Press
September 11, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 754 words
Byline: By RICHARD N. OSTLING, AP Religion Writer
Body




Given his snide comments about Christianity, CNN founder Ted Turner was an odd choice as honorary chairman of the "peace summit" on interfaith tolerance, which drew 1,000 leaders from many religions to the United Nations in late August.
Turner told the throng that folks in the Southern church where he grew up "thought that nobody was going to heaven except them" and maybe 99 percent of humanity was going to hell. "I was pretty confused and I said, 'This can't be right."'
The arithmetic of heaven aside, Turner was correct in his underlying contention that for many in a multicultural age, traditional belief in Jesus Christ as the only savior is unpalatable.
The U.N. meeting included few conservative Christians, and many participants contended that the religious freedom enshrined in the U.N.'s 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights should not extend to convert-seeking.
As if responding to such talk, a Sept. 5 Vatican decree against religious relativism declared that followers of other religions "are in a gravely deficient situation" compared with those in the church with "the fulness of the means of salvation."
The summer's other religious summit meeting was totally different, however: Billy Graham's conference in Amsterdam, Netherlands, for 10,700 evangelical Protestants from 207 lands. Among leaders of this expanding international movement there's no apology for soul-winning based on Christianity's exclusive claims, which come straight from the New Testament (John 14:6, Acts 4:12, 1 Timothy 2:5, etc.).
An "Amsterdam Declaration," which summarized the meeting, said "there may well be traces of truth, beauty and goodness in many non-Christian belief systems" but they are not "roads to salvation. The only way to know God in peace, love and joy is through the reconciling death of Jesus Christ the risen Lord."
The theme was reinforced in the meeting's most important address, a sophisticated and uncompromising speech on the Bible by the Rev. John Stott, a former Church of England rector in central London who took early retirement and has spent the past quarter-century as a globe-trotting Bible teacher. He has also written top-drawer evangelical commentaries on several New Testament books.
Reviewing Timothy Dudley Smith's 1999 biography of Stott (InterVarsity), Books & Culture magazine portrayed the urbane, Oxbridge-educated clergyman as equivalent in influence to the more famous Graham, who, at 81, is a year older. Stott has had special impact among British evangelicals, and college students and fellow Anglicans worldwide.
"Our insistence on Jesus as the only saving name causes great offense, and I fear that the offense will increase as pluralism spreads," Stott told the meeting. But the New Testament allows no other option. And, he said, proud human beings want to earn their salvation. They resist the Bible's teaching that it is a gift from God and "utterly undeserved."
So, too, Scripture's claim to authority "is increasingly distasteful to many people today." Since the 1960s, said Stott, the world has been in revolt against all authority, of the state, church, school, family and pope as well as the Bible. Yet people "crave the very authority they resent."
Stott flatly rejected the charge that evangelicals idolize or worship the Scriptures. Rather, he said, they worship the God who "has clothed his thoughts in words" in the Bible, and the Jesus they can know through the written Word of God.
All that was a reassuring summary of evangelical faith. But Stott proceeded to chide his fellow believers at two points.
First, he warned them, "the Word of God does not include everything we would like to know." Evangelicals "tend to be overly dogmatic, more so than Scripture itself permits," regarding the "secret things" of God. At a press conference, he said interpretation of Bible prophecy and the End Times is a good example.
Second, he admonished evangelicals to remember that "the Word of God needs to be interpreted." It makes the way of salvation crystal clear, but much else was expressed within ancient cultures and requires careful study.
"I beg you not to resist this task, this sweat of interpretation and application. We need to repent of our tendency to evangelical laziness, behaving as if Scripture would yield up its treasures to those who do not dig for them."
Wise words, for Christians in all camps.
---
 
On the Net: http://www.amsterdam2000.org. 
---
 
Richard N. Ostling, AP religion writer, is co-author of "Mormon America," recently published by HarperSanFrancisco.
 
 Load-Date: September 12, 2000

 

End of Document
