

The IOC goes into the reform business - grudgingly
The Associated Press
March 17, 1999, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 825 words
Byline: By JIM LITKE, AP Sports Writer
Body




The International Olympic Committee met today in Lausanne, Switzerland, to face down the biggest crisis in its 105-year history. The only other time that many people with something to hide turn up in the same place is one of those sting operations when police send letters to unsuspecting fugitives informing them they've won the lottery.
The difference, of course, is that nobody from the IOC ended the day behind bars. Not even close.
Nearly three dozen IOC officials were implicated in various bribery scandals. But so far, only four have quit and six more were expelled via the ballot box today. And all they lost was membership in the world's most exclusive country club.
"Our main goal is to take the necessary steps to be absolutely certain that this very sad episode never happens again," IOC boss Juan Antonio Samaranch said. "Throughout the remaining time of my presidency, I intend to make this our highest priority."
If all the IOC accomplishes is canning a half-dozen members with little visibility and less power - while the better-connected members get off with warnings - the two days of meetings will be little more than a show trial. Yet say this much for Samaranch - he got through the opening portion of the program with a minimum of mess.
One of the six, Jean-Claude Ganga of the Republic of Congo, allegedly devoured so much payola that bid representatives from Salt Lake City dubbed him "the human vacuum cleaner." And in keeping with his nickname, he promised not to go without plenty of noise.
In the days leading up to the expulsion vote, Ganga noted all six of the accused were from Third World countries, then suggested the IOC investigating committee was both racist and hypocritical in choosing its scapegoats. But in the end, he offered only a muted defense of his own conduct and went quietly.
Not Samaranch. Facing a vote of confidence, Samaranch's opening speech to the IOC earned two rousing standing ovations. In a closed-door meeting afterward, he received the equivalent of a third when delegates voted 86-2 to let him complete a fifth term.
Until his speech this morning, Samaranch had refused to accept any responsibility for the serial bribery that took place on every side of him. But his words - "it is our IOC which is now on trial" - hinted that might not be the only change in his attitude. While proposing a series of reforms and promising to open the books on the IOC's business, the 78-year-old president let slip he might step down before his term expires in 2001.
"I have personally given the best of myself to the Olympic movement over the last 18 years and … my last service to Olympism would be to restructure our organization in order to enter the new millennium stronger than ever," Samaranch said.
Nothing would cement that promise more than his leavetaking. Right now, IOC members voice dissent as often as they ask for bargain rates on hotels or airfares. Nearly 80 percent of the committee owes their appointments to the imperious Spaniard, and his most powerful underlings have so much invested trying to reach the front of the line of succession that they may not recognize real reform if and when it comes along.
Canadian Richard Pound and Australian Kevan Gosper, both members of the executive board and mentioned as possible heirs, have been talking tough about cleaning house - until talk is aimed at the executive suite. Even American IOC member Anita DeFrantz, whose insight and candor won her a spot on the short list of candidates to succeed Samaranch, has so far carefully toed the party line.
"I know there are many who feel he should resign,," she said. "But he doesn't want the scandal to be his legacy to the Olympic movement. He wants to oversee cleaning up the mess so he can leave office with the knowledge that the people who created the problem are no longer involved in the movement."
To effectively achieve that end would require the sort of bloodletting that even a ruler as ruthless as Samaranch cannot afford. Fully one-third of the IOC already has been tainted to varying degrees, and the really serious mudslinging has barely begun.
Kim Un-yong of South Korea, another possible Samaranch heir, was not among the six IOC members expelled today. But news reports said new evidence against him has been presented to the investigating committee. Kim responded by saying he would fight back with "lots of ammunition," and if need be, take a few members down with him.
On Tuesday, it almost seemed he meant that literally. While arguing loudly with two high-ranking colleagues on a terrace at IOC headquarters, the 67-year-old Kim, president of the international Taekwondo association, coiled into a martial-arts pose. Fortunately, his fellow debaters scattered before any blows were exchanged.
The way things are shaping up, the IOC will be lucky to complete their business without doing the same.
---
Jim Litke is a sports columnist for The Associated Press. Write to him at jlitke ap.org.
 Load-Date: March 17, 1999

 

End of Document
