

The Artists: Small-Town Art Gallery Entices the World
June 28, 1996, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 584 words
Byline: By GRAHAM HEATHCOTE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST. IVES, England
Body




People from round the world cross the seas by the thousands to this southwest corner of England. Their goal? To visit an art gallery in an old fishing town.
To almost everyone's astonishment, the St. Ives Tate Gallery has attracted more than 500,000 visitors since opening three years ago.
"You could understand it if this was New York with over 7 million population, but St. Ives has only 8,000," said Michael Tooby, curator of the gallery on the north Cornwall coast.
What the visitors come to see are the works of Britain's most famous colony of artists, who starting in the 1920s worked in St. Ives, 300 miles from London.
The St. Ives Tate was built when London's Tate Gallery, which holds the nation's collection of British and modern art, wanted space to show its works by St. Ives artists: Dame Barbara Hepworth, Ben Nicholson, Naum Gabo, Peter Lanyon, Terry Frost, Roger Hilton, Patrick Heron and Denis Mitchell.
The gallery also shows how they related to the modern movement elsewhere, like American Mark Rothko and his fellow abstract expressionists. Rothko, Helen Frankenthaler and Mark Tobey, and critic Clement Greenberg visited St. Ives in the late 1950s and early 1960s when the town's reputation as a world center for modern art was being established.
The colony of big names broke up by the mid-1970s, but St. Ives remains a great place to meet artists and art dealers living and working there.
"We are all amazed by the numbers of visitors," said Terry Tonkin, a St. Ives town councilman. "The council wasn't keen on the gallery and felt the space should be used for housing. Now we have both and we prosper from this modern art.
"What has happened is that the St. Ives artists have come of age. They made the place famous but only now, with this beautiful building, are they being appreciated."
The artists made St. Ives a celebrated outpost of the avant-garde. Their works are hailed as masterpieces of modernism - though not everyone liked them or appreciated them.
The sculpture by Hepworth, the most famous St. Ives artist, was publicly ridiculed by town council members when she presented an abstract carving called Dual Form to the town in the 1960s.
Hepworth died in 1975 and today her carving has an honored place outside the Town Hall.
A ticket to the St. Ives Tate includes entry to her old home, studio and sculpture garden in another part of the town and visitors there have soared from 20,000 a year to 120,000 since the gallery opened.
Tooby said the artists were attracted to St. Ives "by its clarity of light and its peace and beauty."
The town is beautiful and quaint, with golden beaches, narrow streets, cottages, alleys, steps and harbor.
Behind the town lies the rugged, rocky Cornish countryside, scarred by old tin and copper mines and china clay quarries.
"For 70 years there was talk of the town having its own art museum but nothing happened until the Tate in London had an exhibit in 1985 about the St. Ives artists. That sparked local ambition and the St. Ives Tate Action Group was formed to campaign for it," Tooby said.
It also coincided with Cornwall's need to revive its flagging tourist industry.
The $ 4.95 million gallery is a stunning place to visit: built into a cliff on the site of a demolished gasworks, four stories tall, all in white. And it offers views of Atlantic Ocean breakers crashing on Porthmeor Beach.
"We said before we opened in June 1993 that we expected 70,000 visitors a year but I wondered privately if we would get even 40,000," Tooby confided.
 Load-Date: June 28, 1996

 

End of Document
