

THE NEW BERLIN: A flurry of change 10 years after the fall of the wall
The Associated Press
October 18, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel
Length: 772 words
Byline: By ALLISON LINN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




The fall of the Berlin Wall 10 years ago and the government's return to its prewar capital has prompted a flurry of change in this city of 3.4 million.
The city's skyline is a maze of construction cranes. Wherever you go, you are unlikely to be far from a building under construction or renovation.
The changes are so fast and furious that Bernd Buhmann, spokesman for the Berlin Tourist Bureau, says even Berliners can find it disorienting.
"If I'm even gone for one week, there are things I don't recognize when I come back," Buhmann says. His office now dubs the city "the new Berlin."
Even though Berlin is still very much in transition, there are plenty of sites to visit in this historic city.
There are also a number of events and exhibits planned to mark the 10th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall (Nov. 9) and the city is just now wrapping up celebrations of 50 years as the Federal Republic of Germany.
The first and most important stop on a tour of Berlin today is the parliament building, or Reichstag. The 105-year-old concrete base melds seamlessly with a shining, transparent glass dome. The renovations were executed by British architect Sir Norman Foster, whose design was meant to emphasize that the new Germany has nothing to hide.
Visitors can traverse a circular walkways up to the top of the dome, which affords a stunning view of the entire city. Parliamentarians meet in the chamber just below the dome.
A short walk from the Reichstag is Pariser Platz and Brandenburg Gate. Once an eerie no-man's land dividing East and West Berlin, it is now a beautifully landscaped, bustling visitors' mecca. Many of the buildings destroyed here during World War II have been rebuilt, and other new structures have cropped up around the square.
The Brandenburg Gate has been backdrop for parades celebrating nine years of reunification and 50 years of the Federal Republic of Germany. On Nov. 9, the area also will host young jazz and classical musicians in celebration of 10 years without the Berlin Wall.
Two of the city's opera houses, the Komische Oper and the Staatsoper Unter den Linden, also have concerts planned on and around Nov. 9, among the many classical music events planned throughout the city.
Potsdamer Platz is another former no-man's-land turned jam-packed city square.
Berlin's former city center was mostly destroyed during the war and left vacant after the wall went up around it in 1961. These days, it is mostly a big construction site, but it's still worth a trip over to see the skyscrapers in various stages of completion.
Climb to the top of the glaringly ugly red "Info Box," just outside the Postdamer Platz subway stop, to get a bird's-eye view of the square. Inside the temporary building, there's also a multimedia exhibit displaying the construction plan for Potsdamer Platz.
One of the best ways to get a sense of the changes that have occurred since the Berlin Wall came down is to visit a chunk of it. Bits of the wall are scattered throughout the city. The biggest stretch is on Muehlenstrasse, along the Spree River in former eastern Berlin. Called the East Side Gallery, it was also the site of the "Berliner Fest an der Mauer" (Berlin Celebration on the Wall) earlier this month.
Also in celebration of 10 years without the wall, the Haus am Checkpoint Charlie museum will exhibit children's drawings on the theme of "Eine Welt Ohne Mauer" (A World Without a Wall).
For a more general sense of the history of the wall, visit the Landesbildestelle's exhibit "Mauer Stand Orte" (Locations of the Wall). It's a video and photo documentary of the wall's evolution.
Two other museum exhibits offer a sense of the time leading up to and just after the fall of the Berlin Wall.
"Let Berlin Be Next," at the Alliierten Museum in the distant Berlin neighborhood of Dahlem, documents George Bush's role in the reunification of Germany. "Ost-West Erweiterung" (East-West Expansion) uses photographs of everyday life in cities such as Berlin, Halle and Leipzig to document the decline and fall of the German Democratic Republic.
For a more informal sense of how East Germany has changed (or not) since the city reunited, head to the former East German neighborhoods of Mitte around the Hackescher Markt and Prenzlauer Berg.
Both neighborhoods have plenty of beautifully remodeled apartments and storefronts standing next door to those still bearing bullet holes and other scars from World War II.
This year won't mark the end of Germany's celebrations of the great changes of this decade. Officials are working on grandiose plans to commemorate the 10-year anniversary of German reunification, Oct. 3, 2000.
 Load-Date: October 18, 1999

 

End of Document
