

THE 20TH CENTURY; Brief summary of World War II
The Associated Press
November 30, 1999, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1088 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Notable events in World War II, 1939-45:
On Sept. 1, 1939, Adolf Hitler's Germany invaded Poland. Two days later, England and France, honoring their alliance with Poland, declared war on Germany and began mobilization.
In October and November Russia, which had signed a nonagression pact with Germany in August, imposed "mutual defense pacts" - and Russian military occupation - on Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania. Finland refused, prompting a military assault by Russia in November, which lasted until March 1940.
In April 1940, Hitler attacked Denmark and Norway; then Belgium and the Netherlands on May 10. Having outflanked the large French defensive forts at the Maginot Line, German forces swept with relative ease toward the North Sea. On May 26, massive evacuation of Allied troops began at the beaches of Dunkirk; 338,000 soldiers ultimately escaped. On June 22, France fell to Germany.
Hitler next turned his attention to Great Britain, stepping up air attacks. The Battle of Britain reached its peak in August and September, in preparation for a planned invasion of the island. On September 7, Hitler began the nightly bombing of London, ultimately killing tens of thousands of civilians. By early October, Hitler gave up on ideas for invasion, as the British Royal Air Force still had the upper hand in the air, and the British Navy on the sea.
In the United States, President Franklin Roosevelt won passage in Congress of a lend-lease bill, allowing him great leeway in transferring equipment as needed. It became law on March 11, 1941.
Meanwhile, Hitler and his ally, Italy, had subdued parts of the Middle East and North Africa. In April, Yugoslavia and Greece fell, and by May Libya and the Greek island of Crete were under Axis control.
On June 22, Hitler invaded Russia. German victories came swiftly in the summer months, but by October German troops were exhausted. Despite heavy losses, Russian forces saved Moscow and bought time until winter set in, bogging down the ill-prepared German troops.
On Dec. 7, 1941, Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, bringing the United States into the war. Japan began a sweep through the Pacific that included Guam, Wake Island,tthe Gilbert Islands and the Philippinesl.
By mid-1942, American forces began to halt the Japanese advance. In May and June, the Japanese were forced to retreat at the Battle of the Coral Sea and the Battle of Midway. On August 7, the U.S. First Marine Division landed at Guadalcanal. Eventually, Gen. Douglas MacArthur led the westward advance along New Guinea and the Philippines, while Adm. Chester Nimitz swept up the central Pacific islands.
The plan of the Allies, however, was to focus first on defeating Hitler. Despite the American military's preference for an assault across the English Channel, they accepted Winston Churchill's proposal to first strike in North Africa. In October 1942, this began with a counterattack by the British Gen. Bernard Montgomery in Egypt, and the landing of the American Gen. Dwight Eisenhower in Morocco. It took until the following May to secure the whole of North Africa, setting the stage for a push to Europe via Italy.
On July 10, 1943, Allied forces, led by Gen. George Patton and Montgomery, landed in Sicily. Italy quickly surrendered, and on Sept. 9 the Allies landed on the mainland at Salerno. Fighting continued in Italy until June 4, 1944, when Rome was captured.
June 6, 1944, was D-Day, the long-planned cross-channel invasion of France. At Normandy beaches, the Allies landed a million men within two weeks. Hitler, ignoring advice from his generals, refused to strategically retreat as the Allies advanced. On Aug. 25 Paris was liberated, and by mid-September most of France and Belgium had been cleared of German troops. The Allies lost momentum at the German border, however, and the Germans counterattacked at the Ardennes Forest on Dec. 16. This came to be known as the Battle of the Bulge, as Germans advanced along a 50-mile "bulge" in Belgium and Luxembourg. Cloud cover prevented Allied air attacks and supply drops. The German advance stalled at Bastogne in Belgium, where the Allies held out for six days until the skies cleared and air power was brought to bear on the Germans.
By January 1945, the Russians had begun an offensive in the east. In the west, Allied forces took the Ruhr Valley, site of Germany's heaviest industrial production. On April 30, Hitler committed suicide in his bunker in Berlin. The city fell to the Russians on May 2, and five days later Germany signed an unconditional surrender. May 8 was proclaimed V-E Day.
Meanwhile, MacArthur in the Pacific had been able to push the Japanese from the eastern tip of New Guinea by January 1943. In March, the Battle of the Bismarck Sea, off New Guinea, had favorable consequences for the Americans. Eight troopships and ten warships carrying Japanese reinforcements were been sunk by American bombers, and for the remainder of the war the Japanese no longer dared transport troops to areas under siege. In November, MacArthur began an assault on New Guinea and the surrounding islands, while Adm. Nimitz attacked the Gilbert Islands of Makin and Tarawa.
In June 1944, the Marianas fell to the Americans, putting Japan within range of B-29 bombers. In October, MacArthur moved into the Philippines. The Battle of Leyte Gulf was one of the largest naval engagements in history.
U.S. Marines invaded Iwo Jima on Feb. 19, 1945. Nearly six weeks were required to secure the island, needed for its proximity to Japan in order to expedite bombing campaigns. On April 1, the Americans invaded Okinawa in the largest amphibious operation of the Pacific War. It left the Japanese Navy virtually decimated.
On July 16, 1945, the first detonation of an atomic bomb was successfully made in the New Mexico desert. On July 25, President Harry Truman ordered the bomb dropped on Japan if it did not surrender by August 3. The deadline passed, and on August 6, Hiroshima was leveled; three days later a second atomic bomb was dropped on Nagasaki.
Japan accepted the surrender terms, and hostilities ended on Aug. 14, V-J Day. On Sept. 2, representatives of the Japanese government formally surrendered to MacArthur aboard the battleship Missouri.
---
 
(Sources: Ernest R. Dupuy, "World War II: A Compact History"; George B. Tindall and David E. Shi, "America: A Narrative History," 3rd ed., vol. 2.; Brig. Peter Young and Brig. Gen. James L. Collins, eds., "Illustrated World War II Encyclopedia," Vols. 1 and 2.)
End Adv for Sunday, Dec. 5, and thereafter
 
 Load-Date: December 6, 1999

 

End of Document
