

The sidelines and sideshows of the Albanian crisis
March 16, 1997, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 597 words
Byline: By BRIAN MURPHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TIRANA, Albania
Body




What to wear at the roadblock?
Depends on which side of the chaos the blockade stands.
In the south, where the uprising began, the checkpoint garb is an astonishing mishmash - sometimes creepy, sometimes comical.
"Documents! Documents!" screamed an insurgent, his voice muffled by medical gauze wrapped around his head mummy-style. Behind him, another gunman favored the silent treatment. His "disguise" was a piece of tape plastered over his mouth.
Farther down the road, a man fired his Kalashakov into the air for the benefit of photographers. Strings of black hair from his motley wig shook as he blasted away.
Near Tepelena, a young man cocked his pistol and pointed it at the heads of two government hostages. The captor, although menacing, was having trouble with his pantyhose - pulled over his head with the deflated legs flopping about like giant ears and falling in front of his face.
Around Tirana, roadblock attire is more uniform.
Civilians who joined a militia corps to help police restore order took to wearing matching red-and-blue ski masks. One older man added a touch of the traditional and trendy: a white fez and Italian sunglasses.
 
 ---
One casualty of the crisis is the British Embassy car pool.
A fleet of 18 cars, including the ambassador's, was stolen Thursday by a mob in the port of Durres, where embassy staff had taken more than 150 people to be evacuated.
Left without a lift back to Tirana, about 25 miles away, the embassy workers joined the exodus out of Albania. The ambassador was left alone to handle the task of trying to find any remaining British or Commonwealth citizens.
 
 ---
Some shoot and some loot.
Others spray and play.
Even with gunfire ringing close by, a small amusement park in the center of Tirana kept plugging along. Bumper cars kept bumping and a spinning spider-like ride kept bobbing up and down - even as the unrest in the capital went through its own highs and lulls. On Sunday, the ride was temporarily stopped for a peace demonstration in Skanderbeg Square. But one couple stayed aboard the ride's saucer-shaped cars for a better view.
The car wash business also never missed a beat. Even in the most lawless areas, it was still possible to pull into one of the many roadside stops where high-pressure hoses blast the dirt and grime from vehicles.
One enterprising owner offered to give a cleansing blast to guns, which may have gotten dirty in the looting.
 
 ---
Under communist dictator Enver Hoxha, hundreds of thousands of pillbox bunkers were built all over the country to defend Albania in war.
Now that violence has arrived, neither the military nor the insurgents find them of much use. Few, if any, people took up positions in the bunkers. A woman in Vlora turned one into a little market.
 
 ---
Rumors fly about almost as much as bullets.
A false tip that President Sali Berisha had resigned was reported Saturday by Greek media, which are received across much of rebellious southern Albania. Spontaneous celebrations flared, then sputtered as word trickled in that Berisha was still in power.
The management of the Austrian-owned Europark Rogner hotel, near the presidential offices, ordered all guests to turn off their lights and gather downstairs in preparation for violence - which never came.
 
 ---
The crisis has brought foreign journalists to the backwaters of one of Europe's most backward countries - isolated for decades by authoritarian rule.
But pop culture knows no bounds.
A man stopped a group of reporters in the city of Fieri with the only English he knew, courtesy of Chubby Checker: "C'mon, c'mon, let's twist again."
 Load-Date: March 16, 1997

 

End of Document
