

The tenor and the taxman: Pavarotti closes curtain on four-year tax battle
The Associated Press
July 27, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 417 words
Byline: By ELLEN KNICKMEYER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME
Body




It's not over until the fat guy writes a check.
Luciano Pavarotti brought down the curtain Thursday on a four-year tax battle that saw the world's most famous tenor threatened with indictment. In a command performance before Italy's finance minister, Pavarotti sealed a deal that will have him paying nearly $12 million in taxes and interest.
"I cannot live being thought not a good person," said Pavarotti, who donned a pinstripe suit over black sneakers for his litigation-closing handshake with Finance Minister Ottaviano del Turco.
"Until 20 minutes ago, I felt like I had a knife in my stomach. But now, no more," said a frazzled-looking and tousle-haired Pavarotti, still unable to muster more than forced smiles for his day of reckoning with the taxman.
Pavarotti lost a protracted legal battle last year in which he unsuccessfully claimed the tax haven of Monte Carlo rather than Italy as his official residence.
Italian prosecutors turned up the pressure in April when they sought his indictment on tax fraud charges. The crime carries an up to five-year prison sentence.
Faced with examples of fellow tax-taxed celebrities in Italy - Alberto Tomba, who settled this year after courts set a date for the ski champ's tax trial, and Sophia Loren, briefly jailed in a tax-evasion tussle in the 1980s - Pavarotti ultimately agreed to fork over.
"I want at last to have myself free of a big, big strain," he said Thursday. "It ruined my private life."
The Finance Ministry said Pavarotti will pay in installments. Rome-based La Repubblica newspaper said he would pay about $5 million now, with the rest coming over two years.
The Italian case was the latest to take center stage among Pavarotti's tax troubles.
In 1999, Pavarotti paid an undisclosed six-figure sum to settle a tax evasion probe opened against the Three Tenors - Pavarotti, Placido Domingo and Jose Carreras - in Germany. Domingo also paid an undisclosed sum. The status of the investigation regarding Carreras was not known Thursday.
In the 1970s, tax problems kept the Wagnerian soprano Birgit Nilsson from performing in the United States for several years.
Pavarotti has always denied wrongdoing, saying he pays taxes where ever he performs.
"It's very difficult to explain the life of one who travels the world, and who every year visits 50 different cities," he said on state TV Wednesday night.
"I suffered a lot in these four years," he added Thursday. "I'm still going to suffer, because I'm still going to have to pay - but finally I'm free."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo ROM124
 Load-Date: July 28, 2000

 

End of Document
