

The Fire - And The Horror - Still Smolder At Qana
April 19, 1996, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 624 words
Byline: By TAREK AL-ISSAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QANA, Lebanon
Body




The sky that rained shells over the U.N. base here now produces only a light spring drizzle - not yet enough to wash away the smells of smoldering mattresses, singed hair and human blood.
Beyond, incoming shells echo in the south Lebanon hills, landing less than 2 miles from the headquarters of the Fijian battalion of the U.N. Interim Force in Lebanon. Israeli warplanes roar overhead.
At the Qana base on Thursday, at least 75 men, women and children who thought they'd found sanctuary from Israel's determined campaign to deal a knockout blow to Lebanon's Iranian-backed guerrillas instead found violent death.
"My brain is dead. My mind is paralyzed," a shaken survivor, Jalali Buhjair, said Friday as he helped in the cleanup.
Thursday's dead were among the 500 refugees who had sought safety with United Nations troops at the Qana, headquarters of the Fijian contingent of the 4,500-member U.N. Interim Force in Lebanon.
More than 100 people were wounded, including four Fijian peacekeepers, when six 155-mm shells crashed into the base. Israel said it hit the refugees by mistake, with misaimed fire intended for Hezbollah guerrillas launching rockets 300 yards from the U.N. base. Hezbollah has denied firing attacks from the area.
"I can't find the words to describe what I feel after seeing this," Gen. Stanislaw Wozniak, the visibly shocked U.N. force commander, said as he inspected the carnage's aftermath.
The attack on the base southeast of the Biblical port city of Tyre was the bloodiest in Israel's nine-day air and artillery blitz on Lebanon.
At least 134 people have been killed and more than 300 wounded since last week. Nearly all were civilians, according to Lebanese police and other officials. Only one Israeli - a soldier serving in the Israeli occupation zone in south Lebanon - has been killed.
"Why civilians?" said Wozniak, a Polish army officer. "Simply you don't attack civilians. You don't attack U.N. positions."
He said he had told the Israeli military chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Amnon Shahak, "general to general" that "what has happened is not acceptable, and I made it clear to him it should not happen again."
As he spoke, Israeli jets howled overhead, breaking the sound barrier in two deafening booms.
U.N. troops, undeterred by the intermittent shelling of nearby hills, worked to clear the pieces of broken glass, the dagger-sharp bits of shrapnel-shredded tin roofing and the blood-stained blankets.
Sponge mattresses still smoldered. The remaining walls were covered with stains and bloody fingerprints.
A mass funeral was to be held Saturday in the village - security conditions permitting, Lebanese officials said.
The victims of Qana, some of their bodies in pieces, will be buried in a single grave, the officials said.
Many surviving refugees, meanwhile, were evacuated to other U.N. bases or left for Beirut. Buhjair, one of those who stayed, is from Algeria, where a Muslim insurgency has left thousands dead since 1994.
"I fled Algeria to get away from the killings. Here I am, by far much worse," the heavy-set farmer said. He said he escaped injury by diving into an underground shelter.
Ahmed Rabihi, a political refugee from Iraq, said his life was saved because a woman behind him died, her body absorbing the shrapnel that sliced into her back as she tried to reach an underground shelter.
When the first shell landed nearby, Rabihi hit the ground with his wife. Clutching their year-old son and 3-year-old daughter, they crawled down several steps into the shelter.
"Another shell hit. A woman behind me slammed on top of me. I felt the heat. It was blood. She was dead," Rabihi said.
"I've lived through the Iran-Iraq war and the Gulf War," said Rabihi, 40. "I've seen dead people in one piece, not in shreds."
 Load-Date: April 19, 1996

 

End of Document
