

THE 20TH CENTURY; Brief summary of the Korean War
The Associated Press
November 30, 1999, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 489 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Events of the Korean War, 1950-1953:
North Korean forces crossed the 38th parallel, the boundary between North and South Korea established after World War II, on June 25, 1950. Two days later, the United Nations Security Council voted to send armed forces to repel the attack. The United States and fourteen other nations sent troops, under the unified command of U.S. Gen. Douglas MacArthur.
The first few months did not go well for the U.N. forces, which by September were beaten back to a small area in the southeast corner of South Korea surrounding the city of Pusan.
On Sept. 15, 1950, troops led by MacArthur made an amphibious landing at Inchon, and soon regained the South Korean capital of Seoul. With two fronts, the U.N. forces scored a series of victories, pushing the enemy back beyond the border.
MacArthur argued for a continued push to reunify the country, which was approved by President Truman until the threat of a full-scale intervention by the Chinese. The North Korean capital of Pyongyang was occupied on Oct. 20, and six days later advance units reached the Chinese border at Chosan on the Yalu River.
In October, however, Communist Chinese "volunteer" forces had begun to cross over from Manchuria, coming in large numbers the following month. When they arrived, the two main ground commands, the U.S. Eighth Army and the U.S. X Corps, were physically separated. With the Chinese attacks, they were forced to retreat south of the former border.
In January 1951, the U.N. troops dug in below Seoul, and, led by Gen. Matthew B. Ridgway, launched a counterattack called Operation Thunderbolt. U.N. troops were back across the 38th parallel in some places by March 1951.
At this point, President Truman offered negotiations to restore the former boundary between the two Koreas, and MacArthur unilaterally issued an ultimatum to China to make peace or be attacked. This and other disagreements regarding strategy led Truman to relieve MacArthur of his command on April 11, to be replaced by Ridgway.
On June 24, 1951, the Soviet representative to the United Nations, Jacob Malik, proposed a cease fire and armistice along the old 38th parallel. Truce talks, first in Kaesong and later in Panmunjom, dragged on for two years. A truce was declared on July 27, 1953.
Conditions of the truce allowed for the boundary to be set just north of the 38th parallel, creation of a 2.5-mile demilitarized zone. No final peace conference was ever convened, so the war was never officially declared ended.
The other fourteen countries that sent troops to Korea were Great Britain, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, India, South Africa, France, Greece, the Netherlands, the Philippines, Thailand, Turkey, Belgium, and Sweden.
---
 
(Sources: John Miller, Owen J. Carroll and Margaret E. Tackley, "Korea, 1951-1953"; George B. Tindall and David E. Shi, "America: A Narrative History. 3rd ed., vol. 2.")
End Adv for Sunday, Dec. 5, and thereafter
 
 Load-Date: December 6, 1999

 

End of Document
