

The battles around Podujevo: Preparations for the spring?
The Associated Press
December 30, 1998, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 670 words
Byline: By VESELIN TOSHKOV, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PODUJEVO, Yugoslavia
Body




In the snowy hills of northern Kosovo, Serbs and ethnic Albanians alike fear the four days of fighting that raged last week were a dress rehearsal for fiercer battles to come.
Clashes that erupted here Christmas Eve added at least 15 people to the more than 1,000 who have died in Kosovo since February, when Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic launched a crackdown on independence-minded ethnic Albanians.
The battles were halted by international monitors sent to Kosovo under an agreement reached Oct. 12 between Milosevic and U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke to end seven months of fighting.
But the bitterness remains. Ethnic Albanian rebels appear to be gearing up for a new round of fighting, possibly in the spring. And Serb civilians are anxious for the government to finish off the rebels, regardless of threats of NATO intervention.
"Soon, there will be no Serbs here unless the state takes measures and finishes off with these bandits and savages," said local Serb official Srboslav Bisercic, referring to the Kosovo Liberation Army.
Although the area has been quiet for the past two days, ethnic Albanian rebels show no sign of backing down. If the rebels capture Podujevo, they would control the main highway between Kosovo's capital, Pristina, and the heartland of Serbia, the main republic of Yugoslavia.
KLA trenches lie only a few hundred yards away from the 20-mile road linking Podujevo with Pristina.
"The KLA will do everything to keep these positions," said Fehim Rexhepi, an ethnic Albanian journalist who reports on the rebel movement.
Caught in the middle are the hundreds of unarmed monitors sent by the 54-nation Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to verify compliance with the October truce.
On Tuesday, the OSCE said 100 additional verifiers were on their way to Kosovo, bringing to 700 the number deployed to help keep the peace. In a few weeks, the organization expects to have the full complement of 2,000 verifiers in the Serbian province.
But critics among both the Serb and ethnic Albanian communities have questioned whether unarmed verifiers can contain the conflict for long, given the bitterness on both sides.
On Tuesday, the chief Serb official in Kosovo, Zoran Andjelkovic, told local Serbs that the OSCE verifiers have no business telling the government "what to do and how to deal with the terrorists."
"It is their job only to verify the facts on the ground and inform their superiors of their findings," he said. "And the facts clearly show that the criminal gangs are terrorizing the civilian population."
The Serb-led government fears that the October agreement has given the rebels time to regroup, retrain and prepare for more battles when warmer weather will enable them to smuggle more weapons and fighters across the snow-covered passes from their sanctuaries in Albania.
Rexhepi said the guerrillas have already reorganized and increased their presence in the Podujevo area. He estimates that the KLA has deployed between 2,000 and 3,000 guerrillas around the town.
He said the KLA's total strength has grown to about 6,000 across the province since the cease-fire.
"They are more disciplined, better-equipped and prepared for any battle than they were several months ago," Rexhepi said.
Many of the villages in the Podujevo area are deserted, except for uniformed KLA fighters. The KLA is particularly strong in the nearby village of Lapastica, where hundreds of ethnic Albanian refugees fled after the latest fighting.
In Podujevo, 1 miles northeast of Lapastica, Serbs are anxious and fearful of what will happen to them in the coming months.
On Tuesday, a group of nervous Serb men smoked cigarettes as they waited for news on a police effort to evacuate civilians from rebel territory.
"My mother and father are there," one said, refusing to give his name. "They wouldn't listen to me when I told them to evacuate in time."
Another cursed the West for pressuring the government to halt the crackdown in October. "Our hands are tied," he said. "The world is against us."
 Load-Date: December 30, 1998

 

End of Document
