

The Artists: Show Offers a Glimpse of Thomas Eakins, the Walt Whitman of Paint
July 5, 1996, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 551 words
Byline: By DEAN WRIGHT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Thomas Eakins did with paint what Walt Whitman did with words: Through exquisitely wrought naturalistic images, he celebrated America as a muscular, light-flooded vision of democracy where the class-based hang-ups of the Old World had no place.
In "Thomas Eakins: The Rowing Pictures," the National Gallery of Art has mounted a small but intense show that displays Eakins' lifelong interest in rowing, one of the most popular pastimes of 1870s America and a sport that demonstrated some of the differences between the New World and the Old.
Like the everyday citizens Whitman embraced in his poetry, Eakins' rowers were portraits of America - firemen, lawyers, mechanics, laborers and even, in one picture, Eakins himself.
"Unlike in England - where rowing was restricted to people who did not work with their hands - rowing in America was open to everyone," Helen Cooper, curator of American paintings and sculpture at the Yale University Art Gallery, said at a preview of the exhibit.
Cooper, who organized the show, writes in the accompanying catalog that Eakins "came to see rowers - in their pursuit of excellence, their drive to break old boundaries, and their commitment to hard work - as symbols of a kind of democratic, American morality."
"The Biglin Brothers Racing" (1872) depicts two of the most famous rowers of their day, John and Barney Biglin, propelling their craft in a celebrated race on Philadelphia's Schuylkill River. The Biglins are lean, muscular and athletic, but there is something more - a sense that the mind and the body are working in harmony.
"The Biglin Brothers Turning the Stake" (1873) is a celebration of teamwork, in which the Biglins execute the complex rowing maneuver needed to turn the craft around.
"These pictures encapsulate a moment of physical activity," Cooper said, "but in doing that they capture more than the moment."
Besides nine oils, the show displays a watercolor and 13 drawings, mostly finely detailed perspective studies that the disciplined Eakins completed before beginning the paintings, all of which were done in his studio.
One drawing contains so much detail - the dimensions of the boat, the distance of objects from the viewer and the position of the sun - that a scholar was able to determine the time of day depicted in the picture.
Eakins painted his last rowing picture in 1874. Within a few years the sport was beset by betting scandals that sank its popularity for many decades.
But Eakins, Cooper said, went on to even more ambitious pictures, such as "The Gross Clinic" (1875), which shows a surgeon operating and firmly established Eakins as the foremost exponent of the new naturalism.
"The rowers set the pattern for the kinds of portraits Eakins would paint for the rest of his life, people who combined intellectual and physical skills," said Cooper.
Whitman, who lived in nearby Camden, N.J., and whose portrait Eakins painted, said of his good friend: "I never knew of but one artist, and that's Tom Eakins, who could resist the temptation to see what they thought ought to be rather than what is."
---
"Thomas Eakins: The Rowing Pictures" at the National Gallery of Art runs through Sept. 29, then goes to the Yale University Art Gallery in New Haven, Conn., Oct. 11, 1996-Jan. 14, 1997, and the Cleveland Museum of Art, Feb. 15-May 15, 1997.
 Load-Date: July 5, 1996

 

End of Document
