

THE NIRVANA ECONOMY?; U.S. nudges Europe into prosperity - and anxiety
The Associated Press
November 7, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1749 words
Byline: By BRUCE STANLEY, AP Business Writer
Dateline: MILAN, Italy
Body




The artisans at Messulam SpA use skills honed by ancient Etruscans to hammer silver plate into gleaming bowls and samovars.
To help sell the tableware, the family-owned firm relies on a more recent innovation: direct marketing via the Internet.
By coupling a new technology with 2,500 years of craftsmanship, managing director Roberto Beretta hopes Milan-based Messulam can offset Italy's rigid labor laws, which are among the company's toughest constraints.
When the loss of a major supplier last year compelled him to lay off a dozen workers, it took Beretta six months and the arbitration of a judge to do what an American boss could have achieved in minutes. There was no alternative. "Otherwise, we would have had to shut down," he says.
Companies across Europe have struggled against similar obstacles in the 1990s. Inflexible rules about the hiring and firing of workers, politicians reluctant to let foreigners compete with state-owned companies, high interest rates that choked off consumer demand - all have sapped the region of its economic potential.
Europe's uneven, tepid growth contrasts sharply with the vigor of the U.S. economy during the same period. Americans have enjoyed prosperity for more than eight years, the longest peacetime expansion in their history, while Europe and much of the industrialized world have had to make do with crumbs.
In Italy, economic output during the 24 months ending in March increased by a quarterly average of just 0.4 percent, the most anemic growth rate in Western Europe. Some of Italy's neighbors fared little better.
Germany languished due to the high costs of unification and a global downturn in demand for its exports. France is saddled with a stubbornly high unemployment rate of 11.2 percent.
Now, at last, the flames of a broad recovery are starting to flicker.
"There's sort of a stereotype of a sclerotic Europe that is not borne out by the facts," says Bill Callaghan, chief economist for the Trades Union Congress, Britain's largest labor group.
Among recent positive signs:
-France's gross domestic product increased by a healthy 0.6 percent during the year's second quarter. The finance ministry has predicted the economy will grow by as much as 2.5 percent this year and 3 percent in 2000.
-In Germany, which makes more than 25 percent of Europe's manufactured goods, orders jumped by 1.3 percent from June to July, three times more than most analysts had predicted.
-A galloping demand for houses has pushed British property prices skyward, and the Bank of England raised a key lending rate in September for fear that the economy might overheat.
-Ireland, long a laggard, now boasts Europe's fastest-growing economy, and Irish emigres are coming home to join the boom in construction and services.
"I think the fundamentals are pretty favorable for Europe," says Paul Mortimer-Lee, a London-based economist with the French bank Paribas. "I think we're going to see quite a bit stronger growth in 2000 than we have seen this year."
The turnaround extends also to industrialized countries outside Europe. Japan's economy finally started to grow again this year after shrinking for 15 consecutive months. South Korea, Thailand and other formerly high-flying tigers of Asia are clawing their way back from financial crisis.
Although growth rates vary widely within Europe, the overall improvement in the region has coincided with the introduction in January of a single regional currency, the euro, and its subsequent slide to near-parity with the U.S. dollar.
The euro is still primarily a bookkeeping entry for businesses and governments in the 11 countries of "Euroland." Euro coins and notes won't enter circulation until Jan. 1, 2002. But the currency's low value relative to the dollar has given a competitive edge to products already priced in euros.
"The weakness of the euro since the start of the year is one of the reasons the European economy is now picking up, because that has given a boost to export orders," says Jose Luis Alzola, an economist at the London office of Salomon Smith Barney Citibank.
The European Central Bank, headquartered in Frankfurt, Germany, is doing its part by charging commercial banks a low 2.5 percent for short-term loans. Cheaper loans usually mean increased investment and consumer spending.
Italy needs a lot more of both. Under the 1992 Maastricht Treaty that set financial rules for joining the euro, Italy had to slash government spending more than most countries in order to qualify for the new currency. Recession soon set in.
At the Salvatore Ferragamo store on Milan's chic shopping street, Via Monte Napoleone, sales of shoes and handbags have been flat for the past three years. "Before, the price wasn't important, but now people care how they spend," store manager Marina Brasca says.
Indeed, European consumers eager for better prices and wider selections have created an opening for aggressive U.S. companies.
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. is among the growing number of American businesses investing in Europe. Wal-Mart alarmed supermarkets in Britain, where the country's biggest supermarkets are under investigation for possible price-fixing, when it bought the grocery chain Asda Group PLC in June.
Other U.S. firms hope to profit from a wave of mergers and acquisitions sweeping the region. This consolidation trend is one aspect of the economic restructuring now underway in Europe, several years after a similar upheaval in the United States.
Europe's largest cities and high-tech centers have generally profited from these changes, which have favored services at the expense of heavy manufacturing.
But the region's industrial core is going the way of Pittsburgh and Detroit. Economic growth has declined sharply in manufacturing centers such as Germany's Ruhr River valley, parts of southern Belgium, and large sections of northern Spain, France and England.
One result is a chronically high jobless rate. Unemployment in Euroland stands at 10.2 percent, compared with 4.2 percent in the United States.
Many economists and business executives blame Europe's labor laws, saying they have impeded growth by restraining businesses from quickly adjusting their workforce in response to market conditions.
At InnoConcepts N.V. near Rotterdam, which helps inventors turn ideas into marketable products, general manager Oscar Middendorp makes the point.
"In Holland," he says, "we are more cautious before hiring someone - in terms of references, questions we ask, qualifications - because we know it will cost us a certain amount of time if we decide we do need to fire them."
Sweden cut its unemployment rate to 6.8 percent in July from 8.5 percent a year ago, while clocking some of the fastest growth in Europe. Even so, Lena Munther has little to show for the four years she and a friend have run an organic cafe and food store in Stockholm.
"We hardly have any financial leeway at all. We clear just enough to pay our bills," Munther says.
Elsewhere in Europe, external forces have contributed to much of the torpor. Major exporters like Germany and Italy suffered from the global financial crisis that erupted in East Asia in July 1997. The crisis spread to Russia and Latin America, depressing orders for German and Italian exports and causing both economies to shrink in early 1998.
But analysts suggest that Europe has inflicted much of its own economic pain.
When German unification brought a torrent of investment into former East Germany, the German government hiked interest rates to keep down inflation. Germany's neighbors raised their rates to keep their currencies stable against the soaring mark. They avoided inflation, but only at the cost of stifling demand and growth.
The United States, by contrast, has followed a more expansionist monetary policy in the 1990s. U.S. companies also are blessed with an enormous domestic market and a pool of workers who think little of uprooting themselves to seek jobs in far-flung corners of the country.
"In Euroland, you don't have anything like the internal migration that you have in the United States, and there are much more serious barriers of language and culture," says William Kennedy, an economic historian at the London School of Economics.
These barriers, while largely psychological, belie the notion of the unified and efficient market symbolized by the euro.
Among the biggest hurdles within Europe are nationalistic policies discouraging cross-border competition.
When Telecom Italia sought to dodge a hostile takeover bid by Italian competitor Olivetti this summer, it tried to forge a friendly merger with Germany's telecommunications powerhouse, Deutsche Telekom. The Italian government, however, made no secret of its opposition to the transalpine combination. The effort collapsed, and Olivetti prevailed.
Economic nationalism also has deep roots in France. Banque Nationale de Paris, the country's largest bank, launched a hostile takeover bid in March for French rivals Societe Generale and Paribas. But BNP ended up with only Paribas, a blow for senior French politicians who had hoped for the creation of a Gallic megabank that would fend off foreign investors.
"I don't think there will be opportunities for us in France, due to the resistance of the French government and French companies," says Roberto Fanori, a spokesman for Snamprogetti, the Milan-based engineering arm of Italy's ENI energy group.
State ownership of leading firms also has hindered growth in Europe.
Although the British government sold off large stakes in the steel, car and aerospace industries, many governments in continental Europe have been slower to privatize their holdings. Most of the region's former state-run monopolies are only now starting to face up to competitive realities.
ENEL, the state-controlled Italian electric utility, lost its 37-year monopoly on power sales under a law passed in February. It plans to issue its first shares to the public.
As a preparatory step, ENEL has trimmed its payroll from 107,000 workers to 80,000, through retirements and attrition. Yet the shrinkage did no harm to service, says economist Carlo Scarpa of the Milan-based Mattei Foundation, a research center funded by the ENI group.
As it learns to trust market forces, the Italian government is shedding an economic role that dates back a half-century.
"In Europe, there was a lot of state intervention but no vision," Scarpa says. "No one was willing to say, 'OK, we accept greater unemployment today if it means greater growth tomorrow."' For release anytime
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY329-331 of Oct. 4; logo NIRVANA ECONOMY; Graphic
 Load-Date: November 8, 1999

 

End of Document
