

The Clintons: Leaving Lyon With A Walk In the Park
June 29, 1996, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 507 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LYON, France
Body




The Clintons enjoyed some private time in the Parc de la Tete d'Or early today, strolling through the serene setting on the third and final day of the annual economic summit of leading democracies.
President Clinton and first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton walked hand-in-hand past a field of deer, around a glassy pond and over a Japanese footbridge, admiring some of the park's 60,000 rose bushes.
Mrs. Clinton, comfortably dressed in a two-tone blue jogging suit, baseball cap and sunglasses, stopped with her husband before a bronze and stone sculpture depicting seven men using a lever trying to move the world.
The sculpture was presented to Lyon Mayor Raymond Barre in honor of the G-7 summit of the seven most industrialized nations.
President Clinton, in a T-shirt and black running pants, jogged around the grounds and stopped in front of the park zoo's lion's den as he had the day before, and chatted with park director Bernard Deville.
Asked what he thought of the summit, Clinton told reporters: "So far, I'm pleased."
 
 ---
After a sumptuous dinner, the leaders gathered on the rooftop of Lyon's hilltop basilica to watch an 11-minute firework show, accompanied by the amplified blast of Ravel's "Bolero."
Dinner was served Friday night at the Leon de Lyon restaurant. And with a collection of world leaders inside, French police were especially vigilant outside.
Security was so tight that when a woman opened her window to look outside, a plainclothed officer on a floor above pulled his gun, ordering her to shut it.
 
 ---
British Prime Minister John Major said today he believes the Irish Republican Army was responsible for an attack on a British barracks in Germany.
Three mortars were fired at the barracks in Osnabruck Friday night, causing minor damage but no injuries.
"Terrorism is going to fail. It is not going to achieve any political results," Major said.
The Group of Seven summit that Major has been attending has been dominated by a search for new ways to defeat terrorism.
The IRA ended its 17-month cease-fire with a February bombing in London that killed two men. Another, in Manchester on June 15, injured 200 people.
Every attack, Major said, makes it more difficult for the IRA's allies in the Sinn Fein party to participate in efforts to achieve peace in the region.
"They are shrinking in the view of many people who previously supported them, and that is extremely good news, and from the IRA's point of view, they must be extremely worried about that," Major said.
 
 ---
Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and his top aides struggled during the summit to deal with a fire that forced evacuation of their offices back in Washington.
The U.S. Treasury is the third oldest government building in Washington after the Capitol and the White House.
The blaze Wednesday caused extensive damage. Rubin described it as "a very serious fire in a very wonderful building."
Rubin's chief of staff, Sylvia Matthews, returned to Washington to deal with the fire. Officials said they hoped they could return evacuated employees beginning Monday.
 
 Load-Date: June 29, 1996

 

End of Document
