

The year in theater: 'Wild Parties,' 'Tallulah' and goodbye 'Cats'
December 19, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1167 words
Byline: By MICHAEL KUCHWARA, AP Drama Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It was the year of two "Wild Parties," three Tallulahs and, by the fall, no "Cats."
Theater 2000 saw the decline of the big British musical on Broadway, the rise of the Internet as a prime source of theater gossip and the best fall season in several years for new plays, including a comeback of sorts for comedy king Neil Simon.
The following is a list of bests and worsts, highs and lows, of the theater year. Totally subjective, of course.
The best:
The Tony Awards got it right. "Copenhagen," Michael Frayn's intellectually bracing and surprisingly moving examination of two physicists on opposite sides during World War II, was the year's best play. And even more important for Broadway, it was financially successful, having repaid its more than $1.3 million in production costs before it closes Jan. 21 after a 10-month run.
Tony voters chose "Contact" as best musical, and they were right on that count, too. The musical, which first opened at Lincoln Center Theater's small playhouse in the fall of 1999, moved to the larger and Tony-eligible Vivian Beaumont Theater this year. So call it the best musical of the last 18 months.
Some critics fussed because the show used prerecorded music, from classical to golden oldies, and none of the characters sang. Still, "Contact" told its story, three short tales of relationships, mostly in dance. Director-choreographer Susan Stroman pushed the boundaries of what makes a musical, and she succeeded in expanding the notion that what sings on stage doesn't necessarily have to be a song.
There were other promising musicals, both of them off-Broadway. Kirsten Childs' "The Bubbly Black Girl Sheds Her Chameleon Skin" was a sprightly, occasionally spiky musical whose ever-smiling heroine made a satisfying journey to self-awareness. And "A Class Act" was the melodic and heartfelt biography of Ed Kleban, the forgotten lyricist of "A Chorus Line." The show moves to Broadway in March.
The worst:
Tomorrow, tomorrow and tomorrow seemed interminable when Kelsey Grammer portrayed the Scottish king in a torturous "Macbeth," the year's most misguided star vehicle. To make matters worse, the Brits arrived at the same time in the same play at an international arts festival in New Haven, Conn. A lacerating Royal Shakespeare Company production of "Macbeth" showed us colonials how the Bard should be done. Antony Sher was blood-chilling in the title role and Harriet Walter demonically unhinged as his royal helpmate.
The most underrated:
"Seussical," a colorful celebration of Dr. Seuss, filled with show-biz fizz and a delightful score whose charms may be more apparent (especially to the tin-eared critics who originally dismissed it) when Decca Broadway releases the original cast recording in February.
When "Seussical" went to Boston last summer to try out, the musical thought it was getting out of the line of fire. Wrong. Its every misstep, including replacement of its director, costume designer and set designer, was reported on the Internet via chat rooms and theater Web sites. The musical became the first victim of the all-pervasive power of the World Wide Web, where everyone online is a critic.
The most overrated:
"The Unexpected Man," Yasmina Reza's stifling two-character play that trapped Alan Bates and the incomparable Eileen Atkins for a long 70 minutes. An inert drama of side-by-side interior monologues by a famous novelist and an adoring fan, the play came alive when the two characters finally talked to each other - in the last five minutes of the play.
"Cats" hung up its whiskers at the venerable Winter Garden Theatre in September, after 7,485 performances that began in October 1982. It was the first of the long-running British musicals to fold, a fate awaiting "Miss Saigon" at the end of January.
"Les Miserables" and "The Phantom of the Opera" are still sturdy box-office draws, but impresario Cameron Mackintosh's likely successor to those two shows, "Martin Guerre," never made it to New York. It collapsed in Los Angeles last April after an extended American tour.
All of a sudden, Tallulah Bankhead was the woman everyone wanted to put on stage - but whether audiences wanted to see her was another question. The eccentric actress, who died in 1969, was subject of three plays, two of which played New York and a third, starring Kathleen Turner, began a long national tour that could bring it to Broadway before next summer.
Tovah Feldshuh portrayed the star in "Tallulah Hallelujah!" - a play with music that opened off-Broadway in October and runs through the end of December. Off-off-Broadway had a brief fling with Miss Bankhead, too, where "Dahling!" - written by and starring Nan Schmid - had a six-week run last fall.
After nearly a decade of lean years, Neil Simon, Broadway's most successful playwright, returned with a hit - a boulevard comedy called "The Dinner Party." The play, featuring TV favorites Henry Winkler and John Ritter, already has paid back its $1.2 million production costs, money provided by the playwright himself.
Profitability should also be in the picture for another comedy, "The Tale of the Allergist's Wife" by Charles Busch. The play has been attracting sizable audiences and features one of the more dazzling performances of the year: Linda Lavin as a neurotic New Yorker unhappy with her life.
It was a bountiful year for other great female performances, on and off-Broadway. Janie Dee, an English actress unknown here, was delightful as a robot with an all-too-human heart in Alan Ayckbourn's futuristic comedy, "Comic Potential." On a more serious note, Mary-Louise Parker portrayed a touching, unstable young woman in "Proof," David Auburn's examination of a volatile father-daughter relationship.
"What's a party without a few casualties?" That was the prophetic promotional line from the short-lived Broadway version of "The Wild Party," one of two attempts to make a musical out of the cynical Jazz Age poem by Joseph Moncure March.
Unfortunately, the casualty turned out to be the bitter, bruising show itself, brilliantly directed by George C. Wolfe but lacking in popular appeal. An off-Broadway version, another production by the ubiquitous Manhattan Theatre Club, fared no better with critics or audiences.
The year also saw the deaths within days of each other of two of Broadway's most colorful producers, David Merrick and Alexander Cohen. Whatever you thought of them or their shows, the productions they presented on Broadway reflected their personal taste and quirks.
Musical comedy also lost the greatest dancer of its golden age, Gwen Verdon, who died in October at 75.
Spring 2001's most anticipated show: "The Producers," a musical version of the Mel Brooks comedy classic, adapted for the stage by Brooks himself and starring Nathan Lane and Matthew Broderick. Another to watch for: the first Broadway revival of "Follies," the legendary Stephen Sondheim musical about the past and present of show business coming together in the ruins of a Broadway theater ripe for demolition.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY566 of Dec 19
 Load-Date: December 20, 2000

 

End of Document
