

THE 20TH CENTURY; Rights for All: From suffragettes to King and beyond, more than a dream
The Associated Press
November 7, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1678 words
Byline: By ALLEN G. BREED, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATLANTA
Body




Four-year-old Jabari Flemings is gazing innocently up at a television monitor when his mother, Glenda, swiftly steps between him and the flickering image and gently nudges him along.
She has brought him to the Martin Luther King Jr. National Historic Site to teach him about his past. But he's too young for this: segregation-era footage of two black men lynched in a leafless tree.
"At this age he didn't need to see that," the 40-year-old Mrs. Flemings says. "Later, he'll find out."
As his mother talks, Jabari sits amid the photographs of restaurants with "Whites Only" signs and policemen siccing German shepherds on black protesters. In one hand, he clutches a Blue's Clues doll, in the other, a park brochure with the words printed across it in bold, sunburst colors, "I HAVE A DREAM."
That dream of universal human rights spread unstoppably through the 20th century, carried by leaders like King and his spiritual mentor, Mohandas "Mahatma" Gandhi, who strides in bronze at the entrance to the King memorial.
It is a dream fed through hunger strikes in India, watered with blood in China, beaten into the human consciousness with clubs in the American South and tempered in the crematory fires of a German madman who questioned the right of entire peoples to even exist.
"I think the legacy of this century really is one of fear, terror, cruelty - but also of a response to terror, fear and cruelty," Nobel Peace Prize laureate Elie Wiesel, who survived Hitler's death camps at Auschwitz and Buchenwald, said in a telephone interview.
If this century was a long march for civil rights, gay rights and the rights of the handicapped, among those in the lead were women.
"Suffragettes" in Britain and the United States worked for decades to win equality, first through calm persuasion and, when that failed, through civil disobedience, a tactic later protesters would adopt. They broke street lamps, cut telephone lines and slashed museum paintings. One suffragist threw herself under the king's horse during a race and was killed.
In March 1913, 5,000 women staged a suffrage pageant in Washington, withstanding a mob's attacks until cavalry troops intervened. "Nothing less than riots," was an Associated Press correspondent's description.
Eight months later in London, a protest at Parliament became "Black Friday," which a historian described as "a battle between the police and not the unemployed, the homeless or the destitute - but middle- and upper-class women of all ages."
In the end, they got their vote.
And others, elsewhere, asserted their rights.
In 1909, W.E.B. Du Bois and others formed the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People to redeem the promise of equality made a half century earlier by Abraham Lincoln.
"By every civilized and peaceful method we must strive for the rights which the world accords to men," he wrote in 1903, citing the Declaration of Independence.
In India, Gandhi used nonviolent civil disobedience to end British colonial rule. He explained, "A nonviolent revolution is not a program of seizure of power. It is a program of transformation of relationships, ending in a peaceful transfer of power."
Though such leaders were essential, perhaps the greatest catalyst for the human rights movement in this century was Adolf Hitler's Holocaust.
When the smoke of World War II cleared and revealed the ashes of 6 million - Jews, Gypsies, homosexuals and others persecuted for simply being who they were - it became clear that the internal affairs of nations could no longer be passed off as nobody else's business.
"People realized that human rights … had to be defined and institutionalized," said Andrew Young, former United Nations ambassador under President Jimmy Carter. This was largely due to "guilt over what happened in the Second World War," he said.
In 1948, three years after the UN's founding, nations adopted a Universal Declaration of Human Rights, guided along by former first lady Eleanor Roosevelt. It upheld such basics as the right to equality and freedom from torture, but it did not become a binding convention until 1966.
In the intervening years, many governments, including Germany's, established a Bill of Rights. In the United States, this was the era of the civil rights movement, the series of marches, sit-ins, church rallies and boycotts that ultimately dismantled segregation laws that had evolved since the Civil War.
A 1954 Supreme Court decision, Brown vs. Board of Education, desegregated schools and provided a spark. But many say the movement truly began when one black woman, Rosa Parks, was arrested for refusing to give up her seat to a white passenger on a Montgomery, Ala., bus, and blacks responded with a crippling boycott.
The news media spotlight fell on a local preacher whose eloquence and energy helped keep the protest going - and so the world first got to know King.
Over and over, the electronic images that have chronicled the 20th century brought the demands for rights into everyone's hearing and seeing, making it harder to shrug off abuses happening somewhere else.
From newsreels of wasted fingers clinging to concentration camp fences to the image of a lone man facing down a row of Chinese tanks, people saw man's inhumanity - and saw those who stood up and said, "This is not right."
Taylor Branch, the Pulitzer Prize-winning historian, said "the sheer mass of newspapers and communication" made protests more important. "That helped draw attention to what was happening to people and it really made ordinary people into citizens."
One group's strides inspired others, and sometimes success surprised even the adherents.
In June 1969, drag queens at New York's Stonewall bar fought back against police harassment, and their action emboldened homosexuals around the world. It was the beginning of the gay rights movement.
Others, too, demanded an end to discriminatory treatment.
Born with cerebral palsy, Arthur Campbell Jr. wasn't allowed to attend school in his native Kentucky. He didn't get his first wheelchair until he was 30.
"Up until 20 years ago, a person like myself wouldn't have been allowed to live by himself or be out on the streets," says Campbell, 54, his words coming in the choked, frustrated half-screams of a man still struggling to be understood.
Leading by example in a civil disobedience campaign learned from past rights movements, Campbell was arrested 29 times around the country. He was among 70 protesters who chained themselves together in the Capitol Rotunda in Washington to dramatize support for the Americans with Disabilities Act, before it became law in 1990.
It is truly a paradox that a century so steeped in blood should also be marked by so many relatively bloodless miracles.
Cold War dissidents who for decades chipped away at Soviet totalitarianism finally saw students chip down the Berlin Wall. In the Philippines, Corazon Aquino turned grief at her reformist politician husband's assassination into a "people power" revolution. And after enduring Apartheid's brutalities, Nelson Mandela emerged from his 27-year imprisonment to lead South Africa toward racial reconciliation.
"If you see the 20th century as the century of the stunning ascendancy of freedom and democracy … then I think the advance of human rights makes more sense," Branch says. "Because democracy and human rights are just different parts of the same picture. They're about who matters."
As the 20th century ends, the focus has turned to how to enforce human rights laws, including the universal declaration. Slowly, the threat of military or legal intervention, sanctions or international censure is institutionalizing the idea of rights for all.
Some are troubled that recognition of rights must be forced.
"They (some nations' leaders) don't act out of conviction; they act out of fear," says Arun Gandhi, co-founder of the Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi Institute for Nonviolence in Memphis and grandson of the Mahatma. "It's, 'What will the Western world say? What will the World Bank say? What will the United Nations say?' And, 'We have to behave if we want aid from them.' "
In the end, changing people's convictions is more important that enforcing laws, he says.
True, said the Rev. Joseph Lowery, a co-founder of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference who marched alongside King, but repressed groups cannot afford to wait for people's convictions to catch up with the law.
"I'm a preacher, and people's motives interest me," says Lowery. "But … if he's got his foot on my neck, I'd like his foot off my neck - regardless of his attitude."
As repressive governments fall and democracy spreads, some leaders say crucial human rights remain unguaranteed.
"What's the use of the right to vote if you don't have food to eat?" says Johan van der Vyver, a professor of international law at Emory University and one of the architects of his native South Africa's post-Apartheid constitution.
President Carter has also called poverty the most egregious human rights violation today. "That's one of the foundations for human rights is to share blessings and also, I would guess, to share suffering," Carter said in a telephone interview.
Lowery agrees. He faced the dogs of Birmingham, Ala., police chief Bull Connor in the struggle for black equality. At 77, he sees the advances black Americans have made but knows, too, that they still earn less and occupy proportionately more jail cells than whites.
"The hounds of poverty are just as bad as the dogs of Bull Connor," he says.
Not far away at the King memorial, a winter wind seems to be trying to blow out the gas flame that burns before the civil rights leader's tomb.
Mrs. Flemings laments how far the world still is from realizing King's dream. She knows it won't happen in her lifetime. But for Jabari, whose name means "he will become strong," she sees hope.
"When he's older, it'll get better," she says. "Yeah, every year it's going to get better. Every century it's going to get better."
---
Editor's Note - Allen G. Breed is the AP's Southeast regional reporter, based in Raleigh, N.C.
End Adv for release anytime
 
 Graphic



 
With AP Photos NY321-325 of Jan. 25, graphic CENTURY LOGO
 Load-Date: November 8, 1999

 

End of Document
