

The Artists: Boursin, the artist: No longer just a model in her bath
The Associated Press
May 1, 1998, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 681 words
Byline: By GRAHAM HEATHCOTE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




French Impressionist Pierre Bonnard was so much in love with Marthe Boursin that during their nearly 50 years together, he did 384 paintings of her and thousands of drawings.
Sixteen of the paintings depict Boursin in the bathroom, both in and out of the water.
"But she didn't spend her life in her bath. Those bath paintings were done over 16 years," says Pierrette Vernon, a Paris art dealer whose grandmother was Boursin's sister.
Boursin was Bonnard's companion, model and wife, and their life together unfolds in the big Bonnard exhibition at London's Tate Gallery.
The exhibition, which runs through May 17 and has been drawing huge crowds, moves to the Museum of Modern Art in New York City on June 17. It will run at MOMA through Oct. 13.
Vernon has brought Boursin to light as an artist in her own right. In another and much smaller Bonnard show in London, at David Stern's gallery in Notting Hill, works by both Boursin and Bonnard were shown together for the first time, a half-century after their deaths.
Included in the show were 40 of Boursin's pastels and charcoal drawings, which came to Vernon's side of the family because they were not considered to be of value, she said in an interview.
Bonnard was already a recognized artist in Paris before the end of the 19th century, having won a competition in which Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec came second. His winning entry was a poster of a champagne bottle.
His 20th-century works are celebrated for their depiction of light and color. He painted rooms with garden views through open windows and the objects in the rooms. Boursin was often present - standing, sitting or reading, as well as bathing.
In her pictures, Boursin shows she wasn't influenced by Bonnard's art, or that of any of the famous artists they knew. She preferred to depict the objects in the rooms on their own - the flowers, fruit, vegetables, chairs, jugs and bowls, as well as the garden, some landscapes and a portrait or two.
"Pierre emphasized Marthe's art in his letters. He wrote that she painted strongly and had a determined personality. You can feel the breeze in her pine trees," Vernon said.
Boursin's picture of a cherry-decorated jug of flowers is the same jug Bonnard painted, but her version is rougher and simpler and, like all her work, lacks Bonnard's seductive glow.
Bonnard met Boursin in Paris in 1893 when she worked in a flower shop. The relationship was opposed by his parents, who felt Boursin, a country girl, was not classy enough for their son.
Vernon said Boursin started to paint in 1920 with her friend Louise Hervieu, a painter and drawing teacher.
In the French national library in Paris, Vernon found the only known catalog of an exhibit of Boursin's works, held in a Paris gallery in 1924. She exhibited as Boursin Solange, taking the name of her grandmother.
Since then, she has been a forgotten artist, an elusive and even mysterious figure, best known for her appearances in her husband's work.
Asked why Bonnard always painted Boursin as a young woman and never aging, even when she was old, Vernon said: "He considered her ageless - she represented woman to him. Very few painters at that time had only one woman as a model.
"Marthe in her bath is everyday life, and there's nothing strange about it. They were a very intimate couple leading intimate lives. Pierre was obsessed with Marthe, and it lasted all his life."
Boursin was 73 when she died in 1942 in their hillside villa, Le Bosquet at Le Cannet above Cannes in the South of France. Bonnard died at age 79, five years later.
"Pierre was looking at Marthe all the time. There was extraordinary intimacy between them," said Lionel Pissarro, great-grandson of the Impressionist Camille Pissarro. Lionel Pissarro owns a gallery in Paris but works with David Stern.
"Pierre's vision of the world went through Marthe, and it's not a surprise that having shared her life with him art became her world," Pissarro said.
"I see the harmony between the two reflected in their art when their works are shown together. I know that art can become almost a way of communicating in a family."
 Load-Date: May 1, 1998

 

End of Document
