

The pope, the press and the Cohibas: Notes on John Paul's Cuba sojourn
The Associated Press
January 25, 1998, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 786 words
Byline: By HUGH A. MULLIGAN, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: HAVANA
Body




Notes from the Cuban notebook of an AP reporter who has covered Pope John Paul II on 27 of his journeys across five continents:
 
 ---
With nearly 3,000 media types covering the pope in Cuba one wonders how the Rough Riders made it up San Juan Hill without a TV producer bellowing: "Take two, Teddy."
But Fidel's socialist island was saved from sinking into a bottomless sea of sonorous sound bites when the new White House scandals broke on the day Juan Pablo Segundo landed in Havana. Suddenly for the networks, it was anchors away.
On the first available charters out, Tom Brokaw, Peter Jennings and Dan Rather all defected from His Holiness to search for sinners in the Beltway.
Que pena, what a pity, as the Habaneros say. They ceded to other image-makers some of the more memorable moments on this Pearl of the Antilles since the first European visitor, Christopher Columbus, mistook the natives for subjects of the Mongol khans.
Sights like the pope preaching to an overflow crowd from Castro's bully pulpit at an altar set up before a nine-story portrait of the Sacred Heart that temporarily turned the National Library into a baroque Spanish basilica, resplendent with medieval religious pageantry.
On his right hand in La Plaza de la Revolucion, Cuban communism's most hallowed shrine, was a huge image of the legendary Ernesto "Che" Guevara on the facade of the Ministry of Security.
To his left loomed a tall monument to Jose Marti, a martyr in the struggle for independence from Spain, which is where Fidel delivers marathon homilies.
Where else in or outside of Christendom could you hear a quarter-million voices chanting "Ave, Ave," the Lourdes hymn to the Virgin Mary, immediately followed by the communist Internationale, as the Cuban Maximum Leader's limousine entered the square shortly after the popemobile?
>---
The pontiff, who has traveled as a pastor in 118 countries but was making his first visit to Cuba, must have been impressed at the efficiency of his hosts in one of communism's last strongholds. He still had two days to go on his five-day pilgrimage when party workers were seen replacing banners announcing "Bienvenido Su Santidad" - Welcome, Your Holiness" -- with "Feliz Regreso" - "Farewell." Perhaps the Central Committee was sending him a message.
>---
Some journalists were billeted in the old Capri and the restored Nacional hotels where, in pre-revolutionary days, mafia dons conspired and cavorted while Frank Sinatra crooned, roulette wheels hummed all night and, toward the end of his career, Hollywood tough guy George Raft served as a greeter.
This is no longer the rumba-pulsing turf of Graham Greene's man in Havana, where "every vice was permitted and every trade possible." But even with the pope in town and despite Fidel's firm views on public morality, mini-skirted hookers are back prowling the Malecon, the decaying seaside boulevard, and beckoning from the shadows of the royal palms flanking the newer hotels.
Apparently the "special period" of economic austerity, attributed to the collapse of aid and trade from the Soviet bloc and the continuing United States blockade, had forced some to diversify their trade. A common pitch heard was: "You no like me. OK. I sell you nice cigars. Real Cohibas." The brand was Fidel's favorite before he forsook Cuba's most enduring contribution to smoke-filled rooms.
Other professions apparently are feeling the fiscal pinch. One morning a rusting Russian Lada taxicab merged the recorded strains of Mozart with the groans of its gears and the tinny tympan of its the four cylinders. The cabbie turned out to be a moonlighting eye surgeon from Havana's large hospital for the blind. Top specialists in medicine make about $ 22 a month. With a free press dashing about on expenses, he often made that much in a day.
 
 ---
Even without a translator, visiting reporters easily learned that Cubans loved jokes, baseball, boxing, pizza and hot dogs. Propagandists for the Washington-based Free Cuba Committee had the brainstorm of saturating the island with baseball-style cards showing the pope in various activities: skiing, mountain climbing, canoeing.
One wonders how long it will be before kids hooked on "beisbol" will be swapping two El Papas for one El Duque, the wily curveballer Orlando Hernandez, who recently defected to join younger brother Livan, a star of the Florida Marlins.
 
 ---
At the hotel switchboards things sometimes did get lost in the translation. A charisma-conscious British TV correspondent asked for the barber shop - but got connected instead with Barbara Chaffe, a retired nun from Roxbury, Mass. She was not at all interested in blow-drying his coiffeur for his 6 p.m. standup in front of the old Spanish cathedral.
 Load-Date: January 25, 1998

 

End of Document
