

The Spiral gets the nod: A unique museum addition for posh London
The Associated Press
November 17, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 297 words
Byline: By GRAHAM HEATHCOTE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




A proposed extension of the Victoria and Albert Museum that sparked an uproar among traditionalists because of its resemblance to a collapsing deck of cards has been approved by municipal planners.
The planning and conservation committee of the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea voted Monday night in favor of the $ 125 million extension, known as The Spiral.
The museum, which contains a vast collection of decorative arts, hopes to open The Spiral in 2004, director Alan Borg said.
"We are overjoyed," Borg said Tuesday. "We feel it's a really important day for new architecture in Britain."
Construction funds are being sought in Britain and abroad, since the design was considered too controversial to receive money from the National Lottery.
The architect, Polish-born American Daniel Libeskind, who recently completed an extension to the Berlin Museum based on the form of a Star of David, said he was delighted that his project had been approved.
The extension will consist of a continuous spiral wall wrapped around in 23 planes, and will be covered in ivory-colored ceramic tiles. With four floors below ground and seven above, the project will fill a gap between two of the museum's Victorian buildings.
Carol Seymour-Newton, secretary of the Knightsbridge Association, which represents area businesses and residents, called the project the "wrong development in the wrong place" and a "classic example of architectural bad manners."
But the project is backed by English Heritage, which cares for historical buildings and monuments, and the Royal Fine Arts Commission called it "daring and innovative."
The Victoria and Albert Museum, popularly known as the V and A, gets 1 million visitors a year. It was founded in 1852 to support and encourage excellence in art and design.
 Load-Date: November 17, 1998

 

End of Document
