

The rich, the powerful and the brilliant meet for deals, fun
January 29, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 529 words
Byline: By ALEXANDER G. HIGGINS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DAVOS, Switzerland
Body




Bibi Netanyahu, meet Bill Gates. Newt Gingrich, say hello to Kofi Annan. And everyone listen to Luc Montagnier, one of the discoverers of the AIDS virus.
Only at the World Economic Forum, a six-day extravaganza of deal-making, deep thinking and fun in the snow, does such a disparate group of high-powered politicians, business leaders, scientists and intellectuals come face to face.
Headliners at this year's forum, which opens Thursday, include the Israeli prime minister, the Microsoft billionaire, the U.S. House Speaker, the new U.N. chief, key players from the Middle East and Russia and top scientists from around the world.
Most of the action takes place outside the formal discussions and dinners. "If you look at the subjects of most of the debates, you can't imagine most people sitting through them," said British author Bryan Appleyard.
Many of the government and corporate bigwigs will spend their time outside the Congress Center in one-on-one meetings.
Netanyahu has blocked out hours of time for sessions with other participants, including Gates and British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind.
In the past, the Davos forum has achieved its biggest success as a backdrop to negotiations. Netanyahu's predecessor, Shimon Peres, negotiated through the night with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in 1994 to achieve breakthroughs in their peace efforts.
The prime ministers of Greece and Turkey met in 1988 to smooth relations. In 1990, soon after the Berlin Wall came down, West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl sat with East German leader Hans Modrow to move toward reunification.
But sometimes differences are bridged within the forum itself. In 1992, South African President F.W. de Klerk shared a platform with African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela and his Inkatha rival Chief Mangosothu Buthelezi.
Whether Netanyahu will meet privately with Arafat or Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak this year has yet to be disclosed.
Davos (pronounced DA-vos), a narrow valley town of 12,300, is taken over for a week each winter by the forum, which began in 1971.
Leaders and business moguls leave behind virtually all of their aides. They have to. Hotel rooms can barely handle the 1,700 participants as well as 300 journalists covering the event. Only the most risk-prone politicians bring bodyguards.
This year, Montagnier, the French AIDS research pioneer, will lecture on the threat of new diseases, while Annan, the new U.N. secretary-general, expounds on his vision for the world body.
Steve Forbes, big-spending loser in the U.S. Republican presidential primary, will join deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers in speculating on whether other countries can learn from the American economic recovery.
Chen Jinhua, chairman of China's State Planning Commission, will reassure potential investors about the Chinese economy, and Anatoly B. Chubais, chief of staff to Russian President Boris Yeltsin, will discuss how Russia can make more of an impact on the world economy.
Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin will appear in a separate session.
On Sunday morning, the fun and games move to the slopes, for those who want to ski and make deals at the same time.
 Load-Date: January 29, 1997

 

End of Document
