

The anticipation was intense, the reaction both exuberant and grim
November 10, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 627 words
Byline: By JON MARCUS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.
Body




Supporters of British au pair Louise Woodward danced and cheered in two continents as she was freed from prison Monday, while relatives of her 8-month-old victim were grimly satisfied that she was still considered guilty.
As far as most of her supporters were concerned, however, Ms. Woodward was exonerated when a judge decided to release her - even though she remains convicted of manslaughter.
"I don't give a damn about that," said Frank Hogan, who celebrated the developments at a restaurant near the courthouse. "She's going home."
Residents of Louise Woodward's tiny hometown of Elton, England, and about 100 demonstrators who have been holding vigils at the Cambridge courthouse all cried, cheered and passed around champagne.
"We've got the news that really we should have had all along," said Elton resident Audrey McCarvell. "The evidence was there to be seen. We have had the majority of the world behind us."
Among those pleased with the outcome was a juror in the trial. One said he felt "greatly relieved" the verdict was reduced to manslaughter, a choice he said he and other members of the jury wished they had been given. At the request of Ms. Woodward's attorneys, the judge confined the jury to considering only first- or second-degree murder or acquittal.
After reducing the conviction, Superior Court Judge Hiller Zobel sentenced Ms. Woodward to the time she has already served in prison since she was charged in February. She was ordered not to leave the state, however, in expectation that the prosecution would appeal.
Ms. Woodward was convicted on Oct. 30 of second-degree murder for fatally shaking 8-month-old Matthew Eappen and slamming his head against a hard surface Feb. 4. Her attorneys argued that the baby's injuries were pre-existing.
The child's parents, weary of intensive media attention, stayed out of sight Monday. But his grandmother, Achamma Eappen, said the lesser manslaughter conviction "still proves that she's guilty."
"I guess the judge knows what he's doing," Mrs. Eappen told The Associated Press. "All that we wanted was for us to know what really happened and this still shows that she's guilty."
Some thought she should have to serve more jail time.
"I'm very irate," said Hazel Colwell of Lewisburg, W.Va. "I'm at the point of crying. If that girl gets off with killing that child without serving any time except that she got I think it's the worst type of justice ever."
The juror, Stephen Colwell, did not hesitate when asked if he still felt Ms. Woodward had caused the baby's death.
"Absolutely," he said. The defense's argument that Eappen had been injured weeks before the day that he was left alone with his au pair "just did not seem reasonable to us."
But one American supporter, Daniel Preston, said, "It's a victory any which way you look at it. At least she's not sitting in a jail cell."
Nerves had been frayed by nearly a week of waiting when Zobel finally released his ruling Monday. The anticipation intensified as technical problems delayed its scheduled posting on the Internet for nearly 90 minutes, and then for several hours before Zobel convened a hearing to announce his sentence.
"We believe justice will only truly be served by Louise's full vindication," a spokesman for supporters waiting tensely in Elton said before the hearing.
In the restaurant where they awaited Monday's ruling, some of Woodward's U.S. sympathizers also kept a candle lit and observed a moment of silence in memory, they said, of Matthew Eappen.
Freed finally to discuss the trial in depth, Colwell said he was amazed at the attention it received around the world.
"When I went in for jury duty, I thought I'd be going home in an hour and a half, or back to work," he said. "We certainly didn't know what we were getting into."
 Load-Date: November 10, 1997

 

End of Document
