

The Big Apple hosts a street party for the globe
The Associated Press
January 1, 2000, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 481 words
Byline: By G.G. LaBELLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




For 24 hours at least, Times Square's nickname lived up to its hype as the Crossroads of the World: The people of the world were either on its sealed-off streets or flashing across its screens.
Despite fears that the bash might become a terrorist target or a high-tech victim of Y2K, the $7 million event - three years in the making - came off with barely a hitch.
An estimated 2 million people stood shoulder-to-shoulder for 20 blocks and the party was to go on for 24 hours - marking hour-by-hour the advent of the new year in each of the world's time zones.
Steve Vasquez, 20, said he worried about terrorism but still drove from Minneapolis, Minn. "It's great to still be alive," he said. "I want to tell my grandkids that we were here."
The performances by some 500 dancers, singers and puppeteers started when it was midnight in New Zealand and was to end with the new century arriving almost 24 hours later at an island in the Marquesas chain.
While the millennium arrived first in many other parts of the world, the world came to Times Square for this party: Flags from Argentina, Malta and Japan were draped over police barricades.
The show featured a 16-foot elephant puppet to celebrate New Year's in India, Lakota Sioux dancers from the American West and pink confetti fashioned to look like cherry blossoms for Japan.
Finally, at midnight, it was New York's turn.
A Waterford crystal ball descended as the crowd waved flags, tinsel pompoms and multicolored balloons. Giants puppets - Father Time for 1999, a newborn for 2000 - wiggled above the jam-packed crowd, which was illuminated by whirling spotlights.
A roar for the last 1,000 years arose as the ball slowly rode down its 77-foot flagpole, starting in 1999 and finishing in the next millennium. A blizzard of confetti blanketed the crowd as fireworks exploded overhead.
"Since I was a little boy, I wanted to come to New York for the millennium, and now my dream has come true," Tiago Depuydt of Veurne, Belgium, said shortly after midnight.
Some 8,000 police officers had been stationed in and around the square - more than double the usual number on New Year's Eve. Some officers were equipped with anthrax antidote kits in case of a biological attack.
Police had welded shut manholes and locked mailboxes to eliminate hiding places for bombs. In the end, they arrested only about a dozen people for minor rowdiness.
"It's the most diverse city in the world," Mayor Rudolph Giuliani said. "It shows that we can get along, we can have a great celebration, we can do it peacefully."
Dr. Mary Ann Hopkins, a New York medical professor and volunteer with the group that won this year's Nobel Peace Prize, pushed the button to lower the crystal ball in her first Times Square New Year.
"It's thrilling to be a part of it," she said. "The energy of the people is exhilarating, and that's what I like to do in medicine - work with people."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo SES104; AP Graphic TIMES SQUARE 2000
 Load-Date: January 2, 2000

 

End of Document
