

The Ideas of March: Dole and Clinton on the Issues
March 24, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 5534 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




And then there were two.
Breaking clear in a contest once crowded and tangled, Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole has secured the Republican presidential nomination and won the right to engage President Clinton in the fall.
Neither man at this point has a comprehensive platform.
But what they do have, after Clinton's three years in the White House and Dole's 27 years in the Senate, are records. And since January they've answered questions on a variety of subjects put to them by The Associated Press.
Here are their answers, plus summaries of their words and actions on a variety of issues. Positions may change, and Ross Perot may yet jump in again to mix everything up.
But as of now, this is where they stand and what they've said.
 
 ABORTION:
Clinton: "The decision to have an abortion should be between a woman, her doctor and her faith. Abortions should be safe, legal and rare. We can lower the number of abortions by emphasizing education, prevention and personal responsibility to reduce the number of unwanted pregnancies."
Dole: "Since 1974, I have opposed the Supreme Court's Roe vs. Wade decision legalizing abortion on demand. In 1983, I voted for a constitutional amendment overturning this decision. I support a constitutional amendment to restrict abortion, subject to the exceptions of life of the mother, rape and incest."
 
 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION:
Clinton: "It should be changed now to take care of those things that are wrong and it should be retired when its job is done. I am resolved that that day will come. But the evidence suggests - indeed, screams - that that day has not come."
The administration is drafting rules to limit preferences for minorities and women in government contracting while expanding efforts to recruit contract bids from minority and female-owned firms. Has suspended rules requiring that a specific number of contracts be set aside for minorities or women.
Dole: "You don't cure the evil of discrimination with more discrimination." Former affirmative action supporter. "Should there be preferences? Should there be quotas? My view is maybe at a time there should have been, but I think now we've reached a point where we need to move on."
 
 AIDS RESEARCH SPENDING:
Clinton: "Preventing HIV infection and finding a cure for AIDS is a top priority. … That is why we have increased overall AIDS funding by 40 percent, including Ryan White CARE assistance for outpatient care. These policies have already achieved remarkable success: Thanks to recent scientific advances, people with HIV and AIDS live twice as long as they did two years ago; the United States now approves AIDS drugs faster than any European nation. We must not slow the battle to fight HIV and AIDS."
Dole: "I believe we must do everything possible to foster and encourage research aimed at stopping the proliferation of this deadly disease. That's why I support the Ryan White Act, which provides federal assistance for AIDS research. American scientists have the brightest minds and the best technology in the world."
 
 AMERICORPS:
Is AmeriCorps, the national service program, worth saving?
Clinton: "Definitely. Our challenge is to give Americans the educational opportunities they need for the 21st century and to strengthen our sense of responsibility and community. Through AmeriCorps … we are widening the doors to college and at the same time building a sense of service to our neighborhoods. Last year, AmeriCorps recruited 25,000 volunteers to work in our schools, hospitals, and neighborhoods while earning money for college or job training."
Dole: "No."
 
 ARTS SUBSIDIES:
Clinton: "The National Endowment for the Arts - in partnership with individuals, corporations and foundations - has brought art and culture to communities large and small throughout the country. The arts provide Americans of varied backgrounds an opportunity to share experiences they otherwise may not have. Federal subsidies for the arts - less than 0.02 percent of the federal budget - help attract tourists, stimulate business, and expand the tax base. This small investment expands the education and cultural base of all Americans."
Dole: "I opposed the establishment of the National Endowment for the Arts in 1965 and I continue to question why the federal government should be actively involved in the culture business. I support the elimination of the NEA."
 
 BALANCED BUDGET:
Clinton: Waging protracted fight with congressional Republicans that has shut parts of the government twice. Latest proposal retains goal of balancing budget by 2002 but transfers tough consequences to a future president: Two-thirds of the savings would come after Clinton stepped down from a second term. Opposes balanced budget amendment to the Constitution.
Dole: A major figure in budget standoff with Clinton causing two partial government shutdowns. Says first act as president would be to call for constitutional amendment. "Congress needs the discipline." Amendment fell one vote short in Senate last year.
 
 BUREAUCRACY:
Which federal government departments, if any, you would close?
Clinton: "We now have the smallest government in 30 years. We are cutting agency administrative costs by 14 percent. We eliminated 300 programs, such as subsidies for mohair, wool and honey, and dismantled 16,000 pages of unnecessary government regulations. We have proposed the restructuring of all government agencies. We also plan to eliminate many more programs, such as the Tea Tasters' Board, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, and the Naval Academy's own dairy farm. The era of big government is over."
Dole: "Housing and Urban Development, Education, Commerce and Energy."
 
 CRIME:
Clinton: Won $ 30 billion package providing for 100,000 more police officers, imprisoning criminals for life on third felony, building prisons and more. Stiffened gun control. Proposals for more police powers and anti-terrorism steps mired in House.
Dole: Favors more spending for prisons and for juvenile boot camps, and prosecuting youths as adults when charged with murder or a third violent felony. Favors allowing evidence to be used from criminal searches conducted without warrants, but with "just cause." Favors limits on death row appeals and tougher penalties for illegal firearm possession. Opposes most gun controls.
 
 CRIME - PAROLE:
Do you favor "truth in sentencing" for violent criminals so they serve full sentences with no chance of parole?
Clinton: "The current policy of 'truth in sentencing' is a good policy because it is wrong for violent criminals to get out on parole before they complete their prison sentence. The sentence given to a rapist or murderer should be the sentence they serve. Serious criminals should know that they will be held responsible for the crimes they commit."
Dole: "Yes."
 
 DAY ONE:
After the inauguration ceremony, what would be your first action as president?
Clinton: "To continue our policies of economic growth consistent with our values and investing in our future, ensuring that America will meet the challenges of the 21st century."
Dole: "I will call upon Congress to pass a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution."
DRUGS:
Clinton: "While the overall drug use rate is going down, drug use among our children is still going up. When we lose these children we suffer terrible individual losses and more." Ordered cuts in aid to Colombia after concluding it was not doing enough to stop drugs. Giving public housing authorities power to evict any tenant found with drugs or involved in trafficking. Cites economic sanctions on leaders and associates of Colombia's largest cocaine cartel and cooperation with Mexico in tracking down a billionaire trafficker among U.S. advances.
Dole: "The bottom line is you need strong moral leadership in the White House, somebody in the bully pulpit speaking about family values and Hollywood and television, all the violence we have and all the drugs we have." Favors mandatory sentences for selling drugs near schools, death penalty for international traffickers, more spending on drug education and treatment. Co-sponsor of congressional study on drugs and youth.
 
 EDUCATION:
What is the main step to improve public education?
Clinton: "Greater involvement by parents in their children's education will strengthen our schools and our families. We should give parents the right to choose which public school their children attend. We should also remind parents that they are their children's first teachers. They must turn off the television set more often, see that the homework gets done, and visit their children's classroom."
Dole: "I believe that school choice and returning education decisions back to the local level will reinvigorate America's education system, and prepare children to compete and excel in the global economy of the next century. The only way to restore accountability to our schools is by wresting control of education policy away from Washington bureaucrats and returning it to parents and local communities."
 
 EDUCATION - GOALS 2000:
Clinton: Proposing 30 percent budget increase for program he introduced after it was developed under Republican President Bush. Administration says history standards proposed by a panel as a voluntary model did not turn out right and will be redone.
Dole: Criticizes the history standards as flying in the face of American values.
 
 EDUCATION - SCHOOL VOUCHERS:
Do you favor providing parents with vouchers to send their children to any participating public, private or religious school?
Clinton: "I support increased options and quality of education through such projects as charter schools, public school choice and national standards. I also support efforts to increase parents' participation in their children's education, such as parenting education, parental resource centers and through Education Secretary Riley's parental responsibility campaign. I do not support using public funds to pay for private schools."
Dole: "Yes."
 
 ENTERTAINMENT VALUES:
Clinton: Signed law requiring future TV sets to come with a "V-chip" helping parents delete objectionable shows. Delaying enforcement of provision outlawing transmission of indecent material to minors over computer networks, pending outcome of free-speech court challenge. Favors making TV stations show at least three hours of children's educational programs a week. Cites "destructive impact on children of being permitted to watch excessive violence on television for hours and hours a day, year after year after year."
Dole: Has attacked Hollywood as corrosive moral influence. "Do you want censorship? No. Do you want someone in the bully pulpit to stand and say, 'Wait a minute, there's a fine line between profit and greed?' We want to make a profit in America, that's what it's all about. But when you hammer our children every day with the same, same, same message that helps debase our culture, then … you've stepped over the line." Opposed government-directed TV ratings system, now being done voluntarily.
 
 ENVIRONMENT - PROPERTY RIGHTS:
Do you support "takings" legislation that would require payment if federal environmental regulations reduce property values?
Clinton: "No. The administration supports protecting private property. If the government takes someone's property, the government should pay. … But the so-called takings legislation introduced as part of the Republicans' 'Contract With America' goes beyond constitutional protections - it would cost taxpayers tens of billions of dollars and weaken safeguards for public health, safety, and the environment."
Dole: "Yes." Sponsored legislation.
 
 ENVIRONMENT - PROTECTED HABITATS:
Would you support changing the Endangered Species Act to limit the number of habitats eligible to be designated endangered?
Clinton: "No, because habitat protection is essential to conserve endangered species and the ecosystem on which they depend. The Endangered Species Act embodies values important to all Americans and we must maintain our commitment to protect our nation's priceless biological heritage. Working together with state and local governments, this administration is minimizing the act's economic impact on the lives of private landowners, while upholding our responsibility to future generations to leave this planet and its species in better condition than we found them."
Dole: "Yes."
 
 ENVIRONMENT - WILDLIFE REFUGE:
Do you favor proposals to open part of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil exploration and drilling?
Clinton: No. Threatens veto of GOP bill authorizing exploration. "The Arctic Refuge is a rare, pristine wilderness that should be preserved for future generations. There are substantial state and federal lands that can be developed in Alaska without disturbing the refuge. And since there is more oil in energy efficiency than can be extracted from the Arctic Refuge, drilling is as unnecessary as it is unwise."
Dole: Yes, because development "can be done safely and responsibly without damage to the environment, and because careful development of America's oil and natural gas resources contributes to economic growth, creates American jobs, enhances our nation's economic security and reduces dependence on foreign oil."
 
 FOREIGN AFFAIRS - AID:
Should the U.S. continue sending almost half of its foreign aid to Israel and Egypt?
Clinton: "U.S. assistance to Israel and Egypt furthers our national security interests. We must continue to play our historic role in fostering peace and stability in the Middle East. Helping those parties in the region who are striving for genuine peace is one of my administration's top foreign policy objectives."
Dole (campaign): "Has worked tirelessly to maintain strong relations with the Israeli government, considered the United States' most important ally in the Middle East."
 
 FOREIGN AFFAIRS - BOSNIA:
Clinton: Brokered Bosnia peace settlement and has sent 20,000 soldiers to help enforce it in the 60,000-strong NATO force. Hopes to withdraw troops by end of this year. "We have seen parents divided from their children, children deprived of their dreams, people caged like animals in concentration camps, women and young girls subject to systematic rape. We have seen unbelievable horrors. But now we have a chance to end this misery for good - and we have a responsibility to act."
Dole: Criticized Clinton's Yugoslavia policy but played central role in Senate resolution backing mission. "I don't support President Clinton. I support the American forces."
FOREIGN AFFAIRS - CHINA-TAIWAN:
Clinton - Has sent warships to the area of China's war games off Taiwan. Administration says it has been assured China won't invade Taiwan. Under congressional pressure, granted U.S. visa last year to Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui in what China calls the provocation for current tensions.
Dole: "I support sending a strong signal to China. In a sense, they may be testing the president."
 
 FOREIGN AFFAIRS - CUBA:
Responses to Cuba's shooting down of two civilian U.S. planes off its coast, with the loss of four crew members from anti-Castro exile group based in Florida.
Clinton: Halted U.S.-Cuba charter flights, expanded official U.S. broadcasting to Cuba as part of a strengthening of sanctions eased last year. Also, accepted compromise version of controversial plan in Congress to let Americans sue some foreign investors with interests in Cuba. Called attack "an appalling reminder of the nature of the Cuban regime: repressive, violent, scornful of international law."
Dole: Said Clinton had been "coddling Castro" before incident. "The president has yet to understand that the only way to deal with Castro's tyranny is with real firmness and pressure."
 
 FOREIGN AFFAIRS - MIDDLE EAST:
On countering terrorism and promoting peace in the wake of terrorist bombings in Israel.
Clinton: Pledged at least $ 100 million to combat Middle East terrorism and promised stronger security ties with Israel. "Fear must be conquered, security must be restored and peace must be pursued."
Dole: Said Congress was likely to take a hard look at assistance to the Palestinian Authority in the wake of the attacks. "Unless and until serious anti-terrorist actions are implemented by Chairman Arafat, it is difficult to justify continued U.S. assistance to the Palestinian Authority."
 
 FOREIGN AFFAIRS - UNITED NATIONS:
U.S. Army Spec. Michael New was given a bad-conduct discharge for refusing to wear a U.N. beret and shoulder patch in a Macedonian peacekeeping mission. Should U.S. soldiers be permitted to refuse duty that would put them under foreign or U.N. command, or require them to wear U.N. insignia?
Clinton: "Michael New's discharge from the U.S. Army is now under review by military authorities, who will make their recommendation."
Dole (campaign): "Like all veterans, Bob Dole understands that discipline is a critical element in maintaining military unit cohesion. He supports legislation that would ensure that American troops never have to face the same dilemma that Michael New had to face. … American troops should never be ordered to serve under U.N. command."
 
 FOREIGN AFFAIRS - VIETNAM:
Should the United States have reopened diplomatic relations with Vietnam?
Clinton: "Establishing official relations with Vietnam has enhanced America's ability to achieve the fullest possible accounting of our POWs-MIAs, pursue our goal of improving Vietnam's human rights practices and expanding U.S. commercial ties and exports to that country."
Dole: "No."
 
 GAMBLING:
Should Washington increase taxes on the gambling industry or impose restrictions on its growth?
Clinton: "Regulation of gambling has been primarily a state and local issue. I support establishment of a national commission, which will examine the gambling industry and make recommendations for national policy."
Dole: "I support legislation establishing a national commission to examine the gambling industry and its impact on local communities. As a general matter, the regulation of gambling is a responsibility of state and local government. I do not support any additional federal tax increases."
 
 GOVERNMENT ETHICS - LOBBYING:
Is the current one-year cooling off period between the time senior federal workers leave their jobs and the time they may actively lobby former associates adequate?
Clinton: "This administration enacted an unprecedented ban on senior federal workers lobbying anyone in the federal government within one year of leaving office. We also banned top appointees from lobbying their own agencies for five years after they leave, required senior administration officials to pledge never to lobby on behalf of any foreign government, eliminated the tax write-off for special interest lobbying expenses, and mandated all professional lobbyists to disclose fully who pays them and how much. These historic measures taken together constitute the strictest lobbying reform in history."
Dole: "The Senate has passed a comprehensive lobbying reform bill that tightens the registration and disclosure requirements for Washington-based lobbyists. The Senate has also amended its own rules to dramatically limit what senators may permissibly accept as gifts."
 
 GOVERNMENT ETHICS - TRAVEL:
Should government officials, both executive and legislative, be permitted to go on fact-finding trips paid for by private interests?
Clinton: "Yes, as long as the travel is consistent with all regulations preventing conflict of interest, and so long as full disclosure is made of the costs of travel, all members of the traveling party and how the trip is paid for."
Dole: "Last year, the Senate passed new ethics rules that allow privately financed fact-finding trips only to the extent these trips are related to the performance of a senator's official duties and are publicly disclosed. Under the new rules, senators may not accept reimbursement from private sources for participating in events that are essentially recreational in nature."
 
 GUN CONTROL:
Clinton - Won ban on assault-type weapons and set waiting period for handgun purchases. Blames gun-control opponents for gutting anti-terrorism legislation in House. "Congress … should listen to the cries of the victims and the hopes of our children, not the back-alley whispers of the gun lobby."
Dole - Says he is committed to repealing ban on assault-style weapons but Congress probably doesn't have votes to override a Clinton veto. Favors allowing people to carry concealed firearms that are legally registered. Favors "instant" background check for gun purchases. "The ban on so-called assault weapons has not been effective, and several are already back on the street."
 
 IMMIGRATION - LEGAL:
Would you support legislation further reducing the number of legal immigrants allowed in this country?
Clinton: "I support lowering the level of legal immigration by a moderate amount at this time. … Legal immigration reform must be based upon principles that are pro-family, pro-work and pro-naturalization, retaining opportunities for family reunification as the levels are lowered. We must not let this issue become divisive in this country."
Dole: "I believe our system of legal immigration needs to be re-examined. As part of this re-examination, I support a modest, temporary reduction in the annual rate of legal immigration."
 
 IMMIGRATION - ILLEGAL:
Clinton: "We are a nation of immigrants. But we are also a nation of laws." Increased Immigration and Naturalization Service's budget by 73 percent since 1993, adding hundreds more border agents and spending more to detain and deport illegal immigrants with criminal records. Has prohibited companies from getting new federal contracts if they have hired illegal immigrants.
Dole: Pushed for legislation giving more money to states struggling with costs of jailing illegal immigrants. Would deny social services to illegal immigrants.
IMMIGRATION - OFFICIAL ENGLISH:
Clinton: Administration has criticized proposals to require federal government to communicate solely in English, except on matters of health, safety and foreign affairs. Says English is "of course" the language of the United States, but people should value "the culture, the traditions of everybody." Defends bilingual education. As Arkansas governor, signed official-English law for state.
Sen. Bob Dole: Advocates official English. "We need the glue of language to hold us together."
 
 MEDICAID:
Which level of government should have primary responsibility for Medicaid?
Clinton: "The federal government must work together with the states to ensure that all Americans live with security and dignity. We must retain the federal guarantee to accessible and affordable long-term care for seniors and people with disabilities. We should also give states flexibility to work with local communities to provide care within these national guidelines. We cannot abandon our fundamental obligations to the people who need Medicaid."
Dole: "State government."
 
 MEDICAL SAVINGS ACCOUNTS:
Should people be allowed to set up tax-free medical savings accounts?
Clinton: "No. We need to give Americans more choice and more access to affordable health care they cannot lose. But we must do so in a thoughtful way that strengthens our ability to ensure that Medicare remains available for all of our seniors. Medical savings accounts would drain resources from Medicare and undermine our commitment to provide opportunity, security and quality care for all Americans."
Dole: "Yes."
 
 MINIMUM WAGE:
Should the minimum wage be raised?
Clinton: "More and more Americans are working hard trying to live on the minimum wage, which has hit a 40-year low in purchasing power and is no longer enough to support a family; $ 4.25 an hour is not a living wage. Raising the minimum wage by 90 cents an hour over two years to $ 5.15 would enable working Americans to provide for their families."
Dole: "Many economists argue that an increase in the minimum wage will result in fewer job opportunities for those seeking to enter the work force for the first time. I believe we can create more and better-paying jobs by balancing the federal budget, providing tax relief for American families, and reducing the regulatory burden on our nation's small businesses. These policies will spur economic growth and enhance opportunity."
 
 PRIORITIES:
What should the government's top priority be in 1996?
Clinton: "The government's top priority in 1996 must be implementing sound economic policies, moving to balance the budget, fighting crime and violence, protecting quality education and health care for the elderly, and a safe and clean environment."
Dole: "I will put the federal budget on a seven-year balanced budget plan, provide meaningful tax relief for working Americans and reform our failed welfare system."
 
 RESOURCES - GRAZING FEES:
Do you support raising the fees charged to ranchers who graze cattle on federal lands?
Clinton: "The American people deserve to receive a fair return for the private use of publicly owned resources. However, we must take into account how any changes to the structure of fees would affect the economies of agricultural and cattle-producing states."
Dole: "No."
 
 RESOURCES - MINING FEES:
Do you support ensuring the government gets fair market return for publicly owned minerals extracted by private mining companies on federal land?
Clinton: "Yes. Mining companies should pay a fair share. At a time when Republicans in Congress are cutting Medicare and Medicaid and raising taxes on working families in order to balance the budget, it is wrong that mining companies can take public minerals worth $ 1 billion for as little as $ 275."
Dole: "Fees for mineral extraction on federal lands should be set in a way that promotes responsible development of our nation's mineral resources to support economic growth and create jobs. Such fees also need to reflect the federal government's fiscal responsibilities to the American taxpayers to balance the budget and manage federal resources."
 
 RESOURCES - NUCLEAR POWER:
Do you support the construction of new nuclear power plants in the United States?
Clinton: "New nuclear power plants are not being built today for two economic reasons: first, they are extremely expensive - more costly than both conservation measures and other sources of electricity generation; and second, nationwide conservation and utility deregulation have reduced the demand for huge new plants. The administration supports research and development funding to help develop more cost-effective nuclear plant designs. Ultimately, however, the market and the public must choose … not the government."
Dole: "If nuclear power is selected as the economic choice, and otherwise meets all health and safety licensing requirements, Bob Dole supports the right of companies to choose nuclear power technology. However, one of the most pressing problems facing the nuclear energy industry is the disposal of nuclear waste. This problem has not been adequately addressed by the Clinton administration and needs to be resolved."
 
 SOCIAL SECURITY:
Clinton: "We have an obligation to our parents and children to protect Social Security for the future. We should not seek savings from Social Security to solve our deficit problem or pay for other spending priorities or tax cuts. Future changes should be geared to one thing only: what is best for the long-term viability of the trust fund. Those adjustments should be made through serious, bipartisan efforts."
Dole: Played leading role in Social Security reforms that taxed a portion of benefits for high-income recipients, scaled back cost-of-living increases and put system on sounder footing. Is "committed to maintaining a fair, sound Social Security system that avoids reductions in future Social Security benefits or future tax increases."
 
 TAXES:
Clinton: In 1993, pushed through higher income taxes on wealthy and 4.3 cent-per-gallon increase in tax on gasoline. Election-year proposal includes eventual $ 500 tax credit for pre-teen children, college tuition deduction, expanded use of IRAs and higher capital gains tax for some investors. Has criticized proposals for flat tax.
Dole: Voted for 1990 budget deal raising taxes by $ 133 billion in career that also includes votes for tax cuts. Promotes $ 500 per child tax credit. Endorsed constitutional amendment that would require three-fifths majority votes in Congress to approve tax increases. Pledges no increase of income tax rates. Skeptical of proposals for flat tax.
 
 TAXES - MORTGAGE INTEREST DEDUCTION:
Would a flat tax that eliminates the mortgage interest deduction make it harder for people to buy homes?
Clinton: "Yes. Eliminating the mortgage interest deduction would raise taxes on working families. This would make it more difficult for most Americans to purchase and own their own homes. Interest rates are at a historic low. We need to keep the economy growing so more people, not fewer, can have good jobs and the ability to buy their own homes."
Dole: "Yes."
TERM LIMITS:
Clinton: Opposes.
Dole: Qualified support for 12-year Senate limit; says House should set its own. Has delayed term limits vote in Senate out of apparent concern it might lose. Says limits should not be retroactive.
 
 TRADE:
Clinton: "The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and North American Free Trade Agreement have eliminated tariffs in sectors where the United States is most competitive overseas. As a result, we have opened new foreign markets for American products, boosting U.S. exports, added billions of dollars to our GDP and produced hundreds of thousands of good-quality jobs at home."
Dole: "I supported the North American Free Trade Agreement and the GATT agreements because I support opening foreign markets to U.S. goods and services. At this time, we need to step back and assess whether these agreements have, in fact, benefited working Americans as originally hoped. On the issue of GATT, it is my hope that Congress will soon pass legislation that I introduced that would allow us to withdraw from the World Trade Organization if the United States' rights are being abridged by bureaucrats in Geneva."
 
 UNIONS:
On banning permanent replacement workers in strikes.
Clinton: Issued order - recently overturned by appeals court - banning federal contracts with companies that replace strikers with permanent replacements. Failed to win legislation in former Democratic-controlled Senate to prohibit companies from hiring permanent replacements. "The right of workers to strike has long been one of America's envied freedoms."
Dole: Engaged in Senate filibuster that blocked legislation to prohibit use of permanent replacement workers. Criticized Clinton's later executive order on federal contracts as an end run around legislative process. "This is all about politics. This is about 1996 and President Clinton trying to shore up his base."
 
 WELFARE:
Divisions between Clinton and Congress, and between factions in the GOP, have held up promised welfare reform.
Clinton: Would replace Aid to Families with Dependent Children entitlement with aid limited to five years and conditioned on recipient preparing for full-time work. Says plan would save $ 40 billion over seven years while increasing money for child care, child-support enforcement and child protection and giving states more flexibility to tailor programs to individual needs.
Dole: Favors ending federal welfare and job programs and giving the money to states, letting them set eligibility and benefit levels. Would freeze grants for five years at 1994 levels and set five-year lifetime cap on welfare for each recipient. Single teen-age mothers would have to live at home and stay in school to get benefits. Short of welfare reform votes last year, Dole suspended debate and negotiated compromises within the GOP.
 
 WHAT WORKS:
Give one or two examples of a federal social program that works as it is.
Clinton: "The Earned Income Tax Credit and Head Start program protect and strengthen families, the fundamental building blocks of our society. That is why the administration has expanded the EITC by $ 21 billion over five years, to protect working families from falling into poverty, and Head Start by $ 760 million, to provide thousands more children with their only access to primary education."
Dole: "Job Corps."
 
 WORK INCENTIVES:
Do you favor providing tax incentives for companies to hire and train homeless people who want to work?
Clinton: "By creating partnerships between the federal government and local communities, small businesses and ordinary citizens, we can renew economic activity in our disadvantaged urban and rural areas. My empowerment zone initiative offers $ 3.5 billion in tax incentives and flexible block grants to encourage new private investment in 104 economically distressed communities across America. We have also created a national network of nontraditional community banks, which uses federal seed money to leverage billions of dollars more in private capital for community renewal."
Dole: "The fundamental focus of welfare reform must be the promotion of work and personal responsibility. State governments, local communities, churches and charitable organizations can often be effective at addressing the poverty problem. The federal government must give these institutions the tools they need to get the job done."
 Load-Date: March 24, 1996

 

End of Document
