

The United Nations in Yankee Stadium: Diplomats head to the ballpark
June 19, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 422 words
Byline: By TIM WHITMIRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




U.N. Security Council members came to Yankee Stadium, but with no intention of brokering a truce in the Mets vs. Yankees civil war.
The multinational observers were in the stands Wednesday for Game 3 of New York's "Subway Series," the guests of U.S. Ambassador Bill Richardson.
"This is the best way to show off the U.S. and the city," Richardson said.
Whether good public relations means listening to a large, shirtless man bellow the name of each Yankee batter - as one nearby fan was doing - remains open for debate. Still, the diplomats had fun.
"The game here is more interesting than the game in the Security Council," said Chinese Ambassador Wang Xue Xian, who was among about a dozen of Richardson's guests at the game, which the Yankees won 3-2.
Wang was one of the few members of the U.N. contingent not wearing a Yankees or Mets cap. "I'm neutral. I don't want to take sides," he said, adding that while working on the West Coast, he took in baseball games at Dodger Stadium.
For those ambassadors not fully familiar with the American national pastime, Richardson's office provided a packet explaining the game, including the basics: "The object of baseball is to score runs. … The game is played on a diamond-shaped field with the four bases located at each corner of the diamond. … The pitcher stands in the center of the diamond and throws the ball for the batters to try to hit."
One ambassador who needed no introduction to the game was Hisashi Owada of Japan, a diehard fan of the Tokyo Giants of Japan's Central League.
Owada said he went to Shea Stadium in Queens last year to see Japanese star Hideo Nomo pitch for the Los Angeles Dodgers against the Mets, but this was his first trip to Yankee Stadium.
A late arrival to the game was the U.N. ambassador from the United Kingdom, Sir John Weston. He wore, improbably enough, a Yankees cap that would have been considered treasonous 220 years ago.
"This is a fashion item," he explained, somewhat apologetically, then reasserted his nation's superiority over its former colony by adding, "This is the only game the British didn't invent."
Richardson, who was drafted by the then-Kansas City Athletics in 1967 and played briefly in the semi-pro Cape Cod League before injuring his arm, said the field trip was important in light of recent tensions between the United Nations and the city over diplomatic parking tickets.
"I think we want to show a stronger relationship between the U.N. and the city," he said. "This initiative is a small but symbolic step in that direction."
 Load-Date: June 19, 1997

 

End of Document
