

The sky's the limit for U.S. dollar's gains against yen, analysts say
The Associated Press
June 16, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 661 words
Byline: By MARTIN FACKLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TOKYO
Body




A new round of outcry from Japan's trading partners helped slow the yen's slide against the dollar Tuesday, but foreign exchange traders doubt the yen has hit bottom and see no reason why the dollar won't resume its rise.
The reason for the dollar reaching nearly eight-year highs: Investors are voting with their money, moving their funds out of a Japanese economy mired in its worst recession in a half-century. The miserable returns and a lack of confidence in the integrity of Japan's stock and bond markets have only made matters worse.
Worse, no relief seems to be in sight.
"I think the (dollar's long-term) direction is still north," said Tatsuya Ishii, senior sales manager and head of customer foreign exchange at Banque Nationale de Paris in Tokyo.
The same old faces are still in charge of Japanese politics, and they have shown themselves unwilling to make the painful structural changes that foreign and Japanese investors alike are demanding. Japan has come under increasing criticism amid concerns the dollar's gains against the yen could spell disaster for struggling economies elsewhere in Asia.
In Washington, the Clinton administration said it was considering sending its chief Asian troubleshooter to Tokyo for discussions with Japanese officials over the deteriorating economic situation.
A trip by Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers is under consideration and a final decision will soon be made, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin said.
"We have, for a long time, expressed great concern about the weakness in the yen and the weakness in the Japanese economy. And it does seem to us that it might be an appropriate time for Larry Summers to go and have a direct discussion on the premises, if you will, as opposed to telephonically," Rubin said Tuesday in response to a question why Summers might be sent to Japan.
Published reports in Japan said Summers was expected to be in Tokyo on Thursday for emergency talks with Finance Minister Hikarua Matsunaga and Eisuke Sakakibara, vice finance minister for international affairs.
A Chinese government economist called Japan "irresponsible" for not taking more aggressive steps to prop up its currency. European finance ministers meeting in Wales issued a joint statement Monday calling on Tokyo to reform its financial system.
Even Japan's own Ministry of International Trade and Industry warned in a report Tuesday that volatility in the currency markets could throw Asia back into turmoil and threaten the global trading order.
"The market has no confidence in Japan's economic policies," said investor Shigemi Nonaka, a managing director at Sakura Asset Management Co.
Since June 1, the U.S. currency has risen 6 percent to a peak early Tuesday of 146.75 yen. Traders say it could easily pierce the 150-yen level in coming days - even after pulling back to 143.30 yen late Tuesday afternoon in New York. The possibility that the complaints would prompt the Bank of Japan to buy yen in the market pulled the dollar back from its highs.
There's a growing perception in Tokyo that Japan's economic system - which propelled Japan to become the world's No. 2 economy - has outgrown its usefulness.
The financial system, originally designed to funnel scarce capital to strategic industries, doesn't seem to know how to invest money profitably in a mature economy.
Since most money flowed through banks, financial markets were never allowed to develop sufficiently. And a seemingly never-ending series of scandals involving insider trading and stock manipulation hasn't improved the Tokyo Stock Exchange's popular image as a rigged casino.
Investors still complain about inadequate disclosure by companies and lax oversight by regulators. Another problem: Short-term interest rates at historic lows of a 0.5 percent.
The response of Japan's leaders?
We "are concerned about (foreign exchange) movements which represent pessimism not warranted by facts," Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto told Parliament on Tuesday.
 Load-Date: June 16, 1998

 

End of Document
