

THE 20TH CENTURY; Churchill made words weapons of war: 'We shall never surrender!'
The Associated Press
November 7, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1514 words
Byline: By ROBERT BARR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




If the 20th century had its pivot points, where history turned, surely one was June 1940.
German forces, marching across continental Europe, had just crushed the French army, and, with the United States still holding back from the growing conflict, Britain stood alone to face Nazi bombs.
If it was the kingdom's darkest hour, it was also Winston Churchill's supreme opportunity.
Only weeks after becoming prime minister, Churchill summoned the nation to battle the legions of Adolf Hitler.
"If we can stand up to him, all Europe may be free and the life of the world may move forward into broad, sunlit uplands," Churchill told the House of Commons, and later the whole nation by radio, on June 18.
"But if we fail, then the whole world, including the United States, including all that we have known and cared for, will sink into the abyss of a new Dark Age…
"Let us therefore brace ourselves to our duties, and so bear ourselves that, if the British Empire and its Commonwealth last for a thousand years, men will still say, 'This was their finest hour.' "
To a nation already bloodied by fighting in France, and so recently humiliated by the desperate evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force across the English Channel from Dunkirk, the defiant words stiffened resolve, and expressed the determination that carried people through long years of sacrifice.
Even Churchill's jowls bespoke the determination of a bulldog.
As the American radio correspondent Edward R. Murrow said of Churchill in later years: "Now the hour had come for him to mobilize the English language, and send it into battle, a spearhead of hope for Britain and the world."
Churchill had become prime minister only a month before, telling Britain, "I have nothing to offer but blood, toil, tears and sweat."
Within weeks, reporting on the evacuation of Dunkirk, he breathed determination: "We shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight in the hills; we shall never surrender!"
And by August, sensing a turn in the tide of war, Churchill saluted the courage of Britain's fighter pilots: "Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few."
It's easy to imagine Britons huddling in their homes or in shelters, taking courage night by night from their leader's words crackling over the wireless. Churchill spoke on the radio as prime minister only five times in 1940 and he wasn't very good at it.
Harold Nicholson, then a member of Parliament, judged the "finest hour" speech to be a failure when Churchill repeated it on the BBC.
"He hates the microphone, and when we bullied him into speaking last night, he just sulked and read his House of Commons speech over again," Nicholson said. "Now, as delivered in the House of Commons, that speech was magnificent, especially the concluding sentences. But it sounded ghastly on the wireless. All the great vigor he put into it seemed to evaporate."
Nicholson's wife, Vita Sackville-West, said Churchill's words sent chills down her spine.
"I think one of the reasons why one is stirred by his Elizabethan phrases is that one feels the whole massive backing of power and resolve behind them, like a great fortress: they are never words for words' sake," she wrote to Nicholson.
Churchill - who became Sir Winston in 1953 - had been a large figure in British politics for decades. He fought in India in 1897, and wrote a book about it, including the memorable line: "Nothing in life is so exhilarating as to be shot at without result."
To his American mother, Jennie Jerome, he wrote from India: "I have faith in my star - that I am intended to do something in the world. If I am mistaken, what does it matter? My life has been a pleasant one ..."
He was part of a cavalry charge in Sudan in 1898, and wrote a book about it; he went to South Africa as a journalist to cover the Boer War, was taken prisoner, escaped, and published another book.
He was elected to Parliament as a Conservative in 1900, immediately giving speeches criticizing the party, and joined the Liberals in 1904. His first Cabinet post came in 1908, as trade secretary, and by 1911 was in charge of the navy as First Lord of the Admiralty.
He rose despite doubts about his judgment and his ego.
Beatrice Webb, the socialist leader who met Churchill in 1903, sized him up as "restless, almost intolerably so, without capacity for sustained and unexcited labor, egotistical, bumptious, shallow-minded and reactionary, but with a certain personal magnetism, great pluck and some originality, not of intellect but character."
David Lloyd-George, the Liberal prime minister, was scathingly succinct about his sometime protege: "He (Churchill) would kill his own mother just so that he could use her skin to make a drum to beat his own praises."
His capacity for work, cigars and alcohol were legendary; he painted, and in his late years wrote a history of World War II and won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1953. He remained in the House of Commons until he was 90.
Churchill's early political ascent ended with the failure of the naval assault on the Dardanelles in 1915, one of his pet schemes for breaking the impasse of trench warfare. The British hoped for an easy naval victory, knocking Turkey out of the war; but British ground forces absorbed 250,000 casualties before withdrawing at the end of the year.
"Let me stand or fall by the Dardanelles, but do not take it from my hands," Churchill pleaded to Prime Minister H.H. Asquith in May 1915.
Asquith's government fell, and Conservative leader Andrew Bonar Law agreed to join a new coalition only if Churchill was excluded.
Churchill went to France to command the 6th battalion of the Royal Scots Fusiliers. Asquith admired Churchill's ability, but believed he would never reach the top. "To speak with the tongues of men and angels, and to spend laborious days and nights in administration, is no good if a man does not inspire trust," Asquith said.
Churchill was recalled in 1917 as minister of munitions in Lloyd George's coalition, and later served as secretary of war. From 1925 to 1929, once again a Conservative, he ran the Treasury as chancellor of the exchequer, and returned Britain to the gold standard.
The "wilderness years" began in 1931, with the Conservatives in opposition, when he resigned from the leadership over its support for moves toward Indian independence.
Churchill had no doubt that colonialism was good for India.
"The withdrawal or suspension of British control means either a Hindu despotism … or a renewal of those ferocious internal wars which tortured the Indian masses for thousands of years before the British flag was hoisted in Calcutta," Churchill said in a speech to the India Empire Society in 1930.
He was condemned in the Tory press for his "wrecking activities" in 1935 when he backed his son Randolph's candidacy in a special Parliamentary election on an "anti-India Bill" platform. Randolph split the Conservative vote, allowing the Labor Party to win the seat.
During World War II, Churchill declared that he had not taken office "to preside over the liquidation of the British Empire." As opposition leader after the war, however, he acquiesced to the inevitable, and voted for independence.
As the Nazi menace grew in the 1930s, Churchill's pugnacity caught the attention of Hitler, who in November 1938 accused Churchill of "mad" talk of war.
Churchill sarcastically responded that he was sorry that Hitler "has not been mellowed by the success which has attended him. The whole world would rejoice to see the Hitler of peace and tolerance, and nothing would adorn his name in history so much as acts of magnanimity, of mercy, and of pity to the forlorn and friendless, to the weak and the poor."
The war was the making of Churchill. He was 65 when he was appointed prime minister, and it was only eight months earlier that he was again appointed First Lord of the Admiralty in Neville Chamberlain's Cabinet.
David Reynolds, a historian at Cambridge University and a Churchill biographer, notes that before 1940, "his carefully wrought speeches had often seemed ponderous, even pompous, ill-timed for the national mood. … But in 1940, to borrow the metaphor of biographer Piers Brendon, 'the nation changed and Churchill stayed the same. For a short time, indeed, he created a new Britain in his own heroic image."'
Speaking on the day of Churchill's funeral in 1965, New Zealand Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies recalled the fears and the pessimism of June 1940.
"In the whole of recorded modern history this was, I believe, the one occasion when one man, with one soaring imagination, with one fire burning in him, and with one unrivaled capacity for conveying it to others, won a crucial victory not only for the forces (for there were many heroes in those days) but for the very spirit of human freedom," Menzies said.
Churchill himself had said: "It was the nation and the race dwelling round the globe that had the lion's heart. I had the luck to be called upon to give the roar."
End Adv for release anytime
 
 Graphic



 
With AP Photos NY326-330 of Sept. 20
 Load-Date: November 8, 1999

 

End of Document
