

Thumbnail sketches of participants in the NATO summit
The Associated Press
April 17, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 4018 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Participants in the NATO 50th anniversary summit. The first 19 are NATO members, the rest partners:
BELGIUM:
Portly, soccer-loving Prime Minister Jean-Luc Dehaene, 48, is a survivor in the often-turbulent world of Belgium politics. For seven years he has managed to hold together a four-party coalition of parties from the country's fractious Dutch- and French-speaking communities.
He leads the center-right Christian People's Party. Renowned for his straight talking and deal-making skills, Dehaene was favored by most of his European Union colleagues to take over as the EU's top executive in 1994, but his strong support for greater European unity was unpalatable to then-British Prime Minister John Major, who vetoed.
CANADA:
Jean Chretien, 65, was elected prime minister in 1993 and re-elected in 1997. His centrist Liberal Party holds 156 of the 301 seats in the House of Commons.
The 18th of 19 children raised in the Quebec mill town of Shawinigan, he is known for his rough-hewn speaking style and his willingness to confront the powerful separatist movement in his home province.
CZECH REPUBLIC:
Vaclav Havel, 62, former playwright and dissident, became president of then-Czechoslovakia in December 1989. He is serving his second and last term. He had served several years in communist prisons before the 1989 Velvet Revolution that swept him into office.
Havel is a longtime advocate of NATO eastward expansion, and outspoken supporter of the NATO airstrikes on Yugoslavia. While still highly recognized abroad, his popularity at home has sunk from a record 82 percent to under 50 percent.
DENMARK:
Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, a Social Democrat, became Denmark's prime minister in 1993 after a decade of Conservative-led government coalitions. The former trade union economist also became the sixth Social Democratic head of government since World War II.
The 55-year-old Nyrup Rasmussen's popularity at home is dropping noticeably, according to opinion polls, after he failed to honor campaign promises. Nonetheless, his job is not threatened as his minority government can count on support in parliament.
Denmark's foreign minister since 1993, Niels Helveg Petersen, belongs to the small social-liberal Radical Party. The 60-year-old has been a staunch advocate that the former Warsaw Pact nations and the three Baltic states - Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania - should be allowed closer to NATO and the European Union.
FRANCE:
French President Jacques Chirac has been enjoying high popularity of late, making a political comeback since his giant miscalculation in 1997 to call early legislative elections to strengthen his position. Instead, he saw his center-right majority swept away by a leftist coalition, and he has been "cohabiting" since with Socialist Prime Minister Lionel Jospin.
Chirac, 66, came to power in 1995, elected president after a lengthy stint as mayor of Paris. He had also served as prime minister under the late President Francois Mitterrand from 1986 to 1988. The founder of the Gaullist Rally for the Republic party, Chirac appealed to voters with a populist yet traditionally conservative platform.
On the issue of Kosovo, he has consistently backed the use of force against Yugoslavia. France is not a member of NATO's military wing, but the country's cooperation with the alliance is at its highest level since it withdrew from NATO's military command in 1966.
GERMANY:
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, head of a six-month-old, center-left administration, has quashed early speculation about the influence of former pacifists in his government by staunchly backing NATO's air war on Yugoslavia with German participation.
Schroeder, 55, got off to a rocky start because of infighting over economic policy and phasing out nuclear power. But he's consolidated power and gained international standing, brokering a complex budget deal for the 15-nation European Union and leading the German military into its first combat since World War II. The first German chancellor without personal memory of World War II, Schroeder stresses that his nation has a moral duty to intervene to prevent atrocities.
Both Defense Minister Rudolf Scharping and Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer were antiwar activists in the 1970s and '80s but are now among the fiercest defenders of NATO's strikes.
GREECE:
Prime Minister Costas Simitis, whose Socialist government took over in 1996, has been forced into a tough political balancing act since the NATO bombings began. Public mood is strongly in support of fellow Christian Orthodox Serbs, but Simitis has backed away from the anti-American suspicions of previous Socialist governments and is trying to keep Greece from being perceived as NATO's weak link.
One of Simitis' biggest fears is that instability in the Balkans could derail Greece's efforts to join the European Union's single currency group by 2001. This has been the main objective of the Simitis government and failure would be a huge blow to the Socialists who have governed Greece for 15 of the past 18 years.
HUNGARY:
President Arpad Goencz is a former member of the anti-fascist resistance, arrested for his role in the 1956 anti-Soviet uprising and given a life sentence before amnesty in 1963. A novelist and playwright who has translated major English novels into Hungarian, he was elected president of the republic by parliament in August 1990 and been re-elected once since.
Prime Minister Viktor Orban was active in the dissident movement in the last years of communist rule. A deputy in parliament since 1990, he became premier last year. Once a left liberal, he has moved to center-right, but his party is still in the Liberal International.
ICELAND:
President Olafur Ragnar Grimsson, 56, of the People's Alliance party was sworn in Aug. 1, 1996. A career left-wing politician who twice switched parties and was unpopular as finance minister, Grimsson surprised many Icelanders by steamrolling past three other candidates in the 1996 election.
David Oddsson has been Independence Party prime minister for eight years. A popular, charismatic figure with a strong sense of humor, he also holds the portfolio of minister for statistics.
A lawyer and former mayor of Reykjavik, he is a political bulldog who has learned to operate within the coalition government his right-wing party formed with the Progressive Party.
ITALY:
Premier Massimo D'Alema, 49, became the first former communist to head a Western nation's government when he took over last October. A member of Italy's biggest party, the Democrats of the Left, D'Alema heads a center-left coalition that ranges from Communists to former Christian Democrats.
Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini, 68, served as premier for a few months in 1995 and is also a former Treasury Minister, after many years spent at the International Monetary Fund and Bank of Italy. A high-profile foreign minister, he was the first high-ranking Western official to visit Iran and Libya.
During NATO's airstrikes in Kosovo, Dini has repeatedly called for a return to negotiations with Serbs, and Italy has been seen as a weak partner in the alliance despite D'Alema's continued backing.
LUXEMBOURG:
Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker has been in office since 1995. Leader of the center-right Social People's party, he heads a coalition government that also includes the Socialists. He faces national elections in June.
Juncker also serves as finance minister in NATO's smallest nation. At 44 he is one of Europe's youngest leaders, but is already a political veteran having entered the cabinet in 1984. He enjoys respect among his European Union colleagues as an astute negotiator and broker of deals.
NETHERLANDS:
Foreign Affairs Minister Jozias van Aartsen, 51, started his government career in 1970 at the parliamentary offices of the liberal VVD party. He became agricultural minister in Prime Minister Wim Kok's first ruling coalition, which took power in 1994.
He took up his current post in August 1998, when Kok's coalition was re-elected. Van Aartsen is a member of the right-leaning VVD party, which is part of the so-called "purple coalition" that also includes the left-of-center D66 and Kok's Labor Party.
NORWAY:
Prime Minister Kjell Magne Bondevik, a Christian Democrat, leads a minority centrist coalition government consisting of Christian People's Party, Center Party and Liberal Party, which came to power in the fall of 1997. Bondevik, an ordained Lutheran minister, is 51. Foreign Minister Vollebaek, 52, is a career diplomat and also a Christian Democrat.
POLAND:
President Aleksander Kwasniewski, 45, a former communist, was elected president in 1995, having defeated Lech Walesa, the Solidarity leader, who will be also present at the summit. During his presidency, Kwasniewski has supported Poland's entry to NATO and the European Union. He has kept away from political squabbling between the now governing Solidarity bloc and the opposition ex-communists. He is likely to win the next presidential elections in 2000.
Prime Minister Jerzy Buzek, 57, a chemistry professor and longtime Solidarity activist, became the prime minister after Solidarity won the 1997 elections. He heads the coalition government of the Solidarity bloc. Buzek's government launched an ambitious reform program early this year aiming to overhaul Poland's pension system, education and health and local government. Criticized for mishandling the reforms, his cabinet has the lowest popularity ratings among Poland's post-communist governments.
PORTUGAL:
Prime Minister Antonio Guterres led the Socialist Party to power in the 1995 election, after 10 years in opposition, by moving it into the center ground, blending pro-market, business-friendly policies with social concerns. A modest man with a deep Roman Catholic faith who is widely respected for his sharp intelligence, he is very popular. He is a graduate in electro-technical engineering from Lisbon's Superior Technical Institute, one of the country's most prestigious universities.
SPAIN:
Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar, 46, is a former tax inspector who rose quickly through the ranks of the center-right Popular Party. A firm supporter of U.S. foreign policy in recent crises such as the bombing of Iraq and Yugoslavia, Aznar has pledged to send 400 Spanish troops to Albania to help Kosovar refugees.
Aznar was elected in 1996, ending more than 13 years of Socialist rule under Felipe Gonzalez, in large part because of voter disgust with corruption. He faces another election in 2000.
TURKEY:
President Suleyman Demirel, 75, is an engineer and former premier who was elected head of state in 1993 after the death of Turgut Ozal. Foreign Minister Ismail Cem, 59, is a former journalist. Both men firmly support NATO airstrikes against Yugoslavia. Demirel said after a recent visit to Albania, where he inspected refugee camps, that the "NATO operation will continue until it meets its aim."
UNITED KINGDOM:
Labor Party Prime Minister Tony Blair, 45, has enjoyed record popularity since sweeping to power in May 1997. When he was first elected to Parliament in 1983, Labor had a left-wing, antiwar platform that included scrapping Britain's nuclear weapons.
Underlying the party's move to the center, Blair ranks among the most hawkish NATO leaders on Kosovo. On Iraq, Britain alone has fighter-bombers patrolling the no-fly zone with U.S. warplanes. Blair trained as a lawyer. His wife, Cherie Booth, is a successful lawyer. They have three children.
UNITED STATES: In his two terms in office, Bill Clinton has overseen the most prosperous U.S. economy since World War II. Despite that success, his administration was blemished by his illicit affair with a young White House intern and subsequent impeachment and acquittal on charges of perjury and obstruction of justice. Clinton's administration has been plagued by other scandals, too. However, he was also the first president in a generation to not only balance the federal budget, but generate a government spending surplus. Clinton came into office in 1993 after more than a decade as the governor of Arkansas, one of the nation's poorest states. He was a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University and he and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, both graduated from Yale Law School.
 
 ---
 
 TNERS:
 
ALBANIA:
Pandeli Majko, 31, was elected prime minister last October after antigovernment riots led to the resignation of former prime minister Fatos Nano. He is the former leader of the Socialist Party Youth Organization.
He is the youngest Albanian prime minister, among the youngest in Europe if not the youngest. His Socialist Party holds 118 of the 150 seats in the parliament. He is married and has two children.
ARMENIA:
President Robert Kocharian, 44, is considered a nationalist and technocrat. A native of Nagorno-Karabakh, he led the enclave's independence movement and was elected president of the self-proclaimed republic in 1994. He became Armenia's president last March, after only one year in the country's government. Supporters say his vigor makes up for lack of experience.
AUSTRIA:
Social Democrat Chancellor Viktor Klima, 51, was sworn in on Jan. 28, 1997, after having served as finance minister for about one year, replacing Chancellor Franz Vranitzky, who resigned. In contrast to the formal style of his predecessor, Klima comes across as spontaneous and lively.
The Social Democrats lost much of their traditional workers' vote to right-wing populist Joerg Haider in the fall of 1994. An anti-Haider campaign was a big success in December 1995 elections. New Austrian elections will be held in October this year, and the Social Democrats are again expected to emerge as the strongest party.
AZERBAIJAN:
President Geidar Aliev, 75, is a former Communist Party leader of Soviet Azerbaijan and KGB general, who retook power in a bloodless 1993 coup. He has stifled dissent, censored news media and enforced a blockade on archrival Armenia. But he remains widely popular in Azerbaijan, where he has cultivated the image of a savvy grandfather who is not to be crossed, and has decorated the streets with his portraits and slogans. He was re-elected last October in a ballot that international observers said was heavily rigged.
BULGARIA:
President Petar Stoyanov, a 47-year old lawyer, has played a key role in defusing Bulgaria's worst post Cold War crisis in 1996-97 and has remained atop the popularity rankings among local politicians ever since. Although wielding largely ceremonial powers, Stoyanov has used his popularity to usher Bulgaria's turnaround from the staunchest of former Soviet allies to a candidate for NATO and the EU.
Pledging that Bulgaria will not get involved in the war in neighboring Yugoslavia, Stoyanov has repeatedly voiced moral support for NATO's air raids, insisting this is the right "civilization choice" for Bulgaria.
Prime Minister Ivan Kostov, 49, leader of the governing Union of Democratic Forces led his pro-western party to power after dealing a crushing defeat to the Socialist Party of former communists in April 1997 pre-term elections.
ESTONIA:
A one-time resident of California, Foreign Minister Toomas Ilves renounced his U.S. citizenship in 1992 to enter Estonia's diplomatic corps. In the 1980s, he headed the Estonian service of Radio Free Europe.
He is a leading figure in the new, center-right coalition government. Since independence in 1991, Estonia has made eventual NATO membership a top foreign policy priority. Ilves has supported the NATO action in Kosovo, but worries the Balkan crisis will overshadow the issue of expansion at the upcoming summit.
Defense Minister Juri Luik, 32, is the youngest member of the new center-right government, headed by Prime Minister Mart Laar. Before becoming defense minister last month, he was Estonia's ambassador to NATO.
FINLAND:
President Martti Ahtisaari, 61, a former United Nations' Bosnia and Namibia peacebroker, has been president since 1994. He is responsible for Finnish foreign policy and has reiterated that Finland wants to remain nonaligned and responsible for its own defense. But Finland wants to keep its options open, and works closely with NATO. When Finland takes over the rotating EU presidency in July, Ahtisaari has said that one of its main tasks will be to improve ties between the EU, Russia and the United States.
GEORGIA:
President Eduard Shevardnadze, 71, Georgia's former Communist-era boss and Soviet foreign minister. He was brought back to power by an armed group that ousted the republic's first popularly elected president, Zviad Gamsakhurdia, in 1992. Shevardnadze has survived several assassination attempts both during and after the Soviet times, and has made many enemies among warlords and secessionists.
KAZAKHSTAN:
President Nursultan Nazarbayev, 58, is another ex-Communist leader who started limited democratic reforms in the first few years after independence. But in 1995, he dissolved parliament and pushed through a referendum that extended his term to the year 2000. Demonstrations are tolerated occasionally, as long as they address economic issues such as overdue wages. Open opposition to the president is prohibited.
KYRGYZSTAN:
President Askar Akayev is widely considered a moderate in a region noted for authoritarian leaders. He has led this tiny, mountainous republic since the Soviet collapse and western observers said his 1995 reelection was based on a legitimate ballot. Still, human rights groups have criticized him for clamping down on free speech and for not following through with democratic reforms. The country posted modest growth last year, but remains one of the poorest ex-Soviet republics.
LATVIA:
Guntis Ulmanis was the first elected president of Latvia after the country gained independence in 1991; his term ends this year, and he has said he is not running for reelection. The presidency is a largely ceremonial position, though he plays an important role in international affairs and during the formation of governments. Ulmanis has been outspoken about the need for NATO membership.
Valdis Birkavs has been foreign minister in virtually every Latvian government since independence in 1991. Amid some fairly strong nationalist forces in and out of government, Birkavs has always been considered a moderate. He has said he is committed to better relations with neighboring Russia, but argues Moscow has shown little reciprocal good will. Birkavs, like his two Baltic counterparts, has said his country won't heed Russian objections to Baltic NATO membership.
LITHUANIA:
President Valdas Adamkus is a former administrator at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. He fled Lithuania when the Soviet Union invaded the country in 1944, and eventually settled in Chicago.
After almost five decades, he returned to Lithuania and won a surprise victory in presidential elections in early 1998. He renounced his U.S. citizenship after the election. His popularity ratings have soared, apparently because of perceptions that Adamkus is honest and Western-oriented. He has been a strong advocate of membership in NATO.
Foreign Minister Algirdas Saudargas is a member and leading figure in the ruling Conservative Party, a pro-reform, moderate-nationalist party. He was also foreign minister immediately after Lithuanian independence in 1991.
MACEDONIA:
Ljubco Georgijevski, 39, became premier after national elections last November. Although his government initially opposed deployment of the NATO force in Macedonia, it changed this stance, saying it supported a constructive attitude to the Kosovo crisis and would welcome closer ties with NATO.
Macedonia joined NATO's Partnership for Peace program in 1995 and has aspirations for full membership in the Alliance.
MOLDOVA:
President Petru Lucinschi, 59, took office in December 1996. His policy is characterized by pro-Russian views, even if he informally supports the reformist Movement for a Democratic and Prosperous Moldova that runs the government. Moldova, a former republic of the Soviet Union, is lukewarm on the prospect of joining NATO. Lucinschi will be accompanied by Foreign Minister Nicolae Tabacaru and Defense Minister Valeriu Pasat.
ROMANIA:
President Emil Constantinescu, 59, was elected in 1996 on a centrist National Peasant Party ticket. He will be accompanied by pro-western Foreign Minister Andrei Plesu, 51, in office since December 1997. Both supported NATO airstrikes against Yugoslavia.
SLOVAKIA:
The government is headed by Mikulas Dzurinda, 44, whose government was elected on Oct. 30, 1998. Before that, he was opposition leader of the five-party Slovak Democratic Coalition that ousted Premier Vladimir Meciar from office in elections last year. Meciar's authoritarian style had prompted both NATO and the European Union to bypass Slovakia. NATO admitted the Czech Republic, Slovakia's neighbor, as a new member instead, alongside Hungary and Poland.
Dzurinda and his government are seeking membership in both organizations and have begun political reforms. Dzurinda is a trained transportation engineer.
SLOVENIA:
President Milan Kucan heads a country that is trying to become a NATO member. The last parliamentary elections in 1996 led to a center-left coalition government of Liberal Democrats and the Slovenian People's Party, supported by three other minor countries. Slovenia's 2 million people, situated among Austria and Croatia, Italy and Hungary, became independent from Yugoslavia eight years ago.
SWEDEN:
Prime Minister Goeran Persson is a Social Democrat, traditionally Sweden's dominant party. He did well enough in national elections last September to narrowly hold onto power. Persson's social democrats are the leaders in a 3-party ruling coalition that includes the former Communist Left party and the Greens.
On Kosovo, Persson and Foreign Minister Anna Lindh have said the NATO attack was "unfortunate" but unavoidable. They've said Milosevic is responsible for the human rights violations. Nevertheless, they'd rather the United Nations had endorsed it.
SWITZERLAND:
Defense Minister Adolf Ogi, 56, said last weekend that he would like to see Swiss troops involved in peacekeeping missions in Kosovo, and that he supported the call of EU foreign ministers for non-NATO members to be involved. He said he could also see Swiss involvement in peace talks.
TAJIKISTAN:
President Emomali Rakhmonov, is a hard-line leader who came to power in 1992, as Tajikistan was sliding into civil war following independence. Propped up by 25,000 Russian troops, he signed a peace accord with opposition forces last year. The two sides are trying to reconcile, but Rakhmonov has given no indication he will relinquish power.
TURKMENISTAN:
President Saparmurat Niyazov, 59, has led the impoverished Central Asian nation since 1985, when it was still part of the Soviet Union. The former head of the Turkmen Communist Party, renamed the Democratic Party, has resisted moves toward fair elections, a free press and economic reforms. He has created an elaborate cult of personality - erecting statues and larger-than-life portraits across the country and putting his face on all the currency. Turkmenistan sits on vast reserves of natural gas, but the absence of export pipelines has kept the country in poverty.
UKRAINE:
President Leonid Kuchma, 60, a rocket designer and missile plant director with little political experience, was unexpectedly elected president in 1994 after promising sweeping rights for Ukraine's large Russian-speaking population - which he didn't deliver. His primary preoccupation now is winning re-election in October, in the face of shrinking public support amid a worsening economic situation and growing wage and pension debts. Kuchma has pursued ambivalent foreign policies, balancing between Europe and Russia, but failed to choose a clear direction.
UZBEKISTAN:
President Islam Karimov, 61, is Uzbekistan's former Communist boss who has largely kept the Soviet-style political system in place. Foreign investors have been repeatedly frustrated by bureaucracy and corruption. Political dissent is not tolerated, and the press is state-controlled. He has also feuded with Islamic extremists because of his insistence on keeping Uzbekistan a secular state.
 Load-Date: April 17, 1999

 

End of Document
