

Travel: An Expat Looks at the American South
The Associated Press
October 12, 1998, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1506 words
Byline: SUZY PATTERSON, Associated Press Writer
Body




Some think were it not for air conditioning, the South would never have risen again. It made a great short holiday for this European-based, Yankee-born American's "exotic" tour to the States, full of scenic splendor, sincere Southern hospitality, and great food, from crab cakes to creme brulee.
Obviously things are more relaxed, less grandiose than for London-Rome-Paris type tourism. Lower prices as well as the mild climate seem downright soothing. Here are some highlights:
 
 Charleston
With its rich historical and architectural background, the city founded in 1670 has often been proclaimed a "living museum." Founded by British colonists and named for King Charles II, it has aristocratic cachet.
The city draws thousands for the legendary Spoleto-USA festival in late spring, a world-class event lasting about a month. But other events mark the year, including the annual southeastern Wildlife Exposition in February and the Festival of Houses and Gardens (March-April).
Don't miss a look around the Battery district, a fabulous sight of the stately homes with their columns, porches and secret gardens, still inhabited by rich people living almost as in antebellum days. Take in King Street and Old City Market for chic or colorful shopping.
The Visitor Center and, across the street, the Charleston Museum (an award-winning modern building) are helpful places to take off from.
Of many old houses or churches to visit, the Heyward-Washington House is an outstandingly handsome 1772 town house, an inspiration for Dubose Heyward's book, Porgy, of "Porgy and Bess" fame. You'll see where George Washington slept in 1793 (not grandly, but in attractive four-poster style), original antiques, a child's room and the authentic, preserved kitchen out back. It's a tiny sweatshop with dirt floor, huge iron pots, and definitely an early-Porgy place.
Three mansions and gardens not to miss are all on Ashley River Road: Middleton Place is famous for the oldest landscape gardens in the U.S., laid out on French "formal" lines in 1741. It is resplendent today when lit with a riot of azaleas in the spring, camellias in winter, magnolias and roses in June. Liveoaks are truly majestic. Versailles it's not, but it has more human-size charm.
Visit the restored stableyards, where kids and grown-ups can see a "working" plantation just as it was in the 18th century, with spinning, blacksmithing, cow-milking at various times of day. The adjacent rustic restaurant is a restful stop before visiting what is left of the mansion, most of which burned during the Civil War.
The handsome brick house contains beautiful antiques and personal souvenirs, some from Arthur Middleton, son of the original owner and a signer of the Declaration of Independence.
Drayton Hall just up the road is a shell with nothing in it, but a beautiful example of pure Georgian Palladian architecture, with beautiful original plasterwork.
Magnolia Plantation offers house tours of the Greek Revival mansion, and visitors also enjoy the vast gardens (herb garden, topiary, tropical garden, a maze like that of England's Hampton Court and more).
Gracious living is part of the fun. The hotel or B&B scene is excellent, notably at Charleston Place Hotel, the Kings Courtyard Inn, the reasonable Elliott House Inn nearby.
But those who like to savor old mansion and country-style living head for Woodlands Resort and Inn, about 35 minutes northwest of Charleston off at quiet Summerville.
In a grand brick and pillared Greek Revival style mansion, it has vast bedrooms, decorated in antique Southern style (damask curtains with ball fringe and all), with modern conveniences like whirlpool baths.
Bought and restored five years ago by Joe Whitmore, a native of Martha's Vineyard who loves the South, the hotel is run informally but perfectly. "I wanted to create the best of an English inn or a French chateau-hotel with a Deep South touch," says Whitmore, who loves warm weather and Southern gentility.
He also loves good food and wine. Guests are thrilled to sample the cuisine of chef Ken Vedrinski, featuring fabulous foie gras, grilled beef filet with wild mushrooms and fava beans, and rich, diet-breaking desserts.
 
 Beaufort
About two hours south in Beaufort, on an island, explorers love the low-keyed, "sea islands" atmosphere, where you don't worry about much except perhaps eating too many sauteed shrimp or pasta at one of the simple waterside restaurants.
Take a guided buggy ride, walk or bicycle around the historic houses area, and take in scenic beauties used for movies like Forrest Gump and The Big Chill.
You can enter the 18th-century John Mark Verdier house on Bay Street, the main thoroughfare, to see a restoration of what the interior could have looked like and observe where Frenchman Lafayette slept during a brief visit as he encouraged his American friends.
For bed and breakfast, gracious Rhett House, with its period-style furniture, nice service and breezy verandah with view, is the place to stay. The rather more ornate Beaufort Inn offers quite good lunch and dinner as well as those hearty breakfasts for which the South is famous.
 
 Savannah
Savannah deserves several days. Among its distinctions is its celebrated starring role in the book, "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil," by John Berendt, and the subsequent movie, which made clear the city was not only gracious Old South, but full of fascination and eccentric inhabitants.
On a grid pattern, the city founded by James Oglethorpe in 1733 is best viewed from the meticulously preserved historic downtown, punctuated with its regular green squares (which slow traffic down nicely), and its stunning restored houses. Among them is the brick Mercer house, once belonging to singer-composer Johnny Mercer, then to Jim Williams, the antique dealer who murdered his assistant there - the key incident in the "Midnight" book and movie. You cannot enter, as Williams' sister lives there.
Many other houses can be seen inside, such as the Owens-Thomas house, where guides point out slaves' quarters and artifacts, details of the 1890 Regency architecture by William Jay, a beautiful dining room, a canopied bed and portraits where Lafayette's son slept, mementoes and bedroom of the last owner, "Miss Margaret" Thomas, who died in 1951 in the same four-poster she was born in 81 years before.
The "Midnight" (Garden of Good and Evil) tour is a classic now, done well by Old Savannah tours, Hospitality Tours and others.
You'll see highlights of the book settings, mainly the picturesque Bonaventure cemetery beside the Wilmington River, with its liveoaks, palms, magnolias, wisteria, dogwood and impressive statuary.
The little bird girl who graced the book cover, however, has been so desecrated by tourists she was removed to a museum. But you can view graves of poet Conrad Aiken, Johnny Mercer, and Danny Hansford, the petulant young man whose murder sparked off the "Midnight" book.
The Gastonian is an antique-filled B&B, very comfortable except for some of its awkward sitzbaths. A great feature is the breakfast room where you can kibitz with the young chefs as you wait for your mounds of pancakes and sausages, prepared before your eyes.
Elizabeth's is considered the top elegant restaurant in town. Pink house is a fabulous historical mansion, but the food is acceptably unremarkable. Miss Wilkes' in the historic part of town is famed for her groaning boarding-house style tables and lines of eager diners. And Miss Paula Deen of the friendly Lady and Sons restaurant is known for her incomparable buffet, where customers rave "best crab cakes and fried green tomatoes I've ever tasted!"
 
 Sea Island
Sea Island, to the south, is 10,000 acres of beautiful houses, quiet elegance and the famed Cloister Hotel. Since 1928, it's been a gem of the South, offering everything from a great Beach Club restaurant to golf, tennis, skeet shooting, spa and more.
 
 Cumberland Island
A truly magical adventure, a visit to Greyfield Inn here means a 45-minute boat trip from Fernandina Beach, Fla., then discovery of gracious living in antique-furnished rooms complete with claw-footed bathtubs in the bathrooms, family portraits in the living room where guests (not more than 25) gather for cocktails before candlelight dinner.
Greyfield once belonged to the daughter of Thomas Carnegie, brother of magnate Andrew. Thomas's vast original estate burned down, but the relics are hauntingly evocative of past splendors.
A wildlife haven, the 17-mile-long island unspoiled by roads, people or buildings can be toured by jeep with naturalist guides to view the wild horses, horseshoe crabs and Eastern shore birds and animals. They'll also point out the simple slaves' church deep in the scrub woods where John F. Kennedy Jr. and Carolyn Bessette chose to get married a couple of years ago, far from the madding crowd.
---
Dayton, Ohio, native Suzy Patterson has lived in Paris for more than 30 years, writing about fashion, food, and travel. She has been Paris fashion writer for the Associated Press for over 20 years.
 Load-Date: October 12, 1998

 

End of Document
