

Two boys, a letter, a continent: African stowaways touch the world
The Associated Press
March 18, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1221 words
Byline: By RAF CASERT, TIM SULLIVAN, Associated Press Writers
Dateline: BRUSSELS, Belgium
Body




For four days, they were ghosts in the machine.
At least three times, they had crisscrossed jungles, the Sahara and Europe before their bodies were discovered in the jetliner's wheel well. Now Yaguine Koita and Fode Tounkara were in the air again, flying home to the West African nation of Guinea.
But this time the two 14-year-olds were inside the airplane, accompanied by solemn men in solemn suits - their country's ambassador to Belgium and a representative of the Belgian government. They were being returned home with honors.
All because of the letter.
Ann Fransen, the Brussels deputy prosecutor, had been burning to read it ever since she watched the medical examiner remove it from Yaguine's clothing. It was late afternoon, hours later, before a copy was faxed to the Palais de Justice and delivered to her by a clerk.
She sat at her desk, where she keeps pictures of her two little girls, and read:
"Excellencies, Messrs. members and officials of Europe.
"We have the honor and pleasure and great confidence in you to write this letter to talk to you of the objective of our journey and the suffering of us, the children and young people of Africa…
"We have war, disease, malnutrition, ...In Guinea, we have too many schools but a great lack of education and training. Only in private schools can one have a good education and good training, but it takes a great sum of money, and our parents are poor and they have to feed us. Nor do we have sports schools where we can practice football, basketball or tennis.
"That is why we, African children and youth, ask you to create a great, efficient organization for Africa to allow us to progress.
"And if you see that we have sacrificed and risked our lives, it is because there is too much suffering in Africa and we need you to struggle against poverty and put an end to war in Africa. …
"Finally, we appeal to you to excuse us very, very much for daring to write this letter to the great personages to whom we owe much respect…
"Written by two Guinean children, Yaguine Koita and Fode Tounkara"
This letter, Fransen immediately decided, must not be buried in a file.
"I'm not that emotional," she said later, "but it immediately gripped me."
But how to make it public? There was the long way - going through channels in the law enforcement bureaucracy. And there was the short way - go directly to the investigating judge. Fransen chose the short way.
Publish it, the judge said. And the floodgates opened.
Yaguine's and Fode's letter was splashed across the continent's biggest newspapers. Churches and charities campaigning for Africa adopted the boys as a symbol. The tragedy struck an especially sensitive nerve in Belgium, where many still feel guilty over their country's past as a colonial power in Africa - a history of greed and brutality that inspired Joseph Conrad's novel, "Heart of Darkness."
In Guinea the boys were mourned as national heroes, their bodies received at Conakry's airport by cabinet ministers. Their parents were comforted by some of the most powerful men in the country. Web sites sprang up all over the Internet commemorating Yaguine and Fode.
The letter reverberated through the United Nations and the International Monetary Fund, and for a while it seemed that the gulf of indifference separating Europe and Africa was finally narrowing.
---
 
Belgium is about one-ninth the size of Guinea and has slightly more people. "With our limited means we are not able to solve the suffering of the Third World," says Filip Dewinter, leader of the anti-immigrant Vlaams Blok (Flemish Bloc) party.
The country's political divide is widening. Like populist parties in Austria and Switzerland, Belgium's is gaining support with its call to curb immigration.
But Belgium is also about 30 times richer than Guinea, and its new foreign minister, Louis Michel, had already been looking for ways to address Africa's plight and counter the anti-immigrant camp.
The boys' letter, he believed, would be the perfect metaphor.
So he made it the theme of his speech Sept. 25 to the U.N. General Assembly, gathered in New York seven weeks after the bodies were found.
They were, Michel told the General Assembly, "victims of their idealism and their innocence who embarked on this reckless voyage to chase the mirage of Western civilization."
Three days later, Michel Camdessus, then managing director of the International Monetary Fund, opened his address to the board of governors by quoting from the letter.
"It tells us that the extent of poverty still present at the end of a century of affluence is intolerable," Camdessus said. "It is time to respond."
The voices of Yaguine Koita and Fode Tounkara had reached the world's highest forums. But in Guinea, tolerance began to wear thin. As European journalists arrived to follow up the story, Guinean officials grew defensive.
Did the boys even write the letter? Some Guinean officials doubt it. They insist it's too sophisticated for a 14-year-old. While the handwriting appears to be Yaguine's, they say he may have copied it from a letter written by a teacher, an older friend, even an opposition politician trying to discredit Guinea.
Yet its very artlessness is striking. It is peppered with grammatical errors. It feels like the work of a child trying to sound like an adult - and failing.
The government gave each family $300 and paid for the burials; then officials dropped all contact with them. Yaguine, officials said, had betrayed his nation, embarrassed Guinea before the world.
Guinea has an informal social network and family values to cope with poverty, they said. It wasn't life in Conakry that killed Fode and Yaguine, they said; it was the false allure of TV images from the West.
"We can't say that there's no poverty, but that's not is what is driving the children overseas," Ibrahima Camara of the Ministry of Social Affairs, Women and Children said in an interview. "It's the mirage."
Such responses infuriate Bayo Karamba, a Guinean aid worker and children's advocate. "They are concerned with keeping the army quiet so there isn't another coup - period," he said. "They don't care about the children."
In the months that have followed, Europe's cries for change have melted into letdown. The boys' story faded from front pages. The politicians started talking about other things. Life went on.
Belgium did revive an aid plan for Guinea and forgave about $10 million of Guinea's $ 3.3 billion in foreign debt, a droplet in the ocean of financial misery.
"It created hope, but everything is so slow," sighed Michel, the foreign minister.
"It's been forgotten," said Karamba. "By everyone."
Now the boys' letter rests inside Dossier No. 46.93.123506/99 of the Belgian state judiciary. And on another continent, in a public cemetery, two graves 10 feet apart mark the end of the journey for two boys who had a message for the world.
The small mounds of dirt in the Conakry graveyard are edged by rocks and rotting chunks of palm trees. Green and purple plants thrive in the dark soil.
Staked to each grave is a small metal marker.
Both are blank.
--
On the Net: www.orientation.com. Select "Guinea" in the destinations box and you will be referred to a variety of sites on all aspects of Guinea.
---
 
This story was reported in Guinea by AP West Africa Bureau Chief Tim Sullivan and in Belgium by AP Brussels Correspondent Raf Casert.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY336-339 of March 13; WORLD ON THE MOVE logo
 Load-Date: March 19, 2000

 

End of Document
