

U.S. Army chief says military coalitions are the way of the future
The Associated Press
September 6, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 340 words
Byline: By DEAN VISSER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SINGAPORE
Body




Coalitions are the way of the future for the world's army operations, U.S. Army Chief of Staff Eric K. Shinseki said Monday at a meeting of senior military officers from 35 Asia-Pacific countries.
"Coalition operations are the way we will respond to crisis. No one, including the United States, can or will go it alone," Shinseki said. "The global perspective is the reality that we all now live in."
The U.S. Army wants "to embrace even more strongly our allies and coalition partners," said Shinseki, who recently commanded the NATO-led peace stabilization force in Bosnia.
Shinseki gave the keynote speech at the Pacific Armies Management Seminar, or PAMS, an event co-hosted by Singapore and the United States that runs from Sept. 6-10. The conference focuses on changes confronting armies in the 21st century. Organizers describe PAMS as a "nonpolitical, multinational forum."
Rapidly advancing technology is one of the greatest challenges facing today's armies, delegates said.
The Gulf War and Kosovo crisis showed how fast warfare is evolving, said Singapore Chief of Army Maj. Gen. Lim Chuan Poh.
"Given the short technological shelf life, especially in information technology, the real challenge becomes one of not fielding a new command and control system that is obsoleted before launch," he said.
The conference will likely touch on typical management issues such as budgeting and recruitment, said U.S. Army Pacific spokesman Col. John Smith. Efforts will also be made to strengthen relations between the armies involved, Smith said.
Specific security issues, such as East Timor or China-Taiwan tensions, are not on the agenda but might be discussed informally by delegates.
The army chiefs are also scheduled to play volleyball and view combat team live-firing demonstrations.
Among the army chiefs at the talks are those from Australia, Bangladesh, Brunei, Canada, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mongolia, Nepal, New Zealand, the Philippines, Russia, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Tonga and the United States.
 Load-Date: September 6, 1999

 

End of Document
