

U.S. on the edge of the Asian whirlpool
The Associated Press
June 19, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 539 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It is hard for Americans to comprehend the deadly black whirlpool that is inexorably sucking in more of the world's economy.
It's vacation time in America. Joblessness is down, wages and profits up. Ordinary people have become investors. The economy has been described as the most beautifully balanced in about a half-century.
But the economies of much of Asia have been crippled as piece by piece their productive capacity disappears into the sea storm. And the destruction is spreading: Europe, Latin America and, yes, North America.
The currency of Japan, the world's second-largest industrial nation, where banks hold $ 550 billion in bad loans, is endangered. Its economy is in recession, and officials have been slow to deal with the situation.
Linked through exports and imports to other nations in the global economy, exports by the United States already have been hurt; the industrial operating rate in April was the lowest in two years.
Farmers are angry. Agriculture secretary Dan Glickman predicts Asia's problems will lower their exports by $ 2 billion this year. Oil is in a glut situation. High-tech companies are battling crash-price imports.
Canada's exports are damaged, and its dollar fell below 68 U.S. cents in mid-June. Mexico is hurting too; Asia's exports are underpricing theirs. And South American nations too have felt the effect.
Economic destabilization creates political problems. Can China protect its economy, or will it too devalue? Can the United States afford to impose economic sanctions on Pakistan, a big wheat importer?
Important as they are, these questions are minor compared with the biggest question of all: Can the United States and Europe risk their own economies in order to continue importing from distressed nations?
While nobody can read the future, economists try. Some of them now say the remarkable U.S. economy risks inflation while others foresee the possibility of deflation. Plausibility supports their concern.
If the United States chooses to force-feed its aged economic expansion in order to help disabled economies export their way to health, will it then face the prospect of inflation that will destroy its equilibrium?
On the other hand, as importers of last resort, will the economies of the United States and Europe be overwhelmed by goods that underprice and undermine domestic production and jobs, producing a downward price spiral?
The impact of either would, of course, be catastrophic for the U.S. securities markets and, by extension, the entire world economy. And the political consequences would be unfathomably complex and dangerous.
A world economy is one of mutual responsibility and dependence; when one nation or group of nations tries to do more than it can afford, a day of reckoning approaches, and the consequences are shared by all.
Meanwhile, the U.S. economy is still strong, even if it has suffered serious damage: the loss of many tens of thousands of jobs, diminished production, unfair price competition. Even Alan Greenspan concedes this.
But Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chief, and Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, know that no economy, even the world's largest, can escape the dark whirlpool if it is allowed to grow any larger.
 
 End Adv AMs Friday, June 19
 
 Load-Date: June 19, 1998

 

End of Document
