

Up to final hours, the carnage of the Great War continued
The Associated Press
November 10, 1998, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 450 words
Byline: RAF CASERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OUDENAARDE, Belgium
Body




Among the endless rows of crosses in cemeteries along the front lines of the Great War, few are more poignant than those bearing the inscription "Nov. 11, 1918" - armistice day.
After four years of unprecedented carnage, men kept falling even in the war's final hours - long after the German enemy had given up hope of winning.
The French army and the U.S. 37th and 91st Divisions launched one of the final offensives of World War I on Nov. 10, 1918, near this medieval Belgian town, trying to capture one more hill before the weapons were finally put down.
The 37th Division alone lost 22 men in the final 24 hours of fighting before the guns fell silent at 11 a.m. on Nov. 11, 1918.
Those men and 4,500 other Americans who died in the last weeks of fighting will be honored Wednesday during a ceremony at the war memorial in Oudenaarde.
In nearby Ypres, Belgian King Albert II and British Queen Elizabeth II will also honor the slain troops, over 10 million from a host of nations.
The Belgian monarch's grandfather, Albert I, was supreme commander of the Belgian troops during the World War I and witnessed the American sacrifices firsthand. "Belgium will never forget your countrymen, who, having neither their Fatherland nor their home to defend ran up to secure the rights of humanity," Albert I wrote.
Their memory is now kept at the Flanders Field American Cemetery outside Oudenaarde, where 368 of the fallen are buried.
On a recent November morning, the cemetery was waterlogged, leaden clouds whipping overhead as a gale rippled huge pools of mud in surrounding fields. Thick, black clay spilled onto the narrow roads.
In 1918, the air was heavy with rumors of impending peace, but Allied generals wanted to pressure the Germans as much as possible before a cease-fire was signed and continued to push battle-weary troops forward.
The U.S. troops joined a French division west of Oudenaarde and launched an offensive on the Scheldt River on Oct. 31.
The infantry, dragging heavy equipment, got stuck in the mud and German machine gun posts fired with ruthless abandon. The advance was costly and slow - farm by farm, hedge-by-hedge, according to retired Belgian army Lt. Col. Dr. Jean-Pierre Deweer, who wrote a study on the battle.
The American troops were sitting ducks for the Germans shooting from the opposing hills. They also had to brave poison gas.
Soldiers had to duck fire swimming across the river before digging foxholes that immediately filled with water. Men died from pneumonia and infected wounds.
Now, the message of their suffering still hits home.
"Lest we forget, God bless them," wrote a visitor, Mario Runco of the NASA Space Center in Houston, in the visitors' book at Flanders Field.
 Load-Date: November 10, 1998

 

End of Document
