

Wales welcomes the queen - and, more cautiously, the new assembly
The Associated Press
May 26, 1999, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 451 words
Byline: MARA D. BELLABY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARDIFF, Wales
Body




After nearly 600 years of union with England, Wales marked its first sniff of power Wednesday with the opening of a new assembly.
But the star attraction was Queen Elizabeth II, a symbol of the strong ties that still bind the principality to the rest of Britain.
The queen - accompanied by her husband, Prince Philip, and her eldest son, Prince Charles, the prince of Wales - was welcomed by thousands of people at each of the day's events.
Crowds lined the streets shouting "We want the queen," and small children shyly presented bouquets to the 73-year-old monarch.
The opening ceremony was short and simple, and the queen wore a bright pink dress suit instead of the robes and crown she wears to open the sessions of the House of Commons in London.
"On the eve of the millennium, this new assembly extends a bridge into the future," she told the 60-member assembly.
"It is a forum in which all the people of this ancient and noble land will in the years to come have both a resonant democratic voice and a clearer expression of Welsh society and culture," she said.
Local political leaders acknowledge that the 2.9 million Welsh are unconvinced of the benefits of Prime Minister Tony Blair's major constitutional shake up.
Scotland has its first parliament in nearly 300 years and Northern Ireland a separate assembly under the 2-year-old Labor Party government's plan to dilute the political power of the British government, while preserving the union.
But in Wales, united with England since the 16th century and under the same monarch since the 1200s, the drive for autonomy never really caught on.
Only half the electorate voted in favor of the creation of an assembly in a September 1997 referendum, and fewer than half bothered to vote in May 6 elections to choose the members.
Unlike the Scottish Parliament, the assembly has no powers to raise taxes or pass new laws. It will be responsible for distributing a $ 13 million grant from London and for making decisions that directly affect Wales.
"Oh, I'm not so excited about the assembly myself, but it is nice to see the queen in Cardiff," said Suzanne Payne, who waited with her 11-year-old daughter outside Llandaff Cathedral to watch the queen arrive.
"Many people are at best agnostic about the value of the assembly," assembly leader Alun Michael said during the opening ceremony, conducted in Welsh and English. "We must convince people by the way we conduct ourselves."
Charles, speaking in Welsh, said Wales could now direct "Welsh minds … to Welsh matters."
The daylong celebrations were to conclude with an informal dinner, attended by the royals and Blair; a nighttime concert, billed as the biggest showing of Welsh talent ever; and a fireworks display.
 Load-Date: May 26, 1999

 

End of Document
