

WALTER MEARS: Should the perilous option be on the table?
The Associated Press
April 13, 1999, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 745 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




From the day President Clinton took what he called the best among bad alternatives, the air war for Kosovo, he has resisted the more perilous option of invading. But if it comes to that, the Republican Congress may provide him policy insurance.
The congressional message could be that the use of U.S. ground forces in a NATO invasion should be an option, at least as a threat. Actually doing it would take weeks. There are both Republicans and Democrats arguing that the ground troop option should be readied.
That is a marked turn from long-standing congressional reluctance at the use of American forces in the Balkans, even by invitation to keep the peace, let alone by invasion to win it.
GOP Sen. John McCain has taken the lead in pressing the ground force option, saying it should be embodied in bipartisan resolutions authorizing whatever force is necessary, including ground troops, to gain NATO objectives.
Clinton defines them as the withdrawal of Serb forces from Kosovo, the return of ethnic Albanians driven from their homes, autonomy for the province and an international peacekeeping force there. The bombing was launched because Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic would not accept those terms for ending civil war in Kosovo.
By U.N. estimate, more than 500,000 refugees have fled Kosovo in the "ethnic cleansing" onslaught by Yugoslavia since NATO airstrikes began on March 24.
The administration says the airstrike strategy is succeeding by weakening Yugoslav Serb forces. But McCain says Milosevic is getting what he wanted by driving what was the Albanian majority out of Kosovo.
McCain, who delayed his declaration of 2000 presidential candidacy because of the Balkan conflict, said the administration has to change its position against the option of ground troops.
It has not. Defense Secretary William Cohen said Monday that the administration is not considering the possibility because the NATO command has not requested ground forces.
That's a somewhat circular argument, since the NATO commander is an American.
"Should it become necessary, we'll take it under advisement," Cohen said.
But at this point, he said, there is strong consensus for the air campaign. And the NATO commander, Gen. Wesley Clark, said he remains convinced that air power alone will suffice.
The air war risks NATO and U.S. casualties, but not on the scale that would go with a ground invasion in the Balkans.
The House was edgy about agreeing to the use of Americans as peacekeepers to guarantee a Kosovo settlement, before Milosevic blocked that deal. The House voted 219 to 191 on March 11 for a resolution endorsing a peacekeeping mission. With the airstrikes imminent, the Senate voted 58 to 41 to support them. Again, it was grudging support for Clinton's policy. In each case, the vote was on commitments the president already had made, as he did in 1995 in sending American peacekeeping troops to Bosnia to enforce a U.S.-brokered settlement of ethnic wars there. While that force has been reduced by two-thirds, more than 6,000 Americans are still there.
When Congress got around to endorsing the Bosnia force, the resolution pointedly said that the commitment was Clinton's and that its approval came with reservations about the policy.
Now there are reservations about a Clinton policy that precludes the threat of ground troops. While the White House still says that Clinton does not intend to send them into the Kosovo conflict, its officials also say that NATO made standby plans for that eventuality in late 1998, and they could be updated quickly if necessary.
Sen. Dick Lugar of Indiana, a Republican leader on foreign policy, says a diplomatic settlement won't be possible until Clinton stops saying no on ground forces. Other Republicans contend that Clinton has been misleading in saying the airstrikes will be enough, without ground forces. Not that Congress is about to tell him to send them in. The critics of his air-only stance are saying that Milosevic shouldn't be told he won't face NATO and thus U.S. troops.
Clinton said Milosevic could end the airstrikes tomorrow by coming to terms with NATO. "But until he does, he should be under no illusions that we will end it from weariness," Clinton said Monday at Barksdale Air Force Base, La. "We are determined to continue on this mission."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and special correspondent for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: April 13, 1999

 

End of Document
