

Warm words from the summit, sharper tones from the sidelines
The Associated Press
April 3, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 674 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




Sharp rebukes and frank pleas punctuated the first day of the Africa-Europe summit Monday, overshadowing the warm words of cooperation and hope that marked the opening ceremony.
The two-day meeting is a major effort to overcome the bitterness of Europe's colonial past and launch new efforts to bring the heavily indebted African nations into the global economic and political mainstream. But a vehemently anti-Western statement by Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi raised tensions that more moderate leaders had hoped to avoid.
In a closed-door session attended by heads of governments and top ministers, Gadhafi said Europe "had been submerged by American imperialism," according to a diplomat who heard Gadhafi's speech. The diplomat quoted Gadhafi as saying in the unflinching 20-minute address that "unless Europe is freed from NATO, it cannot be free."
Summit host President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt had tried to keep the session from deteriorating into a forum for airing old grudges. Arab diplomats speaking on condition of anonymity Monday said Mubarak had asked Gadhafi not to raise controversial topics.
Gadhafi's message conflicted with the conciliatory tone set by Prime Minister Antonio Guterres of Portugal, whose country holds the presidency of the 15-nation European Union.
"It is time to change our conception and preconceptions of each other," said Guterres.
Debt remained the overriding issue.
Africa as a whole has $350 billion in external debt, with some countries paying more every year to service their loans than they do on health and education.
President Benjamin Mkapa of Tanzania said African nations know where they have to go, what's unclear is how.
"It is not necessary to hammer to African governments the value of competitive economic regimes with and between countries," he said. Africa, Mkapa said, "wants to be part of the action, not an object of perpetual international pity."
Even though African hopes for immediate substantial relief from the EU were dashed, German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder offered $350 million in debt relief to almost 30 African nations as "a special sign of solidarity."
"I am confident that the other creditor nations will follow our example," the chancellor said.
Salim Ahmed Salim, secretary-general of the 53-member Organization of African Unity, said the need for a "faster, deeper and broader process of debt relief cannot be overemphasized."
"We should not wait for a major catastrophe to occur," he said.
The European Union, which recently offered $1 billion in debt relief to the world's poorest nations, had little more to give at the summit beyond a promise to write a report that will be studied at a future ministerial meeting. Most work on African debt will be handled by other international institutions, such as the Paris Club of creditor nations, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
"Africa today is suffering from both deprivation and the burden of this ever-widening gap between the rich north and the poor south," said President Abdelaziz Bouteflika of Algeria, current chairman of the OAU. "Africa hopes that it will find listening ears and understanding from Europe during this summit."
The Europeans were most interested in talking about ending Africa's many conflicts, and promoting democracy and human rights.
"The transition to democracy is not quite achieved in the whole of the continent," said Romano Prodi, president of the EU Commission, the organization's executive arm.
President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe angrily complained that Britain was still treating his country like a colony.
"Britain has no right, no right at all, to try and suggest to the rest of the world that we are a failure," he said in response to British criticism of political violence at a weekend peace march in the Zimbabwean capital, Harare.
The march, organized by the country's biggest opposition alliance, was marred by black war veterans attacking demonstrators who were protesting the takeover of more than 700 white-owned farms.
----
On the Net: European Union at http://europa.eu.int 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XCAI104,110,111,113
 Load-Date: April 4, 2000

 

End of Document
