

Water the lifeblood and bane of the Dutch lowlands
The Associated Press
January 11, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 312 words
Body




Coursing through thousands of miles of rivers and canals, water is the very lifeblood of the Netherlands.
And it is a constant threat.
Two-thirds of the Netherlands sits below sea level, forcing the Dutch to mix their love of water with a healthy dose of vigilance.
Many miles of the coastline are barricaded against ravaging tides by a multimillion-dollar wall of dams and sluices. It was built in the aftermath of a 1953 tidal flood that killed nearly 2,000 people while they slept in the southern coastal region of Zeeland.
Officials from the government water authority keep constant vigil along the dams and coast, trying to ensure that the North Sea never again wreaks such deadly havoc.
Inland, a network of dikes, canals and pumping stations keeps low-lying land dry.
But the earthen dikes - many dating to medieval times - still face an age-old enemy: millions of muskrats that thrive in the soggy surroundings. Professional rat catchers use simple traps to snare the critters and prevent them from undermining the levees.
Elsewhere on Dutch rivers, patience is a lifestyle for lock-keepers and ferry pilots waiting for the next customer to help along or across the water.
From the fishing village of Volendam, on the shore of the Ijsselmeer inland sea, a fleet of small trawlers harvest the sea, hauling in eels in the summer and perch in the winter.
And in the village of Spakenburg, ship carpenters employ traditional methods to patch up the boats, replacing rotten wood with new planks and sealing the seams with hemp and tar.
But for millions of ordinary people, the Dutch river and coastal systems are simply a source of natural beauty to be admired.
Employees of the national monuments authority use small boats to patrol areas of outstanding beauty and make sure that human activity does not encroach on one of the Netherlands' most valuable natural assets - its water.
 Load-Date: January 11, 1998

 

End of Document
