

Weekly business briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
December 17, 1998, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 2894 words
Dateline: SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico
Body




PUERTO RICO: Nationwide Insurance loses age discrimination lawsuit
 Nationwide Insurance has lost a dlrs 4.4 million age discrimination lawsuit filed by two employees in its Puerto Rican branch, El Nuevo Dia newspaper reported Thursday.
A federal jury on Friday awarded the amount to Juan Gonzalez Perez and Manuel A. Baralt, who were fired in 1994 by the company.
Gonzalez, a manager in the personal and commercial insurance department, was 60 when he was fired and had worked for Nationwide for 25 years. Baralt, a claims manager, was 49 and had 25 years with the company.
The U.S. District Court jury ordered the company to pay Gonzalez dlrs 1.5 million for mental anguish, dlrs 400,000 in lost wages and dlrs 500,000 for his wife's suffering.
It awarded Baralt dlrs 2 million, including dlrs 500,000 for his wife's suffering.
It was unclear Thursday if Nationwide planned to appeal the decision.
A third age discrimination lawsuit filed by former vice president and general manager Enrique A. Lopez is still pending, El Nuevo Dia reported.
 
 SURINAME: State Oil to sell crude to Trinidad's Petrotrin
 
 PARAMARIBO, Suriname (AP) - Suriname's State Oil has signed a dlrs 40 million contract to sell crude oil to Trinidad's Petrotrin, company officials said Thursday.
State Oil will supply Petrotrin with 110,000 to 175,000 barrels of crude per month over two years, according to the contract signed Wednesday. Petrotrin has processed part of State Oil's crude since 1986.
The two countries are separated by about 400 miles (650 kilometers). In a written statement, government-owned State Oil said the deal fit into the country's plans to strengthen trade ties to the Caribbean.
State Oil also said in a written statement it has signed an agreement with Canadian firm Koch Exploration to negotiate oil exploration in the country's Wayombo area.
 
 PUERTO RICO: Hotel stays drop in October because of hurricane
 
 SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) - Hotel reservations in Puerto Rico dropped 7 percent from September to October because of damage caused by Hurricane Georges, tourism officials said Thursday.
However, they noted the numbers for 1998 are still up over 1997.
Georges hit Puerto Rico on Sept. 21 and forced temporary closures at 14 hotels, most of them outside San Juan, the Puerto Rico Tourism Co. said. The number of registrations outside San Juan dropped 38.3 percent.
Total room nights sold in October increased 6.4 percent over October 1997, from 171,870 to 182,941. Occupancy rates averaged 76.3 percent - about 16 percent higher than last year because of the reduced number of rooms.
During the first 10 months of 1998, registrations totaled 1.3 million - 4.7 percent higher than in 1997.
 
 UNITED STATES: French buying Consolidated Cigars, newspaper says
 
 MIAMI (AP) - France's largest tobacco company is buying Consolidated Cigar Holdings - makers of Dutch Masters, Don Diego and Muriel cigars, among other brands - in a dlrs 730 million deal.
The French concern, Seita SA, agreed to buy Consolidated for dlrs 531 million in cash, or about dlrs 17.85 a share. Seita also was to assume nearly dlrs 200 million in debt owed by Fort Lauderdale, Florida-based Consolidated, The Miami Herald reported Thursday.
Consolidated has 5,400 employees. Just 550 employees work in the United States, while the rest work in Consolidated's cigar factories in the Caribbean and in Central America.
The move will let Seita get its foot in the door in the U.S. cigar market, which is the world's largest market for stogies. Consolidated already commands 24 percent of cigar sales in this country.
The move also appeared certain to cement Seita's position as the world's leading cigar maker.
Consolidated Cigar is controlled by billionaire investor Ronald Perelman, who has a 65 percent stake in the company - which would be worth about dlrs 350 million in the sale. Perelman has said he backs the offer from Seita.
 
 ST. MAARTEN: Most passengers from stricken cruise ship leave
 
 PHILIPSBURG, St. Maarten (AP) - Hundreds of tourists who abandoned ship when a cruise liner struck a Caribbean reef were flew home to the United States Wednesday.
Most of the 2,557 tourists evacuated from the Monarch of the Seas on Tuesday were flying to Miami or San Juan, Puerto Rico, or had already arrived, said Gloria Jacaruso, spokeswoman for Royal Caribbean International.
Some tourists, unwilling to shorten their vacations, were staying in the island of St. Maarten, 150 miles (240 kilometers) east of Puerto Rico.
The Monarch slammed into a reef less than a mile (kilometer) off Philipsburg at 1:30 a.m. Tuesday, opening a 120-foot-by-3-foot gash (40-meter-by-1-meter) in the forward left side of the hull. The crew decided to beach the 74,000-ton ship on sand in Great Bay harbor to prevent it from sinking, and all passengers were safely evacuated. No one was hurt.
Investigators from the U.S. Coast Guard, Dutch St. Maarten and Royal Caribbean were on the scene, trying to determine what caused the accident.
 
 PUERTO RICO: Third man arrested in alleged kickback scheme
 
 SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) - The Federal Bureau of Investigation has arrested a third man in an alleged kickback scheme during the aftermath of Hurricane Georges.
Subcontractor Luis A. Rodriguez Sierra was charged Tuesday with conspiracy to defraud the U.S. government, the agency said Wednesday. It claims he inflated estimates of hurricane debris in the town of Toa Alta in order to win more funds from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
On Nov. 24, the FBI arrested Toa Alta mayor Angel Rodriguez and contractor Jose Orlando Figueroa on charges they demanded dlrs 2.5 million in bribes from Mississippi-based JESCO, a company hired to collect debris after Hurricane Georges struck on Sept. 21.
Angel Rodriguez and Figueroa pleaded innocent on Monday to conspiracy, extortion and bribery indictments.
U.S. prosecutors claim Figueroa contacted Rodriguez Sierra through the telephone book and directed him to show dlrs 500,000 cubic yards of debris.
Figueroa paid Rodriguez Sierra dlrs 2,500 and promised him a bonus after the inflated estimate was submitted to the U.S. government, prosecutors allege.
 
 JAMAICA: Parliament raises money laundering reporting threshold
 
 KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) - The Jamaican parliament has passed money laundering legislation raising the reporting threshold for banks from dlrs 10,000 to dlrs 50,000.
All "suspicious" transactions of any amount must still be reported, the law says. The changes were passed Tuesday.
The change was made to ease restrictions on tourism-related businesses that transact large amounts of money in foreign currency, said National Security Minister Keith Knight.
The amendments also raise the reporting threshold for foreign currency exchange house from dlrs 5,000 to dlrs 8,000.
Under Jamaican law, banks are required to report transactions above the threshold to the island's director of public prosecution. Some government bodies, international agencies and diplomatic offices are given exemptions.
During debate in parliament, the opposition Jamaica Labor Party claimed that the amendment forces banks to do more detective work instead of automatically reporting transactions.
 
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO: Economy shrinks in third quarter
 
 PORT OF SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) - Dashing predictions of growth, a report by Trinidad and Tobago's central bank says slipping oil prices drove the country's economy down a half-percent during the third quarter of 1998.
A dip in contract prices for natural gas also contributed to the sluggish numbers, the Trinidad Central Bank said in the report released Tuesday. It covers July, August and September of 1998.
Government officials had predicted a 5 percent economic growth rate earlier this year.
But the report said revenue from crude and refined oil tumbled almost dlrs 16 million during the quarter. Taxes from the petroleum sector, which were as high as 40 percent of total revenue during the oil boom years of the 1970s and 1980s, dropped to just under 10 percent during the quarter.
Overall, however, the petroleum sector showed a gain of 0.4 percent, due mostly to dramatic increases manufacturing of petrochemicals like fertilizers - which saw production rise 16.4 percent - and methanol.
However, declines in distribution, transport, communications and the finance and real-estate sectors overwhelmed the slight gain in the petroleum sector.
 
 PUERTO RICO: Architects to appeal demolition of hotel to supreme court
 
 SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) - The Puerto Rican Architects' Association says it will appeal the demolition of a San Juan hotel to the island's supreme court.
The group wants La Concha Hotel in the Condado tourist district declared an historic landmark, but its case has been rejected by both a trial judge and an appeals court.
On Wednesday, El Nuevo Dia newspaper quoted the association's executive director, Cristina Cardalda, as saying the group would appeal the case to the high court. "This was what we had anticipated since the beginning," Cardalda said.
The state-owned hotel, named "The Shell" for a shell-shaped wing on the beach, is due to be destroyed along with the San Juan Convention Center as part of Gov. Pedro Rossello's plans to shed money-losing government enterprises.
 
 PUERTO RICO: Government behind on pineapple production
 
 SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) - The Puerto Rican government said it is behind on deliveries of pineapples to fruit processor Procesadora Campofresco, which bought the Lotus pineapple brand from the government in 1995.
The San Juan Star on Wednesday reported Agriculture Secretary Miguel Munoz saying state-owned farms had produced 23,000 tons (20,700 metric tons) of the 27,000 tons (24,300 metric tons) promised to the company this year.
Campofresco accused the government of planting only 165 acres (66 hectares) of the 291 acres (116 hectares) that must be seeded by Nov. 30, but Munoz said the government had reduced production at Campofresco's request while the company moved equipment to another plant.
The government is still considering bids for the sale of the government's pineapple farms and hopes to reach a deal next year.
The plan is part of Gov. Pedro Rossello's efforts to privatize government enterprises including a sugar company, the telephone utility, a shipping firm and the management arm of the water utility.
 
 UNITED STATES: Kiwi to fly from JFK airport to Aguadilla, Puerto Rico
 
 NEWARK, New Jersey (AP) - Newark-based Kiwi International Airlines announced today it's adding service from Kennedy International Airport in New York starting next month.
The carrier will offer two round-trip flights a week to Aguadilla, Puerto Rico.
Kiwi already flies to the western Puerto Rican city from Newark, Orlando and Miami.
The airline will not add jets to its fleet of eight 727s, just shift planes to accommodate the new route.
 
 GUYANA: Business group urges consumers to avoid imports
 
 GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) - A business group has joined government calls for consumers to buy more locally produced goods to prevent further declines in the value of the Guyanese currency.
The Guyanese dollar has declined in value by 20 percent in recent months to a rate of 170 to one U.S. dollar, triggering fears of inflation.
On Monday, the Private Sector Commission, an umbrella organization of business groups, said reducing imports to the South American country is a key part of propping up the currency.
"All we are asking is that people buy a little more of what is manufactured locally. We have passed the stage where we can call for a restriction of imports with all the conventions we have signed to open up the economy and with globalization on the horizon," said David Yankana.
The currency has also been weakened by depressed world market prices for sugar, bauxite, gold and timber. Most of these are key Guyana exports.
 
 BAHAMAS: Stars, extravagance christen resort in Bahama
 
 PARADISE ISLAND, Bahamas (AP) - With a gold-gilded beauty queen atop an ice sculpture and Grace Jones rising from a cloud billowing smoke, celebrities christened Atlantis, billed as the biggest island resort in the world.
"The Bahamas has been catapulted to the point of dominance in the tourism business in our region," Prime Minister Hubert Ingraham said after cutting the ribbon of a dlrs 20 million, three-lane bridge to Paradise Island.
He said the dlrs 400 million hotel and its dlrs 450 million second phase was the island's largest private investment.
Michael Jackson, Stevie Wonder, Quincy Jones and his 45-piece orchestra, Bebe Winans and Natalie Cole performed Saturday night. Billionaire real estate magnate Donald Trump and media queen Oprah Winfrey mingled with guests beneath the hotel's 70-foot (21-meter) domed lobby as fireworks soared over the Atlantic Ocean.
Actress and signer Grace Jones rose from a billowing cloud of smoke as the Goddess of Atlantis, presiding over an aquatic routine performed by the U.S. synchronized swim team.
 
 GUYANA: Exxon negotiating for rights to search for oil
 
 GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) - U.S. oil company Exxon is negotiating with Guyana officials for the rights to explore for oil in an off-shore area already searched unsuccessfully by a French conglomerate.
Officials with the Guyana Geology and Mines Commission said Saturday they expect to reach an agreement within weeks with Exxon for the rights to explore an 11,000-square-mile (28,600-square-kilometer) area.
French company TOTAL unsuccessfully probed the area in 1991, but Guyana officials want to try again. The South American country is surrounded by oil-producing nations such as Venezuela, Brazil and Trinidad and Tobago.
 
 MARTINIQUE: Port blockage scuttles negotiations to end strike
 
 FORT-DE-FRANCE, Martinique (AP) - A scheduled meeting Friday morning between banana growers and striking workers fell apart because the growers' representatives refused to meet while protesters continued to block the port.
The representatives of the growers decided not to negotiate as long as the port is blocked by strikers, Louis Daniel Berthome, farmers federation president, told RFO radio Friday.
On Thursday, the workers' union proposed opening the port to allow the export of 20 containers of bananas, but growers refused the offer, citing solidarity.
"It was as if they asked us to choose among a hundred containers, and the growers refused to negotiate on that basis," said Berthome.
Meanwhile, merchants said the inability to import goods right before Christmas was increasingly hurting their businesses.
 
 PUERTO RICO: Nicaragua files suit against tobacco companies
 
 SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) - Nicaragua has filed suit against U.S. tobacco companies in federal court, modeled after the lawsuit filed by U.S. state attorneys general.
The suit, filed Thursday in the U.S. District Court in the U.S. commonwealth of Puerto Rico, names several cigarette companies including Philip Morris, Liggett Group and British American Tobacco.
Guatemala, represented by the same Houston law firm that represents Nicaragua, has filed a similar suit and a Brazilian official said Thursday his country is also considering legal action.
"This is very similar to cases filed by the U.S. attorneys general and we anticipate using a number of documents used throughout the United States in (related) litigation matters and many of the witnesses we anticipate using at trial are in U.S. jurisdiction," said lawyer D'Lisa Simmons of the Houston-based law firm of Fleming, Hovenkamp and Grayson, which is representing Nicaragua and Guatemala.
 
 TRINIDAD: Official criticizes hike in cement prices
 
 PORT OF SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) - An 18 percent price increase by the country's sole supplier of cement was criticized by Minister of Trade and Industry Mervyn Assam as "scandalous."
In a radio interview broadcast Thursday, Assam joined others in criticizing Trinidad Cement Ltd. for the price hike. The company's chief executive officer Rollin Bertrand said the increase was necessary to pay greater dividends to shareholders.
Assam called the increase "totally and completely inimical to the interests of Trinidad and Tobago." TRINIDAD: Repeal of registration fees boosts used car imports
PORT OF SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) - Dealers who sell used cars imported from other countries have reported huge sales increases since a 50 percent hike in registration fees was repealed by the government a week ago.
In October, Finance Minister Brian Kuei Tung announced an increase in the registration fee for imported used cars. For those with engine displacement up to 1599cc the fee rose from dlrs 20,000 TT (dlrs 3,250 US) to dlrs 30,000 TT (dlrs 4,875 US).
On Dec. 4, the government repealed the increase, causing an instant boom in sales, dealers said.
 
 BARBADOS: Barbados and Venezuela sign economic pact
 
 BRIDGETOWN, Barbados (AP) - Barbados and Venezuela signed a taxation agreement Friday which Barbados Foreign Minister Billie Miller said could result in greater trade and investment between the countries.
Miller said the agreement is part of Barbados' resolve to work toward further economic integration in the Caribbean and greater economic ties with Latin America.
"This agreement … will allow our business persons to plan their activities between the two countries more effectively and securely and will further the process of economic integration in our region," said Miller.
Foreign Minister Angel Burelli signed the agreement for Venezuela.
 Load-Date: December 17, 1998

 

End of Document
