

With AOL Time Warner here to stay, media feel the urge to integrate; The Week's Business feature
December 15, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 852 words
Byline: By SETH SUTEL, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Ground was broken in New York's Columbus Circle area a month ago for a much-anticipated addition to the Manhattan skyline. But at the time it wasn't clear whether the new building's occupant would be called Time Warner Inc. or AOL Time Warner Inc.
Now, after 11 months of regulatory wrangling, the uncertainty is gone. With Thursday's approval by the Federal Trade Commission of America Online Inc.'s $111 billion acquisition of Time Warner, the largest media deal of all time is all but sure to be consummated.
What's less certain is how the rest of the media industry is going to respond to this new, burly giant in their midst. With 26 million online subscribers and an array of assets that includes CNN and HBO, Time, Fortune and People magazines and the Warner Bros. movie studio, the new AOL Time Warner will be not only the largest media company on the planet but also the best equipped for the digital age.
Scary for its competitors? You bet. Ever since the landmark deal was announced in the opening days of 2000, several other deals have either been announced or completed that are based on the same premise: It is no longer sufficient for a media company to produce good entertainment. It must also have a significant distribution system, preferably one that can be upgraded to handle next-generation media services like interactive television.
Viacom Inc., owner of the Paramount movie studio, MTV and Simon & Schuster, completed its acquisition of CBS Corp. this year, which included not only the television network but also a huge outdoor advertising company a major radio station group, Infinity Broadcasting.
Universal Studios owner Seagram Co. was acquired this summer by Vivendi, a French pay-TV and online media conglomerate; special-interest magazine publisher Primedia Inc. purchased About.com, a similarly oriented Web site; and even Bertelsmann, the hulking German media empire, took a major step into the unknown this fall by teaming up with Napster, the renegade online music distributor.
Now that AOL Time Warner is sure to take its place at the top of the media heap, there is even more pressure on other companies to get serious about broadening out into new distribution channels.
"When media companies want to vertically integrate with a particular distribution platform, that's a pretty strong signal," said Mark Snowden, a senior research analyst at Gartner, a consulting group based in Stamford, Conn. "What it means is that the Internet is just as important as TV. Everybody else is going to be looking for other distribution platforms."
That said, finding another combination like AOL and Time Warner, each of which dominated their respective field, is not going to happen any time soon. No other media company - not Viacom, Walt Disney Co., News Corp. or Sony Corp. - has the breadth of Time Warner, and no other online company has the size or clout of AOL.
The next distribution company that many are looking to see in a merger is DirecTV, a satellite broadcasting service under Hughes Electronics, a unit of General Motors Corp. News Corp., which owns the Fox TV network and the 20th Century Fox Hollywood studio, is seen as the most interested party since DirecTV's U.S. satellite footprint would fill a gaping hole in Rupert Murdoch's otherwise extensive global satellite network.
An ironic media linkup now being bandied about is the possible acquisition of Yahoo! Inc. by Disney. A year ago, rumors had Yahoo buying Disney. Yahoo was then worth three times as much as Disney then; now, the reverse is true.
Tom Rogers, the Primedia chairman who engineered the About.com deal, said he welcomes the shakeout in New Media stocks this year as an opportunity for print and broadcast companies to broaden their horizons, especially with acquisitions.
"I think it's just the time for the traditional media world to be more aggressive, as the Internet-only model is proving itself to be unviable," said Rogers, a former senior executive at NBC.
Michael Kupinski, a media analyst at A.G. Edwards & Sons, a St. Louis-based brokerage, said consolidation of TV stations and newspaper ownership could be a major theme to watch in the coming year, especially if incoming president George W. Bush follows through on suggestions that he loosen rules barring one company from owning both a TV broadcaster and a newspaper in the same city.
That rule change could help companies such as Texas-based Belo Corp., which already own both broadcasters as well as broadsheets, to further build up their concentrations of media properties and use them to promote and feed material to their own online outlets. Other newspaper publishers such as Gannett Co., Tribune Co., E.W. Scripps Co. and The New York Times Co. all have interests in television already, and many are looking to expand them.
"You're going to see much more integration in this area. You'll see more news content from newspapers on TV, and more video content on the Internet," Kupinski said. That kind of pressure for consolidation is sure to make media "a very competitive environment" over the next year, he said.
 
End adv for weekend editions
 
 Load-Date: December 18, 2000

 

End of Document
