

With the election soon, who's the candidate for Italian president?
The Associated Press
May 10, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 500 words
Byline: DENNIS REDMONT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME
Body




Voting starts this week for Italy's president, but there are no formal candidates and whoever wins is unlikely to complete the seven-year mandate.
A total of 1,010 electors - from the Senate, the Chamber of Deputies as well as regional representatives - begin the first round of voting on Thursday. During the first three rounds, a two-thirds majority is needed for victory. In subsequent rounds, 50 percent plus one vote are needed to clinch election.
Only one of Italy's nine postwar presidents, Francesco Cossiga, a former Christian Democrat premier, was elected on the first ballot.
It took 10 days and 16 ballots for Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, the 80-year-old incumbent, to win election in 1992 - and only after a Sicilian highway bombing killed Italy's top Mafia-fighter, shocking the politicians into ending their squabbling and lining up behind Scalfaro.
According to the constitution, any Italian over 50 years of age is eligible to serve as president, a largely ceremonial post whose holder sometimes ends up serving as a referee among the nearly 50 fractious political parties in the current parliament.
This time, Treasury and Budget Minister Carlo Azeglio Ciampi and two former Christian Democrats, Senate President Nicola Mancino and Interior Minister Rosa Russo Jervolino, are most frequently mentioned for the post. But no one is calling anyone a front-runner since many times candidates become trial balloons overnight.
Italy's current center-left government, headed by ex-Communist Massimo D'Alema with a razor-thin Parliament majority, has not posted a candidate.
Opposition leader Silvio Berlusconi, the media tycoon and former conservative premier, has urged the left to submit a name with broad parliamentary backing to avoid a protracted vote.
Chamber of Deputies president Luciano Violante has set a June date for a new attempt by the legislature at constitutional changes that would switch presidential elections to a popular vote.
"The new president will have the moral obligation to resign once these reforms are passed. He would be delegitimized, if he didn't," Violante said recently.
The minister for constitutional reform, former Socialist Premier Giuliano Amato, also declared it inconceivable the new president would complete the seven-year term. Amato himself is viewed as a compromise candidate.
Reformers suffered a defeat last April 18 when only 49.6 percent of Italy's registered voters - just short of the 50 percent plus one vote required quorum - bothered to turn out for a referendum that called for the elimination of proportional representation in the Chamber of Deputies.
As things stand now, one quarter of the seats are filled by proportional representation.
Nevertheless, 21 million Italians did vote for new rules, while 3 million turned out to defend the status quo, which has given Italy 56 governments since World War II, all based on shaky coalitions.
Scalfaro, another former Christian Democrat, has been mentioned as a stopgap candidate who would push for reforms.
 Load-Date: May 10, 1999

 

End of Document
