

World ringing in the new, but lot of the bad old lingers
The Associated Press
December 27, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1376 words
Byline: By The Associated Pres
Body




In a new year, a new century, a new millennium, the global landscape may take on a new look in 2000. But a world full of trouble spots can never truly ring out the old.
In the coming year, Israelis and Arabs may cross a threshold toward lasting peace. Northern Ireland's "men of violence" may lay down their arms for good. The tottering Boris Yeltsin will give way to what many Russians hope will be a stabler leadership in the Kremlin.
But in Chechnya, in Africa, in the Taiwan Strait, along Korea's 38th parallel, and elsewhere around the globe, the new century inherits a legacy of war or the threat of war from the old, a legacy the peacemaker-in-chief hopes mankind will work to disown.
"The 20th century has been the most murderous in human history," U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan said as the century neared its end. "We must make sure the 21st is more peaceful, and more humane."
The Associated Press asked some of its correspondents around the world to assess the prospects for 2000. Here are their reports:
---
 
Middle East
 
By JOCELYN NOVECK
JERUSALEM - The new year dawns with a crucial deadline looming for Israel and the Palestinians.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat have set a February target to reach the broad outlines of a final peace treaty, and are aiming at September for the final accord itself.
The deadlines seem optimistic to all. To be decided are the most difficult issues dividing the two sides, among them the ultimate borders of a future Palestinian state, the fate of Palestinian refugees and the status of Jerusalem.
But for the moment, the Arab-Israeli peace process has been jump-started by the sudden progress between Israel and Syria. In a genuine breakthrough, the two foes resumed talks Dec. 15 in Washington after a nearly four-year stalemate.
The dramatic development means peace between the two foes could come in 2000. And it also gives credence to Barak's pledge to pull Israeli troops out of southern Lebanon by July. Syria is the main power broker in Lebanon.
Succession is the question in several Arab states.
Syrian President Hafez Assad is widely believed to be grooming his son Bashar to take over, though his plans may be challenged by other members of the clan or by military or political leaders.
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak's trip to France in late 1999 for medical treatment raised questions about his health and his country's political future. Mubarak, 71, has led Egypt since 1981 and has no vice president or other apparent heir.
In Saudi Arabia, 75-year-old King Fahd spends much of his time out of the country after suffering a stroke and has already handed over day-to-day control to Crown Prince Abdullah, himself in his 70s.
Throughout the region, political thinkers are calling for a shift to democracy. But there is little sign the ruling elites are prepared to give up control.
---
 
Russia and CIS
 
By BARRY RENFREW
MOSCOW - Many Russians hope their unhappy country will get a new chance when President Boris Yeltsin steps down in 2000 after dominating Russia during a decade of upheaval and missed opportunities.
Despite amassing vast power, Yeltsin failed to carry out many of the democratic and market reforms he championed, and most Russians want new, effective leadership to halt decades of economic and social decline.
Everything will center on June elections, for which Russia's political factions are already preparing. Yeltsin's successor is likely to have similar pro-democratic, pro-market policies and the goal of making Russia a world power - something that will worry the West, although there is little chance of another Cold War.
After the success of centrists in the Dec. 19 parliamentary elections, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin has an early lead in the presidential race - but he faces many challenges, including keeping the support of Yeltsin, who has a history of dismissing popular subordinates. The war in Chechnya, which boosted Putin's fortunes, is likely to drag on and could work against him if there is no clear-cut victory.
The presidential election will be a major step in cementing democracy. Although many Russians have not seen material benefits from post-Soviet reforms, they seem unwilling to return to the country's autocratic past.
Russia, Ukraine and other parts of the former Soviet Union are likely to go on staggering from one crisis to another. Their economies are in shambles and most governments appear incapable of turning things around. Corruption and crime is rampant in many countries.
Most of the Central Asian nations are sinking into authoritarian, one-party rule, and Belarus has revived Soviet-style political and economic controls.
---
 
Asia
 
By ELAINE KURTENBACH
BEIJING - Asian nations begin the 21st century buoyed by the prospects of recovery as their battered financial markets and industries gradually recuperate from the region's economic crisis.
The return to rapid growth depends on continuing reforms to establish stronger, less corrupt financial and political systems. Separatist violence in Indonesia, labor unrest in China and chronic food and fuel shortages in North Korea remain potentially destabilizing factors.
With unemployment at close to a record high and wages still falling in recession-bound Japan, there are signs that government spending is bringing a rebound in confidence and consumer demand. Confidence in Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi's economic policies will be a key factor in elections due by autumn.
Other Asian countries expect steadier improvement, with stronger exports and healthier financial markets aiding growth in the Philippines, South Korea, Malaysia and Thailand.
China's economy has been fortified by heavy state spending and a modest recovery in exports, but the government is struggling to keep a lid on protests by millions of workers left unemployed by restructuring of inefficient state industries.
Malaysian President Mahathir Mohamad, recently elected to his fifth term, will be trying hard to woo back many of the majority Malays who expressed disapproval of his rule by backing orthodox Islamic groups. Thai Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai is expected to try to delay parliamentary elections as long as possible to take advantage of the improved economy.
Tensions between North and South Korea have eased, but remain volatile between China and Taiwan, which holds a presidential election in March. India has a watchful eye on the new military regime in rival Pakistan.
---
 
Europe
 
By JEFFREY ULBRICH
BRUSSELS, Belgium - The European Union marches into 2000 with a mandate to get into defense and a will to expand early in the decade to include many of western Europe's former enemies to the east.
As part of its new common foreign and security policy, the 15-nation EU has pledged to develop its own military capability, beginning with a rapid reaction force eventually able to deploy up to 60,000 soldiers on short notice. This, they say, is for crises in which the United States does not want to get involved through NATO.
At the same time, negotiations press ahead to allow Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Estonia and Cyprus into the EU, while a number of other countries continue their candidacies, but on a slower track.
Peace should deepen its roots in one corner of Europe. The Irish Republican Army and other paramilitary groups in Northern Ireland are in negotiations to surrender their arms by May under the British province's 1998 peace accord.
Sitting like painful boils on the rump of Europe's peace and prosperity are Kosovo and Bosnia, leftover problems from the 1990s that show no sign of going away soon.
NATO will reduce its forces in Bosnia from 34,000 to 19,000, but no one pretends peace and stability are at hand. There is no light at the end of the tunnel in Kosovo, either, where 50,000 NATO-led soldiers and United Nations administrators struggle to end violence spawned by ethnic hatred.
Yugoslavia remains a pariah state, with President Slobodan Milosevic wanted for trial by an international war crimes tribunal.
Albania, Romania and Bulgaria are mired in economic problems, a legacy of their communist past and subsequent mismanagement. While Romanians stage protest demonstrations in growing numbers, Bulgaria is showing signs of a modest turnaround.
---
 
MORE
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY313-315 of Dec. 27
 Load-Date: January 3, 2000

 

End of Document
