

2 killed in violence on the outskirts of Somalia's capital
The Associated Press
May 16, 2006 Tuesday 11:53 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 314 words
Dateline: MOGADISHU Somalia
Body




Fighting between Islamic militias and rival secular fighters killed two people on the outskirts of the Somali capital on Tuesday, despite a weekend cease-fire ending days of bloodshed in the capital.
The U.N. Security Council expressed concern about the violence, which has killed at least 142 people in Somalia over the last several days.
The council demanded that the warring factions Islamic militias and rival secular fighters allow for the resumption of aid work and the collection of dead bodies in Mogadishu, the shattered country's capital.
The latest fighting was between units of the radical Islamic Court Union and a militia loyal to Mohamed Dheere, a secular alliance leader who was not involved in the Mogadishu cease-fire. Each side accused the other of instigating the attack.
Despite the fighting, the cease-fire in the capital generally appeared to be holding for a second day Tuesday as thousands of people who fled their homes during more than a week of violence began to return.
Somalia has had no effective central government since 1991. A U.N-backed interim government has tried to assert control from Baidoa, 150 miles west of Mogadishu, because the capital is considered unsafe.
The Islamic fundamentalists have portrayed themselves as the force capable of bringing order to the Horn of Africa country. They have built up their forces as part of a campaign to install an Islamic government in Somalia and have established a system of courts. The secular alliance accuses the Islamists of having ties to al-Qaida, while the Islamic group says the warlords are puppets of the United States.
The Security Council reiterated its backing for Somalia's transitional government and urged all sides to "return to the path of dialogue and reconciliation." It urged U.N. member nations to enforce a 1992 arms embargo and said it would consider how to strengthen the restrictions.
 Load-Date: May 17, 2006

 

End of Document
