

2 men face retrial over the failed plot to bomb London's transit system in 2005
The Associated Press
July 11, 2007 Wednesday 10:02 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 623 words
Byline: By JILL LAWLESS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




Prosecutors on Wednesday said two men will face retrial over a failed plot to bomb London's transit system in 2005, two weeks after suicide bombers killed 52 commuters in the city.
Prosecution lawyer Nigel Sweeney told a London court that Manfo Kwaku Asiedu, 34, and Adel Yahya, 24, must be retried after a jury at their first trial failed to reach a verdict.
Four other men were convicted of the plot and face possible sentences of up to life in prison. Sky News reported Wednesday that the four were sentenced to life in prison.
A jury on Monday found Muktar Said Ibrahim, 29; Yassin Omar, 26; Ramzi Mohammed, 25; and Hussain Osman, 28, guilty of conspiracy to murder in an al-Qaida-inspired plot to detonate explosives-filled knapsacks on three subway trains and a bus. Prosecutors said the attacks were a deliberate mirror image of the July 7, 2005, transit bombings, though the planning started long before.
Judge Adrian Fulford dismissed the jury on Tuesday after they said they could not agree on a verdict for Asiedu and Yahya.
All six defendants denied the charges, saying the devices were duds and their actions a protest against the Iraq war. But police and prosecutors said scientific tests proved the bombs were all viable. They do not know why they did not work.
Deputy Assistant Commissioner Peter Clarke, the Metropolitan Police anti-terrorism chief, said the four convicted plotters "set out to replicate the horrors that had been inflicted on Londoners on July 7, 2005."
"The convictions show that the jury rejected the blatant, indeed ridiculous, lies told by these defendants in a futile attempt to escape justice," he said.
During the six-month trial, prosecutors said Asiedu lost his nerve and abandoned his device in a London park. The device was shown to the jury as evidence during the trial.
Yahya left Britain for Ethiopia several weeks before the attacks.
During the trial, Asiedu turned on the others and claimed Ibrahim, the gang's self-proclaimed leader, had wanted the attacks "to be bigger and better" than the July 7 bombs.
The four convicted men attempted to detonate explosives-laden backpacks on three subway trains and a bus, as in the July 7, 2005, attacks. The devices made from a volatile mix of hydrogen peroxide and flour failed to explode, and no one was injured.
Unlike three of the four July 7 bombers, who were British-born, those in the July 21 plot had come to Britain as youths from places like Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia. Some had become British citizens, while others had refugee status.
Police believe the planning for the attack started after Ibrahim returned to Britain from a trip to Pakistan in March 2005. He was in that country at the same time as two of the July 7 bombers Shezhad Tanweer and Mohammed Sidique Khan but officials do not know if they ever met.
The judge said he would consider the potential links between the two sets of bombers while he was deciding on the sentences.
They believe the transit system was not the group's original target, but was chosen following the successful attacks two weeks earlier. The original target is unknown.
The failed attack sparked a huge police manhunt for the would-be suicide bombers. Much of the prosecution's case was based on eyewitness testimony and closed-circuit television footage from the targeted subway cars and bus.
Following the men's arrests, police acknowledged they had video evidence of several of the suspects at a training camp in the northern English countryside taken a year before the attacks but had failed to identify them.
Ibrahim also had been arrested and charged over a disturbance while he was distributing extremist Islamic pamphlets, but was nonetheless allowed to travel to Pakistan months before the failed attacks.
 Load-Date: July 12, 2007

 

End of Document
