

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
March 29, 2007 Thursday 9:25 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1219 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CUBA: U.S. remains top food source for island, despite 45-year-old trade embargo
HAVANA (AP) Since 2003, one country has been the main supplier of food to Fidel Castro's Cuba: the United States.
Although many Americans think their government's 45-year-old embargo blocks all trade with the communist government, the United States is the top supplier of food and agricultural products to Cuba. In fact, many Cubans depend on rations grown in Arkansas and North Dakota for their rice and beans.
Since December 1999, governors, senators and congressmen from at least 28 U.S. states have visited Cuba, most to talk trade. They keep coming: Nebraska Gov. Dave Heineman was flying in Sunday with a farm delegation. Gov. C.L. "Butch" Otter of Idaho plans a visit next month.
Washington's sanctions choke off most trade with Cuba, but a law passed by Congress in 2000 authorized cash-only purchases of U.S. food and agricultural products and was cheered by major U.S. farm firms like Archer Daniels Midland Co. interested in the untapped Cuban market.
Cuba refused to import one grain of rice for more than a year because of a row over financing, but finally agreed to take advantage of the law after Hurricane Michelle in November 2001 cut into its food stocks.
Since then, experts say Cuba has paid more than US$1.5 billion (€1.1 billion) for American food and agricultural products.
PUERTO RICO: B. Braun to shutter U.S. territory plant, shift production
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) German medical device maker B. Braun Melsungen AG has announced it will close its plant in Puerto Rico and relocate production to other factories.
After 33 years of operating in the U.S. Caribbean territory, B. Braun of Puerto Rico Inc. will phase out production in the southwestern town of Sabana Grande and eliminate 400 jobs by the end of the year, plant general manager Felipe Sandoval said in a statement.
Roughly 80 positions will be cut by the end of this month.
Sandoval said the company aims to save money by consolidating operations, and will shift the plant's production to factories in the Dominican Republic, Italy, Brazil, and Pennsylvania.
GRENADA: Last defendants plead guilty in offshore bank scam
PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) The last two defendants in a Grenada-based multimillion-dollar offshore bank and insurance scam have changed their pleas to guilty in U.S District Court, federal prosecutors say.
Sentencing will be June 11 for Douglas Ferguson, 74, who pleaded guilty March 19 to conspiracy to launder money, and Laurent Barnabe, also known as Larry Barnabe, who changed his plea late Tuesday, Assistant U.S. Attorney Claire Fay told The Associated Press.
The case entwined the Caribbean offshore haven of Grenada, a castle in Uganda, claims of a four-pound-plus ruby embedded in a statue, and a shootout in Africa.
The defendants were officers and directors of the First International Bank of Grenada and its subsidiaries. Ferguson's role was as head of a sham offshore insurer tied to the bank. Losses to investors are estimated as high as US$206 million (€154 million).
The bank collapsed in 2000.
The Grenada operation "wasn't really a bank, and they basically had no ability to function as a bank," Fay said.
CUBA: Cuba shows off oil, natural gas works to foreign visitors in bid to attract investment
SANTA CRUZ DEL NORTE, Cuba (AP) Cuban oil officials have taken foreign geologists and petroleum experts on a tour of the island's oil and natural gas works in hopes of sparking more international interest in investment.
Attendees at an earth sciences conference were taken by state oil company Cuba Petroleos to several extraction facilities in a deposit-rich strip along the northern part of the island, including the US$200 million US$206 million (€150 million) Cuban-Canadian ENERGAS natural gas plant in an area called Boca de Jaruco.
About 95 percent of Cuba's daily production of 85,000 barrels of petroleum and 120 million cubic feet (3.4 million cubic meters) of natural gas comes from the region along the north coast.
Cuban officials are betting on even richer deposits offshore, where foreign companies are already engaged in exploratory drilling in partnership with the communist government.
The U.S. Geological Survey estimates that the North Cuba Basin holds 4.6 billion to 9.3 billion barrels of crude, along with 9.8 trillion cubic feet (280 billion cubic meters) to 21.8 trillion cubic feet (620 billion cubic meters) of natural gas.
GUYANA: Cargo of possibly contaminated poultry feed from France tested for salmonella
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Health authorities are testing a shipment of poultry feed from France that may be tainted with salmonella, the Guyana government says.
Agriculture Minister Robert Persaud said French officials had warned the shipment of roughly 815 metric tons (900 tons) of soy-based feed shipped to the South American country might be contaminated.
The salmonella bacteria can cause diarrhea, fever, dehydration, abdominal pain and vomiting. Serious cases can result in death.
Persaud said the feed, which arrived in Georgetown's port last week, should not have been offloaded from the Bahamas-registered ship.
On Monday, High Court Judge James Bovell-Drakes ordered the feed be stored in the importer's warehouse while health authorities test it.
SURINAME: Chinese delegation grants US$2.4 million in aid
PARAMARIBO, Suriname (AP) Suriname received US$2.4 million (€1.8 million) in aid from China for economic development, officials say.
Li Changchun, a senior member of China's ruling Communist Party, led a 50-member delegation of Chinese public and private sector officials that arrived Tuesday in Paramaribo, the capital of this South American country.
President Ronald Venetiaan did not disclose what the government planned to do with the money.
Tens of thousands of Chinese have immigrated to Suriname since the mid-1800s. In recent years, the Asian giant has given military and health aid and funded the construction of the Foreign Ministry's main office.
CUBA: Havana Club says it sold record 2.6 million cases in 2006
HAVANA (AP) Cuba's Havana Club rum brand sold a record 2.6 million cases last year, fueled by a 30 percent sales surge in the island's domestic market, according to company officials.
Enrique Noste, Havana Club's director of marketing for Cuba, said the company's rums now rank 34th out of the world's 100 top-selling spirits. He did not provide overall sales figures for 2005, but said the company topped the 2 million-case mark for the first time in 2004, while selling barely 1 million in 1998 and just 460,000 in 1994.
Havana Club sells more rum in Cuba than anywhere else. Its sales on the island reached 960,000 cases in 2006 and will top a million this year, said Noste, who said the country's top-selling spirit has long been cheap varieties of white rum.
"It's a sector that is very popular with the population," he said. "Undoubtedly, it's a type of drink that has been a big hit with the Cuban people and it's the base of growth for us. We have had growth in other sectors, but it's the strongest."
The Cuban government has produced rum under the Havana Club label since 1960 and it has been available worldwide since 1993, when it partnered with the French beverage company Pernod Ricard SA.
Italy is the brand's top overseas market, followed by Germany, Spain and France.
 Load-Date: March 30, 2007

 

End of Document
