

Aid agencies hire fighters to guard the food shipments hungry Somalis depend on
The Associated Press
December 12, 2007 Wednesday 4:46 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 608 words
Byline: By KHALED KAZZIHA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MERKA Somalia
Body




On the white sands of a Somali beach, Mahmoud Farah watches as aid workers struggle through the waves to unload sacks of desperately needed grain before the tide comes in.
Guns-for-hire like Farah are an indispensable part of aid operations in the chaos of Somali's civil war.
"Somalia is one of the worst, if not the worst, environment for humanitarian agencies to operate in the world," said World Food Program spokesman Peter Smerdon.
He said the United Nations doesn't hire gunmen itself. Instead, security for food aid rests with local contractors, who may safeguard the shipments of food from rapacious clan militias however they choose.
"When food is being transported, local contractors often have to place a bond on the value of the goods being transported so that if it is looted or stolen they lose money," Smerdon said.
Protecting those shipments in Somalia, a failed state that has not had a functioning government since 1991, means hiring lots of gunmen whatever their history.
A former waiter, Farah first picked up a gun in 1991, when Somalia was imploding after the fall of dictator Mohamed Siad Barre. The restaurant owners he worked for had fled the city as rival warlords battled each other in the streets of the capital. So the lean, grizzled Farah joined one of their factions.
"The gun gave me power, even though the war was the worst time of my life," he says, the sun glinting off the lines of rifle cartridges slung across his skinny chest. "Many of my friends were killed. Every death broke my heart, but when my brother was killed by a stray bullet, that broke me."
After his brother's death, his uncle convinced him that fighting with a militia that was devastating the city and looting food was dishonorable. The uncle employed him as a bodyguard one of Somalia's few growth industries until he found work with the United Nations last year.
"We have the choice of working in Somalia with guards or not working at all," said Pedram Yazdi, a spokesman for the International Committee of the Red Cross. "There are not regular security forces, and we don't want to be an easy target."
There is no shortage of fighters for hire. The arid Horn of Africa nation is one of the poorest in the world, but it is flooded with weapons. The shaky transitional government is battling an Islamist insurgency as clan-based violence continues.
One Islamic extremist group, some of whose leaders are on a U.S. government list of wanted terrorists, briefly took power in the capital and parts of the south last year before Ethiopian troops supporting the transitional government forced them out. The Islamic group's remnants have since waged an Iraq-style insurgency against the government and its Ethiopian backers. Now the United Nations says Eritrea, Ethiopia's archenemy, is helping the insurgents.
According to a recent human rights report, fighting in the capital of Mogadishu has killed 6,000 people this year, and forced 600,000 people to flee their homes.
The displaced desperately need food aid, says Smerdon, but the insecurity means the agency struggles to get food to all the civilians who need it.
"Roadblocks and piracy are making it very difficult to reach people in need," Smerdon said.
Having lived through the chaos of the militias and the Islamic victory, Farah was among the first wave of refugees to leave the city when the Ethiopians came in.
"I don't carry the gun for political reasons. I carry it for my bread," said Farah, a father of four, watching hungry Somalis line up in the seaside town of Merka for a share of 3,600 tons of World Food Program rations that have just arrived by ship. "If my bread is attacked I will fight."
 Load-Date: December 13, 2007

 

End of Document
