

Al-Zarqawi's successor: A new face at the top of al-Qaida in Iraq
The Associated Press
June 16, 2006 Friday 2:49 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 885 words
Byline: By KIM GAMEL
Dateline: BAGHDAD Iraq
Body




The U.S. military presented the new face of al-Qaida in Iraq on Thursday, displaying a photograph of a bearded man in a traditional white Arab headdress and saying he was taking over after the death of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi.
The new leader is Abu Ayyub al-Masri, an Afghanistan-trained explosives expert with links to Osama bin Laden's top deputy, said Maj. Gen. William Caldwell.
He also is the man behind the nom de guerre made public by al-Qaida in Iraq after al-Zarqawi was killed last week in an U.S. airstrike on his safe house outside of Baghdad, the military spokesman said.
However, U.S. National Security Adviser Stephen Hadley said it's not certain that al-Masri is al-Zarqawi's successor.
"That's clearly one of the leading names, but we're going to need a little bit of time to sort out and they're clearly needing a little time to sort out where they go after what is clearly a big blow to al-Qaida," Hadley said at the White House.
Caldwell said al-Masri was the man identified in an Internet posting by al-Qaida that said Abu Hamza al-Muhajer was al-Zarqawi's successor. The name means "emigrant" in Arabic and suggested he was not an Iraqi.
According to the U.S. military, Al-Masri was a founding member of al-Qaida in Iraq. After meeting the Jordanian-born al-Zarqawi in Afghanistan, he followed him to Iraq to help set up the terror cell in 2003.
Even before terror leader's death, the Bush administration posted a $200,000 bounty on al-Masri because of his level of leadership within al-Qaida, Caldwell said.
Citing recently declassified documents, he said al-Masri has been a terrorist since 1982, "beginning with his involvement in the Egyptian Islamic Jihad," which was led by Ayman al-Zawahri, bin Laden's top deputy.
Going by that chronology, the photograph the military presented showing a young man with a sparse mustache and a trimmed goatee appeared to be at least several years old.
The beard as well as the headdress white cloth with a black coil are more often associated with men from the Gulf states than Egypt, where Western-style clothing is common, such headdresses are generally not used, and beards fuller when worn.
Caldwell said the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency provided the picture, adding: "Everything we had was classified just 24 hours ago associated with this gentleman this terrorist."
Yet Islamist watchers in Egypt and abroad said they had never heard of al-Masri whose name means "the Egyptian" and expressed skepticism about U.S. claims that he was poised to become Iraq's new terror leader.
"His codename doesn't ring a bell for me; he's not one of the wanted Jihadis in Egypt," said Egyptian lawyer Montasser el-Zayat, who was imprisoned with al-Qaida No. 2 al-Zawahri from 1981-84.
In an indication of the confusion surrounding the identity of the group's new leader, the U.S. first announced al-Masri's name shortly after the Jordanian-born al-Zarqawi was killed June 7. But al-Qaida in Iraq later identified its new leader as al-Muhajer.
The new leader issued a Web statement Tuesday vowing to avenge al-Zarqawi's death and threatening horrific attacks "in the coming days."
"Don't be overcome with joy about killing our sheik Abu Musab (al-Zarqawi), God bless his soul, because he has left lions behind him," the statement said.
Citing recently declassified information, Caldwell said the military believes al-Masri first went to Afghanistan in 1999 to receive training and lecture on Islam to other militants. There he became an expert in building roadside bombs, skills he used in Fallujah and Baghdad.
He trained with al-Zarqawi at the al-Farouq camp in Afghanistan and they began to collaborate in Iraq. Raids in April and May in southern Baghdad recovered material confirming his high-level involvement in moving foreign fighters from Syria to Iraq, Caldwell said.
However, Yasser al-Sirri, an Egyptian who runs the Islamic Observation Center in London, said information supplied by al-Qaida in announcing the new leader pointed to another man: Abdullah bin Rashid al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Mujahedeen Shura Council five allied groups in the Sunni Arab-dominated insurgency.
"I'm 95 percent sure that this al-Masri doesn't exist," al-Sirri said, adding that the group could be trying to cover up the nationality of its new leader to promote a broader Islamic identity.
"Al-Qaida does not want to show that he is an Iraqi because they work under the Islamic banner ... and they seek international jihad," al-Sirri said.
Caldwell acknowledged that al-Masri's ability to exert leadership over al-Qaida cells remained unclear and said other "al-Qaida senior leadership members and Sunni terrorists" could try to take over the operations.
He pointed to al-Baghdadi along with Abu Abdul-Rahman al-Iraqi, whom al-Qaida in Iraq statements have identified as the group's deputy. Al-Iraqi was believed to have been killed in the airstrike along with al-Zarqawi.
Mustafa Alani, a terror expert at the Gulf Research Center, said the ultimate call for the new leader would be made by bin Laden or al-Zawahri, believed to be hiding in the rugged border area between Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Associated Press writer Kim Gamel is in Baghdad. Willa Thayer contributed to this report from Cairo, Egypt. Maamoun Youssef and Nadia Abou el-Magd in Cairo also contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: June 16, 2006

 

End of Document
