

Amid lull in violence, Kenyan's seek the safety of ethnic numbers
The Associated Press
February 17, 2008 Sunday 7:20 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 939 words
Byline: By MATTHEW ROSENBERG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NAIVASHA Kenya
Body




As the bus slows for a police checkpoint, hawkers rush up pushing ears of corn, sodas and fried treats toward the open windows.
The journey is long, the passengers hungry and thirsty. But nobody's buying. Instead they hurriedly jam the windows shut. They are of the Luo tribe, and this is Kikuyu territory.
"We are among our enemies. It can be dangerous to be eating these foods," says Daniel Ochieng Adongo. "There could be poisoning."
With the violence sparked by a deeply flawed election tapering off, a quieter tragedy is unfolding in Kenya. The tribes that lived together peacefully for decades are peeling off in search of safety in ethnic numbers. A bus ride with 68 fleeing Luos provides a ground's-eye view of a migration that could permanently fracture the country's ethnic map.
More than 1,000 people died and some 600,000 were forced from their homes in the strife that followed the December election in which President Mwai Kibaki, a Kikuyu, was declared the victor over Raila Odinga, a Luo, even though most local and foreign observers said it was rigged.
The fear and enmity sown by the violence is evident during much of the 10-hour bus ride with the refugees. They are fleeing their homes in Nairobi, the capital in the Kikuyu-dominated central highlands, for western Kenya, their Luo heartland.
"It is like we are living in two countries," Adongo says as the bus pulls away from the police checkpoint. "We are leaving their country for our country."
The first half of the trip requires an escort of soldiers in jeeps and trucks because it passes through Kikuyu areas such as Naivasha, a town that in better days attracted hordes of tourists eager to see lions, wildebeest and other animals. Angelina Jolie even filmed part of her Tomb Raider franchise amid the arching rock formations in a nearby national park.
But that was then. Last week, members of a feared Kikuyu gang called Mungiki were setting up roadblocks in town, looking for Luos and members of other ethnic groups that supported Odinga.
Most of the bus passengers were living in Thika, a relatively prosperous town on Nairobi's edge. Adongo, a rangy, impassive-looking man of 35, was a mechanic who managed send a little money home to poor relatives in western Kenya every week.
In the election, Adongo, like most Luos, supported Odinga. When Kibaki was declared the winner, years of resentment against the Kikuyu's domination of the country exploded. Luos and other tribes tied to the opposition chased Kikuyus from western Kenya, burning their homes, looting their shops and killing many.
Kikuyus were fast to extract revenge on Luos in their midst. In a predominantly Luo part of Thika, a mob showed up and told the residents to leave or die. So Adongo and a few thousand others took what they could carry and fled to a camp on Nairobi's outskirts, many leaving homes they had grown up in.
That was about a month ago. With the roads now clear, a church group is giving Luos free bus rides to western Kenya.
Once luxury coaches, the buses are ragged from years of grinding down Kenya's rutted roads. The seats sag, windows are cracked, wooden planks cover holes in the floor and the air brakes wheeze asthmatically.
Luos pile in with bundles of clothes, boxes of trinkets and pictures tied with string, and sacks of flour and rice.
Some will stay with relatives out west, others will have nowhere to shelter.
The convoy joins its army escort on the road out of Nairobi as it starts its 150-mile journey in the verdant highlands where sheep and goats graze next to vegetable plots. Soon, the bus descends to the dusty savannah of the Rift Valley, passing occasional herds of zebra.
Along the way, it overtakes run-down cargo trucks crammed with other fleeing Luos and their furniture, clothes, goats, chickens. The passengers stare in silence when driving by burned out homes, which they assume belonged to Luos.
Hours later, as the bus barrels past tea plantations, safely out of Kikuyu territory and now in hills dominated by ethnic groups aligned with the opposition, they pass more burned-out homes. This time they presume the charred wrecks belonged to Kikuyus, and they start chattering.
"We are glad," says Christina Odhiambo, a 39-year-old who used to clean houses in Nairobi. "It is what they deserve."
Soon enough, tea bushes give way to fields of sugar cane they have reached the Luo heartland on the shores of Lake Victoria.
Driving into Kisumu, the region's main town, people shout, "we've arrived, we've arrived." Passersby cheer them on.
Even the sight of the muddy transit camp on the grounds of a half-built church doesn't get them down. They stumble out expectantly, glancing at the long tents and tarps strung from unfinished cinderblock walls. A few line up for a meal of boiled beans and vegetables. The rest look for a place to bed down for the night.
Church workers at the camp say 9,000 people have passed through in 10 days. Most are quickly shipped out to villages where they have relatives, even distant ones.
Adongo is going to relatives outside Kisumu who have been putting up his wife and three children for the past month. He used his last money to send them west, and he needs work. "My relatives are poor. They will need help feeding us."
For Odhiambo, who has little family in western Kenya, the future is less certain. Her 19-year-old son left Nairobi 11 days ago and is staying with a friend in Kisumu. Maybe she can stay there, she says, while she looks for something permanent.
As for work, "there are houses to clean. There are dirty houses everywhere." But having grown up in Nairobi, she speaks little Luo, and worries: "Will they trust me?"
 Load-Date: February 18, 2008

 

End of Document
