

Anglican conference opens in Tanzania amid struggle over the Bible and homosexuality
The Associated Press
February 14, 2007 Wednesday 10:23 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 689 words
Byline: By ELIZABETH A. KENNEDY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DAR ES SALAAM Tanzania
Body




Leaders of the world's 77 million Anglicans opened a crucial meeting Wednesday as the church struggles to reconcile Scripture and homosexuality, with the American wing coming under increasing pressure to reconsider its liberal stance on gays.
Splits between Anglican liberals and conservatives have been growing for years, but reached a crisis in 2003 when the Episcopal Church the U.S. wing of the global Anglican Communion consecrated its first openly gay bishop, V. Gene Robinson of New Hampshire.
The problems mounted last year with the election of Katharine Jefferts Schori, who supports ordaining gays and is the first female leader of the U.S. church.
The Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams, the spiritual leader of the communion, has struggled to resolve one of the biggest disputes in Christianity in centuries, but he lacks any direct authority to force a compromise.
Canon Jim Rosenthal, a spokesman for the Anglican Communion, said the debate over the rift is expected to be highly charged. "The basic issue here is what to do about those who decided they don't want to stay in the main Anglican body," he said.
Conservative Anglicans have formed a rival network in the U.S., under the leadership of Anglican Archbishop Peter Akinola of Nigeria, who has called the acceptance of gay relationships a "satanic attack" on the church.
Akinola gave a letter this week to Williams, which is believed to demand concessions by the liberals to head off a schism. Africa is home to half the world's Anglicans and is dominated by conservative leaders.
Rosenthal confirmed the letter's existence but said its contents were private.
Bishop Martyn Minns of Fairfax, Va. one of the most prominent U.S. clerics to leave the American church for Akinola's group said Wednesday it would be best for the U.S. church to "back off and reconsider" its stance on gays. But, he said, that was highly unlikely.
"It's been tragic the amount of time and energy that has been spent on this issue that was initiated by the American church," he said.
The creation of Akinola's group, called the Convocation of Anglicans in North America, has been the most dramatic step by conservatives to encourage a breakaway Episcopal group that would be outside Jefferts Schori's oversight.
An eventual breakup of the communion would be the most stunning fallout from struggles over gay relationships that also have gripped Roman Catholics, Lutherans and others. The Anglican fellowship was founded in the 16th century by King Henry VIII and spread worldwide by the British Empire.
However Jefferts Schori, the head of the U.S. church, was not prepared to back down, said Canon Robert Williams, an aide. Jefferts Schori, he said, "understands the responsibility and the significance of her work here."
The outcome of the conference could reverberate through the Christian world. Debates over gay relationships have divided the Roman Catholic, Lutheran and other denominations.
Several delegates at the six-day conference, which brings together the archbishops who head the 38 provinces in the worldwide Anglican Communion, have threatened to refuse to sit with Jefferts Schori over the issue of gays.
But Rosenthal said the American church leader is welcome and was invited by the archbishop.
"Her presence here is absolute. She is here as the primate of the Episcopal Church. She is here by invitation," Rosenthal said.
Supporters of ordaining gays believe the Bible's social justice teachings take precedence over its view of sexuality. However, most Anglicans outside the United States believe gay relationships are sinful, and they are distancing themselves from the U.S. church.
Davis Mac-Iyalla, director of Changing Attitude Nigeria, an organization of gay Anglicans, said Wednesday that gays must have a place in the church.
But he said religious people must also change their perceptions of homosexuality.
"At first the church in Nigeria was denying my existence, saying they don't have gays and lesbians in the church," said Mac-Iyalla, who traveled to Tanzania for the meeting. "Now they think I should repent."
On the Net:
The Episcopal Church: http://www.episcopalchurch.org
 Load-Date: February 15, 2007

 

End of Document
