

Annan urges rebel holdouts in Darfur to seize the "historic moment" and sign the peace agreement 
The Associated Press
May 6, 2006 Saturday 11:26 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 583 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




Secretary-General Kofi Annan welcomed the partial deal to end the conflict in Sudan's Darfur region and urged rebel holdouts to seize the "historic moment" and sign the peace pact.
The U.N. chief urged ordinary people everywhere in the world to show the same generosity they did after the December 2004 tsunami and help the millions in Darfur who desperately need food and other humanitarian assistance. As for government, the United States "has been very generous" and he called on European donors and Gulf states to be equally generous.
Once the agreement is concluded, Annan said, the international community must immediately strengthen the 7,000-strong African Union force in Darfur with logistical support so it can start implementing the deal.
"We will really need to move very quickly to have the right impact," he said.
The secretary-general also called on the Sudanese government to grant visas to a U.N. assessment team so it can visit Darfur to start planning for a U.N. peacekeeping force to take over from the African Union troops. Sudan has refused to allow the team to visit.
"The government had indicated if there was a peace agreement they would be prepared to engage," Annan said. "Now is the time for them to allow the assessment mission to go in and for us to move expeditiously, and I do intend to be in touch with the Sudanese authorities precisely on this matter."
U.S. Ambassador John Bolton also urged the Sudanese government to allow a U.N. planning team into the country light of the "very positive development" at the peace talks in Abuja, Nigeria.
But Sudan's deputy, U.N. Ambassador Omar Bashir Manis, said it was too soon to say whether visas would be granted.
"I think we have yet to get the details of the peace agreement that was signed and also to see what the parties ... in the Abuja agreement have decided in which areas that they need the U.N. to assist them," he said.
A 10,000-strong U.N. peacekeeping force is already in Sudan monitoring a January 2005 peace agreement that ended a 21-year civil war between Sudan's mostly Muslim north and the Christian and animist south.
Fighting in Darfur began in February 2003 when rebels from black African tribes took up arms, complaining of discrimination and oppression by Sudan's Arab-dominated government. The government is accused of unleashing Arab tribal militia known as the Janjaweed against civilians in a campaign of murder, rape and arson a charge the government denies.
The conflict has killed about 180,000 people mostly through disease and hunger and displaced 2 million.
The agreement signed Friday was between the government and the main rebel group, the Sudan Liberation Army, but two smaller rebel groups refused to sign.
The peace deal calls for a cease-fire; disarmament of the Janjaweed militias; the integration of thousands of rebel fighters into Sudan's armed forces; and a protection force for civilians in the immediate aftermath of the war.
Political provisions include guarantees rebel factions will have the majority in Darfur's three state legislatures, but the rebels did not get the national vice presidency they had sought.
"We are confident that such a peace agreement reached through an enormous investment by the parties and the international partners have the chance to succeed," the Sudanese envoy said.
Welcoming the agreement, Annan said, "I urge the other two parties to seize this historic moment and sign the agreement that will bring this tragic chapter in the history of Sudan to an end."
 Load-Date: May 7, 2006

 

End of Document
