

AP Interview: IOC president says Olympic body 'cannot solve the problems of the world'
The Associated Press
February 21, 2008 Thursday 7:11 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 297 words
Byline: By GRAHAM DUNBAR, Associated Press Writer
Body




LAUSANNE, Switzerland With the clash between sports and politics sharpening as the Beijing Games near, the president of the IOC says the Olympics cannot solve the world's problems.
The International Olympic Committee has come under pressure from political activists protesting China's policies on human rights, Tibet, Darfur, press and religious freedom, and other issues.
"The IOC is a catalyst for change in China but it is not a panacea," Jacques Rogge said in an interview with The Associated Press. "It is a sporting, non-political organization and we cannot solve the problems of the world."
At a news conference Wednesday, Beijing Olympic marketing director Yuan Bin called on activist groups who oppose China's perceived role in Darfur not to put pressure on sponsors to withdraw their financial support.
Some politicians have even suggested a boycott of the games.
"I think it is unavoidable that non-governmental organizations want to leverage the business of the Olympic Games from China," Rogge said. "We believe the Olympic Games are a force for good but don't expect from the games what they cannot deliver."
Last week, Hollywood director Steven Spielberg backed out of his role as artistic adviser to the Beijing opening and closing ceremonies. He accused China of doing too little to end the problems of Darfur, a western province of Sudan where more than 200,000 people have died in conflict between rebels and government-back militias.
"If you organize an Olympic Games in general you know there will be criticism," Rogge said following a ceremony to award Singapore the right to host the inaugural Youth Olympic Games in August 2010.
"There has been criticism in Athens (host of the 2004 Olympics) and there will be criticism in (2012 host) London. That is part of the games."
 Load-Date: February 22, 2008

 

End of Document
