

Arab anger over the Iraq, Lebanon wars could make his job difficult as Mideast envoy
The Associated Press
June 28, 2007 Thursday 12:52 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 832 words
Byline: By THOMAS WAGNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




Among the biggest challenges Tony Blair will face in his new role as Middle East envoy is Arab anger over the wars in Iraq and Lebanon, and perceptions that he speaks for President Bush.
Blair overcame his last hurdle to clinching the job Wednesday when Russia dropped objections and joined the rest of the "Quartet" of peace mediators in announcing his appointment. The Quartet also includes the United States, the European Union and the U.N.
"Even our moderate Arab allies say that Mr. Blair's credibility in the region is in pieces" and that he "merely parrots the U.S. line while privately wringing his hands," The Daily Mirror wrote in an editorial Wednesday.
It added that former President Clinton would have been a more sensible choice.
Throughout his 10 years as Britain's prime minister, Blair was an interventionist, with largely positive results in Kosovo and Libya. Perhaps his most remarkable diplomatic achievement was helping bring peace and democratic self-rule to Northern Ireland, a dispute that had confounded many other British leaders.
But leading the push for peace between Israel and the Palestinians is a challenge of a different magnitude, especially because his reputation is tainted in Arab eyes by his unflinching support for invading Iraq.
In his last appearance before Parliament as prime minister on Wednesday, Blair seemed determined to apply his renowned skills as a negotiator, even as he recognized the difficulties he would face as the Quartet's special envoy.
A viable two-state solution is "possible," he told lawmakers, "but it will require a huge intensity of focus and work."
Some commentators say the enormity of the task would give Blair a chance at redemption for the Iraq war.
Blair's decision to back the Bush administration on the war and take part in the prewar planning made the prime minister enemies at home and in the Arab world.
President Bush, who spoke with Blair on Wednesday, called the outgoing British prime minister a "friend" and "visionary leader," and said he was pleased he had agreed to represent the Quartet.
"Tony is a man who stands up for his beliefs and has the courage of his convictions," Bush said in a statement.
Blair also was criticized for supporting the Bush administration's decision to do little to try to stop Israel's inconclusive war with Hezbollah guerrillas in Lebanon last year.
His role as a Middle East envoy "could be a painful reminder of the most unhappy aspects of his premiership, as he encounters Arab suspicion that he is merely a lackey of George Bush, and Arab anger over Iraq and the Lebanon war of 2006," said an editorial Wednesday in The Guardian.
But it said Blair would deserve enormous credit if he were to defy those odds by "providing the dogged, daily application of pressure and pursuit of detail that the Israel-Palestine conflict requires," and which he demonstrated in Northern Ireland.
White House press secretary Tony Snow said Bush was "delighted" that Blair would be devoting time to the peace process, calling him "enormously capable." But he cautioned against setting expectations too high, saying ultimately the Israelis and Palestinians must end the conflict.
"He's not Superman," Snow said. "He doesn't have a cape."
In Parliament, Northern Ireland First Minister Ian Paisley praised Blair for his success in Northern Ireland and wished him the best in the Middle East.
"He has entered into another colossal task. I hope that what happened in Northern Ireland will be repeated and at the end of the day, he will be able to look back and say it was well worthwhile," Paisley said.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert also welcomed Blair's appointment.
"We wish him luck," he said in a statement. "Israel will provide Blair with all the assistance he needs so that he can fulfill his role and aid the Palestinians."
A statement from the Quartet said Blair will focus on mobilizing international support and assistance for the Palestinians.
At first, the role likely will not involve mediation or negotiation between Palestinians and Israelis.
Blair will replace James Wolfensohn, the former head of the World Bank, who stepped down as envoy in frustration after less than a year following Israel's withdrawal from Gaza in 2005.
The situation has become more complicated by Hamas' takeover of Gaza from the rival Fatah faction and the weakness of Palestinian and Israeli leaders.
Britain already has joined other leaders in trying to bolster the position of President Mahmoud Abbas of Fatah, who is attempting to consolidate his power in the West Bank after the seizure of Gaza by Hamas.
Late Tuesday, Blair telephoned Russian President Vladmir Putin in an attempt to dispel his concerns, Blair's spokesman said.
Relations between Russia and Britain soured when British prosecutors charged a former Soviet-era spy with the murder of Alexander Litvinenko, another ex-KGB officer who had been a severe critic of Putin.
Associated Press Writer Edith M. Lederer at the United Nations contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: June 28, 2007

 

End of Document
