

As protesters gear up, Olympic sponsors craft plans to avoid the fray
The Associated Press
November 15, 2007 Thursday 3:36 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1509 words
Body




BEIJING Concerns are mounting that the Beijing 2008 Olympics could face a perfect storm of bad publicity. If so, how can corporate sponsors avoid getting drenched?
That is the billion-dollar question keeping public-relations experts busy as activists gear up to attack China on everything from its human-rights record at home and abroad to the quality of its toys and air. The scrutiny threatens to take what was originally seen by many multinationals as a certain PR bonanza a chance to attach themselves to the immense national pride surrounding the Olympics in the world's most promising market and turn it into a potential headache.
Already, some activist groups say they are broadening their attention from attacking China's government to targeting Olympic sponsors.
In letters sent last month to Olympic sponsors, Robert Menard, secretary-general of Reporters Without Borders, a Paris-based group promoting global press freedom, warned: "We plan to publicly challenge those companies that are participants in the Beijing Games without doing anything in the area of human rights. We will address their shareholders, their clients and the general public."
Jill Savitt, director of Olympic Dream For Darfur, an activist group based in New York that is pressuring the Chinese government to use its influence to reduce armed conflict in Sudan, says the group is in the process of expanding its reach. "This will only get more uncomfortable for organizers and sponsors," she says. China has been under pressure because it has large investments in Sudan and is perceived to be using its influence to prevent United Nations intervention in the conflict.
In the next week, the group will release a report naming and attempting to pressure 19 Olympic corporate sponsors and the International Olympic Committee for their silence about China's support of the Sudanese government. (The group gave passing grades to only a few sponsors.) The Darfur activists are a force to be reckoned with: In the past year, pressure from such groups has prompted some 20 U.S. states and several universities, including Harvard University, to divest billions of dollars from companies linked to Sudan.
That is why, in response, PR executives are swinging into high gear as well. Companies operating in China are "absolutely focused" on minimizing their potential exposure to issues such as Darfur and Tibet during the Olympics, says Richard Edelman, president and chief executive of Edelman Public Relations.
As Games veterans, "Top sponsors are bracing themselves," says Chris Renner, president of sports-marketing firm Helios Partners China, which advises a subsidiary of Volkswagen AG, the official car sponsor. "The bad PR stuff, it's inevitable."
One strategy some companies appear to be adopting to insulate themselves is focusing on environmental projects in China, which have become a priority for a government increasingly concerned about environmental degradation. Indeed, several Olympic sponsors appear to be hoping to avoid the potential red flags by going green.
Coca-Cola Co. is playing up its water-conservation efforts on the Yangtze River and putting natural-refrigerant coolers and vending machines at all Olympic sites. Since March, Volkswagen has been planting thousands of trees in Inner Mongolia. General Electric Co. is touting its role selling eco-friendly products such as solar-power and water-filtration systems for the Olympic venues.
Given China's pollution problems, focusing on bettering the environment is a "win-win" situation, says Mr. Edelman, whose firm's clients include GE and Coca-Cola.
By concentrating on the environment, companies can show they are acting responsibly and score points with the Chinese government, while at the same time avoid such politically charged issues such as Taiwan or Darfur, PR executives say.
Another Olympic sponsor, Johnson & Johnson, is playing up its role as a good corporate citizen with a host of public-service-style ads offering health advice, while some others, such as Adidas AG and some Chinese sponsors, are basically hoping to avoid the issue by sticking to the message that the Games are about sports, not politics.
Scott Kronick, president of Ogilvy Public Relations China, which represents Adidas, says part of what is happening is that the government is using the Olympics to bring change to China. "Of course, there is heightened degree of awareness that the eyes of the world will be on China," says Mr. Kronick. "I think the leadership quite genuinely knows the environmental situation has to change and if it's the Olympics or whatever that is the catalyst, then so be it."
The high-wattage media glare of the Olympics has historically amped up controversy. The 2002 Salt Lake City Games were hit by issues of judging improprieties during figure-skating events, along with a bribery scandal, while the 2004 Athens Games notched more doping scandals than previous Games.
But experts say sponsors are more at risk during the Summer Games in Beijing, partly because of the record sponsorship fees, which total an estimated $1.5 billion, including more than $100 million from some individual companies who hope to tap China's booming markets. No sponsors have pulled out, and none is expected to do so because they have all signed agreements.
Sun Weide, spokesman for the Beijing Olympic Organizing Committee, has urged that the Games not be politicized. "We have to remember that the Olympics are a sports event, not a political corrective."
But a range of issues from Darfur and Tibet to human-rights grievances within China are making close association with the Games potentially more risky, executives say.
The risks could be heightened by technology: Any attempt by the Chinese government to quash possible dissent and protests is likely to be caught and broadcast to millions via the Internet or cellphone cameras.
"It's like Lenin no Mao meets YouTube," says Moises Naim, editor in chief of Foreign Policy magazine, which is published by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Dr. Naim says he knows several activist groups with definite action plans for the 2008 Olympics. "It will certainly happen. I don't know the scale, but I do know there is intensive preparation."
Some groups such say they are even considering calling for boycotts of sponsors' products, though few appear to have concrete plans at this point.
Sharon Hom, director of New York-based Human Rights in China, says the activists' efforts to generate controversy around the Games could be bolstered by the recent spate of China-made product recalls. Previously, getting American consumers to care about human rights in distant China was difficult, she says. "But if you say the reason you are getting contaminated food and toys all of these things directly affecting you is because the Chinese government is not accountable, and transparent ... I think that that link is going to be easier to make."
Coca-Cola has struck up partnerships with at least some of these activist groups. In the past few years, the beverage giant has started an ambitious set of water-conservation initiatives in partnership with the World Wildlife Fund. They have recently stepped up the China program. Among other things, the project has a five-year $20 million budget to improve the quantity and quality of water for local communities along seven river basins, including the Yangtze. The company is also working with Greenpeace on supplying environmentally friendly vending machines and refrigerators at Olympic sites.
Such projects aren't just green-washing ahead of the Olympics, says Greenpeace director Lo Sze Ping. The Olympic vending machines "are just the first step," says Mr. Lo. He hopes that the machines will lead Coke to globally phase out the use of hydrofluorocarbon refrigerants, which contribute to global warming, though the company hasn't set a timeline for this. Such a move could trigger an industrywide transformation, Greenpeace hopes. "We're not being used. We're very careful working with Coke," he says.
Coca-Cola spokeswoman Christina Lau says the Olympics is "a way to step up our (environmental) initiatives," but said the projects had long-standing goals that would continue past 2008.
For GE, Olympics sponsorship is still "a large experiment," says Steve Bertamini, GE's head of greater China. "Cost remains an issue selling to China."
The company has sold $300 million of products for the Games a fraction of its overall China sales of $5 billion. But the Beijing Olympics is a vital showcase for GE, which is vying for business supplying the Shanghai Expo and the Asian Games in Guangzhou, which will both be held in 2010.
It is too early to tell if these green initiatives will help keep sponsors clean in the eyes of American and other consumers. But it is a step in the right direction, Human Rights in China's Ms. Hom says in an email. Increasingly, Olympic sponsors "are going to need to take serious steps to address this perfect storm brewing," she says.
Geoffrey A. Fowler in Hong Kong contributed to this article.
 Load-Date: November 16, 2007

 

End of Document
