

At home on the range
The Associated Press
June 23, 2006 Friday 2:25 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1197 words
Byline: By NANCY DEWOLF SMITH, The Wall Street Journal
Body




People who can't get enough of Robert Duvall as a grizzled old cowboy ("Lonesome Dove" was only the first of its ilk) will be thrilled to know that he's back in the saddle again in "Broken Trail." The original movie on AMC begins Sunday from 8-10 p.m. ET, and moseys along to its conclusion on Monday in the same time slot.
Moseys is the right word here, because while "Broken Trail" is plot driven and not without action, it is most of all a languid elegy about the olden days on the Western ranges when men were men, doing what men do, under a big sky by day and a silvery moon that illuminated only emptiness at night. In this instance, the men are driving a herd of 500 mustangs from Oregon to Wyoming, rescuing damsels and fighting off bad guys along the way.
By 1898, when the story is set, much of the American West was already filling up, and geezers like Mr. Duvall's character, Print Ritter, were a dying breed. That's easy to forget, though, because Print's sidekick here, a nephew played by Thomas Hayden Church, has rugged individual written all over him too. In fact, as reliably convincing as Mr. Duvall is in the role of a tough but tenderhearted cowboy, it's Mr. Church's Tom Harte who steals the show.
He's a little less cerebral and courtly than his uncle, and when he feels emotion he has no words or desire to express it. All he knows, in fact, is right from wrong. By the time we realize that this fellow with his little moustache, red hair flatted by a hat and intense, wary eyes is the same actor who played the bridegroom oaf in "Sideways," it's too late to make a dent. Tom Harte is the heir-apparent Western hero.
The heroism here takes places on many levels. First, Print, Tom and a fiddle-playing rider they pick up along the way set off on 1,000-mile journey to deliver horses to a Scot in Wyoming who is buying mounts for the British army. He's going to pay well, it turns out, because while the Brits need horses for the Boer War in South Africa, the U.S. Army also needs horses for the Spanish-American war.
For the trail riders of our story, however, the journey is everything. It becomes complicated early on when they come across an evil man who is delivering five Chinese maidens sold into slavery by their poor families in China to a mining-town brothel. Our heroes take the girls under their wing, and then almost deliver them by mistake into the arms of their "owner" a saloon-keep/madam named "Big Rump Kate." Worse, they run afoul of "Big Ears Bywaters" who, along with his generic-Western moniker, is the pockmarked incarnation of evil in a town without a sheriff. Most of the movie is set on the range, though the final showdown, when it comes, takes place near a corral in Wyoming.
Some people die, and not everyone who lives has the same courage when it comes to romance that they do when confronted by bad guys. (Oh, and Mr. Duvall still looks like Boo Radley in one bathing scene.) I'd say more except that would give away the only mystery here. Because most of "Broken Trail" is just what it is, a lovely feast for the eyes that follows the universal storytelling formula: some human beings on a perilous journey that tests their mettle. This is not a criticism. It wouldn't be a story oft-told since the dawn of time unless it was a darn good one.
A new series beginning on the ABC Family channel this week, "Kyle XY" also employs a familiar device. (Monday, 8-9 p.m.). This time, it's the one in which a strange being of uncertain origin appears amid ordinary humans. Think of Francois Truffaut's "L'Enfant sauvage" based on a real 18th-century wild child, David Bowie as "The Man Who Fell to Earth" or Johnny Depp's turn as "Edward Scissorhands." Although the center of the tale is always an affecting mystery man who often has special powers, ultimately the stranger's purpose is to hold up a mirror to ourselves.
Kyle, whom we first see curled up naked and sticky in a forest like a newly-hatched 17-year-old, is so named by the social worker who brings him to live with her family while she attempts to figure out where he came from. We suspect early on that it may not be Earth, because Kyle makes crayon-dot drawings that mimic the resolution of Polaroid snapshots, and before he can speak a word he's able to repair the family's computer. It should be fun, as the series unfolds, to find out more.
In some respects, the first episode reveals too much. Not about Kyle a charming presence played by Matt Dallas but about the social worker's teenage daughter. First seen waking up in bed next to her boyfriend, she is later heard talking about being pawed in intimate places by another boy with warts on his hands. Nice touch for a family-channel show.
The pilot for NBC's "Windfall" snagged a big audience earlier this month because it, too, is based on a theme that we relate to. In this case, it's the dream of sudden wealth. (Thursday 10-11 p.m.) In the pilot, a group of 20 people who contributed $1 to a lottery pool were stunned to learn that they'd share a winning ticket worth $386 million. After the celebrations now come the inevitable consequences, from pesky ethical choices to life-and-death situations.
The wan lothario Luke Perry, of "Beverly Hills, 90210" fame, plays a husband who may lose his wife to his best friend (Jason Gedrick), whose own windfall provoked a fake paternity suit. Winner Damien, who is 17, has married his father's mail-order Russian fiancee so she can claim the money for him, but parental emancipation is proving perilous. A young man with a criminal past also got someone else to claim the prize and may have gotten her murdered. While others are using their money to do good deeds, all around them creeps and problems are oozing out of the woodwork, like the estranged husband who won't sign the divorce papers since his wife struck it rich.
And so it goes. We all know that instant wealth brings more trouble than it's worth, like when you wish to a genie for a million dollars and wake up with a fistful of dollars and no hands to clutch them with. It's God's way of leading us not into temptation. Except, of course, that if we had all that money we'd put it in the bank and live sensibly forever after with no nasty strings attached.
The lottery aside, it's not easy to hit the jackpot. Just ask the folks in the HBO documentary "Boffo! Tinseltown's Bombs and Blockbusters" (Thursday, 9-10:15 p.m.). It functions as a plug for "Variety" on its 100th anniversary and was inspired by the forthcoming book by the paper's editor in chief Peter Bart, "Boffo: How I Learned to Love the Blockbuster and Fear the Bomb."
Mr. Bart, who ran production at Paramount in the heady late 1960s and early '70s, probably has great tales to tell. Yet the central question in this program as famous directors, producers, screenwriters and actors wonder out loud what it takes to make a hit movie goes unanswered. That's not surprising: Nobody has a clue about a formula for box-office or even critical success, and some can only yatter lamely here. That said, even with some cheesy editing gimmickry and no big payoff, "Boffo!" is a pleasant diversion. And, best of all, no mention of the dreaded Brangelina anywhere.
 Load-Date: June 24, 2006

 

End of Document
