

British court rules al-Qaida suspect can be extradited to the United States
The Associated Press
January 5, 2006, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 676 words
Byline: By THOMAS WAGNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




A British court cleared the way Thursday for the government to extradite a suspected al-Qaida member to the United States after receiving American assurances he would not be tried in a military court on charges of plotting to set up a terrorist training camp in Oregon.
The U.S. government gave the court a note guaranteeing British citizen Haroon Rashid Aswat, 31, would be tried by a federal court, not a military tribunal, and would not be designated an "enemy combatant."
Washington has used that label to indefinitely hold hundreds of terror suspects without charge at a detention facility in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
"Whilst the note does not provide any personal protection to this defendant, I am satisfied that it does bind the government of the United States of America, which in these terms includes the president," Judge Timothy Workman said in his ruling at Bow Street magistrates court.
British Home Secretary Charles Clarke now has up to two months to approve the extradition.
The defense had argued that Aswat should not be extradited because he would face an "overwhelming risk" of being held in solitary confinement without trial, cut off from his friends, family and attorneys.
Aswat's lawyer, Paul Bowen, said he would appeal the ruling to the High Court.
Aswat was arrested in Lusaka, Zambia, on July 20 in connection with the July 7 transit bombings in London, in which four suicide bombers killed 52 commuters. He had lived a nomadic life since leaving England a decade ago. At earlier court hearings, it was alleged that he had been to a training camp in Afghanistan and met al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden.
Dressed in a long black cloak and a black skullcap, Aswat watched Thursday's ruling from the back of the courtroom under police guard.
Speaking on behalf of his client, Bowen told the court: "He wants to say that he is an innocent man, that he has nothing to hide and nothing to fear from a trial itself. What he fears is the process he faces in the United States."
Federal prosecutors in New York have charged several men in the alleged conspiracy to set up the terrorist training camp in Oregon with members of a now-defunct Seattle mosque.
They include Aswat and Egyptian-born preacher Abu Hamza Al-Masri, also known as Mustafa Kamel Mustafa, who are both being detained in England facing possible extradition.
A third man charged in the conspiracy is Oussama Kassir, 39, a Lebanese-born Swede recently arrested in the Czech capital, Prague. The U.S. is also pursuing his extradition.
The U.S. complaint alleges that the men began conspiring in 1999 to establish a training camp in Bly, Ore., that would teach jihad - or holy war - so a community of Muslims could move to Afghanistan to fight or be further trained there.
Oregon authorities have said the camp never materialized beyond a dozen people taking target practice.
The complaint refers to a letter faxed from one alleged conspirator to another saying the Bly property was in a "pro-militia and firearms state" that "looks just like Afghanistan" and that the group was "stockpiling weapons and ammunition."
One of the men from the Dar-us-Salaam mosque in Seattle, James Ujaama, cooperated with U.S. authorities in exchange for a shorter sentence. Ujaama served two years in prison for aiding the Taliban.
Aswat's defense team had argued that the U.S. government's assurance about how Aswat would be prosecuted was not legally binding on President Bush.
The defense also argued that Ujaama had reached a plea bargain agreement with U.S. attorneys after they threatened him with penalties such as solitary confinement and severe limitations on his ability to meet with his lawyers and hold confidential discussions with them.
Outside the court, human rights lawyer Gareth Peirce said the case against Aswat was "nonsense."
"The only witness against him in the United States was threatened that if he didn't plead guilty and cooperate, he would be put under military detention. It shows the extent to which the United States is manipulating evidence and pressuring witnesses," Peirce said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos LON803, XLST101, 102, BA804
 Load-Date: January 6, 2006

 

End of Document
