

Bush says Kosovo independence is 'historic step for the Balkans region'
The Associated Press
February 19, 2008 Tuesday 7:48 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 656 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




With President Bush leading the way from Africa, U.S. officials are working across a broad international front to shore up support for Kosovo's declaration of independence.
"The independence of Kosovo is an historic step for the Balkans region," Bush said Tuesday in Tanzania before flying to Rwanda. "It presents an opportunity to move beyond the conflicts of the past and toward a future of freedom and stability and peace."
With actions unfolding in the United Nations and the European Union to back Kosovo, Bush made clear it was all part of a calculated effort.
This strategy was well planned," Bush said, noting that "we had worked out with our European allies the sequencing of it, to make sure that there was a concerted and constant voice supporting this move."
He said Russia was involved in those consultations even though it does not back Kosovo's move.
"Actually, we have been working very closely with the Russians, as we have with the Europeans and other nations on Kosovo's independence, because we believe it's the right thing to do," Bush said. "You know, there's a disagreement, but we believe, as do many other nations, that history will prove this to be a correct move, to bring peace to the Balkans." He added that "we have been in close consultation with the Russians all along. This wasn't a surprise to Russia."
Bush urged Kosovo to uphold its agreement to protect the rights of minorities and pledged the United States will work with other nations to bring about a smooth and peaceful transition to independence.
Earlier, Bush in a letter promised Kosovo's new president, Fatmir Sejdiu, that "the United states will be your partner and your friend."
Serbia recalled its ambassador from Washington over the U.S. decision, and it has threatened to recall its envoys from all countries that establish diplomatic ties with Kosovo, though it said it would not sever relations.
"We feel that this is a travesty of international law. We feel that the negotiations should go on," Ambassador Ivan Vujacic said at a news conference Monday evening at the Serbian Embassy in Washington, adding that he would leave the United States within 48 hours. "We feel that the imposed solution concerning Kosovo is not the right solution and will not add to stability."
Russia and Serbia maintained at a U.N. Security Council emergency session that an independent Kosovo violates the council's orders.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice welcomed "the commitments Kosovo made in its declaration of independence" to implement a United Nations-backed plan, "to embrace multi-ethnicity as a fundamental principle of good governance, and to welcome a period of international supervision."
In Moscow, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said Tuesday that Rice telephoned him on Monday and that he "stressed our fundamental position that Pristina's unilateral actions in declaring the territory's independence of the territory are unacceptable." A ministry statement said Lavrov also emphasized "the danger of such a step, which threatens the destruction of the world order that has developed over centuries, and of international security."
Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns, at a news conference Monday, said, "I do not expect any kind of crisis with the Russians over this."
Burns said the nearly 17,000 NATO troops in Kosovo, including 1,600 U.S. forces, would remain in the country.
He also said that a donors conference would be held soon, and announced the United States was committing $334 million in U.S. assistance to Kosovo this year in addition to the $77 million provided in 2007.
Rep. Howard Berman, acting chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said he supported the diplomatic recognition but added, "Now the work begins. The challenges ahead include tackling high unemployment and bolstering the country's weak economy, strengthening political institutions and the rule of law, and preserving security throughout the region."
 Load-Date: February 20, 2008

 

End of Document
