

Captors hold most of the cards in cases like Iran's seizure of 15 British sailors and marines
The Associated Press
March 28, 2007 Wednesday 5:27 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 672 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Body




Prime Minister Tony Blair promises to ratchet up pressure on Iran to free 15 British sailors and marines. But such high-profile international cases often end with concessions since the captors hold most of the cards.
The trick for governments trying to extricate their citizens or military personnel is to appear resolute to their own public while quietly trying to find an acceptable incentive to prompt another nation to act.
That helped win freedom for Americans held captive in Iran for 444 days a quarter century ago. After a botched rescue attempt, President Carter promised to avoid interfering in Iran's internal affairs. Even so, the Iranians waited to release the hostages until Jan. 20, 1981, minutes after Ronald Reagan was sworn in as president.
More recently, President Bush was forced to play the concession card early in his administration when a U.S. Navy spy plane landed on China's Hainan Island after colliding with a Chinese fighter jet, killing the pilot.
Each side accused the other of causing the April 1, 2001, collision, while the Chinese systematically stripped out all the sensitive equipment from the spy plane and detained its 24 crew members.
The Bush administration later declared in a formal letter that it was "very sorry" for the death of the Chinese pilot and for entering Chinese airspace without permission. China released the crew 10 days after the accident but kept the plane for three more months.
Using force is often a tempting option for governments trying to free captives and preserve national honor. But military force carries huge risks.
Israeli commandos used force to free about 100 hostages seized by Palestinian gunmen in 1976 on an Air France plane hijacked to Entebbe, Uganda but at the cost of more than 50 lives, including 45 Ugandan soldiers and the Israeli commander.
Last summer, an Israeli assault on Hezbollah in Lebanon failed to win the release of two Israeli soldiers seized by the guerrillas. More than 1,000 Lebanese civilians and combatants died and 160 Israelis, but the two soldiers are still held. Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert's prestige withered.
With force such a risky option, diplomacy is usually the preferred course to try to free a captive. Intermediaries are often used to avoid having the aggrieved government appear weak.
Algeria, for example, mediated between Iran and the U.S. to win the release of the hostages seized at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran.
On Wednesday, British Foreign Secretary Margaret Beckett announced she had frozen bilateral talks with Iran on all other issues until Tehran returned the 15 sailors and marines. Instead, Turkey, the only Muslim country in NATO, appears to be lobbying with the Iranians.
In such mediation, governments try to move quickly to avoid having the fate of their captives get bogged down in other issues.
That happened in 1960 when the Soviets shot down a U.S. spy plane and captured the pilot, Francis Gary Powers, only two weeks before a Cold War summit conference in Paris.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev stormed out of the summit after President Eisenhower refused to apologize. Powers was convicted of spying and sentenced to 10 years in prison, but was exchanged nearly two years later for Soviet spy Rudolf Abel.
The British clearly want to keep the focus on their 15 sailors and marines and avoid any suggestion that they could be swapped for Iranians held by the U.S. in Iraq.
Publicly, the Iranian government insists it has no intention of demanding such a trade.
Last week's seizure already has escalated beyond an incident in June 2004 when six British marines and two sailors were captured by Iran in the Shatt al-Arab waterway. The Britons said they had entered Iranian waters illegally and were released unharmed after three days.
Relations between the West and Iran have deteriorated since 2004, however. The U.S. and Britain have accused Iran of arming Shiite militias in Iraq and voted with the rest of the U.N. Security Council last weekend to impose stricter sanctions on Tehran over its nuclear program.
 Load-Date: March 29, 2007

 

End of Document
