

Chad threatens to cut off oil pipeline if the World Bank does not release funds
The Associated Press
April 15, 2006 Saturday 11:36 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 638 words
Byline: By LES NEUHAUS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: N'DJAMENA Chad
Body




Chad on Saturday threatened to cut off its flow of oil unless the World Bank releases funds frozen in a dispute over how the central African country should use its oil revenues.
The announcement followed a late night meeting between President Idriss Deby and his Cabinet ministers to discuss their response to a rebel attack on the capital. The rebels were repulsed but they are believed to be regrouping nearby and the threat of a violent overthrow of Deby's government has not diminished.
The government presumably wants the frozen funds to finance its fight against the rebels.
Chad had a deal with the World Bank for the financing of a pipeline on condition that most of the revenues would be used to alleviate poverty. Deby broke that deal earlier this year so he could use the money to finance his military and the World Bank suspended $124 million in aid to his government.
The government gave the World Bank until Tuesday to unfreeze the funds or else it would shut down the pipeline that carries Chadian oil through Cameroon to terminals on the Atlantic Ocean.
Chad exports about 160,000 barrels per day, a small amount by world standards.
An Exxon Mobil-led consortium exported 133 million barrels of oil from Chad between October 2003 and December 2005, according to the World Bank. Chad earned $307 million, the bank said.
Hourmadji Moussa Doumgor, the communications minister and government spokesman, said that attempts to restrict how the government spends its oil revenues was a violation of Chad's sovereignty. He said government officials would enter into negotiations with the consortium so that oil revenues would no longer be deposited into Western banks, but given directly to the government.
The government also called for a peace rally in N'djamena on Saturday to show Deby's popularity.
Earlier Deby announced that he was severing relations with neighboring Sudan and he threatened to expel 200,000 Sudanese refugees from his country if the international community did not do more to stop what he claimed were Sudanese efforts to destabilize his government.
Deby repeatedly has accused Sudan of hiring mercenaries to overthrow his government. Sudan has denied the accusation, and in turn has accused Chad of supporting fighters in its volatile Darfur region, where Arab militias and African rebels have fought for nearly three years.
The Central African Republic said Friday it was closing its border with Sudan after the rebels passed through the northern part of the country while their way from Sudan to attack N'djamena.
The rebels released a statement on their Web site, again condemning Deby's refusal to negotiate with them. A key issue has been Deby's decision to change the constitution so he can run for a third term in elections set for May 3.
"The regime of Idriss Deby is the basis of the crisis in this part of the African continent," the rebel statement said.
Chad, an arid, landlocked country about three times the size of France, has been convulsed by violence for most of its history, including more than 30 years of civil war since gaining independence from France in 1960 and various small-scale insurgencies since 1998.
Some 180,000 people have died in Darfur in western Sudan over the past three years, some at the hands of Arab militias, many from disease and hunger.
While observers believe Sudan has provided at least some support to the Chadian rebels, the insurgents are led by former senior military officers who until recently served under Deby. There has been enormous dissent within Deby's clan over his decision to run for a third term and over how royalties from recently exploited oil reserves have disappeared.
Army officers first attempted to oust Deby on March 14 by trying to seize power while he was out of the country.
Associated Press writer Abakar Saleh contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: April 16, 2006

 

End of Document
