

Chad's president declares victory following rebel attack on the capital
The Associated Press
April 14, 2006 Friday 2:57 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 851 words
Byline: By ABAKAR SALEH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: N'DJAMENA Chad
Body




When small arms fire echoed through the darkness before dawn Thursday, residents of Chad's capital knew it was the rebel attack they had long expected.
Everyone was aware of the coup attempt against President Idriss Deby on March 14 and the recent defections of key army officers to the rebel United Front for Change.
Those who could remember the coups of the 1970s and 1980s had already stockpiled food and water. They understood that once the siege began, all they could do was huddle in their homes and wait for the fighting to subside.
Within three hours the boom of mortar, artillery and tank shells faded and the attack helicopters returned to base.
Deby declared victory.
But for those who live in eastern N'djamena where the fighting was most intense, his words were hollow. They moved their families into the city center Thursday night, expecting more attacks to come.
Deby has seen his authority undermined by violence across the border in Sudan's Darfur region, where the rebels are based. The path to power in Chad via Darfur is something Deby knows well he seized power in a 1990 coup launched from there himself.
In just three days, the rebels charged 600 miles in pickup trucks from their bases and came close to capturing the National Assembly building in the center of the capital, N'djamena.
Government troops pushed them back. Deby presented 285 prisoners to the media Thursday evening. Several described how senior army officers had collaborated with the rebels, saying they did not expect to meet any resistance when they entered the capital. Their stories could not be independently verified.
Four tanks guarded the presidential palace on Thursday night, and Associated Press reporters saw 13 bodies in the streets; residents reported seeing many more.
Gen. Mahamet Ali Abdullah, speaking on state-run radio, claimed that government forces had killed hundreds of rebels and totally destroyed the column that attacked on Thursday.
But a Web site that said it represented the rebels reported that rebel troops were on the move to the north and east of N'djamena and were regrouping. There was also a statement claiming that rebel forces now controlled two towns near the Sudanese border, Adre and Am-Timam.
The battle for Chad appeared to be far from over.
Deby and Abdullah reiterated their complaint Thursday that the rebels were backed by the Sudanese government.
Chad, an arid, landlocked country about three times the size of California, has been wracked by violence for most of its history, with more than 30 years of civil war since independence from France in 1960 and different small-scale insurgencies since 1998.
The competition for power has become more intense since the country began producing oil. An Exxon Mobil-led consortium exported 133 million barrels of oil from Chad between October 2003 and December 2005, according to the World Bank. Chad, which receives a 12.5 percent royalty on each barrel exported, earned a net total of $307 million, the bank said.
Sudan has accused Chad of supporting the Darfur rebels, even as Deby has sought to mediate in the stalled Darfur peace process.
The Sudanese minister of foreign affairs, Lam Akol, insisted again that Sudan has no connection with the Chadian rebels and said Sudan hoped that Chad would remain stable.
The Sudanese government is accused of unleashing Arab tribal militias to murder and rape civilians and lay waste to villages in Darfur, but it denies the charge. More than 200,000 refugees have fled to Chad, and the conflict has left about 180,000 dead over the last three years most from disease and hunger.
The United Nations has long warned that the violence in Darfur would destabilize the region, especially Chad.
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan is "greatly troubled" by the worsening security in Chad and condemns any effort to seize power by force, his spokesman Stephane Dujarric said Thursday.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said the situation along the Chad-Sudan border was a concern to the United States for security as well as humanitarian reasons. He said people with ties to the U.S. Embassy in Chad have been authorized to leave the country once conditions allow.
The African Union appealed for an end to the fighting and called for dialogue to end the dispute peacefully. The New York-based Human Rights Watch called on all sides to make every effort to prevent civilian casualties.
France sent 150 troops Wednesday to bolster about 1,200 troops already in Chad to protect about 1,500 French citizens there, the French Defense Ministry said. French fighter jets carried out reconnaissance missions over Chad on Wednesday and Thursday, it said.
Col. Gerard Dubois, a spokesman for the French military, strongly denied French radio reports and a statement on a Web site linked to the rebels that French military fighters allegedly carried out bombardments in eastern Chad, hitting civilians.
France has a cooperation agreement with Chad, but a special decision would be needed for French forces to enter combat.
Associated Press writer Madjiasro Nako in N'Djamena contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: April 14, 2006

 

End of Document
