

Chad and the World Bank reach interim agreement on oil program dispute
The Associated Press
April 27, 2006 Thursday 6:29 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 636 words
Byline: By TOM MALITI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: N'DJAMENA Chad
Body




The World Bank has reached a preliminary deal with Chad to release some of the country's frozen oil money, an important step toward resolving a dispute over how the impoverished nation spends its newfound wealth, officials said.
The World Bank helped finance Chad's oil program under demands that the central African country commit most of the money to development. The bank froze hundreds of millions of dollars in oil revenue and aid in January after Chad's parliament voted to allow more money to go toward the general budget a decision many believe was meant to secure funds for weapons in the wake of a growing rebellion.
"It is a stage towards a final agreement. What is important is that there is no longer a problem with the World Bank," Foreign Affairs Minister Ahmad Allam-mi told The Associated Press Thursday.
The World Bank released a statement dated Wednesday saying it would resume paying some loans for programs including education, health and infrastructure. Chad, in turn, agreed to pass a law requiring 70 percent of oil revenues to go toward "priority poverty programs," the bank said.
Once that law is passed, the bank said it will start releasing the frozen revenues over the following three months. Chad's oil minister had threatened to shut down its oil pipeline by the end of the week if the funds were not released.
The dispute's resolution helped cool off oil markets, which had been worried about supply disruptions if Chad went through with its threat. Light sweet crude for June delivery fell as low as $70.85 a barrel, before recovering to $71, a decline of 93 cents in afternoon trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
President Idriss Deby said that Chad agreed to the deal because it is an acceptable compromise.
"They (the negotiators) found a compromise, a compromise that is acceptable to Chad. Now they will continue with the discussions," Deby told supporters at a campaign rally in the eastern town of Abeche.
Government spokesman Hourmadji Moussa Doumgor, however, said that it was too early to say if Chad would withdraw its threat to shut off the pipeline.
"It is too early to say (if the threat is off), but if the parties continue talks and reach a final agreement then the threat will have no effect. However, one must look positively at the latest development," Doumgor, who is also communications minister, told The Associated Press.
Several calls made to Oil Minister Mahmat Hassan Nasser went unanswered.
The agreement benefits both the World Bank and Chad's government, which is fighting a growing and increasingly violent rebellion. On one hand, Chad must devote slightly more money to poverty and development programs about 3 percentage points. But the World Bank also agreed to allow 30 percent of oil revenues to go toward Chad's general treasury, instead of just 15 percent. Chad can use that money on whatever it wants including weapons.
Rebels launched a surprise raid on the capital, N'djamena, on April 13 in a failed attempt to topple President Idriss Deby, who is seeking a third term in May 3 elections. The rebels were pushed back in fighting that killed 350 people, the government said.
An Exxon Mobil Corp.-led consortium exported 133 million barrels of oil from Chad between October 2003 and December 2005, according to World Bank statistics. Chad, which receives a 12.5 percent royalty on each barrel exported, earned $307 million, the bank said.
"Even before recent developments, the people of Chad were among the poorest of Africa, with the bleakest prospects," World Bank President Paul Wolfowitz said in the statement. "Our aim has always been to help the government improve the basic services Chad's people desperately require, from HIV/AIDS projects to schools and roads."
Associated Press writers Abakar Saleh and Majiasra Nako contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: April 28, 2006

 

End of Document
