

France, Denmark, Indonesia ready to take part in the Darfur peacekeeping effort
The Associated Press
August 1, 2007 Wednesday 4:33 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 854 words
Byline: By ANGELA DOLAND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS 
Body




France, Denmark and Indonesia offered Wednesday to contribute to a joint United Nations-African Union peacekeeping force for Darfur, while Sudan praised the U.N. resolution, which was watered down to drop the threat of sanctions.
Acceptance of the new 26,000-strong force marked a major turnaround for Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir's government, which had resisted for months a push to send U.N. peacekeepers to the western Darfur region, where over 200,000 people have died and 2.5 million been chased from their homes in four years of fighting.
But Sudan agreed in June to a compromise deal for the African Union to deploy jointly with the U.N. in a "hybrid force" to end the violence, which is what the U.N. resolution passed Tuesday provides for.
"The Sudanese government is committed to implementing its part of the resolution," Sudanese Foreign Minister Lam Akol told reporters on Wednesday.
The U.N. Security Council unanimously approved the force, which if fully deployed would be the world's largest peacekeeping operation. It is expected to be made up mostly of peacekeepers from Africa with backup from Asian troops.
Tuesday's resolution won Khartoum's praise after it dropped the threat of sanctions against Sudan if it fails to accept the force and an authorization for the new force to seize or collect arms. The changes were made in negotiations between Security Council members to avoid a veto by China, Sudan's top diplomatic ally.
Major Western powers are expected to provide only limited manpower in the force, as many are already overstretched in existing peacekeeping efforts and conflicts such as Iraq, observers say. Britain's military, for example, has 7,100 service members in Afghanistan and 5,500 in Iraq.
"We would consider requests to support the United Nations-Africans Mission in Darfur once we receive a formal request to do so," Britain's Defense Ministry said Wednesday, adding that it is already assisting the existing AU mission in Darfur in areas including logistics and planning.
But a spokeswoman at the British foreign office who spoke on condition of anonymity, in keeping with the ministry's regulations said Britain would not send ground forces.
"We're not going to be putting soldiers with guns and tanks in Darfur," she said.
The conflict in Darfur began in February 2003 when ethnic African tribes rebelled against what they considered decades of neglect and discrimination by Sudan's Arab-dominated government. Sudan's government is accused of retaliating by unleashing a militia of Arab nomads known as the janjaweed a charge it denies. More than 200,000 people have died, and 2.5 million have been uprooted.
The new peacekeeping force will take over from the beleaguered 7,000-strong African Union force now in Darfur no later than Dec. 31. The U.N. said the force, called UNAMID, will have "a predominantly African character," as Sudan demanded.
African troops already in Darfur will stay there. Nigeria, which has about 2,000 troops in Darfur, is ready to send an additional battalion of about 700 soldiers, said army spokesman Col. Mohammed Yusuf.
France offered to send soldiers and participate in the chain of command, as well as take part in reconstruction and humanitarian efforts, Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner said. He did not say how many troops France might contribute.
Denmark's Defense Minister Soeren Gade said his country would definitely help.
"Beside the fact that there is a need for quite a lot of soldiers, there is a need for logistical staff, people in the headquarters, ships that can ferry equipment on long distances, planes that can move equipment and personnel," he said in an interview from Iraq with the TV2 News channel.
Desra Percaya, spokesman for Indonesia's foreign ministry, said the country was willing to contribute troops but was waiting for details on how many non-African troops are needed.
Several countries including Italy, Sweden, Austria, the Netherlands, Poland, Turkey, Thailand, and South Africa said they had not made a decision yet. Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer said the country would send a small number of doctors and nurses, but no troops or security personnel, given its existing commitments in Iraq, Afghanistan and the Solomon Islands.
China made no immediate response, though its special envoy on Darfur said in June that his country would seriously consider sending peacekeepers.
The 15-member Security Council's approval of the peacekeeping force ended weeks of negotiations between its main sponsors Britain and France and the Sudanese government and its key backers including China, which imports two-thirds of Sudan's oil.
The force will include up to 19,555 military personnel, including 360 military observers and liaison officers, a civilian component including up to 3,772 international police, and 19 special police units with up to 2,660 officers.
The ultimate troop strength depends on the willingness of U.N. member states to contribute troops, police, logistics and sophisticated military hardware.
Associated Press writer Thomas Wagner in London and AP reporters around the world contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: August 2, 2007

 

End of Document
