

Hamas, Fatah reach new cease-fire deal, agree to pull fighters off the streets, official says
The Associated Press
May 19, 2007 Saturday 11:22 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 700 words
Byline: By IBRAHIM BARZAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GAZA CITY Gaza Strip
Body




Negotiators from the rival Hamas and Fatah movements reached a new cease-fire deal Saturday, a senior aide to Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas said.
The agreement was worked out in a meeting at the Egyptian Embassy in Gaza, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he is not authorized to discuss the matter with reporters.
Previous agreements reached in the past week of deadly factional fighting quickly collapsed, and it was not clear if this one would hold. Under the new truce agreement, both sides pledged to pull their fighters off the streets and to exchange hostages later Saturday.
Earlier, Israel's defense minister warned that Israel will not let up in its strikes against Hamas and that militants firing rockets on Israeli border towns should be "very afraid." But Amir Peretz also said the time is not right for a major ground offensive in Gaza.
The Hamas rocket barrage on Israeli border towns came during a week of deadly clashes between the Islamic militant group and Abbas' Fatah movement. A series of Israeli air strikes has driven Hamas fighters out of their bases and prompted accusations that Israel is helping Fatah.
Peretz insisted Israel is not interfering in the internal fighting. However, he also said that "we certainly would like the moderate forces to emerge with the upper hand," a reference to Fatah.
Shortly after Peretz spoke on Israel Radio, an Israeli aircraft fired missiles toward a rocket squad near the northern Gaza town of Beit Hanoun, the army said. Hospital officials said two Palestinians were killed and four wounded in the strike. Earlier Saturday, missile strikes demolished two suspected Hamas metal workshops.
Saturday's deaths brought to 22 the number of Palestinians killed in air strikes in the past week.
In Gaza City, Hamas and Fatah gunmen clashed near the Islamic University, a Hamas stronghold, and two Fatah fighters were injured.
The weeklong Hamas-Fatah fighting has killed more than 50 Palestinians and wounded dozens. The clashes have all but destroyed a coalition deal between the two rivals.
Abbas spoke late Friday to the supreme Hamas leader, Damascus-based Khaled Mashaal, who urged senior Hamas and Fatah officials to meet.
Abbas has stayed in his West Bank headquarters during the fighting. Palestinian officials said he was told by security advisers not to travel to Gaza, for fear of possible danger to his life.
Some of the heaviest fighting has taken place around Abbas' heavily fortified seaside compound in Gaza City.
During periods of lull, residents of the area ventured out onto their balconies or even into the streets, while some security men slept on sidewalks after guarding street corner positions through the night.
A local supermarket owner, Mohammed Badrasawi, said the security forces posted in the neighborhood bought most of his bottled water and the entire stock of playing cards 150 decks along with chess boards and dominos for the long hours of guard duty.
After a week of fighting, garbage piles were growing. A few children picked up spent ammunition.
In Israel, two rockets hit the border area Saturday. A day earlier, four Israelis were hurt in rocket attacks.
Peretz, the Israeli defense minister, said Israel would keep going after Hamas targets. "We are mainly focusing on sensitive locations tied to Hamas," he said, adding that this included places where rockets are made.
Asked whether Palestinian Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh and the head of Hamas' military wing, Ahmed Jaberi, also could be targets, Peretz said he wouldn't rule out any action that "makes it clear to everyone that we don't intend to allow anyone to harm Israeli citizens."
"The Palestinians need to understand that Hamas is leading them into disaster, a real disaster," Peretz said. "It is our intention to act against Hamas."
Peretz said the time wasn't right for a major ground offensive in Gaza, and that the military still has enough other tools to deal with the rocket threat.
The defense minister said Israel is worried about efforts by Hamas to improve the range of the rockets. He said Palestinian militants from Gaza were receiving training abroad, including in Iran, in order to improve the reach of the rockets.
 Load-Date: May 20, 2007

 

End of Document
