

Huge fiberglass statue of Anubis, the ancient Egyptian god of the dead, floats down Thames
The Associated Press
October 1, 2007 Monday 8:34 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 294 words
Byline: By RAPHAEL G. SATTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




A giant statue of the ancient Egyptian god of the dead floated down the Thames on Monday, turning heads as it crossed under London's Tower Bridge.
The 25-foot fiberglass representation of the jackal-headed god was taken down the river on the back of a cargo ship to Trafalgar Square, where it will stand for three days before moving to various locations around the capital.
Anubis' arrival is part of an effort to promote an exhibition of the treasures taken from the tomb of the ancient Egyptian King Tutankhamun. The show, "Tutankhamun and the Golden Age of the Pharaohs," opens Nov. 15 at London's O2, previously known as the Millennium Dome.
Tutankhamun ascended to the throne more than 3,000 years ago during Egypt's 18th dynasty period while still a child. He reigned for only nine years and had no surviving children. His two stillborn babies were buried with him.
The exhibit, which has previously been touring the United States since June 2005, includes the golden diadem worn by the mummified king when archaeologist Howard Carter uncovered his the tomb in 1922 and four miniature gold coffinettes that held Tutankhamun's internal organs. Items from other royal 18th-dynasty graves will also be on display.
Organizers said the presence of the 5.6-ton black-and-gold statue was a nod to ancient Egyptian belief that Anubis escorted the dead to the underworld and protected them on their journey.
"That's really his role here, today: He's protecting the Tutankhamun exhibition as it leaves America and heads for the U.K," said Ken Kelling, spokesman for Visit London, the city's tourism authority.
More than 300,000 tickets already have been sold or reserved for the exhibition, which runs until Aug. 30, organizers said.
On the Net:
King Tut: http://www.kingtut.org
 Load-Date: October 2, 2007

 

End of Document
