

In Africa, Bush honors victims of the worst genocide in recent history
The Associated Press
February 19, 2008 Tuesday 10:02 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 854 words
Byline: By BEN FELLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIGALI Rwanda
Body




President Bush on Tuesday called the 1994 genocide in Rwanda a reminder "That there is evil in the world and evil must be confronted."
During his five-nation trip of Africa, Bush visited a memorial in Kigali where some remains of more than 250,000 victims of the killings are buried. Over 100 days, roughly 800,000 people were shot, clubbed and hacked to death in frenzied killing led by radial Hutus.
"It's a moving place. It can't help but shake your emotions to their very foundation," Bush said. `It reminds me that we must not let these kind of actions take place and that the people of Rwanda need help to reconcile, to move foward after a brutal period."
Bush's visit to the memorial, his first, is part of a six-day trek through Africa. The public mission of his travels is to tout U.S. aid to the continent, preserve his health initiatives in Africa beyond his presidency and cement humanitarianism as a key part of his legacy.
In 2005, first lady Laura Bush and their daughter, Jenna, made an emotional trip to the massive burial site on a trellis-covered hillside and the haunting indoor museum where exhibits tell the story of Rwanda's genocide as well as other ethnic slaughter around the world.
Bush, his wife and senior aides saw children's photos and biographical information of the young people who were slaughtered. One of them was Ariane, 4, who liked to sing and dance and loved cake and milk. She was fatally stabbed in her eyes and head.
"We ask for God's blessings on those who still hurt and those who long for help, and on the kids, whose lives had to have been deeply affected by the trauma of the moment," Bd ush said.
The president and Mrs. Bush emerged from the memorial grim-faced and laid a wreath on a bed of stones. Mrs. Bush leaned over to straighten a purple sash on the wreath. The two stood silently with heads bowed in a moment of silence for the event the president has called one of the most horrific episodes of the 20th century.
The country has stabilized under now-President Paul Kagame, whose rebel force toppled Hutu extremists and ended the genocide. Bush sees Kagame, Rwanda's first democratically elected president, as an ally and man of action, although the Rwandan leader is accused by critics of authoritarian ways.
At an arrival ceremony at Kigali International Airport, a boy and girl dressed in formal white clothes gave bright flowers to Mrs. Bush. The president and Kagame walked down a red carpet and stood on a platform as a military band played the U.S. national anthem, and then watched as male African dancers, wearing long, flowing blond wigs, performed on the tarmac.
On his way to the memorial, Bush's motorcade wound down switchback roads, passing squat homes and dilapidated storefronts tucked into the red clay hillsides and valleys that make up this poor city of nearly 1 million. The president attracted some curious crowds, but they were much more subdued than the raucous, enormous attention he received in Tanzania.
Beyond paying respects, one of Bush's main purposes for visiting Rwanda is to praise the nation for its peacekeeping commitment in Sudan. Bush, who is frustrated by the slow pace of international peacekeepers, is expected to single out Rwanda for being the first to deploy peacekeepers to the violent Darfur region. The United States has trained nearly 7,000 Rwandan troops and spent more than $17 million to equip and move Rwandan troops into Sudan for service.
On Air Force One en route from Tanzania, White House press secretary Dana Perino said that Bush will announce the availability of $100 million to train and provide equipment for African peacekeepers, who will deploy to Darfur. She said the money is available to several nations, and that Rwanda's share is $12 million, which will pay for 2,400 peacekeepers and equipment.
Another topic, though, will be Rwanda's troubled history in the conflict in neighboring Congo.
The Rwandan genocide spilled over into Congo, and Rwanda invaded that country in 1998 along with Uganda and the war there has killed a staggering 5.4 million people. Rwanda pulled out in 2002, but part of Bush's aim is to urge Rwanda to end any support for armed groups still fighting there. The U.S. recently helped a fragile cease-fire that may or may not hold.
American aid has been the theme of Bush's stops so far in Benin and Tanzania, where he has been treated like a hero for his efforts to combat AIDS and malaria and fund economic development. Bush also is visiting Ghana and Liberia.
During his visit here, Bush also will praise Rwanda for its growing economy. Yet even with its sales of coffee and tea, and the tourists it draws to see rolling hills and rugged mountains, Rwanda remains deeply poor and dependent on foreign aid. Bush will sign an investment treaty with Rwanda, another symbol of U.S. commitment to sub-Saharan Africa.
"Although the economy has been doing very well and efforts on HIV have been remarkable, the political space and the democratization process has not gone forward," said Jennifer Cooke, an authority on Africa for the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.
 Load-Date: February 20, 2008

 

End of Document
