

In war, Sharon survived wounds against the odds
The Associated Press
January 9, 2006 Monday 7:24 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 748 words
Byline: By RAMIT PLUSHNICK-MASTI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM 
Body




In 1948, Ariel Sharon spent hours in a steaming battlefield bleeding from his leg and stomach after being shot during a Jordanian onslaught. Finally dragged to safety by his comrades, he survived against all odds.
In 1973, he famously crossed the Suez Canal with a bloody bandage wrapped around his head after being wounded in a fierce battle with the Egyptians.
Now, after a massive stroke and brain surgery, the 77-year-old Sharon may no longer be able to beat the odds.
"There is no doubt he is a survivor. He has seen the angel of death looking at him many times," said Haim Hefer, an Israeli author and journalist who befriended Sharon 70 years ago.
"But it doesn't become him to die of a hemorrhage. It's not for him. He should have something bigger," Hefer told The Associated Press.
In the 1948 Mideast war that led to Israel's establishment, Sharon was a 20-year-old fresh-faced platoon commander.
Oozing confidence, he led his troops into the Battle of Latrun on May 24, 1948, commanding the immediate respect of his men, many of whom had only met him days before, Israeli journalist Uzi Benziman wrote in his Sharon biography "Doesn't Stop on Red."
While Sharon's troops headed up a hill in the dark of night toward the Latrun fort held by the Jordanian-led Arab Legion, they were pounded by heavy, direct fire.
Sharon and his men lay in a barley field. Dawn came and the situation worsened. Another Israeli force without Sharon's knowledge was ordered to retreat. Sharon, who was hit by a bullet during the fighting, lay wounded and bleeding profusely, surrounded by enemy soldiers in a burning field.
Just over a year ago, Sharon recalled for The New York Times how he dragged himself into a ravine, where blood mingled with mud.
"I hesitated for one minute, then I put my mouth into this mud there and I drank I don't know I would say a very big quantity of this red-green mud," he said.
"I know it's a terrible thing. Because people will read it and they will say, 'look, he drinks also blood," he told The Times, laughing his trademark deep, hearty chuckle.
In the end, Sharon was rescued when Yaakov Bugin, one of his men, found him lying on his back in the ravine, groaning in pain, Benziman wrote. Bugin, also wounded, helped Sharon stand, and the two slowly retreated.
Sharon spent weeks recovering from a serious wound from the bullet that penetrated his thigh and exited his stomach, only to be back on the battlefield in February. Fifty years later, in the late 1990s, Israel's Defense Ministry recognized him as a wounded veteran for the injuries he suffered in the Latrun battles, which killed more than 200 Israelis.
By 1973, Sharon was a retired general dabbling in politics. With the outbreak of war in October, he was called up for reserve duty.
Ignoring his commanders, Sharon pushed ahead through the Sinai Desert, tailing the Egyptian forces that had launched a surprise attack on Israel just days before. Sharon found the gap between two Egyptian divisions and slipped his forces to the banks of the Suez Canal, Benziman wrote.
Wounded in the head by shrapnel from Egyptian artillery, Sharon and his troops built two bridges across the canal, and the general, a bloody bandage wrapped around his forehead, went across, said Meir Pa'il, a top Israeli military historian.
Sharon would be credited by many as the man who turned the war around. Others would accuse him of starting a "war of generals." In the end, his military tactics paid off for Israel.
"He was a good one (commander) from the point of view of the military profession and excellent from the point of view of his courage," Pa'il said. "His long, long experience and his battle wounds made him a stronger human being at least in his character."
Hefer spent years verbally sparring with Sharon. In 1982, after then-Defense Minister Sharon led Israel into a quagmire in Lebanon, Hefer said he wrote a column so negative that Sharon's wife refused to speak to him.
In a turnaround, Hefer wrote Sharon an open letter after his stroke, and it was published Thursday on an Israeli Web site. It pleaded with the prime minister to come back because all the politicians he left behind were "floor rags."
"Everything you do has to be big. It wasn't enough for you to have a minor stroke, you wanted something big?" Hefer wrote, referring to an initial stroke that Sharon, who will turn 78 next month, suffered Dec. 18. "You will get out of it. You are stubborn, physically strong. I am 80, you are 78, and I never beat you."
 Load-Date: January 10, 2006

 

End of Document
