

Iran the lurking issue as Mideast violence flares
The Associated Press
July 16, 2006 Sunday 10:24 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 907 words
Byline: By SALLY BUZBEE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO Egypt
Body




The past five days' shocking flare-up of Mideast violence may really be, beneath it all, a fight about Iran and its place in the region. While Israel, the United States and some Arab countries hope the Islamic regime suffers a blow, Tehran may count on emerging from the crisis with its power intact and its influence raised even higher.
So far, the battleground has been limited to Lebanon and Israel: Lebanon being pounded by Israeli aircraft and Israeli cities by missiles of the Iranian-supported Hezbollah guerrilla movement in Lebanon.
But the underlying struggle is between Israel and others who view Iran as a threat that must be confronted, and Iran and its allies within Lebanon, Syria and even Iraq, who are determined to show they can cause serious trouble if Iran is squeezed too hard.
All that means the fighting could last a long time.
Tensions have been brewing for years as the Palestinian-Israeli impasse has festered and Iran and Syria have funneled money, training and other support to Hezbollah on Lebanon's southern border with Israel. The reason such violence erupted now remains unclear. In part, Hezbollah's leader may have decided that he needed to show that Hezbollah not the militant group Hamas in the West Bank and Gaza still was the leader of the anti-Israeli cause.
For its part, Israel chose to retaliate and escalate when Hezbollah seized two of its soldiers, perhaps thinking any sign of weakness could make the Jewish state more vulnerable. Or perhaps, as some Israeli generals have suggested, it saw an opening to try to smash Hezbollah once and for all, after the militant group had behaved so provocatively.
Whether they instigated Hezbollah's actions or merely supported them, Iran and Syria had reasons to be pleased.
The Group of Eight summit of major world powers had hoped to focus on a joint policy on Iran's nuclear program, which has brought Tehran international criticism and the possibility of eventual U.N. Security Council sanctions if it doesn't suspend uranium enrichment.
Instead, the leaders spent much of the weekend struggling to reach a semblance of consensus on how to stop the new violence.
Syria, for its part, may hope that Lebanese anger directed at Damascus for its alleged role in the 2005 killing of a former Lebanese prime minister has been redirected at Israel. Syria also may hope that Western nations will come to it for help in solving the Hezbollah-Israeli violence.
Meanwhile, global consensus on the crisis remains far away, despite a G-8 statement Sunday urging Israel to show "utmost restraint" and blaming Hezbollah and Hamas for igniting the crisis.
France, for example, has pushed for a cease-fire, making the point along with other European nations that Israel's attacks on Lebanon rile up anti-Western and anti-Israeli sentiment.
President Bush, however, has not called for a cease-fire.
"Provoking Israel creates a natural division between the U.S., as Israel's ally, and Europe," noted Anthony Cordesman, one of the top Mideast experts in the United States. "It distracts from Syria's crimes in Lebanon and Iran's nuclear programs."
And of course, as the United States has learned so painfully, "every Israeli action against Arabs feeds Arab anger against the U.S.," Cordesman said.
What's more surprising, perhaps, is that Arab countries allied with the United States have lashed out at Hezbollah.
Hezbollah's attacks on Israel were "unexpected, inappropriate and irresponsible acts," Saudi Foreign Minister Saud al-Faisal said. Egypt, Jordan, Kuwait, Iraq, the Palestinian Authority, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain agreed.
All are governments dominated by Sunni Muslims, worried about the growing influence and confrontational stance of the heavily Shiite Muslim Iranian regime. They also worry about the prospect of an Iraq dominated by Shiite parties beholden to Iran.
And unlike Iran, Syria, Hezbollah or Hamas, most of those Arab countries have shown willingness to accept some type of deal on the Israel-Palestinian crisis, even if they're lukewarm about it.
In some ways, it should make the United States happy that Arab countries like Saudi Arabia criticize Hezbollah. But paradoxically, as Mideast hostilities grow it becomes more difficult for such U.S. allies to have any real influence over groups like Hezbollah and Hamas, or countries like Syria. And that means the U.S. ability to influence the region falls.
Stability also becomes an issue. Countries like Egypt worry that even if they don't support Hezbollah their people will, leading to protests and dissent.
Hezbollah and Iran play off that for all it's worth. Hezbollah's leader, Sheik Hassan Nasrallah, has cast himself as a protector of the Islamic world, as has Iran's hard-line president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Both are sophisticated in using the region's satellite television stations to spread their message that confrontation alone can give Muslims dignity.
The question remains how far all this will go.
Iran has warned that Israel will suffer if it broadens its attacks to include Syria, but what Iran might do in such a situation remains unclear.
Both sides clearly view their very existence at risk and thus will be loathe to back down, said Iranian exile Amir Taheri, writing in Sunday's pan-Arab Asharq al Awsat newspaper. And that could make the fight both long and damaging.
"The stakes have been raised beyond anyone's expectation," Taheri said.
Sally Buzbee is the AP's Chief of Middle East News.
 Load-Date: July 17, 2006

 

End of Document
