

Iran on threshold of enrichment and potentially just years away from the nuclear bomb
The Associated Press
January 28, 2006 Saturday 6:42 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1019 words
Byline: By GEORGE JAHN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIENNA Austria
Body




Three years? Five? Ten? The jury is still out on whether Iran wants nuclear arms but if it does, the question is no longer whether it has the skills to make them but when it will finish building the first one.
Iran says it does not want such weapons and the technology it insists on running uranium enrichment has the sole purpose of making fuel for nuclear reactors to generate electricity.
But enrichment can also create the fissile core of nuclear warheads.
So oil-rich Iran's assertion it needs an enrichment program to meet energy needs has been met with skepticism from the United States and other nations already worried about Tehran's plutonium experiments, black market procurement of "dual-use" components that could fit into an atomic arms program, and off-limits sites that dissidents claim are military nuclear workshops.
The skeptics are trying to persuade other nations that steps must be taken to prevent the Tehran regime from working on the technology that could give it the bomb.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and the foreign ministers of the U.N. Security Council's four other permanent members and Germany are meeting Monday in London to see if they can agree on a coordinated approach when the U.N. nuclear watchdog agency discusses Iran later in the week.
Iran's Jan. 10 decision to restart small-scale uranium enrichment and its president's call for Israel to be wiped off the map have boosted support for a U.S.-European initiative to refer Tehran to the Security Council.
The 35-nation board of the International Atomic Energy Agency will debate that idea when it meets Thursday at the U.N. agency's headquarters in Vienna, Austria.
IAEA chief Mohamed ElBaradei, for one, hopes that Iran can be persuaded to accept a Kremlin proposal to move its enrichment program to Russia, where it could be monitored more closely. On Wednesday, the top Iranian nuclear negotiator, Ali Larijani, called the proposal a "positive" development.
In the meantime, Iran is taking a tough public stand threatening to expand its limited enrichment into a full-scale program that would allow it to enrich tons of uranium.
If Iran is referred to the Security Council, "our actions will not be limited to research." Larijani warned. "Then we will begin industrial enrichment."
Experts and Iran's critics say if Iran does that, its first bomb will be only years away leading to a spike in tensions in the already volatile Middle East.
An Iran with an atomic bomb and the means to deliver it would make not only nuclear confrontation with Israel a mind-numbing possibility. It could also lead Iranian rivals, Egypt and Saudi Arabia, to start their own weapons programs.
The IAEA says its three-year probe of Iran's nuclear program has produced no evidence the Iranians are trying to build atomic arms, but the agency also has not been able to rule that out.
American intelligence revealed last year, based on information found in a laptop computer reportedly smuggled out of Iran, suggested Tehran's scientists at least had engineering drafts of a nuclear warhead.
"It's not a smoking gun, but it's the best evidence that Iran has a secret nuclear weapons program," says nonproliferation expert David Albright, a former U.N. nuclear inspector in Iran.
The IAEA probe in Iran also has turned up disturbing findings, including black-market drawings showing how to cast fissile material so it can be used as the core of nuclear weapons.
ElBaradei, the agency's head, has refused to rule out that Iran may be working on a nuclear "weaponization program" including warheads, missile delivery systems, electronics, gyroscopic stabilizers and related items.
Still, the main worry is enrichment.
"The technical challenges of producing fissile material is considerably greater than the challenges of weaponization, at least for a simple nuclear weapons design," says Iran expert Gary Samore of the McArthur Foundation in Chicago.
Tehran is far from its ultimate goal of running 50,000 centrifuges to enrich uranium in the central city of Natanz for what it says will be the fuel requirements of its nearly finished Russian-built Bushehr reactor. It has less than 1,000 centrifuges.
Still, Albright says Iran has enough black-market components in storage to build the 1,500 operating centrifuges it would need to make the 45 pounds of highly enriched uranium needed for one crude weapon.
Feed stock is not a problem. Iran has huge reserves of raw uranium and in May revealed it had converted 37 tons into the gas that is fed into centrifuges for enrichment. That amount could yield about 220 pounds of weapons-grade uranium, enough for about five crude nuclear weapons.
Albright estimates Iran could reach that point within three years. Samore says five. U.S. officials last year cited intelligence estimating Iran would need 10 years for its first bomb.
Whatever estimate is right, international concerns are growing. Even Iranian allies Russia and China have joined the United States and other critics in pressuring Tehran to resume its freeze on enrichment work.
Still, Russia and China, both veto-wielding Security Council members, oppose referring Iran to the council, let alone punishing it with meaningful economic or political sanctions.
Israel, the target of harsh rhetoric from Iran's leaders, argues that tough measures are needed.
Uzi Arad, director of Israel's Institute of Policy and Strategy, says the threat of force should not be ruled out. The prospect of heavy airstrikes on Iranian "nuclear targets, the military regime and maybe even oil targets" could make Tehran back down, he said.
Albright, who heads the Washington-based Institute for Science and International Security, agrees that "a bolt out of the blue ... could cause serious damage" to Iran's nuclear program.
But, he adds, that could also backfire, with the Iranians almost guaranteed to quit the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and forge ahead with their atomic work.
"If you're not following up with regime change or diplomatic force to cause a change in Iran's behavior, you've probably just guaranteed they're going to get nuclear weapons faster," Albright says.
 Load-Date: January 29, 2006

 

End of Document
