

Israeli cabinet minister says he's open to the possibility of a truce with Hamas
The Associated Press
December 21, 2007 Friday 9:45 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 611 words
Byline: By LAURIE COPANS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM 
Body




Israel's infrastructure minister said Friday that he favored a conditional cease-fire with Hamas, becoming the highest-ranking Israeli official to welcome the militant group's proposal.
Binyamin Ben-Eliezer, a former defense minister, said Prime Minister Ehud Olmert may consider discussing a long-term cease-fire with Hamas if the group stops smuggling arms into the Gaza Strip and negotiates the release of an Israeli soldier captured by Hamas-affiliated militants last year.
"The prime minister I know doesn't totally rule anything out," Ben-Eliezer told Israel Radio. "If a serious, realistic proposal is put on the table and Hamas is willing to discuss a long-term cease-fire and is willing to stop the terror, to stop the smuggling and is willing to open talks on the release of Gilad Shalit, I would go to negotiations."
Israel's official position is that it will not talk with Hamas unless the group renounces all violence, recognizes Israel's right to exist and accepts previous peace agreements.
Olmert's office reiterated that stance Friday, and Deputy Prime Minister Shaul Mofaz said, "we will not have any negotiations with terrorist organizations."
But the willingness of a senior minister to openly discuss the possibility of a truce proposed by Hamas may indicate that the government is seriously weighing the idea. Israeli defense officials, speaking on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the topic, said Friday, without providing details, that the government was examining the Hamas offer.
Hamas first floated the idea of a truce in a phone call to an Israeli TV reporter Tuesday from Ismail Haniyeh, leader of the Hamas government in Gaza. The proposal was officially made Thursday though Egyptian mediators. Previous truces have been negotiated through Egyptian mediation, but none have held for long.
"All the Palestinians are in a crisis, not Hamas," said Hamas official Salah Bardawil. "We are not lovers of war. We love our rights. If we can get them through a truce, that would be an achievement."
Palestinian militants continue to fire rockets daily at communities in southern Israel and the army has struck back hard, killing 20 Gaza militants in airstrikes and ground operations in the past week. Late Thursday, Hamas said it had fired three rockets at Israel, its first such claim in weeks. The rocket fire is usually conducted by the smaller Islamic Jihad and the Popular Resistance Committees militant groups.
Abu Obeida, an official with Hamas' military wing, said Friday that the rockets fired by Hamas had targeted an Israeli military base.
"This is a tactic of the Hamas military wing," he said. "It has nothing (to do) with a truce or escalation."
Six Palestinian militants were killed Thursday in clashes with Israeli troops and another died Friday from his wounds. An eighth Hamas militant was killed by Israeli troops near the Israel-Gaza border Friday, the group and medics said. The Israeli army spokesman's office said it was not aware of any clashes in the area.
"To this minute, what we see is Israeli aggression," Hamas spokesman Sami Abu Zuhri said Friday. "The occupation (Israel) is proving that it is not interested in any truce."
Israeli defense officials, speaking on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the issue, said Thursday the Hamas offer was limited to stopping the rocket fire in exchange for a halt to Israeli military operations in Gaza.
They said Hamas gave assurances it could impose the truce on the other militant groups that are firing the rockets Islamic Jihad and the Popular Resistance Committees.
Associated Press writer Sarah El Deeb contributed to this report from Gaza City.
 Load-Date: December 22, 2007

 

End of Document
