

Italy won the cup but Germany won the friends
The Associated Press
July 10, 2006 Monday 1:17 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 806 words
Byline: By SIMON HAYDON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




Italy may have won the World Cup but Germany won all the friends, proving warm and fun-loving hosts of the world's biggest sporting event.d
Germany's team led the way on the soccer pitch with a buccaneering approach and the good vibes infected everyone from the tough policemen looking out for hooligans to Germans spontaneously embracing visitors from Bangkok to Buenos Aires.
"Perfect ambassadors for the new German identity," raved the Star newspaper of South Africa which hosts the next World Cup in 2010.
"Taking the World Cup's slogan of 'a time to make friends' to heart, the traditionally staid, stuck-up Germans wore permanent smiles, went out of their way to help their visitors and were an engaging, warm bunch," wrote the Johannesburg daily.
Mark Perryman, author of "Ingerland: Travels with a Football Nation," said that the friendship of the German people, the perfect weather and the evenhanded policing made for an exceptional tournament.
"The fan parks were absolutely incredible," Perryman said, noting that it was a risk for German authorities to invite tens of thousands of people to just come and join in the party, even though they didn't have tickets.
"What happened was a great festival," he said. "I think it will have a significant effect on German relations."
On its Web site, the Austrian broadcaster ORF described German Chancellor Angela Merkel's embrace of coach Juergen Klinsmann after their third-place win as a metaphor for the country's new relaxed manner.
"A country one doesn't think of as celebrating emotionally surprised itself during the past four weeks," ORF said.
Klinsmann, a 41-year-old who lives in California, was part of the success story, joyfully celebrating his team's successes from the touchline while silencing critics who said his team and coaching abilities weren't world class.
Merkel gained in stature because of the World Cup, the broadcaster said, noting it brought her closer to the people and helped her shed her matronly image.
For Thailand's Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, the appeal of attending Sunday's final in person faded when Germany was eliminated by Italy in the semifinal.
"I changed my mind," Thaksin told reporters. "Now that the host has been defeated, it's better to stay at home."
Television images beamed around the world of smiling and often drunken fans cheering and singing, nationalities intermingled, have gone a long way to making Germany 2006 as much a success off the soccer pitch as on it.
In England, where the population holds its breath at every major soccer tournament to see if its hooligans will once again tarnish the country's image, newspapers were full of positive stories about patient German police and soccer fans enjoying friendly banter that did not degenerate into rioting.
When English hotheads sang songs about World War II, German police calmly explained that it was an "unkind" thing to do. In one memorable image beamed around the world, a German policeman propped up an English carouser who was belting out a booze-soaked anthem.
When an Italian fan confronted a group of Germans who were drinking beers and chanting the virtues of their team on a train the night after the hosts beat Argentina, the situation might easily have been combustible.
It quickly turned into a scene of mutual admiration: Both sides praised the other's team, embraced, and exchanged "good luck" in parting.
It wasn't just in the cities that Germany showed off its warmer side and cast off the stereotypical image of Germans as stuffy and unbending.
The small Westphalian town of Kamen went to extraordinary lengths to welcome the Spanish team, which was based there.
Residents flew the Spanish flag from their windows, painted their faces red and yellow and turned out in their hundreds to watch every team practice. Local businesses also tried to cater to the Spanish visitors.
In The Times of London on Monday, columnist Glenn Moore praised the welcoming atmosphere at Berlin's "fan mile" and other outdoor venues.
"The nation was utterly infected with fussballfieber, and the people went out of their way to make friends," he wrote.
In an editorial headlined "Auf Wiedersehen, and thank you," The Independent daily praised German organization and hospitality and said the event was a watershed.
"The final, in the Olympic stadium of a unified Berlin, exorcised many ghosts," the newspaper said.
It wasn't all love and reconciliation, however.
Although Italian Premier Romano Prodi and Merkel sat together for Italy's defeat of Germany, relations between the rival soccer nations were strained when an article posted on the Web site of German weekly Der Spiegel called Italians "parasites, mamma's boys and slimy."
AP Writers Danica Kirka, Karl Ritter, Krystyna Rudzki, Josh Dickey, Ariel David, Veronika Oleksyn, Jill Lawless and Sarah Ball contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: July 11, 2006

 

End of Document
