

Key battlegrounds around the West
The Associated Press
August 17, 2006 Thursday 9:23 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 587 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Some of the Western hot spots prized by hunters, anglers and outdoors enthusiasts and the oil and gas industry:
ROAN PLATEAU:
Located 180 miles west of Denver in western Colorado's Piceance Basin, one of the natural gas hot spots in the Rockies. North of the Colorado River, it stretches for tens of thousands of acres and ranges from 5,200 feet to nearly 9,300 feet above sea level.
Resources: Its rolling hills, valleys, dramatic canyons and forests are home to large elk and deer herds, mountain lions, peregrine falcons, bears, native Colorado cutthroat trout and plants found nowhere else.
It also contains trillions of cubic feet of natural gas and vast reserves of oil shale. Part of it was known as the Naval Oil Shale Reserve, set aside to mine fuel from oil thought to be in the shale and transferred from the Department of Energy to the Interior Department in 1997.
The Bureau of Land Management is completing a management plan for 73,602 acres of federal land, 34,758 of which are on top of the plateau. Another 51,000 acres are privately owned and not covered by the BLM plan.
Companies with operations in the area include Canadian-based Encana Corp. and Tulsa, Okla.-based Williams Cos. Shell Exploration & Production Co. is testing a shale oil procedure on its land.
VALLE VIDAL:
A 101,794-acre valley in northern New Mexico's Sangre de Cristo Mountains. The Pennzoil Co. donated the land in 1982 to be managed by the Carson National Forest. Deer, elk black bears, mountain lions, bald eagles and native Rio Grande cutthroat trout are found in the Valle Vidal, or Valley of Life, as well as the headwaters of several streams and tributaries of the Rio Grande and Canadian rivers.
A Forest Service study in 2004 found a high potential for oil and gas development in the 40,000-acre eastern part of the valley. El Paso Exploration and Production Co. has wells on private, adjacent land and has asked the Forest Service to open 40 percent of the Valle Vidal for coal-bed methane gas production.
ROCKY MOUNTAIN FRONT:
A 110-mile stretch in northern Montana where the craggy, limestone rocks along the Continental Divide meet the plains. Environmentalists, hunters and anglers say the front is crucial winter range for migratory big game and contains 290 wildlife species and a third of all plant species found in Montana. Energy development on the front has been debated for years, with the government halting new oil and gas leasing on national forest land in 1997. In 2003 the Bush administration imposed a ban of at least four years on Front petroleum exploration, during a study.
Startech Energy Corp., whose parent company is Alberta Clipper Energy Inc., has agreed to sell its leases on public land in the area to a conservation group and Questar E&P is donating its federal leases to Trout Unlimited.
JACK MORROW HILLS:
A 622,000-acre area in southwest Wyoming's Red Desert. Its home to one of the nation's only elk herds living in a desert and considered important habitat for mule deer, pronghorns, sage grouse and mountain plovers. The hills include one of North America's largest active sand dunes and spectacular rock formations, including a volcanic butte. The Oregon Trail crosses the area.
The U.S. Bureau of Land Management recently released a plan that would allow 315 billion cubic feet of gas to be produced from the area over the next 10 to 20 years, which the agency said could provide enough heat for 4 million homes for a year. The plan includes some seasonal restrictions on drilling to protect wildlife.
 Load-Date: August 18, 2006

 

End of Document
