

Libya's Moammar Gadhafi takes the stage in genre-busting show from English National Opera
The Associated Press
September 8, 2006 Friday 12:10 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 779 words
Byline: By JILL LAWLESS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




If Moammar Gadhafi dropped by to check out the English National Opera's latest production, he might well be pleased.
In "Gaddafi: A Living Myth," the Libyan leader bestrides the stage of London's Coliseum like well, a colossus. Angry, powerful, charismatic, dangerous, he's an icon of resistance or terrorism, depending on your view. In the words of the show itself, he's "Gadhafi Superstar."
This is not the usual operatic fare, even for a company like the ENO, which sees itself as a hip alternative to the older, more staid Royal Opera.
The show, which opened the company's 2006-2007 season on Thursday, has a score by Steve Chandra Savale of dance/hip-hop collective Asian Dub Foundation that draws on North African rhythms, punk, hip-hop and drum'n'bass. The libretto is by Scottish playwright Shan Khan, who has said his only previous exposure to opera was the Mozart biopic "Amadeus."
"The audience isn't going to know what's hit them," said ENO's artistic director, John Berry, ahead of the opening. "It's not necessarily going to be a comfortable evening, but it will be a highly contentious, visceral experience."
He was right.
"Gaddafi" is largely a failure as drama it's more didactic than dramatic. The play opens with Gadhafi brooding in his desert bunker in 1986, awaiting air strikes sent by U.S. President Ronald Reagan. It then flashes back to show his journey from poor Bedouin boy to young officer, fired up by Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel Nasser's pan-Arab nationalism, to increasingly isolated and feared dictator he renames the months, always a bad sign. Finally, he emerges as a wily survivor, greeted by Prime Minister Tony Blair and embraced by the West.
But while the piece is eventful, it lacks dramatic tension. Although Ramon Tikaram cuts a commanding figure as the Libyan leader, neither Gadhafi's military showdown with Reagan nor his premonition of an assassin in his midst has much suspense.
As spectacle, however, many scenes pack a punch, merging film images, a pounding score and urban dance moves by Gadhafi's cohort of khaki-clad female bodyguards to truly striking, cacophonous effect: opera as styled by Public Enemy.
Occasional moments are starkly effective,as when the Italian invasion of Libya is rendered with video and red paint.
But the lyrics are often banal we are reminded too often that "land" rhymes with "sand" and in its more strident moments the show teeters precariously on the edge of hilarious kitsch.
However, it's impossible to dislike it. Gadhafi's story of oil, power and terrorism has many resonances for our own time. The show has a handful of insightful lines, as when Gadhafi muses on the West's fascination with him: "The bogeyman, the lunatic there's always one like me."
It depicts Gadhafi's support for militant groups around the world from the Black Panthers to the Irish Republican Army while acknowledging we may never know the full truth behind the bombing of a Pan Am jet over Lockerbie, Scotland in 1988. Two Libyans were eventually and contentiously convicted for orchestrating Britain's worst terrorist attack.
It is defiantly unusual, and no show this weird can be truly bad.
"Gaddafi: A Living Myth" is the latest in a series of works to fuse opera and politics often to controversial effect.
U.S. opera composer John Adams has written both "Nixon in China" about U.S. President Richard Nixon's historic 1972 visit to Beijing and "The Death of Klinghoffer," based on the murder of an elderly American during a 1985 cruise-ship hijacking. Fifteen years after its premiere, it routinely attracts protests wherever it is staged.
Even more provocative was "Jerry Springer The Opera," a blend of lowbrow TV and highbrow culture that included arias about transvestitism and diaper fetishism and a Jesus Christ who admits he is "a little bit gay." It was a hit in London's West End, but saw dates across Britain dropped and a U.S. run put on ice amid protests from outraged Christian groups.
"Gaddafi" is an important production for the ENO, which has weathered a period of financial and management turmoil that saw it lose its chairman and artistic director late last year.
The company, whose 2,400-seat Coliseum theater is London's largest, is keen to reach beyond its graying, middle-class core audience.
In 2004 it performed part of Wagner's "The Valkyrie" to thousands of rock fans at the Glastonbury festival. The company's 2006-2007 season includes a Sanskrit-language opera about Indian independence leader Mohandas Gandhi and the Broadway musical "Kismet" alongside more standard operatic fare by Verdi and Mozart.
"Gaddafi: A Living Myth" runs through Sept. 16.
On the Net:
English National Opera: http://www.eno.org
 Load-Date: September 8, 2006

 

End of Document
