

Mugabe fighting for political life in behind-the-scenes ruling party power struggle
The Associated Press
March 21, 2007 Wednesday 7:04 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 657 words
Byline: By TERRY LEONARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG South Africa
Body




Zimbabwe President Robert Mugabe is fighting for his political life in a behind-the-scenes power struggle within his own party that could oust him faster than street battles with a reinvigorated and determined political opposition.
On the streets, hardline elements of Mugabe's secret police and militant youth militia are stepping up a brutal and bloody crackdown on government opponents. Behind the scenes, analysts said, rival factions within the ruling ZANU-PF are plotting to force the president to step down at the end of his term next year. A key test could come next week at a meeting of the ruling party Central Committee, when a faction could seek to block Mugabe from running for another term.
One faction supports the former parliamentary speaker Emmerson Mnangagwa. Another supports Vice President Joyce Muguru, whose husband is a powerful ex-army commander. Both factions are confident that they can prevent another Mugabe term, University of Zimbabwe political analyst John Makumbe said.
"That is where the real trouble for Mugabe is. Both factions of ZANU-PF don't want him to continue," Makumbe said in a telephone interview from Harare, the capital of Zimbabwe. "For Mugabe, the end is in sight. For him to believe otherwise is naive."
Christopher Dell, the U.S. ambassador to Zimbabwe, told The Associated Press the ruling party was in disarray; that tremendous pressures were building within the party because of the succession battle; and that growing numbers within the party want Mugabe to step down.
"He's not prepared to go down without a fight, but he is weaker than he's ever been before," Dell said.
Mugabe, 83, complained in an interview broadcast on his state television last month that top officials were jockeying to succeed him. But, he announced: "There are no vacancies because I am still there."
Dell said there are several possible scenarios in Zimbabwe "from the president unilaterally declaring a state of emergency and seizing power dropping the facade of democracy to somebody moving against him, to him being forced to stand down by his own party."
Disaffection with Mugabe within the ruling party, the military and security forces stems from the country's economic meltdown, said Dell. Annual inflation now stands at 1,730 percent in Zimbabwe, and the International Monetary Fund predicts it will reach 5,000 percent by year's end.
In just eight weeks the exchange rate on the black market, where even the Zimbabwe Central Bank has had to go to buy hard currency, has gone from 5,000 to 24,000 Zimbabwe dollars per U.S. dollar.
"I don't think we need to do much more to put economic pressure on the government because it seems to be doing a damn fine job of ruining its own economy," Dell said.
Makumbe said powerful businessmen allied with the ruling party know their businesses cannot survive the economic freefall. While they may like Mugabe, they can't afford to support him.
"While Mugabe is in office the economy is not going to recover. Mugabe is a liability to the national economy and his opponents know it," Makumbe said.
Opposition activists said police assaulted dissidents, including leader Morgan Tsvangirai, to break up a March 11 prayer meeting to protest Mugabe's rule. The opposition, which split in 2005 as a faction revolted against Tsvangirai's leadership, has said it has unified in the face of the latest violence and will continue to resist.
"The people have turned a corner and they are not afraid anymore," Dell said.
Mugabe has always had some support from his African neighbors in trying to resist international pressure for changes in his autocratic rule. But Dell said the recent violence against the opposition has changed the response from African governments and deepened his isolation.
South Africa issued its strongest criticism of Zimbabwe to date on Tuesday, and others in the region have been even more pointed.
Terry Leonard is The Associated Press bureau chief for southern Africa.
 Load-Date: March 22, 2007

 

End of Document
