

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
December 12, 2007 Wednesday 10:23 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 937 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: DUBAI United Arab Emirates
Body




Annika Sorenstam has one last chance to avoid a winless season.
Sorenstam begins the defense of her Dubai Ladies Masters title Thursday, looking to avert her first winless season since her 1994 rookie year.
"I would definitely like to win," said Sorenstam, who won by six shots last year. "I feel quite comfortable on this golf course, so that's good. It has been a very difficult year for me, but to finish it off with a victory would be just great."
Sorenstam, who was 69 career victories on the LPGA Tour, was sidelined for more than two months because of a neck and back injury. She is third in the rankings, losing the No. 1 spot to Lorena Ochoa of Mexico.
But at the Majlis course of the Emirates Golf Club, where she dominated in the inaugural championship last year, the Swede is hoping good memories and improved health will help.
"But there is absolutely no pressure on me," she said. "I have just started playing decent golf in the last couple of months, and I am feeling much better on the golf course. All I want to do is play as well as I know I can, and hopefully, be in contention coming down the stretch on Sunday."
Sorenstam faces a tough field in the $734,000 season-ending tournament of the Ladies European Tour. Natalie Gulbis and Laura Davies are among the contenders.
WASHINGTON (AP) San Antonio Silver Stars star Ruth Riley will help distribute insecticide-treated bed nets to children and their families in Mali as part of a United Nations Foundation and Nothing But Nets delegation.
Riley will participate in activities aimed at educating local youth on malaria prevention and healthy living habits. On Saturday, Riley will be joined by members of the first Malian women's Olympic team to teach girls basketball skills in Bamako, the U.S. Embassy in Mali.
The United Nations Foundation's Nothing But Nets, the WNBA, MLS W.O.R.K.S., and the Mali women's national basketball team will co-host the basketball and soccer sports clinics for about 120 boys and girls.
"Whether you are an athlete, a CEO, a volunteer, a student or a teacher, we all have resources that we can utilize to help make a difference in this world," said Riley, two-time WNBA champion and 2004 Olympic gold medalist. "By mobilizing all of our resources and support, we can help to make a significant impact on the lives of children."
LOUISVILLE, Ky. (AP) The Breeders' Cup president said he considers Churchill Downs to be one of two leading contenders to host the 2009 championships, even though the track hasn't formally applied.
Greg Avioli, president of the Breeders' Cup, said the organization would discuss a 2009 host at its February meeting. Besides Louisville, he mentioned Santa Anita in Arcadia, Calif., as a leading contender.
Churchill is "one of the best venues for horsemen in the whole country," Avioli told The Courier-Journal. "Our international contingent loves Churchill. It's just a great facility all around to hold the Breeders' Cup in."
Churchill spokeswoman Julie Koenig Loignon acknowledged the track has had informal conversations with Breeders' Cup officials but said she is unaware of any formal application. The Louisville track has hosted the event a record six times, including 2006.
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) Players on the Ohio State's men's soccer team vowed at the end of last season that they wouldn't get slighted again by the NCAA tournament selection committee.
Not only were the Buckeyes invited this year, but they're playing in the national semifinals, their first appearance in the College Cup.
A 4-0 victory Sunday against Bradley extended Ohio State's unbeaten streak to 14 games and puts the Buckeyes (16-3-5) against Massachusetts (17-7-1), which is unbeaten in its last seven games.
The winner of Friday's game in Cary, N.C., will play the winner of the other semifinal between Virginia Tech and Wake Forest for the championship on Sunday.
Last season, Ohio State finished 11-7-3, going 8-2-1 in the last 11 games. But the Buckeyes were passed over for the tournament.
This season, Ohio State has set school records for wins (16), unbeaten streak (14, 11-0-3), shutouts (14) and consecutive shutouts (5).
NEW YORK (AP) The Sacramento Capitals, the defending World Team Tennis champions, will host the championship on July 24-27.
The Capitals are guaranteed a spot in the championship weekend at Allstate Stadium in Roseville, Calif., the WTT announced Wednesday. Five teams will vy for the Billie Jean King trophy.
The top two teams from the Eastern and Western Conferences automatically qualify for the playoffs, along with a wild card team. Sacramento defeated the New York Buzz last summer to win their sixth title.
"The Capitals hosted one of the most successful championships in WTT history last year," said Ilana Kloss, the WTT commissioner. "The Caps fans are great supporters not only of their team but of World Team Tennis. Their enthusiasm and support for all the teams made it one of the most exciting finals ever."
LONDON (AP) Chelsea admitted to a Football Association charge of failing to control the behavior of its players toward a referee.
The FA said the club failed "to ensure that its players conducted themselves in an orderly fashion" after referee Andre Marriner sent off Michael Essien in injury time of a Premier League match against Derby on Nov. 24. Chelsea said Tuesday it would not contest the charge.
Essien, who was a late substitute, was shown a red card for putting his arm up against the face of Derby striker Kenny Miller. Chelsea won the match 2-0.
On Oct. 25, Chelsea was fined $61,450 for failing to control its players during a Premier League match against Manchester United.
 Load-Date: December 13, 2007

 

End of Document
