

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
August 25, 2006 Friday 11:10 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 781 words
Dateline: JACKSON Miss.
Body




Mississippi isn't home to an NFL team and hasn't had a national college football champion in decades, but on Friday the state was named America's best in the sport.
The honor, a glass football statue, came from USA Football, a national youth football advocacy group founded in 2002 by the National Football League and the NFL Player's Association.
Archie Manning, L.C. Greenwood and Hugh Green were at the state Capitol when Gov. Haley Barbour accepted the award, a day before the Saints play against the Indianapolis Colts at Veterans Memorial Stadium.
Manning, a former star player for the Saints and whose son Peyton Manning is quarterback for the Colts, didn't say who he would be rooting for since it's a preseason game.
"I got to tell you, if it was a regular season game ... I'm going for the Colts," said Manning. "I've got three favorite teams these days, the Colts, Giants and the Saints."
Manning's other son, Eli Manning, is quarterback for the New York Giants.
While there are few who would dispute that Mississippi produces first-class players, USA Football executive director Scott Hallenbeck knows he'll have to justify the award to fans in Texas, Kansas and Florida.
USA Football chose Mississippi after a state-by-state analysis measured the per capita percentage of fans interested in collegiate and professional football, number of NFL players who hail from Mississippi and the percentage of lettered high school football players.
USA Football announced Friday that it will award $500,000 in equipment grants to youth teams.
New Orleans owner Tom Benson said the Saints will match the grant funds.
NEW YORK (AP) New York Road Runners president Mary Wittenberg had help ringing the opening bell Friday at New York Stock Exchange.
Ahead of Sunday's New York City half marathon, she was joined by Olympians Meb Keflezighi and Colleen De Reuck of the United States, Catherine Ndereba of Kenya and Benita Johnson of Australia.
They are the favorites in the 13-mile race through Central Park and along the West Side Highway to lower Manhattan.
"I have never done anything like this before, we don't have anything like this in Australia, this is quite an experience," said Johnson, standing outside the NASDAQ site where Sunday's race will be broadcast live on its video screen.
Keflezighi, who finished in the top three in the previous two New York City Marathons, is used to the bustle of the city.
"It is going to be some trip running past here on Sunday with the race on the screen," he said.
PHILADELPHIA (AP) Wearing a royal blue jersey, former Dallas Cowboys great Michael Irvin stepped back onto the football field Friday in Philadelphia to help kick off the youth football season.
"It's a great thing for the kids to understand that the sport of football deserves this celebration," Irvin said at the nationwide Pop Warner Simultaneous Kickoff before the preseason game between the Eagles and Pittsburgh Steelers at Lincoln Financial Field. "It means we will be around for a long time and we are not going anywhere."
The event begins the 50th season for Pop Warner, which involves 25,000 kids nationwide.
"I went to the Hall of Fame for the very first time this year to see Troy (Aikman) inducted and it was amazing walking through there and seeing all that history and the guys who played hard before me," said Irvin, who was a receiver on three Super Bowl champions with Dallas and is now an ESPN studio analyst.
Eagles quarterback Donovan McNabb, another Pop Warner product, also had words of wisdom for the Philadelphia-area Pop Warner kids in attendance.
"Just keep in mind, the guys you may see on TV playing football went through the same process," said McNabb. "So be patient. Whatever you want to achieve, it takes time. Don't listen to what people say you can and cannot do, because you know what you're capable of doing. Just work on your weaknesses and enhance your strengths."
MONTREAL (AP) A Champ Car practice session Friday was briefly interrupted when a family of ducks waddled onto the Circuit Gilles-Villeneuve track.
The row of ducks brought out the red flag about 30 minutes into the 75-minute session at the Montreal Champ Car Grand Prix. Track marshalls spent about five minutes trying to shoo the mother and five or six ducklings, which eventually got under a guardrail before the cars returned to the track.
The red flag came out again late in the session when Paul Tracy locked his brakes and slid off the track at the first turn. Oriol Servia also spun out just before the end.
Champ Car leader Sebastien Bourdais posted the quickest lap of 1 minute, 22.448 seconds with A.J. Allmendinger second at 1:22.558. The second qualifying is Saturday and the race is Sunday.
 Load-Date: August 26, 2006

 

End of Document
