

Names in the Games
The Associated Press
February 24, 2007 Saturday 10:27 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 840 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: PITTSBURGH 
Body




Roberto Clemente Jr. is hoping to honor his father in the city where the Hall of Fame outfielder made his name with the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Clemente Jr. wants to convert an old fire station into a museum commemorating his father, who died in a plane crash while taking emergency supplies to Nicaragua after an earthquake in 1972.
"A museum is something that would fit perfectly with school programs, a place where students could gain insight into my father's life and the lessons he taught us all," the 41-year-old Clemente told the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review for Saturday's editions.
The memorabilia collection includes bats, wedding photographs, uniforms, personal correspondence and one of his father's 12 Gold Glove awards. Clemente Jr. said he also plans to display the car his father won as the Most Valuable Player of the 1971 World Series.
Clemente, who collected his milestone 3,000th hit in the final regular season game he played for the Pirates on Sept. 30, 1972, was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1973, a few months after he died. The Hall of Fame waived the normal five-year waiting period.
The city previously renamed the Sixth Street Bridge, which leads to PNC Park, the Roberto Clemente Bridge. The ballpark's right field wall is 21 feet high, in honor of his retired uniform number.
PARIS (AP) Zinedine Zidane will play his first match in Europe since retiring after last year's World Cup final when he captains a team in a charity match in Marseille.
Zidane and Brazil striker Ronaldo are ambassadors for the United Nations Development Program and will each captain a team of stars including Chelsea's Didier Drogba on March 19 at Marseille's Stade Velodrome, the UNDP said on its Web site.
"We are very happy to have the opportunity to play this match in Marseille, a city known for its passion for football," Zidane told UNDP's Web site.
Zidane grew up in the Marseille district of La Castellane.
Zidane was sent off for head-butting Marco Materazzi in the closing stages of the 2006 World Cup final and France went on to lose to Italy on penalty kicks.
"I have retired from professional football, but I am determined to continue playing in my capacity as UNDP Goodwill Ambassador for such a good cause," Zidane said.
Proceeds benefit anti-poverty projects ranging from support to female entrepreneurs to the construction of sports centers for street children in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
LONDON (AP) World marathon record holder Paula Radcliffe is back training less than five weeks after giving birth and plans to compete at the World Championships in August.
Radcliffe gave birth to daughter Isla on Jan. 17. She joined her husband and coach Gary Lough this week at training camp in Boulder, Colo.
Radcliffe said a June comeback was still planned most likely a road race. She plans to run either the marathon or 10,000 meters at the Aug. 25-Sept. 2 World Championships in Osaka, Japan.
Radcliffe said she is running about 40 to 50 miles a week about a third of her normal training program and is only 4 pounds over her normal weight. She's also doing cross-training on a Nordic ski machine.
Radcliffe, who holds the women's world marathon record of 2 hours, 15 minutes, 25 seconds, missed last year's London Marathon with a foot injury. She won the marathon at the 2005 worlds in Helsinki, Finland.
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. (AP) Bob Sura, who led Florida State on its 1993 NCAA tournament run, had his No. 3 jersey raised to the rafters Saturday at the Donald L. Tucker Center.
Florida State's career scoring leader joined Dave Cowens and Hugh Durham, who also coached the Seminoles, as the only players to have their jersey's retired.
"This is the most nervous I've ever been on this floor," Sura said at halftime of Florida State's game with N.C. State. "Nothing tops this."
Sura, on the Houston Rockets' inactive roster while recovering from knee surgery, helped lead the Seminoles to the NCAA final eight in 1993. He was a first-round draft choice by the Cleveland Cavaliers in 1995.
Sura, who also played for Detroit, Golden State and Atlanta, said he plans to retire after this season.
Sura scored 2,130 career points at Florida State, where his teammates included players who went on to NBA careers: Charlie Ward and Sam Cassell. He is the only Seminole to top 2,000 points.
KARLSTAD, Sweden (AP) Veteran defenseman Fredrik Olausson, who won a Stanley Cup ring with the Detroit Red Wings in 2001, will retire from hockey because of illness.
The 40-year-old Olausson needs a liver transplant, according to his Swedish Elite League team Farjestad Web site. He became ill in December and underwent surgery twice.
Olausson played only 12 games for Farjestad this season, the last one in December.
Olausson played seven seasons with the Winnipeg Jets. He was traded to the Edmonton Oilers in 1993 and later played for Anaheim and Pittsburgh.
In 1,022 regular-season NHL games, Olausson had 147 goals and 434 assists.
He won a Swedish league title with the team in 1986 and played on the Swedish team that won the 1989 world championship.
 Load-Date: February 25, 2007

 

End of Document
