

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
December 9, 2006 Saturday 10:30 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 1058 words
Dateline: BOSTON 
Body




With the U.S. Figure Skating championships less than two months away, 2006 champion Sasha Cohen has yet to decide if she'll attempt to defend her title.
Cohen, who will perform Sunday at the Marshalls Challenge on the campus of Boston University, said Saturday she plans to compete at the 2010 Olympics and 2009 world championships. Other than that, Cohen said her immediate future was wide open.
"I haven't made any decisions yet for the rest of the season," Cohen said. "I've been keeping my options open and been training to stay in shape. But I have not made any new programs."
The 22-year-old Cohen has competed in six U.S. championships, never finishing worse than third. She finished second to nine-time U.S. champion Michelle Kwan four times before breaking through last year with Kwan resting an injured hip.
ALGIERS, Algeria (AP) Zinedine Zidane will visit the birthplace of his parents for the first time in 20 years, traveling to Algeria to meet the president and see children in hospitals.
The three-time FIFA World Player of the Year will stay four days, government minister Djamal Ould Abbas said Saturday.
Zidane will visit the Mustapha Bacha hospital for children with cancer and another hospital for disabled children. Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika is to meet Zidane.
The soccer star last visited Algeria in 1986. His parents were born in Aguemoun village in the Kabylie region. After the 1998 World Cup, Zidane became a symbol of a multicultural France and is adored in Algeria.
Zidane, who won the 1998 World Cup and the 2000 European Championship with France, was ejected for head-butting Italy defender Marco Materazzi in the 2006 World Cup final. He retired after this year's World Cup and has since worked for charitable organizations.
BUDAPEST, Hungary (AP) Hungary observed a national day of mourning Saturday for the funeral of soccer great Ferenc Puskas.
The national flag was raised and then lowered to half-staff in front of parliament. Public buildings flew black flags.
Puskas, who led Hungary's famed "Golden Team" of the 1950s and later won numerous championships with Real Madrid, died Nov. 17 at 79 after being hospitalized for six years with Alzheimer's disease. He was considered one of the best players of the 20th century.
Top players and sports officials from the around the world attended a memorial ceremony in the national stadium, renamed for Puskas in 2002.
Among those on hand were German soccer icon Franz Beckenbauer, former IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch and some of Puskas' former Real Madrid teammates.
After the memorial, Puskas' casket was placed on a horse-drawn carriage and taken to Heroes' Square for a military ceremony. Later, several thousand gathered and lit candles outside St. Stephen's Basilica, where an evening funeral service was held. Hungary's President Laszlo Solyom said "a great man is being buried" by a nation that "received so much from Puskas to be proud of."
DOHA, Qatar (AP) Australian world-record holder Grant Hackett knows a good swimmer when he sees one. And Hackett says it would be wise to watch Park Tae-hwan of South Korea.
Park won three gold medals at the Asian Games. Especially impressive was his victory in the 1,500 on the last night of the swimming competition when he won in 14 minutes, 55.03 seconds.
Hackett is unbeaten in the 1,500 since 1997, with the streak including the 2000 and 2004 Olympics and the world and Pan Pacific championships. He's wary of Park's youth and versatility.
"I always expected him to swim around that level especially after his 200 and 400 and the way he has been improving over the last couple of years," Hackett told Australian Associated Press. "He's always been a swimmer that I've been aware of."
Hackett expects big things from Park at the world championships in Melbourne, Australia, next March and the 2008 Beijing Olympics.
"By Beijing he'll be very, very good," Hackett said. "He's a very talented young swimmer and seems to be improving a lot."
MILAN, Italy (AP) Star striker Andriy Shevchenko would be welcome again at AC Milan.
"If it were up to me, I would take him back straight away," team owner Silvio Berlusconi said in Saturday's Gazzetta dello Sport. "Don't forget that he was the one that wanted to leave and not even I could stop him."
Shevchenko moved to English Premier League champions Chelsea in May in a four-year deal worth $59 million after playing for seven seasons with Milan.
But the Ukrainian striker, who had 173 goals in 296 games for Milan, has scored only four in 19 games for Chelsea, sparking speculation he could return to Italy during the January transfer window.
The 30-year-old Shevchenko said in the British media on Thursday he was prepared to leave, although Chelsea dismissed the reports.
"I think it'll be difficult because I don't believe Chelsea will let him go," Berlusconi said. "But if it's meant to happen, it'll happen."
Milan has won only one of its last six league games and is in 15th place. It started the season with an eight-point penalty from the Italian match-fixing scandal.
MIDLAND, Mich. (AP) The new home of the Great Lakes Loons will use solar energy to help power the minor league park.
Dow Corning Corp. and Hemlock Semiconductor Corp. donated 168 solar panels that are designed to generate enough energy to operate the stadium's scoreboard, the Midland Daily News reported. The panels will operate year-round and will be connected to the stadium's main power grid.
"We want the stadium to be the best minor league baseball stadium in the country," said Paul Barbeau, president and general manager of the Loons.
The team, which plays in the Midwest League, will begin playing in the stadium in 2007 after moving from Battle Creek.
MANCHESTER, England (AP) Manchester United will play a European all-star team in March to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome, which led to the formation of the European Union.
Marcello Lippi, who guided Italy to its World Cup triumph in Germany, will coach the European team, which could include former Red Devils midfielder David Beckham in the March 13 game at Old Trafford.
Although the game is to mark the anniversary of the treaty, Manchester United also wants it to commemorate the club's 50 years in European competition.
Details of the game were announced Saturday after United's 3-1 win over neighbor Manchester City.
 Load-Date: December 10, 2006

 

End of Document
