

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
June 16, 2006 Friday 8:47 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 690 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA 
Body




Bernard Hopkins is Philadelphia's new peace ambassador.
The new light-heavyweight champion was honored Thursday by Mayor John F. Street with a ceremony in City Hall. Hopkins earned the crown after a unanimous decision over Antonio Tarver last Saturday night.
"Bernard Hopkins is much more than a superb fighter," Street said. "He is a man who overcame a troubled youth, who believed in himself and who reached the pinnacle of his profession. His story is a testament to the human spirit and to the power of redemption."
Hopkins was sworn in as Philadelphia's community engagement ambassador for peace. Street also appointed Hopkins to the mayor's drug and alcohol executive commission.
"My fight in the ring is over but my fight for the kids of this city has just begun," Hopkins said. "The stakes are higher and the price for crime is too great for them today to make a mistake. I didn't accept this job for show, and I will take the responsibility as commissioner with the same level of seriousness I showed throughout my career."
The Hopkins-Tarver fight will be replayed Saturday on HBO.
BUIES CREEK, N.C. (AP) Campbell hired Dale Steele to coach its football program, its first in more than five decades.
Steele has worked at East Tennessee State, Baylor, East Carolina, Kansas State, Wichita State, Tulane, Wisconsin and Ball State. He worked most recently as an assistant at Elon before losing his job when coach Paul Hamilton resigned in December.
The Camels haven't played a collegiate football game since 1950, and the school is targeting a return to the sport in 2008. Campbell will compete at the Division I-AA nonscholarship level.
LONDON (AP) Organizers of the world's five major marathons will bar any athletes convicted of doping violations from running in their races.
The World Marathon Majors organizers of races in Boston, London, Berlin, Chicago and New York said Friday they took the unanimous decision to "maintain the integrity" of the sport.
"If someone falls afoul of doping regulations, they will not be invited to our events," the race organizers said in a joint statement. "We'll do anything we can to deter anybody from cheating."
South Africa's Gert Thys will not be invited to the events. He tested positive for the steroid norandrosterone after winning the Seoul marathon in March.
PARIS (AP) Tom Kristensen aims to extend his record seven wins at the Le Mans 24-hour endurance race this weekend.
Kristensen's team took the first pole position by a diesel-powered car at Le Mans in Thursday's qualifying rounds for the 74th edition of the race. Kristensen has won the last five times at Le Mans.
The Le Mans race on Saturday is won by the team with drivers alternating that completes the most laps in a continuous 24-hour period.
Audi Sport Team Joest driver Marco Werner clocked the second-fastest time, while Pescarolo Sport drivers Nicolas Minassian and Eric Helary were third and fourth, respectively.
The pole success quieted doubts that the diesel-powered Audi TDI Power R10 would not hold up to the rigors of the 8.48-mile track.
BARCELONA, Spain (AP) Five-time world champion Valentino Rossi had the fastest time in the MotoGP free practices Friday ahead of the Catalunya Grand Prix this weekend.
Rossi clocked 1:42.837 in the second session, improving on a fourth-place 1:43.319 in the opening round.
In the championship standings, the Italian rider trails 34 points behind Loris Capirossi and Nick Hayden, who both have 99 points.
Capriossi finished eighth in the lap times with 1:43.433, while Hayden was 10th on 1:43.522.
Rossi is aiming for his eighth win at Catalunya and his third straight MotoGP victory at the circuit on Sunday.
COOKEVILLE, Tenn. (AP) Amy Brown, who spent 10 years as an assistant, is the new women's basketball coach at Tennessee Tech.
She replaces Bill Worrell, who is retiring Sept. 1.
Brown will become only the third coach in the program's 36-year history. Marynell Meadows won 363 games from 1970-85, while Worrell won 408 games in his 20 seasons.
Brown was a four-year starter for Louisiana Tech, which reached the NCAA tournament each season and advanced to the national championship in 1994.
 Load-Date: June 17, 2006

 

End of Document
