

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
January 16, 2007 Tuesday 9:33 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 833 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: COLORADO SPRINGS Colo.
Body




Speedskater Joey Cheek and snowboarder Hannah Teter were honored Tuesday as the U.S. Olympic Committee's sportsman and sportswoman of the year.
Swimmer Jessica Long was selected Paralympian of the Year, and the Team of the Year award went to men's curling.
Cheek won the 500-meter race at the Turin Games, with his margin of victory the largest in more than 50 years. He announced in Turin he was giving $40,000 to a charity for refugee children in Darfur, Sudan. He has since traveled the world, talking to world leaders about Darfur. He also visited refugee camps in Chad.
"It's pretty heady stuff for a guy who speedskates for a living," he said. "It's pretty life-changing stuff."
Teter captured the halfpipe in Turin. Long set five world records and won nine gold medals at the Paralympic worlds in South Africa. She currently holds world records in 12 events.
The men's curling team won the bronze medal at the Turin Games, the first Olympic medal for the U.S. in curling.
NEW YORK (AP) Barbaro's owners, Roy and Gretchen Jackson, will receive the 2006 Special Eclipse Award from the National Thoroughbred Racing Association.
The Jacksons will share the award with the University of Pennsylvania's New Bolton Center, where Barbaro has been treated for life-threatening injuries. He broke three bones above and below his right rear ankle at the start of the Preakness.
"We've tried to do the right thing from the start," Roy Jackson said. "It's been a surreal journey for us since the start of 2006 with a lot of ups and downs, but it is a real highlight in this journey to be recognized by the industry in this fashion."
The Special Eclipse Award, which is presented by the National Turf Writers Association, Daily Racing Form and the NTRA, honors outstanding individual achievements or contributions to thoroughbred racing. It will be presented during the Eclipse Awards next Monday in Beverly Hills, Calif.
GENEVA (AP) Houston Rockets center Yao Ming, former soccer great George Weah and track star Maria Mutola were among those cited Tuesday as "young leaders" with potential to shape the future of the world.
The three join other sports personalities including Yao's teammate, Dikembe Mutombo who previously have been recognized by the World Economic Forum for their professional accomplishments and commitment to society.
The 2007 list was released by the foundation before its annual meeting of business and government leaders in the Swiss Alps. The list is made up of more than 250 "young leaders" corporate executives, politicians, public intellectuals, opera singers and royalty. All are under age 40.
Yao, a four-time NBA All-Star from China, has worked to promote the Special Olympics and help people struggling with disabilities.
Weah is a former FIFA world player of the year and two years ago was runner-up to Ellen Johnson Sirleaf in Liberia's first elections since the end of the country's 1989-03 civil war.
Mutola, a Mozambican who won the 800-meter gold medal at the 2000 Sydney Olympics, has served as a youth emissary for United Nations programs aimed at alleviating poverty and fighting HIV/AIDS.
COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. (AP) Carmelo Anthony, the suspended Denver Nuggets star who led the U.S. team at the world championships, was chosen Tuesday as USA Basketball's male athlete of the year.
Anthony averaged 19.9 points on a team that won a bronze medal in Japan. He scored a U.S.-record 35 points in a victory over Italy during pool play.
After a disappointing stint with the U.S. team at the 2004 Olympics, Anthony joined LeBron James and Dwyane Wade as captains of the team in the worlds. He was was the only American chosen to the all-tournament team.
"Carmelo was on a mission to make our team and he did much more than that, he led our team," USA Basketball managing director Jerry Colangelo said. "He had a terrific summer with the USA team and demonstrated his overall basketball talents and his leadership. In my mind he is deserving and a great choice for this award."
Anthony, the NBA scoring leader, is serving a 15-game suspension for his role in a brawl against the New York Knicks last month.
LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (AP) Virginia Tech defensive coordinator Bud Foster received the Broyles Award on Tuesday, given annually to the nation's top assistant coach.
Foster, who won the award in his fourth year as a finalist, coached the nation's top-ranked defense this season. Virginia Tech allowed 219 yards a game while going 10-3.
The Broyles Award is named for Arkansas athletic director Frank Broyles. He was the Razorbacks' football coach for 19 seasons and more than 25 of his assistants became head coaches, including Joe Gibbs, Jimmy Johnson, Johnny Majors and Jackie Sherrill.
Foster also was a finalist for the award in 1999, 2001 and 2005.
This year's other Broyles Award finalists included Arkansas defensive coordinator Reggie Herring, Louisville offensive coordinator Paul Petrino, Ohio State quarterbacks coach Joe Daniels and Oklahoma defensive coordinator Brent Venables.
 Load-Date: January 17, 2007

 

End of Document
