

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
December 15, 2006 Friday 11:56 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 944 words
Dateline: BOSTON 
Body




After three years of dating, New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady and actress Bridget Moynahan have split.
A publicist for Moynahan on Friday confirmed the celebrity couple's breakup.
Brady and Moynahan "amicably ended their three-year relationship several weeks ago. We ask for your respect and consideration of their privacy. No further comments will be made," a statement said.
The 29-year-old Brady, a two-time Super Bowl MVP who has led the Patriots to three NFL titles, was picked as one of People magazine's "50 Most Beautiful People" in 2002.
The 34-year-old Moynahan has appeared in films such as "Coyote Ugly" and is currently on the ABC television series "Six Degrees."
ALMA, Mich. (AP) Alma College senior quarterback Josh Brehm has been chosen as the winner of the Gagliardi Trophy, given to the nation's top Division III football player.
The 6-foot-2, 220-pound Brehm threw for 3,448 yards and 30 touchdowns this season with only three interceptions, averaging 344.8 yards per game for the Scots (6-4, 5-2 Michigan Intercollegiate Athletic Association). He also rushed for 636 yards and nine touchdowns. Brehm even led Alma in punting.
Brehm accepted the award Thursday in Salem, Va., where he is attending festivities leading up to Saturday's Amos Alonzo Stagg Bowl, the Division III championship game between Mount Union and Wisconsin-Whitewater.
UNITED NATIONS (AP) Speedskater Joey Cheek and distance runner Tegla Loroupe joined actor George Clooney at the United Nations on Friday, trying to spur action to end the conflict in Darfur that has killed hundreds of thousands of people.
All have been to Sudan at different times, and Clooney said they spoke not just as "concerned citizens" but as witnesses.
"All of us can report that the situation is at best grave and about to get worse 2.5 million refugees with now almost no aid, no protection, no hope," Clooney said.
Said Cheek: "These people are civilians, they have done nothing wrong. They have no part in rebel movements but they are being slaughtered."
Loroupe, a Kenyan who won the New York City Marathon in 1994 and 1995, called for more people to get involved.
"These are a few people, but we need more people to join us to finish the marathon. This is everybody's business. It's me and you," she said. "Sports people, actors. We want to see a difference."
JEREZ, Spain (AP) Two-time Formula One champion Fernando Alonso made his McLaren debut Friday with a surprise drive on the final day of winter testing at Jerez.
Sporting a plain white helmet and overalls, the 26-year-old Spaniard was fifth-fastest on the last day of testing. He completed the 2.748-mile circuit in a time of 1 minute, 19.866 seconds after 90 laps in his unbranded MP4-21.
"I'm pleased that I was able to drive the McLaren Mercedes F1 car earlier than expected and would like to thank Renault and Flavio Briatore for agreeing to this," Alonso said.
McLaren had asked Renault to release the defending champion from his contract, which runs until Dec. 31.
"Fernando asked me to test one day with his new team to acclimatize himself to the car," Briatore said. "We enjoy a very good relationship and considering his work and his fabulous achievements these past two years with the double world titles in 2005 and 2006, we decided to give him this opportunity."
CORAL GABLES, Fla. (AP) Miami cornerback Glenn Sharpe is the 2006 winner of the Atlantic Coast Conference's Brian Piccolo Award, given annually to the "most courageous" player in the league.
Sharpe missed most of the 2004 and 2005 seasons after needing reconstructive surgery on both knees, then returned this season to start all 12 regular-season games for Miami.
He finished the regular season with 29 tackles and two interceptions, plus is second in the ACC with 15 passes defended.
"We are very proud of Glenn Sharpe and his efforts to come back and be an integral part of our football team," Miami coach Larry Coker said Friday. "Glenn is a tremendous competitor and a tremendous talent."
Sharpe, who already has his degree from the university, is eligible to play again in the 2007 season.
ALGIERS, Algeria (AP) Zinedine Zidane went back to his roots on Friday, wrapping up a five-day trip to Algeria by visiting the village where his parents came from.
The soccer superstar, in retirement since he led France to the World Cup final in July, has been welcomed as a national hero in Algeria. Thousands of people lined the winding road to Aguemoun, his parents' village in the mountains east of the capital Algiers.
Villagers prepared a giant dish of food in his honor. Zidane was accompanied by his parents and brother.
Zidane last visited the area when he was 14, in 1986. His trip has been a major event for this North African nation and former French colony.
Zidane was expelled from the World Cup final for head-butting Italy defender Marco Materazzi in extra time. Italy won the title on penalty kicks.
On Friday, French fans lost their bid for an official investigation into Zidane's red card. The fans said doubts remained over how one of the officials learned about the head-butt.
They claimed the fourth official's view of the incident was blocked, and that he had to rely on a video replay to make the call a move not permitted under FIFA rules.
The fans wanted the match to be replayed.
But Judge Jean-Claude Magendie threw out the case, filed by two groups of soccer fans whose names translate as "World Cup 2006 Justice" and "The National Action Group for Truth in the World Cup Final 2006."
Magendie said any probe was not justified. He ordered the fans to pay the legal fees for FIFA and the French federation, who had called the fans' actions a "publicity stunt."
 Load-Date: December 16, 2006

 

End of Document
