

Names in the Games
The Associated Press
February 23, 2007 Friday 10:42 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 744 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: JACKSON Miss.
Body




Sorry, Dale Earnhardt Jr. and Tony Stewart. Your fans in one Mississippi family and a big chunk of the state's Army National Guard will be pulling for Casey Mears this weekend.
An image of Staff Sgt. Quinton Martin will adorn the hood of Mears' car Sunday during the Auto Club 500 race in Fontana, Calif.
The 51-year-old Martin is from the tiny town of Seminary just north of Hattiesburg. He was chosen as "Hero of the Year" in a national competition sponsored by Jackson Hewitt Tax Service Inc.
It's believed to be the first time the hood of a NASCAR vehicle will carry the image of regular guy. Only celebrities have had the honor in the past.
The company flew the Martin family to California to be trackside during Sunday's race. Relatives will be rooting to see the National Guard car and Martin's image cross the finish line first.
"I just hope he doesn't wreck and ruin my husband's picture," Pat Martin said of Mears.
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) Tickets Sunday for No. 2 Ohio State's game against No. 1 Wisconsin are fetching higher prices than any previous Buckeyes' regular-season game.
Seats behind the basket that normally cost $14 are being sold for $125, and tickets in the first few rows with a face value of $26 will cost $400 each, said Greg Guy, owner of Blue Chip Ticket Bureau.
The prices are twice as much as any other game this season, Guy told The Columbus Dispatch. They're about 20 percent more than the next most expensive regular-season game Ohio State's upset of then-No. 1 Illinois in March 2005.
Tickets to the No. 2 Michigan vs. No. 1 Ohio State football game in November sold for between $650 and $1,500 each.
The winner Sunday is assured of at least a share of the Big Ten title. It could be freshman center Greg Oden's final home game if he decides to leave school early and enter the NBA draft.
NEW YORK (AP) Commuters passing through Grand Central station can watch some squash competition before catching their trains.
The top squash players in the Tournament of Champions will compete Saturday in a portable, glass court in Vanderbilt Hall with free seating for 500. The event runs through March 2.
"Since the tournament's launch in this iconic venue in 1995, more than 1 million visitors have watched squash at its best," said tournament director John Nimick.
Top-ranked Amr Shabana of Egypt will return to defend his title in the 32-player draw. American Christopher Gordon is a wild card entry. The women's competition includes two-time champion Vanessa Atkinson of the Netherlands and No. 5 Natalie Grainger, who became an American citizen last month.
The weeklong event includes amateurs competing in the U.S. Skill Level Championships and highlights of StreetSquash and CitySquash after-school programs in New York City. WNBA president Donna Orender and Alicia McConnell, director of USOC athletics and a former eight-time U.S. squash singles champion, will be featured at a luncheon Wednesday by PowerPlay NYC in Vanderbilt Hall.
PowerPlay is a nonprofit organization that provides sports and life skills training for girls in underserved communities.
LAS CRUCES, N.M. (AP) New Mexico State coach Reggie Theus loves the support for his team from the home fans.
But the coach doesn't like some of the language, and he warned students during a pep rally that continued use of vulgarities could result in having next season's Western Athletic Conference tournament moved out of Las Cruces.
"There's a lot of haters out there because they're used to seeing New Mexico State at the bottom," Theus said in Thursday's edition of the Las Cruces Sun-News.
He told students that some athletic directors at other WAC schools have expressed concern about a chant containing a vulgarity. Aggies fans have used it for at least the past 12 years after opponents shoot free throws.
WAC senior associate commissioner Jeff Hurd, who oversees the conference tournament, said the league has a sportsmanship policy that calls for "a healthy environment for competition, free of a hostile atmosphere for opponents."
Penalties for violating the policy can vary from letters of reprimand to monetary fines against member schools.
New Mexico State has a contract to stage the WAC tournament at the Pan American Center next month and next season, but Hurd said presidents of the nine WAC schools could vote to move the event if the sportsmanship issue persists.
"The issue is the chant," Hurd said. "It truly is a violation of the sportsmanship policy and it will not be tolerated."
 Load-Date: February 24, 2007

 

End of Document
