

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
January 25, 2008 Friday 10:38 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 922 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: INDIANAPOLIS 
Body




Ron Hunter, the IUPUI basketball coach who went barefoot during a game to raise awareness for needy children in Africa, generated donations of more than 100,000 pairs of shoes for impoverished children.
Hunter exceeded his goal of collecting 40,000 pairs in honor of the 40th anniversary of the death of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
Hunter coached Thursday night's game against Oakland University without shoes, and some in attendance also went barefoot. IUPUI beat Oakland 82-69.
"When we started this I thought 40,000 was going to be tough," he said. "When they told me before the game we already had 100,000, honestly, I almost broke down in tears."
Nearly $20,000 and 110,000 pairs of shoes were donated to the Charlotte, N.C., charitable organization called Samaritan's Feet. They will be given to children in the U.S. and around the world, according to the organization's Web site.
The 43-year-old Hunter almost never sits during games. He didn't have his feet stepped on, but they were still sore.
"My feet hurt so bad," he said after the game. "But imagine a child or a human going their whole lives without shoes."
The coach appeared on several ESPN shows on Thursday, and secured donations of thousands of shoes from Converse, Wal-Mart, Nine West and the Department of Homeland Security.
The mission of the nonprofit, Christian-based Samaritan charity is to send 10 million shoes in 10 years to children living in poverty.
GREENSBORO, N.C. (AP) Retired international soccer star Mia Hamm and two others will be inducted into the North Carolina Soccer Hall of Fame on Saturday.
Hamm led North Carolina to four NCAA titles and was named the ACC player of the year three times. She then moved full-time to a 17-year stint with the U.S. national team, where she scored a record 158 goals in leading the Americans to two World Cup titles and two Olympic golds.
The others being inducted are Gary Hall, the former coach at Barton, Lenoir-Rhyne and Campbell, and longtime referee and state youth referee administrator Paul James.
Hamm, who retired in 2004, will not attend the ceremony due to a previous commitment.
MANCHESTER, England (AP) Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson believes David Beckham deserves the chance to make his 100th international appearance when England plays Switzerland next month.
Fabio Capello takes charge of England for the first time in the friendly on Feb. 6, and Beckham is hoping that his former Real Madrid coach will include him in the team.
"I don't think there is any doubt about that," Ferguson said. "I'm convinced he will get his 100th cap. To deny him another cap when he is already on 99 would not be right and I think Capello has made up his mind about that."
The 32-year-old Beckham welcomed Capello's appointment as England coach in December.
"Fabio is one of the managers players look up to and want to manage them," he said. "He is going to be great for the players and the England team. I hope I'll be part of his plans."
Only four players Peter Shilton, Bobby Moore, Bobby Charlton and Billy Wright have made more than 100 England appearances.
CARSON, Calif. (AP) The Los Angeles Galaxy plan to play exhibition matches against clubs in South Korea and China this spring.
The Major League Soccer team is finalizing details of a trip that includes a game March 1 against FC Seoul at the World Cup Stadium in Seoul, and a March 5 match against Chinese team East Asia in Shanghai.
Along with David Beckham, the Galaxy attracted large crowds for exhibitions in Australia and New Zealand in November.
GLASGOW, Scotland (AP) Don't suggest to Bernard Lagat, the first athlete to win the 1,500- and 5,000-meter titles at a world championships, that Beijing might be his last chance to become an Olympic champion.
"I still feel like I'm 21, so there's still more from me," the 33-year-old Lagat said. "I feel in good shape and luckily I haven't had any injuries or sickness."
Before becoming an American citizen in 2005, Lagat won silver for Kenya in the 1,500 at the 2004 Athens Olympics. He hopes to win gold at both distances in Beijing.
"Running both races isn't easy, but it is doable," Lagat said. "I'm planning to run both, but things could change after the U.S. trials. I'll have two races just for the security and if I feel great, I will try to go for the wins."
Lagat will defend his 1,500 title on Saturday at the Norwich Union meet in Glasgow, Scotland, where the U.S. team takes on Britain, Sweden, Germany and a Commonwealth squad.
SPRINGFIELD, Mass. (AP) Joseph Gallagher, who won 870 games as boys basketball coach at St. John's College High School in Washington, D.C., won the Morgan Wootten Award on Friday.
The award is presented by the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame to a coach who has made significant contributions to the game at the high school level.
"Joe has proven himself as a Hall of Famer in everything he has accomplished," said Wootten, the former coach at DeMatha Catholic High School in Hyattsville, Md., who received his first coaching opportunity from Gallagher. "He is one of the founding fathers of summer basketball and thousands of students he taught and coached have had their lives enriched by a true master."
The 86-year-old Gallagher retired in 1991 after winning 12 Washington Catholic League championships and one city title in 46 seasons. The award, selected by a panel of media members, executives and coaches, will presented in March at the McDonald's All-America Game in Milwaukee.
The winner of the Wootten Award for girls' basketball will be announced on Feb. 1.
 Load-Date: January 26, 2008

 

End of Document
