

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
December 14, 2006 Thursday 9:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 707 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: MIAMI 
Body




Miami Dolphins greats Dan Marino and Don Shula will be part of the Super Bowl ceremonies when the event returns to South Florida on Feb. 4.
Marino, the Dolphins' Hall of Fame quarterback, will toss the coin for the pregame flip, the NFL announced Thursday. Shula, the winningest coach in NFL history, took the Dolphins to five Super Bowls. He led Miami to the only perfect season in league history, and will carry the Vince Lombardi Trophy onto the field.
He'll help present it to the winning team after the game.
TOKYO (AP) Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said he was impressed by Japanese pitcher Daisuke Matsuzaka's preliminary agreement with the Boston Red Sox for $52 million over six years.
"(Matsuzaka) is Japan's best pitcher, and his ability was fully evaluated," the prime minister said Thursday. "I feel so happy to see our countrymen do well overseas, like in the major leagues."
Matsuzaka's agreement includes $8 million in incentives that could bring the total to $60 million over six years.
Matsuzaka has a 108-60 record in Japan with a 2.95 ERA and 1,355 strikeouts in 204 games. He was MVP of the inaugural World Classic last March, won by Japan.
BALTIMORE (AP) A Baltimore Orioles worker whose job was to run errands at the ballpark has admitted stealing team memorabilia and auctioning items on eBay.
A Baltimore Circuit Court judge ordered 23-year-old Jeremy B. Fefel to pay $5,000 restitution to the team and perform 50 hours of community service. If he does as ordered, Fefel would be placed on three years probation.
Fefel pleaded guilty to stealing a list of items that filled two pages of court documents.
Many of the items were media guides from the 1960s and 1970s, including media guides of the New York Yankees, Boston Red Sox, the former Kansas City Athletics and the former Washington Senators.
Other items stolen included a baseball bat used by Brian Roberts, used Orioles game jerseys, Sammy Sosa bobblehead dolls, game jackets, fleece shirts and a framed picture of Orioles Opening Day in 1992 with an accompanying game ticket worth $100. Also taken were numerous Orioles autograph cards worth about $1,000.
SOUTH BEND, Ind. (AP) Notre Dame has more requests for tickets to the Jan. 3 Sugar Bowl than tickets available.
The university received 24,635 requests for the 17,500 tickets it received for the game, which pits 11th-ranked Notre Dame (10-2) against No. 4 LSU (10-2). The tickets will be distributed by lottery, the school announced Thursday.
The university will let people who applied for tickets know Friday whether they will receive tickets.
ALGIERS, Algeria (AP) Zinedine Zidane performed a ceremonial kickoff at an Algerian league match on Thursday and pledged to help advise Algerian soccer teams.
In chilling rain, thousands of fans cheered as the three-time FIFA player of the year took the field with the Algerian sports minister and the president of the Algerian Soccer Federation before a match between USM Algiers and JSM Bejaia.
Zidane is in Algeria, the birthplace of his parents, for the first time in 20 years on an invitation from Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika. His visit has been a major event for this North African nation and former French colony.
Thursday's kickoff was shown live on Algerian television but was delayed because of traffic jams prompted by thousands of people crowding the streets to catch a glimpse of Zidane.
Zidane ends his five-day visit Friday with a stop in Aguemoun, his parents' home village. Zidane last visited the area when he was 14, in 1986.
BALTIMORE (AP) Denver Nuggets star Carmelo Anthony is giving $1.5 million to a youth center in his hometown.
The Carmelo Anthony Youth Development Center will offer after-school education and recreation programs to about 200 school-age children.
Anthony donated the money to the Baltimore-based Living Classrooms Foundation, which also operates a jobs training center for at-risk youth. The foundation will manage the site that serves six public housing communities.
Anthony said the center was the first of many he hopes to open in Baltimore. He recalled that the Robinson Marshall recreation center where he played basketball closed when he was 13.
"I tell you that there's nothing wrong with giving back," Anthony said.
 Load-Date: December 15, 2006

 

End of Document
