

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
August 24, 2006 Thursday 10:07 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 570 words
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Dikembe Mutombo postponed plans Thursday to open a hospital in the Democratic Republic of Congo because of postelection fighting.
Mutombo expected to open the $29 million Biamba Marie Mutombo Hospital and Research Center on Sept. 2. The 300-bed hospital will provide health care to people in Kinshasa, where the Houston Rockets center was born.
"The dedication ceremony is being postponed due to events that have occurred over the past few days in Kinshasa," Mutombo said. "The safety of all participants is my primary concern."
The U.S. Embassy in Congo has recommended against travel because of the fighting.
Mutombo donated $15 million to the hospital, which is named after his mother. He created the Dikembe Mutombo Foundation in 1997, the year his 64-year-old mother died. She was unable to get to the hospital because of unrest in the streets.
No date has been scheduled for Mutombo's trip to Kinshasa.
MONTREAL (AP) Paul Tracy can expect boos, even if it may be hard to hear them over the roar of the engines.
The Toronto driver has been criticized in the local media for saying French-speaking drivers keep their helmets on in fights.
Champ Car leader Sebastien Bourdais, a Frenchman who had words and a shove at Tracy two weeks ago in Denver, said Thursday that fans in mostly French-speaking Montreal should let him know how they feel without resorting to extremes.
"First, if he wants to fight, he's probably picked the wrong sport," Bourdais said. "And second, I just hope the Quebec people reserve for him the welcome he deserves because he's been insulting the French people and the Quebec people and I hope they won't forget that."
Tracy is the circuit's most aggressive driver, and he had confrontations in the last two races. Both times he was fined and docked championship points. He is also on probation for the next three races.
His comments, which he said later were a joke, have probably attracted more interest in what may be Champ Car's last race in Montreal than Bourdais' battle with American A.J. Allmendinger for the championship. The event begins Friday with practice and the first qualifying session.
ST. ALBERT, Alberta (AP) Maybe it wasn't such a good idea to snub of a couple of hometown hockey stars.
The city of St. Albert backed off a plan to sell the naming rights to a two-rink arena currently named for Mark Messier and Troy Murray.
St. Albert Mayor Paul Chalifoux said the city council had no idea the plan to raise money for a new recreation center would cause such an outcry.
Chalifoux is apologizing to those who called and e-mailed complaints to city hall. He said the city sent letters of apology to the Messier and Murray families.
COLLEGE PARK, Md. (AP) Maryland reached a $20 million deal that gives Chevy Chase Bank the naming rights to the field at Byrd Stadium.
The agreement will help the school with a $50.8 million renovation project that includes 500 new mezzanine seats in the lower seating bowl. The field will be named Chevy Chase Bank Field at Byrd Stadium, athletic director Debbie Yow said Thursday.
The 56-year-old Byrd Stadium is named for former Maryland president H.C. "Curley" Byrd, an alumnus who was a multisport athlete and Terrapins football coach.
Byrd Stadium has a seating capacity of more than 52,000. Maryland ranked 38th in the country and sixth in the Atlantic Coast Conference last season in attendance, drawing a school-record average of 52,426 in five home games.
 Load-Date: August 25, 2006

 

End of Document
