

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
January 15, 2008 Tuesday 10:53 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 726 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Kevin Garnett's trade to Boston has people going green.
Garnett's Celtics jersey was the top seller at the NBA store and on NBAstore.com for the holiday season, the league announced Tuesday. Boston also topped the team merchandise sales category for the first time since lists were compiled in 2001.
Garnett's sales have tripled in his first season since being traded from Minnesota. He wasn't even on last year's list, last appearing at No. 16 at the end of the 2005-06 season. He changed to No. 5 in Boston after wearing No. 21 with the Timberwolves.
He replaced the Lakers' Kobe Bryant, who dropped one spot on the list. Denver's Allen Iverson moved up one to third, with Cleveland's LeBron James and Phoenix guard Steve Nash rounding out the top five.
The Celtics were seventh in team sales when last season ended. The Lakers were second, followed by three teams that remain popular even while losing: New York, Chicago and Miami.
The NBA Store and its Web site had their strongest sales quarter ever to close 2007, a 6.5 percent increase over the previous year. Sales on NBAstore.com were up 14 percent in December, its best month yet.
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) A frowning mayor Michael Coleman wore an LSU jersey to a city council meeting, making good on a bet placed with his Louisiana counterpart over college football's national championship game.
Coleman and mayor Kip Holden of Baton Rouge, La., agreed to the wager in New Orleans on Jan. 6, the day before LSU handled Ohio State, 38-24.
"A mayor's gotta do what a mayor's gotta do," Coleman said at the Monday night meeting. "I wear this jersey in mourning, in great disappointment, but mostly in great pain."
If the Buckeyes had won, Holden would have worn an Ohio State jersey with running back Chris "Beanie" Wells' No. 28 to the next council meeting in his city.
ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates (AP) Darren Clarke is getting serious about golf again.
The Northern Irishman, who has dropped to 204th in the rankings since the death of his wife in 2006, finished in the top five at both the South African Open and Johannesburg Open this season, and up next is the Abu Dhabi Golf Championship starting Thursday.
"Last year, I was working really hard, but my head wasn't in the right place. It wasn't in a place that I could compete and things were irritating me, simple little things," Clarke said. "I got through a lot of it anniversaries and stuff from last year and it was from the middle of August onwards that I really got into a position where I wanted to play again."
Clarke, a 10-time winner on the European Tour who struggled for much of last season, said getting better would be a gradual climb.
"I want to play and I want to get myself up as a top player again," he said. "I don't even know what my world ranking is, but I am desperate to get myself back there up again."
NEW YORK (AP) Texas A&M senior Ashlee Pistorius has been chosen as the nation's top collegiate female soccer player.
The honor was based on the results of national balloting among 1,000 NCAA member schools as part of the Collegiate Women Sports Awards program, in its 32nd year.
Pistorius' victory will give her the 2008 Honda Sports Award, given annually to the top women athletes in 12 NCAA-sanctioned sports, along with automatic nomination for the Collegiate Woman Athlete of the Year.
She was voted over three other nominees: Lauren Cheney, a sophomore at UCLA; Kristin Olsen, a sophomore at Southern California; and Mami Yamaguchi, a junior at Florida State. The candidates were selected by the National Soccer Coaches Association of America.
"I was really excited to find out that I was nominated with the other three girls who are great athletes. Then to find out that I was the one chosen as the winner was amazing," Pistorius said. "It's really more of a compliment to the whole team and to Texas A&M than to me as an individual and it really shows what kind of team we are. Our coaching staff expected our best every day during practice, which translated into our best coming out during the games."
Ever since joining the Aggies starting lineup four games into her freshman season, Pistorius has led her team in goals scored. The 5-foot-10 forward was the 2007 Big 12 Offensive Player of the Year, and led the nation in goals scored (25). She was a NSCAA second-team All-American in 2006, and third-team All-American this season.
 Load-Date: January 16, 2008

 

End of Document
