

Names in the Game
Associated Press
July 26, 2008 Saturday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 564 words
Dateline: MANCHESTER, England 
Body




Manchester United is reportedly set to sign Argentina striker Carlos Tevez on a permanent transfer for a British record $63.6 million.
Tevez scored 19 goals in 48 matches on loan last season to help United win the Premier League and Champions League, and British papers reported Saturday that the club now wants to keep him permanently.
"He's definitely very keen to stay," agent Kia Joorabchian told Sky Sports on Saturday. "We'll get there at some point (with the deal), if not quite today."
Joorabchian said it could take weeks or months to conclude negotiations.
ABUJA, Nigeria (AP) Portsmouth had a dramatic start to its preseason tour of Nigeria, when the pilot of its private plane was forced to abort a landing in Abuja from just above the runway.
The airbus was about to land Friday when it suddenly lurched upward. The pilot told passengers he was forced to abort the landing because he had not received permission to land from air traffic controllers.
Pompey defender Linvoy Primus said passengers had no idea what was happening until seconds before the plane was due to touch down.
"It was a great flight and we were just above the runway, when the pilot suddenly pulled the plane out of the landing and back up into the sky" he told the club's Web site. "We were all shocked. No one knew what was happening."
The plane had to circle around a mountainous area in a lightning storm for 30 minutes before clearance was given.
When the pilot landed successfully at the second attempt, he was applauded by the 40 or so passengers, which included five English internationals.
IZVORANI, Romania (AP) Romania President Traian Basescu wished his country's Olympic team success at the Beijing Games on Saturday.
Romania will have 103 athletes competing in 15 sports at the Aug. 8-24 Olympics, with the best medal hopes in women's gymnastics and women's rowing, in which the country traditionally excels.
"You have all my support and love and respect from 22 million Romanians," said Basescu, adding that he'd invite "those that get medals and those that don't" for a celebration after the games.
Basescu will attend the opening ceremony in Beijing on Aug. 8.
Most of the team will fly to Beijing on Sunday.
LONDON (AP) A British government minister has called for restrictions on the number of foreigners playing in the Premier League.
Andy Burnham, the culture, media and sport secretary, said he is prepared to lobby for a change in European Union law if it serves the interests of the English national team.
"There is an argument for a system of quotas, both in terms of supporting the national team and helping to secure more equal competition within the Premier League," Burnham said in Saturday's edition of The Times of London newspaper.
A quota system would be illegal under current EU law, which guarantees citizens the right to work in any member state.
"I would be quite prepared to go to Europe and say this is our proposal, let's see if we can get clearance for this," Burnham said. "Ultimately, sport is about national teams. European law should recognize the special nature of sport and be applied sensitively."
FIFA has proposed a quota system that would force teams to start matches with a minimum of six homegrown players. The scheme has the backing of FIFA president Sepp Blatter, and an overwhelming majority of delegates at FIFA's last annual conference voted in favor of the idea.
 Load-Date: July 27, 2008

 

End of Document
