

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
November 8, 2006 Wednesday 9:56 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 747 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: DAKAR Senegal
Body




Serena Williams is going on a five-day humanitarian trip to Senegal, planning to hold tennis clinics, meet the president and visit the site where Africans were shipped across the Atlantic as slaves centuries ago.
The tennis star was invited to Senegal by the U.N. Office of Sport for Development and Peace in New York, where she attended the first U.N. Global Youth Leadership Summit on Monday.
Williams wants to see how young Senegalese are progressing. She is to meet women and children working on anti-poverty projects, talk with President Abdoulaye Wade and put her tennis skills on display. There are tennis courts in Senegal but the sport is not popular among the young, most preferring soccer.
Williams will tour U.N. development projects and Goree Island. She also is expected to travel to Ghana.
NORMAN, Okla. (AP) Carlee Roethlisberger, the sister of Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger, is heading to Oklahoma to play basketball one more player with a big-time sports pedigree on the Sooners' roster.
The 6-foot-1 forward from Findlay, Ohio, signed a letter of intent Wednesday with Oklahoma, which is ranked No. 3 in The Associated Press preseason poll. Roethlisberger was also sought by Division I schools for volleyball.
"Carlee will bring to Oklahoma the combination of athletic competitiveness and versatility with total effort and personal integrity," said Connie Lyon, her high school coach.
Also on the Oklahoma team are twins Courtney and Ashley Paris, the daughters of former San Francisco 49ers star Bubba Paris, and Abi Olajuwon, the daughter of former NBA MVP Hakeem Olajuwon.
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) Marilson Gomes dos Santos returned home Wednesday after his New York City Marathon triumph, greeted by hundreds and needing security guards to leave the airport as fans tried to get his autograph.
"I never thought I could get this far," a tearful Gomes said at a news conference. "I left home when I was 15 years old so I could compete and it was very hard for (my parents). They always supported me and are my biggest fans."
His victory in New York was the first by a South American, ending the African men's decade-long hold on the race. Last year's winner, Paul Tergat of Kenya, said afterward he didn't know much about the Brazilian.
"I wasn't even among the favorites," Gomes said. "My career is at its climax now."
Gomes, a two-time winner of the St. Silvester road race in Brazil, said one of his biggest problems Sunday was the 39-degree cold.
"I had to protect myself as much as possible," he said.
DETROIT (AP) One year later, Jiri Fischer of the Detroit Red Wings has a new perspective on life.
The 26-year-old Czech had a seizure during a Nov. 21 game against Nashville. He collapsed on the bench, and team doctors needed a defibrillator to revive him.
"It was so confusing after it happened last fall that I didn't know what to do," he said Tuesday at Joe Louis Arena. "There were so many emotions and so many thoughts: What am I going to do? Is my career over? Can I ever enjoy something as much as I did enjoy playing? But then as time went by, I discovered that it's really not everything."
Fischer was diagnosed with an enlarged heart during routine physicals at training camp in 2002. He had two instances of arrhythmia soon after the Nov. 21 episode but said there haven't been any recurrences since. He has become even more mindful of health and fitness.
"I never ate junk food, I never smoked, and I never drank alcohol at all, but that doesn't mean my diet was fine and optimal," Fischer said. "In order for me to do absolutely anything in life, I have to get healthy."
Fischer hasn't skated in the past year, but that could change soon. He said his chances of playing hockey again are slim, but he told The Detroit News and the Detroit Free Press he hasn't given up.
"I just don't really see a reason saying right now, 'Hey, my time is done,'" he said. "Absolutely not."
NEW YORK (AP) Philadelphia's Ryan Howard was voted major league player of the year by members of the players' association Wednesday, and Albert Pujols of the St. Louis Cardinals was voted Marvin Miller Man of the Year.
Florida's Miguel Cabrera was voted NL outstanding player, and Jermaine Dye of the Chicago White Sox was the AL choice.
The Twins' Johan Santana and the Cardinals' Chris Carpenter won pitching awards, Detroit's Justin Verlander and Florida's Dan Uggla earned comeback awards and Oakland's Frank Thomas and the Dodgers' Nomar Garciaparra won comeback honors.
 Load-Date: November 9, 2006

 

End of Document
