

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
September 2, 2008 Tuesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 649 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: FLORENCE, Italy 
Body




FIFA president Sepp Blatter was at Italy's training camp to present the team with a special badge to wear on its jerseys for winning the World Cup.
The golden patch features a miniature image of the World Cup with FIFA and 2006 stamped on it. Italy will wear the badge until the 2010 tournament in South Africa, after which the next winner will have the honor.
Italy opens qualifying for the 2010 World Cup at Cyprus on Saturday, then hosts Georgia four days later.
"The chance to relive another night like that one in Berlin starts with these games," Italy coach Marcello Lippi said. "Wearing the title of World Cup champions on our jerseys should remind us how to do it."
While he was in town, Italy captain Fabio Cannavaro took advantage of the opportunity to offer Blatter the chance to finally present him with the actual World Cup trophy.
After Italy beat France on penalties in the 2006 final in Berlin, Blatter left the trophy presentation to UEFA president Lennart Johansson. The move sparked controversy in Italy, with Blatter saying he wanted to avoid the reaction of German fans, who were angry at FIFA.
"President Blatter, let's end this controversy once and for all," Cannavaro said. "I ask you to present me here with the World Cup."
Blatter accepted and handed the trophy to Cannavaro.
"It's never too late to make good," Blatter said.
LAUSANNE, Switzerland (AP) The International Olympic Committee chose Pernilla Wiberg to lead a panel created Tuesday to examine four candidate cities hoping to host the first Winter Youth Olympics in 2012.
The seven-member evaluation commission will be led by Wiberg, an athletes' representative at the IOC. The 37-year-old Swedish skier won two gold medals and one silver at four Winter Games from 1992-2002.
The candidate cities are: Harbin, China; Innsbruck, Austria; Kuopio, Finland; and Lillehammer, Norway.
Each bid team will present its case and face questions from commission members during video conference calls later this month.
Wiberg and her panel will then prepare a report for the IOC Executive Board to choose a shortlist of finalists. IOC members will vote by postal ballot in November, with the winning city announced in December.
The Winter Youth Olympics will feature about 1,000 athletes from 14-18 competing in seven sports skiing, ice hockey, biathlon, bobsled, curling, luge and figure skating.
WELLINGTON, New Zealand (AP) English soccer star David Beckham and his Los Angeles Galaxy teammates will play in New Zealand for the second time in 12 months, against an Oceania invitation side in Auckland in December.
Beckham and Major League Soccer team the Galaxy drew a crowd of more than 31,000 when they beat the Wellington Phoenix, the New Zealand franchise in Australia's A-League, in Wellington last December.
Match promoters said Tuesday that the Oceania invitation team for the match Dec. 6 will be captained by New Caledonia-based, former France midfielder Christian Karembeu and will include players from the South Pacific region.
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. (AP) Along with their new quarterback, the New York Jets now have a new training facility.
A ribbon cutting was held Tuesday morning for the team's new practice center in Florham Park.
Jets owner Woody Johnson said the new facility marks the team's symbolic and financial commitment to New Jersey after years of practicing on Long Island.
The team settled on Florham Park after a search that included more than 40 sites. It will be home to players including new quarterback Brett Favre, acquired last month in a trade with the Green Bay Packers.
The Jets and New York Giants are jointly building a new stadium in the Meadowlands, and are asking fans to help pay for it through the imposition of personal seat licenses, a one-time fee giving fans the right to buy seats in the new stadium.
The Giants are charging PSL fees for all seats; the Jets are exempting those in the upper deck.
 Load-Date: September 3, 2008

 

End of Document
