

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
September 14, 2008 Sunday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 585 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: PRETORIA, South Africa 
Body




President Thabo Mbeki says South Africa will be ready to host the 2010 World Cup regardless of who is head of state.
Mbeki ends of his final and second term of office next year and a bruising political battle between Mbeki and his would-be successor Jacob Zuma has created political uncertainty in South Africa
Mbeki says "whatever the political challenges" facing the country, the first World Cup to be held on the African continent will be a success.
Mbeki was addressing reporters after a meeting with FIFA president Sepp Blatter on Sunday.
Blatter is in South Africa on a three-day visit to inspect preparations for the soccer tournament. He also will meet with Zuma.
MINNEAPOLIS (AP) When the Minnesota Gophers lost leading rusher Duane Bennett to a season-ending knee injury last week, coach Tim Brewster didn't want to resort to running back by committee.
"I'd like to have a bell cow," Brewster said. "I'd like to have a guy that is THE guy."
In a 35-23 victory over Montana State on Saturday, freshman DeLeon Eskridge did everything but moo.
Eskridge rushed for 114 yards and three touchdowns, the first Gophers freshman to score three TDs on the ground since Darrell Thompson put four in the end zone against Bowling Green 22 years ago.
"Coach said that when we get a chance with the run game we have to establish it so we can open things up for the offense," Eskridge said. "That's all I tried to do."
NEWCASTLE, England (AP) Newcastle owner Mike Ashley blamed fans for forcing him to put the club up for sale, saying he can't afford to match their ambition or cope with the threats to his safety following manager Kevin Keegan's resignation.
Ashley said Sunday that he is "no longer prepared to subsidize" the Premier League club he bought in July 2007.
"I am putting the club up for sale," he said in a statement. "I hope that the fans get what they want and that the next owner is someone who can lavish the amount of money on the club that the fans want."
Ashley, who watched Newcastle matches in a replica jersey while sitting with fans, was lauded for coaxing Keegan out of retirement in January. The relationship with supporters soured when the club's former striker quit on Sept. 4, claiming his position had been undermined by his lack of influence over transfers.
Ashley's takeover sparked great expectation at the northeast England club, which has a huge fan base but last won a major trophy when it captured the 1955 FA Cup. The Magpies haven't won the league since 1927.
BOWLING GREEN, Ky. Junior PGA Championship winner Anthony Paolucci and girls' titlist Danielle Frasier will lead the United States in the Junior Ryder Cup set to begin Monday at The Club at Olde Stone.
The team of six boys and six girls will compete against a European junior team in an expanded format of foursomes, mixed four-ball and singles. The teams will also play a nine-hole "friendship" match Wednesday, the day before the start of the Ryder Cup at Valhalla Golf Club in Louisville.
Boys rounding out the U.S. team are championship runner-up Jordan Spieth, Cameron Peck, Cory Whitsett, Andrew Yun and captain's pick Jeffrey Kang.
The girls' side also features championship runner-up Sarah Brown, Alexis Thompson, Jennifer Johnson, Erynne Lee and captain's pick Tiffany Lua.
"They are a very confident team and in watching them I am very impressed with their length off the tee and iron play," U.S. captain Ken Lindsay said.
The players must be American citizens and members of the high school graduating class of 2009, or younger.
 Load-Date: September 15, 2008

 

End of Document
