

Names in the Game
The Associated Press
June 18, 2006 Sunday 1:01 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 672 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: CHICAGO 
Body




Bulls forward Luol Deng hopes a televised appeal during the NBA finals will offer Americans an opportunity to learn more about the crisis in Darfur and how they can help.
The 6-foot-9 native of Sudan will star in a public service announcement seeking support for Sudanese relief efforts. The spot will air for the first time Sunday on Chicago's WLS-TV during the game between the Miami Heat and Dallas Mavericks.
"The situation in Darfur is a lot worse than what people know," said Deng, a member of the Dinka tribe in southern Sudan.
His family moved to the United States when he was 5 to escape a civil war.
"My father knew what was coming and wanted a better life for his nine children. I'm here because I was lucky," Deng said.
Fighting in Darfur began in February 2003 when rebels from black African tribes took up arms, complaining of discrimination and oppression by Sudan's Arab-dominated government.
The government has been accused of unleashing Arab tribal militias against civilians in a campaign of murder, rape and arson. At least 180,000 people have died many from hunger and disease. More than 2 million have fled their homes, many to neighboring countries where stability has been threatened by Darfur's chaos.
"A lot has been hidden. It's like all the genocides of the past. People are just guessing at how many have been massacred. The more we look, the higher we'll actually find those numbers," said Deng, who played one year at Duke before getting drafted in 2004.
The Bulls and NBA worked with the World Food Program to produce the promotion aimed at getting financial assistance for refugees and other victims of the Darfur crisis. It was filmed earlier this month at the Bulls practice facility, and Deng said he hopes it inspires some of those watching the NBA finals to do what they can to help.
"A dollar is almost a week's worth of food for someone. There are a lot of people with good hearts out there who just need to know there's something they can do," Deng said.
ANAHEIM, Calif. (AP) The Anaheim franchise that opens play next November in the NBA Development League has received a name the Arsenal.
"Arsenal is definitely a unique name when you look at the professional and collegiate sports landscape not only here in California, but also throughout the United States," minority owner Roy Englebrecht said Friday. "That's exactly what we are striving for with our team; to be a unique organization that creates a one-of-a-kind fan experience at our games."
The team logo features a prominent capital A with a basketball streaming across its front and includes the Anaheim city name and Arsenal below the icon. The logo is comprised of a color combination of red, navy blue, gray, and white.
The team will be affiliated with the Los Angeles Clippers and play a 25-game schedule at the 7,500-seat Anaheim Convention Center.
The NBA Development League has expanded to 12 teams for next season.
DULUTH, Minn. (AP) Halina Karnatsevich of Belarus took the women's title for the second consecutive year and Sergei Lukin of Russia won the men's title in the 30th Grandma's Marathon on Saturday.
Lukin, 31, finished the 26.2-mile course along the North Shore of Lake Superior in 2 hours, 14 minutes, 30 seconds. Pavel Andreev, also of Russia, came in second with a time of 2:16:46.
The course record of 2:09:37 was set in 1981 by Dick Beardsley.
Karnatsevich, 37, defended her title with a time of 2:33:39, slower than her winning time last year of 2:28:43 but well ahead of runner-up Svetlana Nekhorosh, of the Ukraine, who finished in 2:37:33.
The winners each will receive the top prize of $8,000.
LONDON (AP) The Britain and Ireland team to play the United States for the Curtis Cup next month was announced Saturday, with Claire Coughlan the only golfer returning from the 2004 tournament.
Ada O'Sullivan is the captain of the team set to play in the July 29-30 event at Bandon Dunes, Ore.
Tara Delaney, Naomi Edwards, Martina Gillen, Breanne Loucks, Tricia Mangan, Kiran Matharu and Melissa Reid make up the rest of the team.
 Load-Date: June 18, 2006

 

End of Document
