

Nigerians voters hope for president who ends corruption, truly is "man of the people"
The Associated Press
April 20, 2007 Friday 9:19 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 949 words
Byline: By EDWARD HARRIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LAGOS Nigeria
Body




Celebrated Nigerian writer Chinua Achebe once summed up his countrymen's entrenched cynicism when it comes to corrupt politicians.
"Tell them that this man had used his position to enrich himself," he wrote in "A Man of the People." "And they would ask you as my father did if you thought a sensible man would spit out the juicy morsel that good fortune placed in his mouth."
Many Nigerians hope Saturday's presidential election will bring a break from their country's corrupt past and usher into power a true "man of the people." If nothing else, it's a milestone for democracy, the first time one elected leader will hand over power to another in a country plagued by military rule and dictators since independence from Britain in 1960.
"We need a change in our country. We need tomorrow to be better than today," said Jimmy Etaki, a 32-year-old construction worker. "We only need our leaders to have the fear of God. For them, it's money, money, money. They don't think of the citizens, but if they fear God, maybe we can have change."
With 140 million people and the world's seventh-largest oil industry, Nigeria enjoys vast human and material potential and has gained influence across the globe. Many in Africa look to its comparatively well-educated people, with writers such as Achebe or Nobel laureate Wole Soyinka, as a source of hope for their continent.
Neither Africa nor the broader world can ignore the outcome of Saturday's election or the consequences if it fails which could be chaos that spreads refugees across Africa and disrupts oil supplies.
Nigeria is a top oil supplier to America, and China is making inroads into its production sector. Armed insurgency in the oil-producing region has already cut production and pushed up oil prices around the globe.
"No country's fate is so decisive for the continent. No other country across a range of issues has the power so thoroughly to shape outcomes elsewhere in sub-Saharan Africa. If Nigeria works well, so might Africa," the New York-based Council on Foreign Relations said in a recent report. "If the democratic experiment in Nigeria stalls, and development and governance stagnate, the rest of Africa suffers and loses hope."
Voters will choose among 25 candidates Saturday. Many of the names and faces, including the top candidates the current vice president, a former military ruler and the brother of a top '70s-era political leader have long been familiar to Nigerians.
The winner must get the most votes nationwide and at least a quarter of ballots cast in 24 of Nigeria's 36 states, a provision designed to ensure the president draws support from around the nation. If no winner emerges, a runoff election will be held within a month. A new government assumes power May 29.
But it will take more than a new president to end corruption, which spans the halls of government in the capital, Abuja, to the powerful governorships in Nigeria's 36 states to the teeming urban slums.
Heavily armed police manning checkpoints shake down travelers, demanding "something for the weekend?"
Hotel receptionists offer larger rooms for standard rates if cash crosses their palms. Freelance parking attendants offer to guard cars for a fee and break tail lights if it's not paid.
Nigerians say corruption could be halted in this deeply hierarchical society by a strong leader who sets the right example and forces others to follow.
President Olusegun Obasanjo's election in 1999 ended a run of military regimes, including one he led. Previous elections were either annulled or the new leaders were overturned by the military.
Obasanjo's 2003 re-election was marred by violence and allegations of vote-rigging. He's barred from this race by constitutional term limits his supporters tried unsuccessfully to overturn. The run-up to Saturday's vote has also been bloody and chaotic.
More than 100 people died in violence in recent weeks, including some 50 killed on April 14 when Nigerians voted for state governors and lawmakers, according to local media.
Obasanjo's ruling party won more than two-thirds of the 36 governorships, prompting accusations of graft and opposition calls for the results to be annulled and a boycott of Saturday's vote.
Topping the ballot are the two main opposition challengers: Gen. Muhammadu Buhari, an '80s-era military ruler known for his strict but less-corrupt rule, and Vice President Atiku Abubakar, a former Obasanjo ally who fell out with his boss over the term limit issue.
This week, the Supreme Court overturned Abubakar's disqualification by the electoral commission over corruption charges he denies, and he rejoined the race only days before the vote.
They face the ruling party candidate, Umaru Yar'Adua, who's widely seen as Obasanjo's hand-picked successor. Yar'Adua comes from a noted political family, but is little known himself. He has suffered kidney problems and was hurriedly flown to Europe last month for unspecified health treatment.
All three are Muslims from the north, part of an informal agreement among Nigeria's political elite that rotates power among the country's Christian-dominated south and predominantly Muslim north. The country's 140 million people are roughly split between Christians and Muslims.
The electoral commission said Friday that 65 million newly printed ballots that included Abubakar were still arriving in the country.
Commission Chairman Maurice Iwu went live on national television to hold aloft a specimen of the new ballot, showing the whisk broom symbol and name of Abubakar's Action Congress in the top slot.
The ballots won't carry the usual photographs of the candidates, which had helped poor and illiterate readers to find their choice on a ballot of 25 parties.
 Load-Date: April 20, 2007

 

End of Document
