

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
June 12, 2008 Thursday 1:55 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 936 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Ove Andersson
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) Ove Andersson, a Swedish former rally driver and Toyota Formula One team principal, died Wednesday in a car crash in South Africa. He was 70.
Andersson was participating in the Milligan Vintage Trial rally and crashed head-on with another car as he turned a corner, Hans-Eric Almeback, the chief executive of Toyota Sweden, told The Associated Press.
The accident occurred outside Oudtshoorn in the Western Cape. The Milligan Vintage Trial is a rally for classic, pre 1960-cars.
During his rally career in the 1970s, Andersson won the Monte Carlo Rally, Rally Sanremo, Osterreichische Alpenfahrt, Acropolis Rally, Safary Rally and gained seven podium places in the World Rally Championships.
He helped build the Toyota Team Europe from his own Andersson Motorsport squad and became the first head of Toyota's Formula One team in 2002.
Eliot Asinof
HUDSON, N.Y. (AP) Eliot Asinof, an author who invited readers behind the scenes of the world of sports with books including "Eight Men Out," has died. He was 88.
Asinof died Tuesday at a hospital in Hudson of complications from pneumonia, said his son, Martin Asinof.
Asinof was best known for "Eight Men Out," his 1963 retelling of the "Black Sox" scandal in which eight members of the Chicago White Sox threw the 1919 World Series. He spent more than three years exhaustively researching the book, his son said.
The book was made into a 1988 movie by the same name starring John Cusack, Charlie Sheen and Christopher Lloyd.
Asinof wrote more than a dozen books, included 1968's "Seven Days to Sunday," for which he spent a year traveling and living with the New York Giants football team. A novel, "Final Judgment," is due to be published later this year, his son said.
Asinof was himself a minor-league ballplayer, briefly playing in the Philadelphia Phillies' organization before joining the Army and serving in World War II. Earlier this year, he completed a memoir about his wartime service, his son said.
The elder Asinof also wrote for television and film, working on Western shows "Maverick" and "Wagon Train," his son said.
Sara Gear Boyd
MONTPELIER, Vt. (AP) Sara Gear Boyd, a former Republican leader in the Vermont Legislature and secretary of the Republican National Committee, died Tuesday of cancer, her family said. She was 67.
The Burlington native and University of Vermont graduate rose to prominence at a time when her home city was moving to the left and had elected socialist Bernie Sanders as mayor.
She was elected to the Vermont House in 1984, serving from 1985 to 1992, the last four years as majority leader. She later served in the Vermont Senate, and her fellow Republicans elected her leader there as well, making her the first woman in the country to serve as majority leader in both houses of a state legislature, according to a state party biography.
Gear Boyd joined the Republican National Committee in 1992 and held several leadership roles in that organization. In 2003, President George W. Bush appointed her commissioner of the White House Fellows.
Vo Van Kiet
HANOI, Vietnam (AP) Former Vietnamese Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet, an economic reformer who led the Communist nation away from poverty and isolation and backed the normalization of ties with the United States, has died. He was 85.
Kiet, who was prime minister from 1991 to 1997, died Wednesday in a Singapore hospital, where he was taken Saturday after suffering a stroke, government officials said.
Born into a peasant family, Kiet fought the French and Americans for almost four decades, joining Communist revolutionary forces at the age of 16.
As prime minister, Kiet helped craft policies that attracted billions of dollars in foreign investment, vastly expanded trade and enabled the economy to grow at an annual rate of better than 8 percent.
Although his first wife and two children were said to have been killed by U.S. forces during the Vietnam War, Kiet was a firm supporter of normalizing relations with the U.S., which was finally achieved in 1995.
He supported moves to privatize much state industry, enact clearer laws and end special privileges for army and party leaders.
He stepped down in 1997 at age 74, saying the country needed younger leaders. But he remained active in the country's affairs.
John Rauch
ATLANTA (AP) John Rauch, the former Georgia quarterback who coached the Oakland Raiders to a berth in the second Super Bowl, died Tuesday at his home in Oldsmar, Fla., his wife said. He was 80.
Rauch was 33-8-1 in three season as the Raiders coach from 1966-68. He also served as head coach of the Buffalo Bills for two years and was an assistant coach with Philadelphia and Atlanta.
Rauch was a Raiders assistant coach for three years before he was named to follow owner Al Davis as head coach no easy task after Davis became commissioner of the American Football League.
Rauch, a native of Philadelphia, was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 2004.
Curtis Watkins
CHICAGO (AP) Curtis Watkins, a member of DePaul's 1979 Final Four basketball team, died Monday of a blocked artery, his daughter said. He was 51.
Former coach Joey Meyer, then an assistant on father Ray Meyer's staff, called Watkins the secret weapon on a Final Four team that featured Mark Aguirre and Clyde Bradshaw.
Watkins scored 24 points in DePaul's win over UCLA that sent the Blue Demons to the Final Four. Indiana State, which featured Larry Bird, defeated DePaul in the semifinal game.
Watkins ranks 10th on the school's all-time scoring list and ninth in rebounds. Meyer called Watkins a coach's dream because of his ability to score and play defense.
 Load-Date: June 12, 2008

 

End of Document
