

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 19, 2008 Friday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1027 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Sam Bottoms
LOS ANGELES (AP) Sam Bottoms, who had small but memorable roles in the 1970s classics "Apocalypse Now" and "The Last Picture Show," has died. He was 53.
Bottoms, one of four actor-brothers, died Tuesday of brain cancer at his home in Los Angeles, wife Laura Bickford said.
In "Apocalypse Now," Francis Ford Coppola's 1979 Vietnam War epic, Bottoms played pro surfer-turned-soldier Lance B. Johnson, who takes to the waves amid bombs and bullets under the orders of the maniacal, surfing-mad Lt. Col. Bill Kilgore played by Robert Duvall.
In his 1971 film debut, a 15-year-old Bottoms starred alongside his best-known brother, Timothy, in "The Last Picture Show," playing a mute and mentally handicapped boy forced by friends to lose his virginity to a prostitute.
Brothers Joseph and Ben are also actors.
Sam Bottoms was born in Santa Barbara in 1955, the third of four sons of sculptor James "Bud" Bottoms. He began acting in local theater at age 10.
After his 1970s films, Sam Bottoms went on to appear in the Clint Eastwood westerns "The Outlaw Josey Wales" and "Bronco Billy," and Coppola's 1987 Vietnam film "Gardens of Stone."
He more recently appeared in the films "Seabiscuit" and "Shopgirl."
Conor Cruise O'Brien
DUBLIN, Ireland (AP) Conor Cruise O'Brien, an Irish iconoclast who led several lives as a diplomat, government minister, author and newspaper editor, has died. He was 91.
A government announcement Thursday did not give the cause of death, although Cruise O'Brien had faded from public life since suffering a stroke in 1998 and several broken bones from a fall in 2007.
O'Brien first gained fame in his early 1940s when he served as a senior United Nations diplomat seeking a solution to civil war in the Congo in 1961. He resigned within the year after repeatedly clashing on policy issues with his U.N. superiors to write "To Katanga and Back," a classic expose on U.N. bureaucracy and weakness.
He served as chancellor of the University of Ghana from 1962 to 1965, lectured in humanities at New York University from 1965 to 1969, then returned to Ireland to launch his political career as a national lawmaker for the Labour Party.
From the start, O'Brien bitterly opposed the rise of the modern Irish Republican Army in the neighboring British territory of Northern Ireland. He frequently wrote that the Republic of Ireland, with its Catholic ethos, must abandon romanticized support for IRA rebels and come to respect and champion the rights of the north's British Protestant majority. This was the only way to achieve unity, he argued, most eloquently in his 1972 book "States of Ireland."
When he lost his parliamentary seat in 1977, O'Brien became editor-in-chief of The Observer newspaper in Britain. He was forced out within three years after criticizing the paper's ownership.
Majel Barrett Roddenberry
LOS ANGELES (AP) Majel Barrett Roddenberry, "Star Trek" creator Gene Roddenberry's widow who nurtured the legacy of the seminal science fiction TV series after his death, has died. She was 76.
Roddenberry died of leukemia Thursday morning at her home in Bel-Air, said Sean Rossall, a family spokesman.
Roddenberry was involved in the "Star Trek" universe for more than four decades. She played the dark-haired Number One in the original pilot but metamorphosed into the blond, miniskirted Nurse Christine Chapel in the original 1966-69 show.
She frequently was the voice of the ship's computer, and about two weeks ago, she completed the same role for the upcoming J.J. Abrams movie "Star Trek," Rossall said.
Roddenberry and her husband, who died in 1991, were proud of the show and the passionate devotion of its fans, Rossall said.
Born Majel Lee Hudec on Feb. 23, 1932, in Cleveland, she began taking acting classes as a child.
She met her husband in 1964 during a guest role for a Marine Corps drama he produced called "The Lieutenant." That same year, she was cast in the pilot for the "Star Trek" series as the no-nonsense second-in-command.
The couple married in Japan in 1969 after "Star Trek" was canceled.
She also was the executive producer for two other TV science fiction series, "Andromeda" and "Earth: Final Conflict."
Dave Smith
SAN DIEGO (AP) Dave Smith, a former All-Star closer who holds the Houston Astros record for games pitched, has died. He was 53.
Former big leaguer Tim Flannery said Smith apparently died of a heart attack Wednesday, but the official cause of death wasn't known.
Smith was an All-Star with Houston in 1986 and 1990, and had 216 saves in a 13-year career. He played with Houston from 1980-90 before finishing his career with two seasons with the Chicago Cubs.
His 563 outings with the Astros is tops on the club's list, and his 199 saves ranks second.
Paul Weyrich
WASHINGTON (AP) Conservative activist Paul Weyrich, who coined the phrase "moral majority" and helped turn social conservatives into a powerful force in the Republican Party, died Thursday. He was 66.
Weyrich's death was announced by the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank he helped to create.
Lee Edwards, a Heritage Foundation scholar and a friend, said Weyrich had suffered from ill health in recent years and had both legs amputated.
Republican National Committee Chairman Mike Duncan said Weyrich "was instrumental in the development of conservative thought" in America.
At his death, Weyrich was chairman and CEO of the Free Congress Foundation, a conservative think tank. His latest commentary, posted on the foundation's Web site with Thursday's date, was titled: "The next Conservatism, a Serious Agenda for the Future."
Weyrich, who lived in northern Virginia, was one of three founders of the Moral Majority, and later had a hand in creating the Christian Coalition.
Weyrich started as a reporter in Milwaukee and came to Washington in 1967 as press secretary to Sen. Gordon Allott, R-Colo. Six years later, he founded the Heritage Foundation, and the next year, the Free Congress Foundation. At a 1979 gathering of religious leaders, Weyrich talked of a "moral majority" in the country. The name stuck. Over the next decade, the group, led by the Rev. Jerry Falwell, energized the conservative movement as a political force.
 Load-Date: December 19, 2008

 

End of Document
