

Obituaries in the news - Correction Appended
The Associated Press
July 4, 2006 Tuesday 1:20 AM GMT

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1044 words
Body




Anna Lee Aldred
MONTROSE, Colo. (AP) Anna Lee Aldred, the first woman in the United States to receive a jockey's license and a member of the National Cowgirl Hall of Fame, has died. She was 85.
Aldred died June 12 at Valley Manor Nursing Home, the nursing home said.
She received her professional jockey's license in 1939, when she was 18, from California's Agua Caliente Racetrack. The license, a small wooden badge, is now on display at the National Cowgirl Museum and Hall of Fame in Fort Worth, Texas.
She was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1983.
She retired from racing by 1945 and opened a riding school in California. She then spent five years performing as a rodeo trick rider, sometimes standing atop the saddle or hanging by her foot from the side of a running horse.
Aldred continued to ride until she was 80, appearing in rodeo ceremonies and working as a "pony boy," trotting horses onto the track of the Montrose fairgrounds for jockeys before races.
Edwin B. Broderick
ALBANY, N.Y. (AP) Bishop Edwin B. Broderick, who led the Roman Catholic Diocese of Albany for seven years, died Sunday. He was 89.
Broderick was appointed the eighth bishop of the diocese by Pope Paul VI in 1969 and served until 1976, when he was named executive director of Catholic Relief Services. He held that post until 1983.
During his time in Albany, the bishop served on the state commission that investigated the Attica prison riots.
Broderick was appointed to the staff of St. Patrick's Cathedral in 1947 and in 1951 became the first full-time director of radio and television for the archdiocese, a position that included work with Archbishop Fulton J. Sheen in the production of Sheen's national television series, "Life is Worth Living."
In 1954, Pope Pius XII designated him the United States representative to the Pontifical Commission for Television.
Roderick MacLeish
BOSTON (AP) Roderick MacLeish, a journalist, filmmaker and author, died Saturday. He was 80.
MacLeish died of natural causes at a retirement home in Washington, D.C., according to his family.
MacLeish was news director for WBZ radio in Boston in the early 1950s and later moved to London where he was assigned the job of establishing a foreign news department for Westinghouse Broadcasting Co.
He covered the Sinai War between Egypt and Israel, the conflict in the Belgian Congo, the Vietnam War and the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Later in his career he was a commentator and news analyst for National Public Radio.
Howard More
LOS ANGELES (AP) Howard More, who founded what became known as the Ski Sunrise resort and helped popularize the sport in the Southern California mountains, has died. He was 91.
More died June 10 at the Mountain View Estates care center in Altadena from complications of Alzheimer's disease, said his daughter, Carol.
"The man was a force of nature. He also took stubborn to a real high," said Bob Roberts, executive director of the California Ski Industry Association. "And that's what it took in the early days to get going."
More took over the Table Mountain resort in 1943 and by the early 1950s had built a lodge from locally harvested timber.
In 1973, four years after he was disabled in a freak accident at the resort, More sold the facility to a group of four investors, who renamed it Ski Sunrise. He reacquired it in 1993 when the investors defaulted on their loan.
Business suffered in recent years, however, because the resort did not have snow making capabilities. More sold the 100 acres of mostly beginner and intermediate terrain two years ago to neighboring Mountain High for $375,000, according to ski industry reports.
Jan Murray
LOS ANGELES (AP) Jan Murray, one of the fabled generation of comics who rose from the Catskills to prime time TV, tickling fans of the 1950s game show "Treasure Hunt," died Sunday. He was 89.
Murray, who appeared in dozens of movies and TV shows, died at his home in Beverly Hills, son Howard Murray said in a telephone interview Monday.
"Treasure Hunt" ran from 1956 to 1959 in both daytime and prime time versions, first on ABC and later on NBC. The contestant who won a quiz got to pick among treasure chests, which contained anything "from a head of cabbage to a check for a large sum of money," according to the book "The Complete Directory to Prime Time Network TV Shows."
Murray honed his craft by watching vaudeville shows and performing at Catskills resorts that catered to the crowds of Jewish vacationers.
Among the other veterans of that vanished show business training ground were Mel Brooks, Red Buttons, Sid Caesar and the late Buddy Hackett.
Murray went on to host a string of game shows in the 1950s, including "Dollar a Second," before moving to Los Angeles to pursue an acting career.
Among the movies he appeared in were "The Busy Body," "Who Killed Teddy Bear" and, in a small role, Brooks' "History of the World Part I."
He also served as a guest host on "The Tonight Show" and did many guest shots in 1960s and '70s TV series, including "Love, American Style," "The Name of the Game" and "The Man From U.N.C.L.E."
Glen Renfrew
LONDON (AP) Glen Renfrew, the former Reuters chief executive who oversaw the information company's transition from private ownership to a publicly-traded company, died Thursday. He was 77.
Renfrew died at a nursing home in St. Albans, England, his son, Barry Renfrew, said Monday.
He was Reuters' managing director and chief executive from 1981 to 1991, a period of rapid growth for the London-based company, which is now known as Reuters Group PLC.
He oversaw the introduction of Reuters' highly successful system of screen-based real-time news delivery for the financial community and led Reuters through its initial stock offering on the London exchange in 1984 a move that unlocked vast profits.
Renfrew began at Reuters as a trainee journalist and worked his way up to the top job via postings in Singapore, South Africa and Belgium. In 1971, he was named manager of Reuters' North American operations and a decade later became the first non-Briton to lead the company since its German-born founder, Paul Julius Reuter.
He was offered a knighthood in 1990 but turned it down, on the grounds that he believed Reuters, as an international company, should not accept honors from any particular government.
Correction




In obituaries July 3 and July 4 for Anna Lee Aldred, The Associated Press erroneously reported the location of Aqua Caliente race track. It was in Tijuana, Mexico, not California. The National Cowgirl Museum and Hall of Fame says Aldred rode at Aqua Caliente in 1939, becoming the first woman in the United States to hold a professional jockey's license.
Correction-Date: July 6, 2006
 Load-Date: July 4, 2006

 

End of Document
