

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
September 20, 2006 Wednesday 2:16 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1158 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Jack Banta
HUTCHINSON, Kan. (AP) Jack Banta, who played on the Brooklyn Dodgers with Jackie Robinson and made three relief appearances in the 1949 World Series, died Sunday. He was 81.
His death was confirmed Tuesday by Elliott Mortuary. Banta, who had heart problems and recently broke his hip, entered a Hutchinson hospice Saturday and died the next day, wife Jackie Banta said.
Banta pitched briefly for the Dodgers in 1947 and 1948. His best season was in 1949 when he went 10-6 and won the pennant-clinching game.
Banta, who threw sidearm, pitched in the World Series against a New York Yankees team featuring Joe DiMaggio and Yogi Berra. The Dodgers had a lineup that included Pee Wee Reese, Duke Snider, Don Newcombe, Roy Campanella and Gil Hodges.
Banta pitched in relief in Games 3, 4 and 5 and gave up a home run to DiMaggio. The Yankees won the Series in five games.
A sore arm limited Banta's 1950 season. He went on to manage in the Dodgers' farm system before leaving baseball. He worked for a grocery supermarket company in Hutchinson for 33 years before retiring in 1989.
Helene Deschamps Adams
NEW YORK (AP) Helene Deschamps Adams, a daring World War II spy and French Resistance fighter who saved American fliers from capture and Jews from execution by the Nazis and played a role in secret preparations for Allied invasions of France, died Saturday. She was 85.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said a daughter, Karyn Anick Monget.
Drawing on experiences that read like the script for a spy epic, she wrote two books, "The Secret War," in 1980, and "Spyglass: The Autobiography of Helene Deschamps Adams," in 1995. She was honored late in life by the U.S. and French governments for her wartime deeds.
Her duties ranged from being a courier to gathering information on German troop strength, airfields and coastal installations in preparation for the Allied invasion of southern France in 1944. She rescued downed U.S. fliers before the Nazis could find them and guided groups of Jews to safety across the Spanish border in the Pyrenees mountains.
Using the code name Anick, Deschamps brazenly posed as a secretary at the Vichy headquarters of the Milice, the French equivalent of the Gestapo, and was able to steal the records of hundreds of people, including Jews, Resistance members and ordinary citizens who had been marked for death or deportation to concentration camps, her daughter said.
Besides her books she was working on a third when she fell ill Deschamps was the subject of several TV documentaries on female spies.
Mazisi Kunene
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) Mazisi Kunene, the first poet laureate of a democratic South Africa whose works recorded the history of the Zulu nation, died Aug. 11. He was 76.
Kunene died in a hospital in Durban after a long battle with cancer, his family said.
He also played a leading role in the anti-apartheid movement while in exile. It was during his time outside South Africa that he published poems such as "Emperor Shaka the Great" and "Anthem of the Decades" and two anthologies, "The Ancestors and the Sacred Mountain" and "Zulu Poems."
Kunene was born and educated in KwaZulu-Natal. He used his writing to oppose the apartheid government. In 1959, with the liberation movement under severe threat, he went into exile and played a pivotal role in the founding of the anti-apartheid movement in Britain.
A few years later, Kunene became the chief representative in Europe and Africa for the African National Congress, which would become the ruling party in South Africa with the fall of apartheid. Kunene was said to have persuaded artists such as Pablo Picasso, Marc Chagall and Henry Moore to donate works for an exhibition to raise funds for the ANC.
A cultural adviser to UNESCO, he taught at a number of universities. In 1975, he joined UCLA, where there was a strong African language department, remaining there until retirement in 1992.
On his return to South Africa in 1993, he began publishing in his native Zulu language. That year UNESCO honored him as Africa's poet laureate, and in 2005 he was made South Africa's poet laureate.
Dorothy Stratton
WEST LAFAYETTE, Ind. (AP) Dorothy Stratton, who was Purdue University's first full-time dean of women and later led the U.S. Coast Guard's Women's Reserve effort that freed up men to serve in World War II, died Sunday. She was 107.
Stratton died at the Westminster Village in West Lafayette, said Sally Watlington, a retired U.S. Navy captain who was a longtime friend.
In 1933, Stratton, then a professor of psychology, became Purdue's dean of women. At the time, only 500 women attended Purdue and many were studying home economics.
During Stratton's nine-year tenure, Purdue's enrollment of female students rose from 500 to more than 1,400 and three women's residence halls were built at the West Lafayette campus.
Stratton, who was born in Brookfield, Mo., in 1899, served as dean of women until 1942, when she became the creator and first director of the U.S. Coast Guard's Women's Reserve after being commissioned earlier that year as a senior lieutenant in the United States Navy.
In 1946, Stratton became the first director of personnel at the International Monetary Fund. She went on to serve as executive director of the Girl Scouts of the U.S.A.
Robert Swanson
ALMA, Mich. (AP) Robert Swanson, a former Alma College president who led the private liberal arts school for 24 years, died Friday, the college said. He was 91.
The cause of death was not available Tuesday from the college.
He became president of Alma College in 1956 and retired in 1980. The college is a Presbyterian-founded school that opened in 1886 and has about 1,200 students, according to The Princeton Review.
During Swanson's presidency, student enrollment grew from 657 to 1,212, and the number of faculty grew from 38 to 72. The value of the college's endowment grew from $375,000 to about $12 million in that time, the school said.
Syd Thrift
BALTIMORE (AP) Syd Thrift, a former general manger of the Pittsburgh Pirates who spent nearly a half century in baseball, died Monday. He was 77.
He underwent knee replacement surgery Monday in Milford, Del., and died that night, said the Baltimore Orioles, one of many teams he worked for. An autopsy will determine the cause of death.
Thrift became GM of the Pirates in 1985 and gave Jim Leyland his start as a major league manager. In 1989, he went to the New York Yankees as senior vice president of baseball operations.
His long baseball career began in 1949 when he joined the Yankees' minor league organization. Among the teams he worked for was the Kansas City Royals, where he founded their renowned baseball academy.
Thrift worked in the Orioles' front office for eight seasons after joining the team in 1994. Five years later, he became the team's vice president of baseball operations, a job he held until 2002. After leaving the Orioles, he consulted for the Tampa Bay Devil Rays until his retirement in 2004.
 Load-Date: September 20, 2006

 

End of Document
