

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
June 16, 2006 Friday 12:02 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 827 words
Body




Chakufwa Chihana
BLANTYRE, Malawi (AP) Veteran Malawian politician Chakufwa Chihana, who rallied opposition to the iron-fist dictatorship of the late Hastings Kamuzu Banda, died Monday after an unsuccessful attempt to remove a brain tumor, the government and relatives said. He was 67.
Chihana, a former trade unionist detained without trial for six years in the 1970s, rose to popularity when in 1992 he openly challenged former president-for-life Banda in elections in the impoverished southern African country. Chihana fiercely criticized Banda during trips abroad and was arrested upon his return to Malawi in April 1992.
His high-profile sedition trial fueled a local and international campaign for change, forcing Banda to call a referendum in 1993 in which Malawians voted overwhelmingly for the restoration of multiparty democracy.
Chihana ran for president in 1994, but lost. He twice served in the government as second vice president.
Hubertus Czernin
LOS ANGELES (AP) Austrian journalist Hubertus Czernin, whose research helped a woman recover five Gustav Klimt paintings looted from her family by Nazis, died Saturday in Vienna of complications from a rare cell disorder. He was 50.
Czernin suffered from mastocytosis, said Randol Schoenberg, a Los Angeles attorney who worked on the multimillion-dollar art restitution case.
"Hubertus Czernin was a hero to me," Schoenberg said. "He committed his life to exposing unspoken truths about Austria and its Nazi past. Without his efforts, none of the recent art restitution would have taken place and certainly the five famous Klimt paintings would never have been returned to Maria Altmann."
Czernin's reporting about stolen art led to the passage of Austria's Art Restitution Law, which opened museum archives and helped families reclaim works stolen by the Nazis or seized by the Austrian government after World War II.
He also helped expose the Nazi past of former U.N. Secretary-General and Austrian President Kurt Waldheim, and sexual abuses by Cardinal Hans Hermann Groer, the former leader of Austria's Roman Catholic Church.
Altmann, of Beverly Hills, had been told that her aunt had given the Klimt paintings to the Austrian gallery in 1925. Czernin's research proved that claim was false. In January, an Austrian Arbitration Court ordered the government to give Altmann the paintings.
Czernin came to Los Angeles in April, when the Klimt paintings went on display at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. He was applauded during opening ceremonies for his role in the return of the paintings, which remain on view until June 30.
Raymond Devos
PARIS (AP) Raymond Devos, a Belgian comic whose whimsical wordplays entertained and delighted generations of French-speaking fans, died Thursday, his family's lawyer said. He was 83.
Nicknamed "the buffoon," Devos was a hulking figure with shaggy brown hair whose routines combined physical humor and sharp dialogue filled with sly plays on words.
Born in Mouscron, Belgium, in 1922, Devos was raised in northern France. He began his career in Paris cabarets, performing in three-man routines before going solo in the 1950s.
In a career spanning more than 50 years, Devos authored four books, won theatrical prizes and was named to France's Legion of Honor.
French President Jacques Chirac hailed Devos as a "a magician of the French language, a great poet of humor."
Devos "knew how to make us laugh out loud and move us to tears with his surprising mix of humor and seriousness, of absurdity and depth that was the hallmark of his singular talent," Chirac said in a statement.
Wesley Hill
NIAGARA FALLS, Ontario (AP) Wesley Hill, who was credited with helping rescue more than 50 people from the Niagara River above and below Niagara Falls, died Monday, his family said. He was 76.
Hill was the last remaining brother of a family of rivermen whose business was river rescues and body recoveries.
Until a few years ago, Hill worked as a special constable and consultant with the Niagara Parks Police, possessing a wealth of knowledge about the river, falls and gorge from a lifetime of observation.
"Mr. Hill was their go-to man when it came to anything to do with river rescues," the Rev. Doug Schonberg said at Hill's funeral Wednesday. "In addition to being a wonderful man, he was a valuable resource."
Hill was born in Niagara Falls the same year his father rode the lower rapids in a barrel, but Hill often expressed disdain for stunts. His brother, William "Red" Hill Jr., was killed in a 1951 attempt to go over Niagara Falls in a barrel made of inner tubes.
"I enjoy life too much to challenge the river unnecessarily," Hill told The Buffalo News in 1979.
Daredevil Dave Munday recalled his 1985 attempt to go over the falls and how Hill lassoed an air pipe of his barrel and pulled it in after it became trapped above the falls.
"I asked him to push me back out into the current, but he said, `I can't do that,'" said Munday, who made it over the falls later that year.
 Load-Date: June 16, 2006

 

End of Document
