

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
September 12, 2006 Tuesday 2:01 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 943 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Hilda Bernstein
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) Hilda Bernstein, an anti-apartheid activist and author whose husband was tried for treason alongside Nelson Mandela, died Friday. She was 91.
Bernstein died of heart failure at her home in Cape Town, her son, Keith, said.
Her husband, Rusty, and Mandela were tried along with other anti-apartheid activists in the infamous Rivonia Trial in 1964. Mandela received a sentence of life imprisonment, while Rusty Bernstein was the only defendant acquitted and freed.
But police harassment made life afterward so difficult for the Bernsteins that the couple was forced into exile, leaving their children behind. They crossed the border to Botswana on foot a journey described in Hilda Bernstein's book "The World That Was Ours."
In exile, Hilda Bernstein was an active member of the ANC and a regular speaker for the Anti-Apartheid Movement group in Britain and abroad.
The couple eventually settled in Britain but returned to South Africa after the 1994 democratic elections that made Mandela the country's president.
Hilda Bernstein was a founding member of the Federation of South African Women, the first nonracial women's organization in South Africa. She also was a writer and artist whose work has been used as book jackets and illustrations, posters and cards for the AAM.
A fiery orator, she served as a city councilor in Johannesburg from 1943 to 1946 as the only communist elected to public office in a "whites only" vote.
Clair Burgener
ENCINITAS, Calif. (AP) Clair Burgener, a loyal ally of three Republican presidents who served the San Diego area in the U.S. House of Representatives for five terms, died Saturday. He was 84.
Burgener died of complications from Alzheimer's disease, said Aurora Griggs, a charge nurse at Silverado Senior Living, where Burgener had lived for several years.
An ally and friend of presidents Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford and Ronald Reagan, Burgener served the staunchly Republican former 43rd Congressional District covering parts of San Diego, Imperial and Riverside counties from 1973 to 1983.
His political career included stints on the San Diego City Council and in the California Legislature, and he was in the minority party for the entire time except for one nine-month period when he was in the state Senate.
Usually a reliable conservative voter, Burgener broke ranks with his party in the late 1970s to support the Equal Rights Amendment. He also was one of only 29 Republicans to vote against the confirmation of Nelson Rockefeller as President Ford's vice president.
But Burgener was best known for defeating Ku Klux Klan leader Tom Metzger, the Democratic candidate, for election to his final term in Congress in 1980.
Gail Leona Hannuk
OLYMPIA, Wash. (AP) Gail Leona Hannuk, a former Miss Washington who was known for her bright singing voice and a lively spirit, died Sept. 1. She was 63.
Hannuk, a student at Grays Harbor College when she won the state title after being selected as Miss Aberdeen in 1961, died at her home after a three-year battle with pancreatic cancer, friends and Miss Washington officials said.
Her death was confirmed on the Web sites of the Miss America organization and Pancreatic Cancer News.
After her year as Miss Washington, Hannuk was a motivational speaker and did promotional work for the state. Most recently she worked as an agent for Windermere Real Estate in the Olympia area and served on the board of the Miss Grays Harbor and Miss Thurston County pageants.
Melanie Lomax
LOS ANGELES (AP) Melanie Lomax, a civil rights lawyer and former Police Commission president, died Sunday after her car plunged off a steep slope near her home, police said Monday. She was 56.
Lomax was backing out of her Hollywood Hills home driveway when her vehicle overshot the roadway and somersaulted down a slope, Officer Michael Lopez said. Paramedics rushed Lomax to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in full cardiac arrest, he said.
Police said Lomax had sustained no visible injuries, and the coroner's office will determine her cause of death.
Lomax began practicing law in the 1970s. She rose to prominence as a civil rights lawyer and later became a confidante of Mayor Tom Bradley.
She served as a police commission president overseeing the Los Angeles Police Department in the early 1990s, a period that included the beating of Rodney King by LAPD officers.
James Wilson
CHICAGO (AP) James Wilson, who took his first journalism job only because the one at a grocery store didn't pay enough and went on to cover some of the nation's biggest stories in a 32-year career with The Associated Press, died Sunday. He was 68.
Wilson's wife of 45 years, Ruth, said her husband died of cancer at the couple's home in the Chicago suburb of Arlington Heights.
Wilson became Chicago bureau chief in 1985 and remained in that post until his retirement in 2000.
His career in journalism began in 1955 when as a college freshman he took a job at the Mitchell (S.D.) Daily Republic, answering phones and writing brief sports items. He had little interest in journalism, but he said he took the $5-a-week job because his part-time job grocery store job paid too little.
Wilson went on to cover or lead the coverage of many major stories with the AP, including the 1972 flood in Rapid City, S.D., that killed 238 people; the 71-day occupation of Wounded Knee, S.D., by members of the American Indian Movement in 1973 and the conflict over desegregation of Boston public schools in the mid-1970s.
Wilson joined the AP in 1967 in Bismarck, N.D. Several years later, as correspondent in Pierre, S.D., he attracted attention through both his political coverage and his eye for feature stories.
 Load-Date: September 12, 2006

 

End of Document
