

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
August 30, 2006 Wednesday 9:28 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1270 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Naguib Mahfouz
CAIRO, Egypt (AP) Naguib Mahfouz, who became the first Arab writer to win the Nobel Prize in Literature for his novels depicting Egyptian life in his beloved corner of ancient Cairo, died Wednesday, his doctor said. He was 94.
Mahfouz, who was accused of blasphemy by an Islamic militant and survived a stabbing attack 12 years ago, was admitted to the hospital last month after falling in his home and injuring his head. He died Wednesday morning after his health declined sharply, said Dr. Hossam Mowafi.
The Nobel Prize, awarded to Mahfouz in 1988, brought international acclaim to the author, even though he had already established himself as one of the Middle East's finest and most beloved writers and a strong voice for moderation and religious tolerance.
In 1994, an attacker inspired by a militant cleric's ruling that a Mahfouz novel written decades before was blasphemous stabbed the then-82-year-old author as he left his Cairo home.
Mahfouz survived, but the attack damaged nerves leading to his right arm, seriously impairing his ability to write.
Across the span of 50 novels, five plays and scores of short stories and essays, Mahfouz depicted with startling realism the Egyptian "Everyman" balancing between tradition and the modern world. The setting of the novels often did not stretch beyond a few familiar blocks of Islamic Cairo, the 1,000-year-old quarter of the capital where Mahfouz was born.
The crowded neighborhood of alleys and centuries-old mosques is the setting for his masterpiece "Cairo Trilogy." The trilogy "Palace Walk," "Palace of Desire" and "Sugar Street," all of which were published in the 1950s details the adventures and misadventures of a Muslim merchant family not unlike Mahfouz's own.
His final published major work came in 2005 a collection of stories about the afterlife entitled "The Seventh Heaven."
Chhaya Devi Parajuli
KATMANDU, Nepal (AP) Chhaya Devi Parajuli, an icon of the struggle to restore democracy in Nepal who attended anti-monarchy protests despite her age and who was even beaten and tear-gassed by police, died Saturday. She was 88.
Parajuli died in a Katmandu hospital after being struck by a motorcycle July 18 in a hit-and-run accident, said her daughter, Pabitra Wagley.
After Nepal's King Gyanendra fired the prime minister in late 2002, political parties began protesting his increasing control over the political system. In early 2003, political leaders called on citizens to attend a large protest against the king in Katmandu.
Parajuli heeded the call, moving some 300 miles to Katmandu from Inaruwa, in eastern Nepal. Thirty-six months later she was still there, having attended numerous anti-Gyanendra protests.
The intensity of the demonstrations increased after the king seized absolute power in 2005 and ended in three weeks of bloody protests that finally forced Gyanendra to back down and restore democracy in April 2006.
The image of Parajuli, waving the four-star red flag of the main opposition party, the Nepali Congress Party, inspired other Nepalese in the struggle.
William F. Quinn
HONOLULU (AP) Hawaii's first governor, William F. Quinn, has died on the island of Oahu. He was 87.
Quinn's relatives notified Gov. Linda Lingle's office that he had died, but no other details were immediately available, said Russell Pang, Lingle's spokesman.
Quinn, a Republican, was governor of the territory of Hawaii from 1957 to 1959, an appointment by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. He was elected to serve as the governor from 1959 to 1962 after Hawaii gained statehood.
Born in Rochester, N.Y., Quinn graduated from St. Louis University and earned a law degree from Harvard University. He got his first taste of Hawaii while serving as a naval officer during World War II.
While in law school, he decided he would move to the islands to begin his career in a private law practice.
He was elected chairman of the 1957 territorial convention and served on the Hawaii Statehood Commission, where he was a proponent of becoming the 50th state.
Quinn's terms as governor included such crises as a 126-day sugar strike in 1958 that idled 13,000 workers, a 1962 West Coast shipping strike that threatened Hawaii's ability to maintain a supply of groceries and other essentials, and a 1960 tsunami that killed 61 and injured 300.
Quinn was president of Dole Co. from 1965 to 1972.
Ralph Schoenstein
PHILADELPHIA (AP) Ralph Schoenstein, a humorist who ghostwrote Bill Cosby's best-selling book "Fatherhood," wrote his own catalog of 18 books and contributed to radio, died Thursday. He was 73.
Schoenstein died of complications after heart surgery, according to Orland's Ewing Memorial Chapel, a funeral home in Trenton, N.J. He lived in Princeton, N.J., and was brought up in New York City.
Schoenstein often wrote about his family and the joys and frustrations of a writer's life.
His first book, 1960's "The Block," was a portrait of his childhood on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. Other books included "Yes, My Darling Daughters: Adventures in Fathering" in 1976; "The I-Hate-Preppies Handbook," which became a best seller in 1981; and "Toilet Trained for Yale: Adventures in 21st-Century Parenting" in 2002.
His most widely read book, though, was "Fatherhood," Cosby's humorous look at being a parent. Schoenstein also was the ghostwriter behind Joan Rivers' "Bouncing Back: I've Survived Everything ... and I Mean Everything ... and You Can Too!", among others.
Schoenstein also wrote articles for The New York Times, The Saturday Evening Post, Playboy and other publications.
He had a regular radio commentary on National Public Radio's "All Things Considered."
Melvin Schwartz
PALO ALTO, Calif. (AP) Melvin Schwartz, a former Stanford University professor who won a Nobel Prize in physics and founded a pioneering Internet company, died Monday. He was 73.
Schwartz, who shared a Nobel Prize in 1988 with Leon Lederman and Jack Steinberger for their research into subatomic particles, died Monday in Twin Falls, Idaho, after a long struggle with Parkinson's disease, Stanford spokesman Neil Calder said Tuesday.
He majored in physics at Columbia University and became a physics professor there in 1958. He went to Stanford in 1966 and stayed there until 1983.
That's when he left to start Digital Pathways, a company that designed computer security systems and was later sold to a larger Silicon Valley company.
Schwartz remained a consulting professor at Stanford until 1991, when he returned to Columbia as a professor and associate director for high-energy and nuclear physics.
Frank Todd Taylor
BALTIMORE (AP) Frank Todd Taylor, who flew several missions in the Asiatic-Pacific Theater in World War II and spent 45 years overseeing federal aircraft safety programs, died Aug. 20. He was 86.
Taylor died of pneumonia at his home in Ellicott City, Md., his family said in a statement Tuesday.
He started as an accident investigator for the federal government in 1948, served as director of the Bureau of Accident Investigation at the Civil Aeronautics Board, and later became a senior accident investigator at the National Transportation Safety Board.
He received several agency awards and commendations for his contributions to aircraft safety, his family said in a statement.
Taylor investigated every major passenger aircraft accident from 1948 until his retirement in 1983, said one of his sons, F. Todd Taylor. He traveled to Antarctica, Brazil, Venezuela, the Canary Islands and spots across the continental United States. Once, Taylor and a team of investigators were rescued by Marines in a midnight operation after being taken hostage in Brazil, his son said.
 Load-Date: August 31, 2006

 

End of Document
