

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 30, 2007 Sunday 1:57 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 814 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Tom Downs
EAST LANSING, Mich. (AP) Tom Downs, an expert in election law who helped draft Michigan's current constitution, has died. He was 91.
Downs died Wednesday, according to the Michigan Political History Society, of which Downs was a member. Katy Downs told the Lansing State Journal that her father died of pneumonia.
Downs was instrumental in drafting Michigan's current constitution, serving as a vice president at the constitutional convention. The constitution was adopted in 1963, and Downs was an expert on its history.
"He was the guy you could pick up the phone and call and find out, 'How did something come into the constitution? How did it get there? What were the arguments?'" said Lynn Jondahl, a former Michigan legislator.
"He was so fascinated by and deeply committed to the democratic process," he said. "It was a rich experience to get together with him and just talk about what was going on in terms of politics and law."
Andrew Grima
GSTAAD, Switzerland (AP) Andrew Grima, whose jewelry adorned royalty and celebrities, has died, relatives said Saturday. He was 86.
Grima died Wednesday at a hospital in the Swiss mountain resort of Gstaad after contracting pneumonia following a fall earlier this month, his family said.
Grima came to prominence in the 1960s with a flowery and organic style that captured the mood of a new generation of postwar fashion designers.
"When he started, jewelry was a very different thing small, precious stuff," his second wife, Jojo Grima, told The Associated Press. "He went straight the other way."
"At that time everything was pretty representative," she said. "There were bows, there were bees, there were little dogs. Andrew used a lot of rough stones and he made large pieces. It was a completely different philosophy."
One of those who took an interest early on in Grima's work was Lord Snowdon, then married to Britain's Princess Margaret.
"Lord Snowdon had written an article in the paper saying that there was nothing exciting in jewelry," Grima's wife said. "My husband called and said, 'Would you like to come and see my workshop,' and they became good friends."
The Snowdon connection as well as numerous prizes Grima received for his work during the 1960s earned him a coveted royal warrant as a supplier of jewelry to the British royal family.
Other customers included former U.S. first lady Jacqueline Onassis, actress Ursula Andress and sculptor Barbara Hepworth.
Serigne Saliou Mbacke
DAKAR, Senegal (AP) Serigne Saliou Mbacke, Senegal's spiritual leader whose image was ever-present in the homes of his millions of followers, has died. He was 92.
Four million people a nearly third of the West African country's population were expected to make a pilgrimage to Mbacke's grave over the weekend, said national police chief Assane Ndoye.
Mbacke was the leader of the Mourides, the most powerful Muslim brotherhood in Senegal. He died Friday and was buried Saturday.
Senegal's President Abdoulaye Wade called for a three-day national period of mourning, with flags flown at half-staff.
Although Senegal is a secular country, the majority of its democratically elected rulers have had to seek the endorsement of Mbacke. His image is always on the dashboards of bush taxis and in the homes of his millions of followers.
Among Mbacke's achievements was the transformation the holy center of Touba from a rural outpost into a city that now has a population of 1 million.
Touba was founded by Mbacke's father, who died in 1927, and has often been described as a state within a state. Inside the city limits, visitors cannot drink, smoke or dance.
Heliodore Mejak
KANSAS CITY, Kan. (AP) Monsignor Heliodore Mejak, who led a Catholic church here for 63 years, died on Christmas Day, ending what may have been the longest active tenure at a U.S. parish. He was 98.
The Archdiocese of Kansas City in Kansas, which confirmed the death, said it believes Mejak was the nation's oldest active priest. He was ordained in 1935 and served under seven popes. Mejak said his first Mass at Holy Family Church on Aug. 1, 1944, and never left.
"To be that old and to continue to function and to care for the community, that certainly shows his dedication and his love for his people," said Thomas Tank, vicar general of the archdiocese.
In addition to his priestly duties, he carried out repairs in the church, cut the grass, managed the finances and even prepared the weekly bulletin.
"He was a stellar priest," said Mary Ann Grelinger, a former parishioner who wrote Mejak's biography for Homiletic & Pastoral Review magazine. "He said Mass every day. He never took a day off or a vacation."
Mejak celebrated Mass until about a week before his death despite failing health and eyesight.
"When he said Mass, it was obvious he was reciting from memory. He couldn't read it at all," said Kevin Fogarty, a firefighter who had attended the church for about 10 years.
 Load-Date: December 30, 2007

 

End of Document
