

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
July 10, 2006 Monday 2:22 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1667 words
Body




John Warner Fitzgerald
ST. IGNACE, Mich. (AP) John Warner Fitzgerald, a former Michigan Supreme Court justice and state Court of Appeals judge, died Friday. He was 81.
Fitzgerald died at a hospital after battling a prolonged illness, said his son, Adam Fitzgerald.
Fitzgerald served on the Michigan Supreme Court for eight years, starting in 1974. He also was influential at Thomas M. Cooley Law School in Lansing, where he was a professor and an original board member.
Fitzgerald served as a state senator from 1958 to 1962 and on the Court of Appeals from 1964 to 1974.
His father, Frank D. Fitzgerald, served two terms as secretary of state and was in his second term as governor when he died in office in 1939. His grandfather, John Wesley Fitzgerald, represented Eaton County in the Michigan House from 1895-96.
His son, Frank M. Fitzgerald, was a member of the state House from 1987-98.
John Warner Fitzgerald also served in the U.S. Army during World War II.
Catherine Leroy
SANTA MONICA, Calif. (AP) Catherine Leroy, the French-born photojournalist whose stark images of battle helped tell the story of the Vietnam War in the pages of Life magazine and other publications, died Saturday of cancer, a physician at St. John's Health Center said. She was 60.
Leroy was 21 years old in 1966 when she took a one-way ticket to Saigon to document American troops in Vietnam. A year later she became the only accredited journalist to participate in a combat parachute jump, joining the 173rd Airborne in Operation Junction City.
In 1968, during the Tet Offensive, Leroy was captured by the North Vietnamese Army. She managed to talk her way out and emerged with images of the North Vietnamese Army in action that were used for a Life magazine cover.
A famous 1967 photo, "Corpsman In Anguish," portrays a young Marine, his face wrenched in torment, hunched over the dead body of his friend, while smoke from the battle rises into the air behind them.
Leroy worked for the Gamma and Sipa photo agencies and later sold her work to The Associated Press and United Press International. Her photos appeared in publications worldwide.
In 1972, Leroy shot and directed "Operation Last Patrol," a film about Ron Kovic and the anti-war Vietnam veterans.
After Vietnam, she covered conflicts in several countries including Somalia, Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran and Libya.
Leroy co-authored the book "God Cried" with Tony Clifton, about the siege of West Beirut by the Israeli army in 1982.
Gilbert R. Mason
BILOXI, Miss. (AP) Dr. Gilbert R. Mason, known as South Mississippi's "civil rights doctor" and one of the state's leading crusaders for racial equality, died Friday after a lengthy illness, officials in Biloxi said. He was 77.
Mason, a Jackson native, worked to integrate Biloxi's beaches and provide medical care for blacks during a time when those services were hard to find, said State Rep. Frances Fredericks, D-Gulfport.
Mason opened his medical practice in Biloxi in 1955, when black doctors were not admitted to hospital staffs and blacks were not allowed on maternity wards a stance he helped reverse.
Johnson, who retired from his medical practice in 2002, also will be remembered for fighting to integrate Biloxi's schools during the racially turbulent 1950s and '60s.
He organized the first act of civil disobedience in Mississippi when he staged beach wade-ins. Blacks who were not allowed on the beach waded into the Mississippi Sound in protest, and were harrassed by whites and jailed for trespassing.
Mississippi NAACP President Derrick Johnson said Mason, along with Aaron Henry, Winston Hudson, Medgar Evers and C.C. Bryant, was among the state's original leaders of the civil rights movement.
John Money
BALTIMORE (AP) Dr. John Money, a well-known psychologist and sex researcher who coined the terms "gender identity" and "gender role" and whose theories expanded on the concept of gender, died Friday of complications from Parkinson's disease, his niece said. He was 84.
Money conducted his research for about 50 years at Johns Hopkins University, where he was a professor of medical psychology.
Money believed a person's gender identity was determined by an interaction between biological factors and upbringing. That represented a break from past thinking, in which gender identity was largely believed to be caused only by biological factors.
Money was born in New Zealand and immigrated to the United States in 1947 to study at the Psychiatric Institute of the University of Pittsburgh, but he left for Harvard University in 1952.
At Harvard, he wrote a dissertation on hermaphrodites, people who are born with characteristics of both sexes. He left soon after that for Johns Hopkins.
Money gave advice to parents to help them decide what sex they should raise hermaphrodites to be.
Money also worked with people who were born with normal sex organs but did not identify with the gender they had been raised to be. Money advised them on whether it would be better to not change or if hormonal or surgical procedures would be beneficial.
In 1965, he worked with the surgeon who performed the first sex-change operation at Johns Hopkins.
At the end of his career, Money developed the concept of lovemaps, which incorporate the diversity of human sexuality that each individual has encoded in his or her brain.
Harold P. Olmo
DAVIS, Calif. (AP) Harold P. Olmo, a renowned viticulturist who played a key role in shaping California's wine industry, died June 30. He was 96.
Olmo died of complications from a hip fracture at a Davis convalescent home, according to the University of California, Davis, where he worked as a researcher and professor for nearly a half-century.
Olmo's travels around the world to track down and gather rare, ancient and endangered grape vines earned him the nickname "Indiana Jones of Viticulture." During his career, he was responsible for developing some 30 grape varieties and improving, authenticating and helping preserve many others.
A native of San Francisco, Olmo joined UC Davis' faculty in 1931.
By developing varieties that would ripen sooner or later in the year, and grow in areas previously considered hostile, Olmo was instrumental in expanding and diversifying California's agricultural profile.
His work with table grapes led him to develop varieties such as Christmas rose, the ruby seedless and the perlette.
In 1948, he introduced his first wine grape, the ruby cabernet. He went on to develop the emerald riesling, centurion, carnelian, symphony, rubired and many others.
But it was his work with chardonnay that revolutionized California's wine industry. When he began researching it, chardonnay was a minor player in the state, its vines covering just 50 acres in 1960. After he developed a variety with larger clusters and greater disease resistance, its popularity soared.
He retired from UC Davis in 1977, though he kept an office on campus and continued his research until just before his death.
Maury Reid
SARASOTA, Fla. (AP) Maury Reid, one of the Tuskegee Airmen who were the nation's first black military pilots, died Tuesday after a long illness, his son said. He was 81.
He was born in Harlem, N.Y., and graduated with the 44G class at the Air Force program for black pilots in Tuskegee, Ala.
Injuries Reid suffered when his plane crashed during a test flight prevented him from flying any overseas missions during World War II, his son said. After the war, Reid returned to New York, where he faced racial discrimination when he applied for jobs, his son Maurice said.
He also fought segregation in his children's New York school district, which he successfully sued to move them from an overcrowded black school to a predominantly white school with smaller class sizes, Maurice Reid said.
Maury Reid remained active as a Tuskegee alumnus, speaking about the program at museums, schools and churches, his son said. He also appeared in a 2004 documentary about the Tuskegee Airmen, "Silver Wings and Civil Rights."
Eric Schopler
CHAPEL HILL, N.C. (AP) Eric Schopler, a University of North Carolina psychologist who worked on humane treatment of autism, died Friday of cancer, friends and family said. He was 79.
He co-founded a program 41 years ago rejecting the notion that autism a complex neuropsychiatric syndrome was caused by destructive parents. Instead, Schopler recognized autism as a brain disorder that could be managed.
Schopler observed that people living with autism were capable of learning but did not learn in traditional ways. He found that customized interventions from therapists, family and teachers made learning possible.
His insights led to the development of Division TEACCH Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related Communication-Handicapped Children a network of nine state-funded clinics that are still operating. The clinics have inspired autism therapy programs in countries throughout the world.
Frank Zeidler
MILWAUKEE (AP) Frank Zeidler, a former Milwaukee mayor who was the last Socialist to run a major American city, died Friday of congestive heart failure and diverticulitis, a hospital spokesman said. He was 93.
Born in Milwaukee on Sept. 20, 1912, Zeidler was part of the Socialist Party's city stronghold, which was fueled by German immigrants who flocked there. The party had thousands of members, a congressional seat and control of the mayor's office for nearly a half-century, ending with Zeidler. He led Milwaukee from 1948 through 1960.
His three terms as mayor were marked by large-scale construction of public housing, creation of the first educational television station in Wisconsin and city beautification programs. Zeidler also made strong statements on behalf of civil rights as Milwaukee became the 11th-largest city in the United States by the end of his term, his daughter Jeanne Zeidler said.
Zeidler said the word "socialism" was discredited when Stalin and Hitler used it in their rhetoric. Still, he remained an ardent Socialist until his death, serving as chairman of the national Socialist party, even as numbers dwindled.
 Load-Date: July 10, 2006

 

End of Document
