

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
January 24, 2007 Wednesday 3:37 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1205 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Benjamin F. Holman
COLLEGE PARK, Md. (AP) Benjamin F. Holman, a newspaper and television reporter who was appointed by President Nixon to head community relations at the Justice Department, has died. He was 76.
Holman, who lived in Greenbelt, died Saturday following complications from emphysema and congestive heart failure, said his sister Lillie Mae Holman.
Holman started at the now-defunct Chicago Daily News in 1952 after graduating from the University of Kansas, spending 10 years at the paper. He then reported for WBBM-TV in Chicago, CBS News in New York and NBC News in Washington.
In 1969, Holman was appointed by President Richard Nixon to the post of assistant attorney general in charge of community relations at the Justice Department, a position he held for eight years.
Holman joined the faculty at the University of Maryland's college of journalism in 1978 as a visiting professor, and was appointed full professor the next year. He was acting dean of the college from 1980 to 1981. He taught courses on newspaper, radio and television news, and focused in beats such as racial issues, the homeless and sports coverage. He retired in 2004.
Howard E. Hunt
MIAMI (AP) E. Howard Hunt, who helped organize the Watergate break-in, leading to the greatest scandal in American political history and the downfall of Richard Nixon's presidency, died Tuesday. He was 88.
Hunt died at a Miami hospital after a lengthy bout with pneumonia, according to his son Austin Hunt.
The elder Hunt was a World War II soldier, CIA officer, organizer of both a Guatemalan coup and the botched Bay of Pigs invasion, and author of more than 80 books.
Yet the bulk of his notoriety came from the one thing he always insisted he wasn't a Watergate burglar. He often said he preferred the term "Watergate conspirator."
While working for the CIA, Hunt recruited four of the five actual burglars Bernard Barker, Virgilio Gonzalez, Rolando Eugenio Martinez and Frank Sturgis, all who had worked for Hunt a decade earlier in the Bay of Pigs Invasion.
Hunt eventually spent 33 months in prison on a conspiracy charge, and said he was bitter that he was sent to jail while Nixon was allowed to resign.
Hunt declared bankruptcy in 1997, largely blaming his Watergate fines and legal fees. A $650,000 libel settlement he was awarded in 1981 stemming from an article alleging his involvement in the assassination of Kennedy was overturned, and he never received any of that money.
He has a memoir coming out next month titled "American Spy: My Secret History in the CIA, Watergate and Beyond."
Ryszard Kapuscinski
WARSAW, Poland (AP) Ryszard Kapuscinski, a Polish writer and journalist who gained international acclaim for his books chronicling the unrest in Africa and the Middle East, died Tuesday. He was 74.
Kapuscinski died at Warsaw's Banacha hospital following heart surgery, said Marek Zakowski, president of Czytelnik publishing house, which has published several of Kapuscinski's books. Zakowski declined to provide details.
In the late 1950s and early 1960s, Kapuscinski served as the sole Africa correspondent for the Polish Press Agency, or PAP, reporting on the upheaval streaking across the continent as African nations shook off colonial rule and declared independence.
He went on to publish books such as "The Emperor,", which chronicled the decline of Haile Selassie's regime in Ethiopia, and was widely interpreted by Polish readers as a criticism of Poland's communist regime.
Three years later, he published "Shah of Shahs," a book about the 1979 Iranian revolution that toppled Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, ushering in the era of the Ayatollahs.
Several of his other books were also translated into English. He also wrote "Another Day of Life," about the Angolan civil war, "Imperium," about the waning days of the Soviet Union, "The Soccer War," and "The Shadow of the Sun."
Carlos Lezama
NEW YORK (AP) Carlos Lezama, the Caribbean-born transportation worker who turned Brooklyn's West Indian Carnival parade into a world-famed event, has died. He was 83.
Lezama, a retired machinist for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, died Monday at Kings County Hospital after a brief illness, according to the Web site of the West Indian American Day Carnival Association.
He started the parade 40 years ago as a local, five-block event. It now draws as many as 1 million people.
Lezama was president of the West Indian American Day Carnival Association, which is now led by his daughter, Yolanda Lezama-Clark.
Born in Trinidad, Lezama was nicknamed "Celloman" for playing both the steel pan and the cello.
He worked on a cruise ship before immigrating to the United States, where he quickly joined Carnival festivities in Harlem. By the 1960s, he and a friend started their own celebration in Brooklyn.
Hugo Moser
BALTIMORE (AP) Dr. Hugo Wolfgang Moser, a neurologist whose work with a rare disorder was depicted in the 1992 movie "Lorenzo's Oil," has died, colleagues said. He was 82.
Moser, who died Saturday at Johns Hopkins Hospital, researched childhood mental retardation and advocated testing all newborns for the condition known as adrenoleukodystrophy, or ALD.
He had been undergoing treatment for pancreatic cancer.
His professional posts included director of the Neurogenetics Research Center at the Kennedy Krieger Institute and professor of neurology and pediatrics at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
By the 1980s, Moser and his wife were working to develop a screening technique that would enable detection of ALD at birth.
The rare disease is caused by a genetic mutation that causes the neurological system to break down.
In "Lorenzo's Oil," actors Susan Sarandon and Nick Nolte portrayed the relentless efforts of Augusto and Michaela Odone to find treatments for their son, Lorenzo, who turned 28 last year. Moser was portrayed in the movie by Peter Ustinov.
The Odones were often at odds with doctors unconvinced about the effectiveness of a treatment made from olive and rapeseed oils. The compound was patented by Augusto Odone and is considered experimental by the Food and Drug Administration.
Moser published a study in 2005, based on research with 84 boys that showed Lorenzo's Oil can prevent onset of the disease's symptoms for most boys who receive a diagnosis of ALD.
Albert F. "Jud" Wagner
SMITH CENTER, Kan. (AP) Albert F. "Jud" Wagner, who was the nation's oldest former Marine, has died. He was 107.
Wagner died Saturday at Smith County Long Term Care, said his son J.S. Wagner, who is 84 and also a former Marine.
The elder Wagner was honored along with his family in November 2006 at a Veterans Day ceremony at the Statehouse.
At that time, according to Gov. Kathleen Sebelius' office and the Commission on Veterans Affairs, he was the only known World War I veteran living in Kansas and the oldest former Marine in the nation.
He had also been honored in October 2006 when a 30-mile section of U.S. 36 through Smith County was designated as World War I Veterans Highway.
J.S. Wagner recalled his father as a strong man who liked farming and raising livestock in Smith County and talking to his four children about serving his country in France and Germany. He enlisted at age 17 and served in the Marines in 1918 and 1919.
 Load-Date: January 24, 2007

 

End of Document
