

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
January 23, 2009 Friday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 768 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




John A. Blackburn
CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va. (AP) John A. Blackburn, the University of Virginia's dean of admissions, died Tuesday. He was 67.
The university said Blackburn, dean of admissions since 1985, died of cancer at his home in Charlottesville.
Blackburn had planned to retire in June.
He pushed for U.Va. to boost its financial aid and abolish its early-decision admissions policy, which he believed gave an unfair advantage to students who could afford to commit to attending without first seeing a financial aid offer. He traveled extensively to promote the AccessUVa financial-aid program for students from lower-income backgrounds.
He also was among the first admissions officials to actively recruit international students.
Constance Eberhardt Cook
ITHACA, N.Y. (AP) Constance Eberhardt Cook, who helped legalize abortion in New York and compel Episcopalians to ordain women before becoming the first female executive at Cornell University, died Tuesday. She was 89.
Cook died at her home in Ithaca, Cornell announced Thursday. The university did not give a cause of death.
Born in Shaker Heights, Ohio, Cook was elected to the Assembly as a Republican in 1962 and served 14 years, representing the 128th Assembly District in the Finger Lakes region of central New York.
In 1970, she sponsored a bill to repeal state anti-abortion laws and to provide for legal, on-demand abortions during the first 24 weeks of pregnancy. After a bitter legislative debate, abortion became legal in New York by a one-vote margin three years before the Supreme Court's Roe v. Wade decision made it legal nationwide.
During the mid-1970s, in private law practice, Cook represented the Rev. Betty Bone Schiess of Syracuse, who sued the Episcopal Church on grounds of sex-based employment discrimination. The case helped force the church to revise canon law in 1977 to allow the ordination of women.
She became Cornell's vice president for land-grant affairs in 1976, a position she held until 1980.
Malcolm MacPherson
NEW YORK (AP) Malcolm MacPherson, a former correspondent for Time and Newsweek whose books included "Roberts Ridge" and "Time Bandit," died Saturday. He was 65.
MacPherson died in Warrenton, Va., of a heart attack during a party in celebration of the impending inauguration of Barack Obama, according to Melville House Publishing, which released his novel "Hocus POTUS" in 2007.
A native of Bridgeport, Conn., MacPherson served in the Marines during the Vietnam War and later reported on conflicts in Africa, Northern Ireland and the current war in Iraq. "Roberts Ridge," a nonfiction book, was set in Afghanistan, while "Hocus POTUS" was inspired by his time in Iraq.
Bill Werber
CHARLOTTE, N.C. (AP) Bill Werber, who was the oldest living ex-major leaguer and a former teammate of Babe Ruth, died Thursday. He was 100.
Werber's son, Bill Jr., said his father died of "old age" after moving into an assisted care facility three weeks ago.
A career .271 hitter who led the American League in stolen bases three times, Werber played with Ruth, Lou Gehrig, Jimmie Foxx and Lefty Grove in stints with the New York Yankees and Boston Red Sox.
Werber also was a member of the 1940 World Series champion Cincinnati Reds and was Duke's first All-American basketball player.
Bill Winfrey
DALLAS (AP) Bill Winfrey, a former newspaper photographer who captured one of the iconic images of Lee Harvey Oswald after the assassination of John F. Kennedy, died Jan. 15. He was 75.
Winfrey died at East Texas Medical Center in Athens from complications of heart disease and diabetes, The Dallas Morning News reported Monday.
A self-taught photographer, Winfrey was on the staff of The Dallas Morning News when Kennedy was killed Nov. 22, 1963. He rushed to the hospital where Kennedy was treated before following a trail of action to the Oak Cliff area of the city, where the hunt for the assassin was on.
Winfrey saw Oswald being put in a police car, did a U-turn in the middle of the street and "beat the police to the police station," he said at a 1993 conference of journalists who covered the assassination. Winfrey was in position to get a picture of a handcuffed Oswald raising his fist as he was led out of an elevator.
Historians say the photo was illustrative of Oswald's defiant attitude during his 45 hours in custody. Oswald was shot and killed by Jack Ruby two days after the assassination, and Winfrey covered Ruby's trial.
In the 1960s, Winfrey left the newspaper to start a commercial photography studio. His wife, Jean Winfrey, said he closed it during an economic downturn. She said he later worked as a locksmith in East Texas.
 Load-Date: January 23, 2009

 

End of Document
