

Obituaries in the news
Associated Press
July 28, 2008 Monday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1028 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Bruce Adler
MIAMI (AP) Bruce Adler, who received Tony nominations for his Broadway performances and lent his voice to some Disney films, has died. He was 63.
Adler died of cancer Friday in a South Florida hospice, his booking agent Moishe Rosenfeld said.
Adler starred for four years on Broadway in the Tony Award-winning Gershwin musical "Crazy For You." His performance earned him nominations for the 1992 Tony and Drama Desk Award as best featured actor in a musical. He was previously nominated for those awards for his 1991 performance in "Those Were The Days."
Adler's voice was featured in the Disney animated film "Aladdin," where he sang the opening song, "Arabian Nights." He also had lines in "Beauty and The Beast."
Adler had a guest appearance on NBC's "Law and Order."
Youssef Chahine
CAIRO, Egypt (AP) Youssef Chahine, one of Egypt's most lauded movie directors whose films over nearly five decades often went on Fellini-esque flights of fancy and tackled social ills and Islamic fundamentalism, died Sunday. He was 82.
His death comes about four weeks after he fell into a coma following a brain hemorrhage. Chahine was flown to France in critical condition for treatment but later sent back to Al Maadi Military Hospital in Cairo, where he died Sunday, according to Egypt's official new agency, MENA.
Chahine's eclectic work made him one of the few Egyptian directors to gain an audience abroad, particularly in Europe and France, where he won a lifetime achievement award at the Cannes Film Festival in 1997.
At home, his films raised controversy for their frank portrayal of sexuality, their sharp criticism of political oppression and, in his later works, their denunciations of rising Islamic extremism in Egypt.
Chahine was born on Jan. 25, 1926 to a Christian family of Lebanese origin in Alexandria, the Mediterranean port known at the time as a cosmopolitan city. Throughout his more than 40 films and documentaries, Chahine sought to recapture and defend the spirit of multicultural tolerance against the forces he saw undermining it fundamentalism, dictatorship and imperialism.
Michael J. Daly
FAIRFIELD, Conn. (AP) A man who was awarded the Medal of Honor for heroism as a 20-year-old lieutenant in World War II has died. He was 83.
Michael J. Daly died at his home Friday, according to a funeral home.
Daly was awarded the Medal of Honor by President Harry Truman for valor in combat. The award was for actions Daly took on April 18, 1945, in Nuremberg, Germany.
According to the Congressional Medal of Honor Society Web site, Daly engaged in four single-handed fire fights to protect his men, killing 15 Germans, silencing three enemy machine guns and wiping out an entire enemy patrol.
Daly was later promoted to captain.
He entered the war as an 18-year-old private after leaving West Point and was also awarded three Silver Stars, two Purple Hearts and a Bronze Star with "V" for acts of bravery.
Johnny Griffin
PARIS (AP) Jazz saxophonist Johnny Griffin, who played with America's greats from Thelonious Monk to Lionel Hampton but chose to live in France, has died. He was 80.
Griffin, whose career spanned more than a half-century, was found dead Friday hours before a concert in Mauprevoir in western France by his wife Miriam, his agent said. The exact cause of death was not clear., his agent said.
A Chicago native, the diminutive Griffin took up the sax early on, eventually preferring the tenor saxophone and taking on the nickname "the Little Giant" for the big sounds he blew out of the instrument at breakneck speed.
Born April 24, 1928, Griffin started at Chicago's Du Sable High School where Nat King Cole, Dinah Washington and other greats grew into their music. He graduated then toured with Hampton's big band. After two years in the Army, he played in Chicago and New York, gaining a national reputation with his hard-bop improvisations. In the late 1950s, he played with Art Blakey and Monk.
In the early 1960s, the sax master moved to France where a collection of jazz artists was gathering. He then hopscotched to the Netherlands and back to France. He toured Europe, keeping up the pace even in his final years with recent concerts in Spain, Portugal and Tunisia, his agent said.
Griffin's 1958 album "A Blowing Session," a hard bop jam session with John Coltrane, drummer Art Blakey and others, remains among his signature works.
Robert T. Herres
SAN ANTONIO (AP) Robert T. Herres, a high-ranking Air Force official who served as vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Gen. Colin Powell, has died. He was 75.
Herres died Thursday at his home after a two-year battle with brain cancer, according to Porter Loring Mortuary.
Herres was also a pioneer in the space program and went on to become chief executive for seven years of San Antonio-based insurance company USAA beginning in 1993.
He was credited with transforming USAA, which caters to military members, by expanding eligibility to include enlisted service members. The company now has about 6 million members.
Herres was a Naval officer who went to the Air Force in a move that allowed him to fly right away, the San Antonio Express-News reported. The former astronaut in the Manned Orbiting Laboratory program never went into space but served as first commander of U.S. Space Command from 1985-87.
Among his other military roles, Herres headed the Strategic Air Command, the 8th Air Force and the North American Aerospace Defense Command.
Herres also was active in the San Antonio community, serving as chairman of the United Way of Bexar County and helping raise millions of dollars for children's health care.
Robert O. Nesheim
BARRINGTON, Ill. (AP) Robert O. Nesheim, a nutritionist for Quaker Oats who helped develop popular breakfast cereals such as Cap'n Crunch and Life, has died. He was 86.
Nesheim died July 19 in Monterey, Calif., his daughter said.
He spent most of his career at the Quaker Oats research center in suburban Barrington, Ill. He worked on a team that developed new products and brands for Quaker.
He was a graduate of the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign and taught there in the 1960s. Nesheim also developed nutritional standards for the military.
 Load-Date: July 28, 2008

 

End of Document
