

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
August 3, 2006 Thursday 1:16 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1088 words
Body




Anthony Cave Brown
WARRENTON, Va. (AP) Anthony Cave Brown, a British journalist who turned to exploring the workings of espionage and the development of the atomic bomb, died July 14. He was 77.
He died at a Warrenton nursing home, his daughter, Amanda Eliasch of London, told The Washington Post.
As a writer, Cave Brown was a witness to history who was not averse to sharing a drink with his famous subjects, including Kim Philby, the British spy who became a Soviet agent.
Cave Brown covered the Hungarian revolt against communism and the Algerian war for independence. In 1959, after visiting Boris Pasternak at his Russian dacha, he smuggled a poem by the Nobel laureate out of the Soviet Union and had it published in London's Daily Mail. He claimed that Pasternak had given him a second poem but that he lost it during a night of revelry in Berlin.
He rode aboard the first nuclear-powered submarine and visited the South Pole. He was based in Paris and later in Beirut, where he sometimes met Philby for martinis before the double agent was unmasked and fled to Moscow in 1963.
In the mid-1970s, he found 80 volumes on the development of the atomic bomb on the 13th floor of the National Archives. The documents had just been declassified and left in a rickety wooden cart. He worked with Charles B. McDonald to distill the material into a 788-page history, "The Secret History of the Atomic Bomb."
Fitz Eugene Dixon Jr.
PHILADELPHIA (AP) Fitz Eugene Dixon Jr., a former owner of the Philadelphia 76ers and a civic leader, died Wednesday of skin cancer. He was 82.
Dixon died at Abington Memorial Hospital, according to Helweg Funeral Service of Jenkintown, which is handling arrangements.
He is perhaps best known for bringing Julius Erving to town in 1976 by paying the basketball star about $6.6 million only a few months after buying the team for $8 million. Under his ownership, the Sixers got to the NBA finals twice but won no championship. He sold the team in 1980 after a decline in attendance and financial losses.
One of Dixon's most visible contributions to Philadelphia is the Robert Indiana sculpture "LOVE," which stands in John F. Kennedy Plaza, popularly known as Love Park.
Dixon served on the boards of many universities and was founding chairman of the State System of Higher Education's board of governors. The system was founded in 1982, bringing together a variety of former teachers' colleges and Indiana University of Pennsylvania.
Vincent P. Dole
NEW YORK (AP) Dr. Vincent P. Dole, whose research in the 1960s established that methadone could be used to treat heroin addiction, died Tuesday. He was 93.
Dole had suffered from complications of a ruptured aorta, family members said.
A clinician at The Rockefeller University, Dole studied a wide range of human biological processes. But it was his pioneering work with methadone that earned the highest accolades.
In 1964, Dole and research partner Dr. Marie Nyswander experimented with shifting addicts from crippling drugs like heroin and morphine to methadone, a synthetic drug far less damaging to the body.
At the time, methadone was known predominantly as a painkiller. First synthesized in the late 1930s, it wasn't widely used because it was highly addictive.
Dole and Nyswander, however, noted that methadone didn't disable its users like heroin or morphine. Methadone satisfied the physical cravings of addiction but didn't make users high or subject them to violent mood swings.
Their studies suggested that addicts could be put on "maintenance" doses of methadone meaning they would remain physically dependent on the drug but be able to conduct otherwise normal lives. Those findings sparked the creation of hundreds of methadone programs worldwide.
Jules Hirsch, a professor emeritus at Rockefeller who worked with Dole for nearly 50 years, said the research also fostered thinking that drug addiction should be treated as a medical problem, rather than a purely moral one.
Daniel Lev
SEATTLE (AP) Daniel Lev, a leading scholar on Indonesia and a longtime University of Washington professor, died Saturday, following a battle with lung cancer. He was 72.
The university confirmed his death.
He worked closely with scholars, journalists, reformers and the military to improve the Indonesian legal system and further human rights there, Judith Henchy, who heads the university libraries' Southeast Asia section.
He embraced the language and culture of Indonesia. Many of his research materials are in the native language.
Lev began his teaching career at the University of California, Berkeley, and came to the University of Washington in the 1970s. He retired in 1999, after years as a political science professor and researcher.
Kim McLagan
AUSTIN (AP) Kim McLagan, a British fashion model in the 1960s and the wife of former Faces keyboardist Ian McLagan, died Wednesday in a traffic accident.
The 57-year-old spa owner was hit by a dump truck when she ran a stop sign in Travis County, said James Parrish, a spokesman for the Texas Department of Public Safety. She was pronounced dead at the scene. No other injuries were reported.
McLagan, originally from London, moved to the Austin area with her husband in 1994, according to the Web site for her spa, K.M. Skincare, located southeast of Austin.
She married the Who drummer Keith Moon in 1966. The next year she appeared in the worldwide satellite debut of the Beatles' "All You Need Is Love" video. The couple divorced in 1975, and Moon died in 1978. She married Ian McLagan the same year.
Cardinal Johannes Willebrands
THE HAGUE, Netherlands (AP) Cardinal Johannes Willebrands, a key figure in the Roman Catholic Church's efforts to improve relations with other Christians and Jews, died Tuesday. He was 96.
Willebrands was known at the Vatican as "The Flying Dutchman" for his travels promoting Christian unity. His death was confirmed by the Dutch Catholic Church.
As president of the Vatican's Commission for Religious Relations with the Jews, Willebrands long sought to improve troubled relations between the faiths. He also was mentioned as a possible candidate for the papacy at the two conclaves of 1978.
In the 1980s, he called for more Jewish teachers at Catholic theological institutes to expand the study of Judaism.
Willebrands was named president of the Vatican's Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity in 1969 and held the post for 20 years. The secretariat was renamed the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity by Pope John Paul II in 1988.
He was named a bishop in 1964 by Pope Paul VI.
 Load-Date: August 3, 2006

 

End of Document
