

Obituaries in the news - Correction Appended
The Associated Press
November 1, 2006 Wednesday 11:01 AM GMT

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 883 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Robert Anderson
LOS ANGELES (AP) Robert Anderson, who as president, chairman and CEO of Rockwell International Corp. oversaw building of NASA's space shuttles and the Air Force's B-1B bomber, has died. He was 85.
Anderson, who also spent 22 years at Chrysler Corp., died at home Saturday of complications from cancer, Rockwell spinoff Rockwell Collins Inc. said Tuesday.
Anderson served in top positions at Rockwell International when it was a multi-industry company that served as prime contractor for the space shuttles and builder of the B-1.
Anderson, a Rockwell director since 1968, became president and chief operating officer in 1970, and then chairman and chief executive officer in 1979. He retired in 1988 and became chairman emeritus in 1990.
During the peak of his tenure, company sales exceeded $10 billion and there were more than 125,000 employees in its aerospace, electronics, automotive, and general businesses, Rockwell Collins said.
But both of the company's high-profile aerospace products endured controversy.
The day the shuttle Challenger blew up during launch in 1986, Anderson said Rockwell was "shocked by the catastrophe" but that the company's scientists and engineers were making every effort to find the cause.
The B-1, a supersonic, swing-wing bomber designed to elude radar by flying at low altitudes to deliver nuclear warheads, was produced despite years of questions over whether it was needed, could perform as well as Rockwell and the Air Force promised, and its cost.
Rockwell International merged its businesses with other companies or spun them off starting in the mid-1990s, with much of its aerospace and defense business going to the Boeing Co. A final spinoff in 2001 formed Rockwell Automation and Rockwell Collins.
P.W. Botha
CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) P.W. Botha, South Africa's last hard-line white president who led the country through its worst racial violence and deepest international isolation, has died, the South African Press Association reported. He was 90.
SAPA quoted security staff at his home on the southern Cape coast. He died Tuesday.
Nicknamed the "Old Crocodile" for his feared temper and sometimes ruthless manner, Botha served as head of the white racist government from 1978 to 1989.
Throughout his leadership he resisted mounting pressure to release South Africa's most famous political prisoner, Nelson Mandela. Mandela was freed by Botha's successor, F.W. de Klerk in 1990.
Botha liked to depict himself as the first South African leader to pursue race reform, but he tenaciously defended the framework of apartheid, sharply restricting the activities of black political organizations and detaining more than 30,000 people.
Through a series of liberalizing moves, Botha sought support among the Asian and mixed-race communities by creating separate parliamentary chambers. He lifted restrictions on interracial sex and marriage. He met with Mandela during his last year as president.
But after each step forward, there was a backlash, resulting in the 1986 state of emergency declaration and the worst reprisals of more than four decades of apartheid.
Within a year after Botha stepped down, de Klerk released Mandela after 27 years in prison and put South Africa on the road to its first all-race elections in 1994, when Mandela became president.
In December 1997, Botha stubbornly resisted appearing before a panel investigating apartheid-era crimes. He risked criminal penalties by repeatedly defying subpoenas from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to testify about the State Security Council that he headed.
The council was believed to have sanctioned the killing and torture of anti-apartheid activists, and the panel wanted to know what Botha's involvement was.
Botha won election to Parliament in 1948, the year the National Party came to power and began codifying apartheid legislation. He joined the Cabinet in 1961 and became defense minister in 1966.
Mose Tolliver
MONTGOMERY, Ala. (AP) Mose Tolliver, whose self-portraits and vivid images of nature, people and animals in humble house paint made him one of the leaders of the "outsider art" movement, has died. He was in his 80s.
The self-taught folk artist, who signed his work Mose T, died Monday of pneumonia at Baptist Medical Center East after years of declining health, family members said.
Various dates have been given for his birth, with 1920 listed by some collectors and galleries.
Tolliver began painting in the 1960s after being severely injured while working in a furniture factory. He was said to have first gained notice when he hung his paintings on trees in his front yard and sold them for a few dollars to passers-by.
Anton Haardt, author of "Mose T from A to Z: The Folk Art of Mose Tolliver," was an early admirer and began buying his work and reselling it, getting it noticed by dealers.
His self-portraits over the years conveyed a range of emotions, she said, from the early years when he painted himself with a pipe to the later years when he included a crutch. Some could be "grotesque."
Mose T's paintings can sell for thousands of dollars today and are in museum collections, including the Museum of American Folk Art in New York, the High Museum of Art in Atlanta, the Milwaukee Art Museum, the Smithsonian Institution and the New Orleans Museum of Art.
Correction




In an Oct. 31 obituary on the folk artist Mose Tolliver, The Associated Press erroneously described the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington. It is privately supported, not part of the federal Smithsonian Institution.
Correction-Date: November 6, 2006
 Load-Date: November 2, 2006

 

End of Document
