

Obituaries in the news - Correction Appended
The Associated Press
August 28, 2008 Thursday

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1085 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Philomena Gotti
NEW YORK (AP) Philomena Gotti, whose brood of 13 children included Gambino crime family kingpin John Gotti and four other sons with mob ties, died Tuesday. She was 96.
She died at her Long Island home, said Charles Carnesi, a lawyer for her grandson John "Junior" Gotti. Her death came a day before Gotti Jr. was to answer federal racketeering charges in Tampa, Fla.
Philomena Gotti, known as Fanny, was born near Naples, Italy, where she married John J. Gotti Sr. They moved to the United States in the 1920s. John J. Gotti Sr. died in 1992.
Gotti Jr., their fifth child, earned notoriety for scheming and murdering his way to the top of the Gambino family in the mid-1980s. His key move was the 1985 assassination of Gambino boss Paul Castellano outside a Manhattan steakhouse.
Four other sons also chose criminal careers: Gene Gotti is serving a 50-year sentence for heroin trafficking; Peter Gotti is serving 25 years for racketeering; Richard V. Gotti was imprisoned in 2003 for racketeering and other crimes; and Vincent Gotti is awaiting sentencing after pleading guilty to charges resulting from an FBI crackdown on the Gambino organization.
Philomena Gotti, who lived in Valley Stream, never saw any of her sons in court.
Del Martin
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) Pioneering lesbian rights activist Del Martin, who married her longtime partner in June on the first day same-sex couples in California gained that right, died Wednesday. She was 87.
Martin died at a hospital two weeks after a broken arm exacerbated health problems, said Kate Kendell, executive director of the National Center for Lesbian Rights. Her wife, Phyllis Lyon, was with her.
Along with six other women, they founded a San Francisco social club for lesbians in 1955. The group evolved into the nation's first lesbian advocacy organization.
Martin in 1970 wrote an influential article in the Advocate magazine that criticized what she saw as the gay rights movement's persistent chauvinism. She and Lyon together wrote "Lesbian/Woman," a 1972 book that argued lesbians should be seen for more than their sexuality and simultaneously offered a frank, no-nonsense account of lesbian relationships.
A year later, Martin became the first out lesbian to serve on the board of directors of the National Organization for Women.
Abie Nathan
JERUSALEM (AP) Abie Nathan, a peace activist who made a dramatic solo flight to Egypt in a rattletrap single-engine plane and later founded the groundbreaking "Voice of Peace" radio station, died Wednesday. He was 81.
Nathan died at Ichilov hospital in Tel Aviv, officials said.
His daredevil escapade won the affection of many Israelis and launched a long and often eccentric one-man crusade to end the Arab-Israeli conflict.
He was born in 1927 in Iran, educated in India and served in the Royal Air Force as a fighter pilot before joining the Jewish immigrant influx into newly born Israel in 1948.
He ran for parliament in 1965 on a promise to fly his private plane to Cairo and talk peace with the Egyptian president at the time, Gamal Abdel Nasser. The voters rejected him, but he flew there anyway. Egyptian authorities treated him courteously and sent him home.
After several fruitless flights, he bought a freighter. He anchored it off the coast of Tel Aviv and turned it into a pirate radio station, "The Voice of Peace," with a mix of pop songs and peace messages. The station became especially popular among youths over the next 20 years.
In the 1970s, Nathan went on hunger strikes to try to force the Israeli government to make concessions for peace with Egypt and to reverse a law making meetings with the Palestine Liberation Organization a crime.
In January 1993, Israeli parliament did just that and later signed an interim peace agreement. Nathan celebrated by sinking the Voice of Peace ship.
Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko
WASHINGTON (AP) Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko, a KGB spy who switched allegiances at the height of the Cold War and was considered by the CIA as its "most valuable and economical defector," died Saturday. He was 81.
Nosenko died after a long illness, according to intelligence officials.
He defected in Switzerland in 1964. Confined to a safe house in Maryland, the former Soviet spy was interrogated for about four months in 1965 until transferred to a specially constructed jail because he was suspected of being a double agent, according to CIA documents. He was held until October 1967, then resettled under an assumed identity.
The CIA put Nosenko under a lie detector in 1964, 1966 and 1968 about Kennedy assassin Lee Harvey Oswald's possible ties to the KGB. Nosenko told his interrogators that Oswald was not a KGB operative, according to a 1979 report to Congress.
Olavo Setubal
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) Olavo Setubal, a former foreign minister who built one of Brazil's largest banks, died Wednesday. He was 85.
Setubal died of heart failure at Sao Paulo's Sirio Libanes Hospital, Banco Itau officials said.
He was president of the now-defunct Banco Federal de Credit when it merged with Banco Itau, a little-known bank in Minas Gerais state with just 31 branches.
Setubal transformed Itau into the second-largest private sector bank in Brazil, with 2,800 branches throughout the country.
Setubal also was mayor of Sao Paulo between 1975 and 1979 and was Brazil's foreign minister between 1985 and 1986, when he was involved in negotiations that led to creation of the Mercosur trade bloc.
Charles F. Whitten
DETROIT (AP) Dr. Charles F. Whitten, a physician, professor and specialist in sickle cell disease, died Aug. 14. He was 86.
Whitten died of complications from multiple myeloma at his home in Detroit, the Sickle Cell Disease Association of America said.
Born in Wilmington, Del., Whitten earned a degree in zoology from the University of Pennsylvania and completed his medical degree at Meharry Medical College.
He joined the Wayne State School of Medicine in 1957 and was chief of pediatrics at Detroit Receiving Hospital, the first black physician to head a department in a Detroit hospital.
In 1971, Whitten helped established the Sickle Cell Detection and Information Center. Also that year, he founded the organization now known as the Sickle Cell Disease Association of America, based in Baltimore. He served as president until 1992.
He also organized Wayne State University's Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center and served as its director until 1992.
Whitten was concerned by the lack of black doctors and started a medical school training program in 1969 to recruit minority physicians.
Correction




In an Aug. 28 story about the death of Israeli peace activist Abie Nathan, The Associated Press erroneously reported that Nathan had a meeting with Pope John Paul VI. Nathan met with Pope Paul VI.
Correction-Date: September 2, 2008
 Load-Date: August 28, 2008

 

End of Document
