

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 25, 2006 Monday 3:22 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 702 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Robert Bilheimer
CANANDAIGUA, N.Y. (AP) The Rev. Robert Bilheimer, a Presbyterian minister who arranged for religious leaders to oppose the war in Vietnam and apartheid in South Africa, died Dec. 17, his son said. He was 89.
His son, Robert, told The New York Times that the leader in the ecumenical movement died of complications from a hip fracture and the late stages of Alzheimer's disease.
Bilheimer organized the first meeting of the World Council of Churches in 1948. The council, made up of 340 churches, denominations and church fellowships in more than 100 countries, is a broad movement with the goal of Christian unity.
He became an associate general secretary of the council and organized the 1960 mission for the South African members, which led to a proclamation rejecting all religious arguments supporting apartheid.
Bilheimer wrote several books, including "The Quest for Christian Unity," "What Must the Church Do?" and "Christians and the Prevention of War in the Atomic Age."
Carlos Alberto Ferreira Braga
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) Brazilian composer and singer Braguinha, who penned more than 500 tunes including some of the country's most famous traditional Carnival songs, died Sunday in Rio de Janeiro, local media reported. He was 99.
Braguinha, whose full name was Carlos Alberto Ferreira Braga, died from multiple organ failure after being hospitalized Saturday night with a generalized infection, according to the Agencia Estado news service and other Brazilian media.
Braguinha, also a singer, participated in the Brazilian Carnival's golden era in the 1930s and '40s.
He composed more than 500 songs, including "Yes, Nos Temos Bananas" ("Yes, We Have Bananas"), "Copacabana" and "Chiquita Bacana."
Uri Dan
JERUSALEM (AP) Uri Dan, a veteran Israeli journalist and close confidant of former Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, died Sunday. He was 71.
The Jerusalem Post said Dan died after a battle with lung cancer, adding that he had continued working until last month. Dan died at a hospital in Kfar Sava, outside Tel Aviv, the paper said.
During a career spanning more than three decades, Dan wrote for a number of Israeli publications, including the Maariv daily and the English-language Jerusalem Post. He also wrote several books, and served as Israel correspondent for the New York Post.
But Dan was best-known for his friendship with Sharon. The two became acquainted in the 1950s, and Dan documented Sharon's crossing of the Suez Canal during the 1973 Mideast War against Egypt.
Dan also served as Sharon's spokesman when he was defense minister during the Lebanon War in the early 1980s. At the time, Sharon was under fire for his actions in the war, and earlier had been passed as a candidate for army chief.
Despite Dan's misgivings about Sharon's pullout from the Gaza Strip last year, the two remained friends until Sharon's debilitating stroke last January. Just two months ago, Dan published a biography called "Ariel Sharon: An Intimate Portrait."
Andrew Spielman
BOSTON (AP) Andrew Spielman, a Harvard School of Public Health professor and a leading authority on diseases passed from insects to people, has died, his wife said. He was 76.
Spielman, of Needham, died Wednesday at Brigham and Women's Hospital after being hospitalized with an undiagnosed illness. His wife, Judith, said he worked full time and traveled until he became ill.
Spielman's research took him to remote areas of the world, and he wrote hundreds of publications on topics including malaria, Lyme disease and eastern equine encephalitis. He also co-wrote the 2001 book, "Mosquito: A Natural History of Our Most Persistent and Deadly Foe."
Spielman's contributions to the field included recognizing that the increase in Lyme disease cases was largely due to an explosion in the deer population, said Peter Krause, professor of pediatrics at the University of Connecticut School of Medicine.
Spielman was born in New York City and grew up on Long Island, N.Y. He got an undergraduate degree in zoology from Colorado College in Colorado Springs in 1952 and graduated with a doctorate in pathobiology from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore in 1956.
He married Judith Miller in 1955, and took a position at Harvard in 1959.
 Load-Date: December 25, 2006

 

End of Document
