

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
June 9, 2009 Tuesday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1278 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Roy Boe
BRIDGEPORT, Conn. (AP) Roy Boe, who owned both the Julius Erving-led New York Nets of the American Basketball Association and the expansion New York Islanders of the NHL in the 1970s, has died. He was 79.
Boe, who lived in Fairfield, died Sunday at St. Vincent's Medical Center in Bridgeport.
Boe first ventured into sports ownership in 1968, when he bought the minor league Westchester Bulls football team. He put Long Island on the map of big-time professional sports when he purchased the Nets from Arthur Brown in May 1969 and moved the team from Commack to West Hempstead closer to New York City.
The Nets obtained Erving, from nearby Roosevelt, for the 1973-74 season and "The Doctor" immediately led the team to titles in 1974 and '76, the second in the final ABA season.
Boe and the Nets joined the NBA for the 1976-77 season in a merger along with San Antonio, Denver, and Indiana, but it was a costly move. The Nets had to pay $8 million, $3.2 million to the NBA and $4.8 million to the New York Knicks as compensation for allowing them to compete in the same territory.
Boe was the original owner of the Islanders in 1972, with his team playing at the Nassau Coliseum. The team made great strides in its infancy, producing a playoff team in its third season and the first of four consecutive Stanley Cup trophies after only seven years.
However, Boe would become cash strapped. He sold Erving to the Philadelphia 76ers for $3 million in 1976. Two years later, Boe sold his interest in the Nets and eventually sold the Islanders to limited partner, John O. Pickett.
He resurfaced in the 1990s as owner of minor league hockey franchises in Worcester, Mass and most recently, the Islanders' farm team in Bridgeport.
Omar Bongo
LIBREVILLE, Gabon (AP) Gabon President Omar Bongo, the world's longest-serving president whose 42-year rule was a throwback to an era when Africa was ruled by "Big Men," died Monday in Spain. He was 73.
Doctors at the Quiron Clinic in Barcelona announced Bongo's death. Bongo, who died of cardiac arrest, was admitted to the hospital last month.
Bongo, who was believed to be one of the world's wealthiest leaders, became the longest-ruling head of government a category that does not include the monarchs of Britain and Thailand when Cuba's Fidel Castro handed power to his brother last year.
Bongo had kept a tight grip on power in the oil-rich former French colony since he became president in 1967, and his ruling party has dominated the country's parliament for decades. Opposition parties were only allowed in 1990, amid a wave of pro-democracy protests.
Fleur Cowles
LONDON (AP) Fleur Cowles, a painter, writer and founder of the short-lived but legendary magazine "Flair," has died.
Cowles died on Friday at a nursing home in Sussex, according to her husband, Tom Montague Meyer. The New York Times reported her age as 101, though Cowles had cited various birth dates as much as 10 years later.
She celebrated her wide circle of acquaintance in her 1996 memoir, "She Made Friends and Kept Them." Queen Mother Elizabeth was a friend, Cary Grant was best man at her third wedding, and British artist Lucian Freud enjoyed her patronage early in his career.
She wrote an authorized biography of Salvador Dali, and "Bloody Precedent," about Argentina under Juan and Evita Peron.
Cowles, however, thought "Flair" was the best thing she ever did.
A 50-cent package of high-society, art, literature and fashion, "Flair" lasted just 12 issues from February 1950 to January 1951. The magazine published works by W.H. Auden, Tennessee Williams, Gypsy Rose Lee, Simone de Beauvoir, Salvador Dali and Jean Cocteau.
Expensively produced, it included gimmicks such as die-cut overlays, varied paper stocks and accordion inserts.
Nathan Friedman
LOS ANGELES (AP) Nathan Friedman, a dentist whose comforting rapport with patients drew celebrities such as Danny Kaye and Lucille Ball to his Beverly Hills practice, has died. He was 97.
Friedman's daughter Susan told the Los Angeles Times that her father died May 27 in Los Angeles of complications related to old age.
Friedman, who practiced dentistry until he was 88, worked to ease his patients anxieties by talking them through their fears.
He also founded a department of behavioral dentistry at University of Southern California, where he was a professor. Its faculty taught students how to quell patients' fears of dental work.
Rajeev Motwani
ATHERTON, Calif. (AP) Rajeev Motwani, a Stanford University computer science professor who advised one of Google's creators, was found dead in his swimming pool. He was 47.
Stanford University said Motwani apparently drowned on Friday at his home in Atherton, and his friends told the school news service he did not know how to swim.
Motwani's work using algorithms to search vast computer databases, like the Internet, is celebrated in Silicon Valley.
Google co-founder Sergey Brin wrote on his blog that Motwani's counsel played a big role in his research, education, and professional development.
Richard Overton
SANTA ANA, Calif. (AP) Richard Overton, a mathematician and computer expert who was serving a life sentence for gradually poisoning his wife to death with cyanide, has died. He was 81.
Overton's daughter, Valerie Overton, said her father had been suffering from diabetes and dementia. He died Thursday at a hospice in Northern California after he had been transferred from Folsom State Prison.
Overton was sentenced to life in prison in 1995. Prosecutors portrayed the part-time professor as a man obsessed with the suspected infidelities of his wife of 19 years.
His wife, 46-year-old Janet Overton, collapsed in January 1988 while leaving the couple's Dana Point home. She died shortly afterward, and authorities initially revealed no evidence of foul play.
But after Overton's first wife, Dorothy Boyer, told authorities he had tried to poison her in 1973 after they had divorced in 1969, a new investigation was opened.
Cyanide was found in Janet Overton's blood and stomach contents, prompting experts to conclude she had been poisoned.
Prosecutors said Overton nursed a murderous jealousy over Janet Overton's alleged infidelity and described him as a devious killer who laced her eyeliner with selenium and her morning coffee with cyanide.
The criminal investigation sparked the book "Final Affair" and a 1999 TV movie, "Lethal Vows."
Kenny Rankin
LOS ANGELES (AP) Kenny Rankin, a pop vocalist and highly regarded musician-songwriter whose 50-year music career ranged from jazz to pop, has died. He was 69.
Rankin died Sunday of complications related to lung cancer at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Mack Avenue Records spokesman Don Lucoff said.
Growing up in the multicultural hotbed of New York's Washington Heights neighborhood, Rankin absorbed a broad array of musical influences, from Afro-Cuban to Top 40 to Jazz to Brazilian.
The musician, who began with a handful of singles for Decca Records in the late 1950's, first gained acclaim as one of the guitarists on Bob Dylan's landmark 1965 album, "Bringing it All Back Home."
Soon after, he made his first appearance on "The Tonight Show," where he impressed host Johnny Carson so much that Carson contributed liner notes to Rankin's first album, 1967's "Mind Dusters." Other albums included "Family," "Like a Seed" and "Inside."
Rankin wrote and recorded the pop standard "Peaceful" and also wrote "In The Name of Love," which was recorded by Peggy Lee, and "Haven't We Met," performed by Carmen McRae and Mel Torme.
Rankin's supple tenor voice on such recordings as "Spanish Harlem," "'Round Midnight" and a cover of the Beatles' "Blackbird" also won him the respect of fellow musicians as a singer's singer.
 Load-Date: June 9, 2009

 

End of Document
