

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
April 7, 2007 Saturday 2:37 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 843 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Luigi Comencini
ROME (AP) Italian postwar film director Luigi Comencini, who was known as the "children's director" for his explorations of the world of children, has died, officials said Friday. He was 90.
Rome's mayor Walter Veltroni confirmed the death in a statement. He called Comencini "a master, one of the great and unforgettable directors in the history of film."
The family said Comencini died after a long illness, the ANSA news agency reported.
Besides films such as "Pane, amore e fantasia" (Bread, Love and Dreams), Comencini was one of the founders of the Cineteca Italiana the first film archive in Italy.
Comencini began his career in film as a newspaper film critic and made his debut on screen with a documentary, "Bambini in Citta" (Children in the City), in 1946.
He was often referred to as the children's director for his popular children's works, including "Le avventure di Pinocchio" (The Adventures of Pinocchio), made for television in 1972.
"We loved him, more than anything else, for his delicate and intense vision of the world of infancy," Veltroni said.
Colin Graham
ST. LOUIS (AP) Colin Graham, the artistic director of the Opera Theatre of St. Louis, died Friday. He was 75.
Graham died of respiratory and cardiac arrest at St. John's Mercy Medical Center, a spokeswoman for the organization said.
The Opera Theatre of St. Louis was formed in 1976, and Graham joined it two years later. He became artistic director in 1985.
Graham, a native of England, received an Order of the British Empire award at Buckingham Palace in 2001. He earned a lifetime achievement award in 2004 from the Texas-based National Opera Association, which promotes excellence in opera through education.
During his 29 years in St. Louis, Graham staged 48 new productions, Opera Theatre of St. Louis general manager Charles MacKay said in a statement. His world premiere production of David Carlson's "Anna Karenina" is scheduled to open April 28 at Florida Grand Opera in Miami, and in St. Louis on June 3.
Graham's assistant, Mark Streshinsky, will take over as stage director.
John Peyton
HONOLULU (AP) John Peyton, a former state official and federal prosecutor who also helped establish a new legal system for war-torn Bosnia-Herzegovina, was fatally injured in a car crash in Africa, state officials said.
First Assistant U.S. Attorney Elliott Enoki told The Honolulu Advertiser on Thursday that Peyton, 62, and his wife, Eileen, were vacationing and on their way to Victoria Falls in Zimbabwe this week when they were involved in the crash.
Eileen Peyton was hospitalized with non-life-threatening injuries, Enoki said.
Peyton, the last permanent head of Hawaii's Department of Public Safety, had been working for the U.S. Agency for International Development to help improve the legal system in Malawi, Enoki said.
Before becoming Public Safety head in April 2003, Peyton helped reform judicial and prosecutorial functions in Bosnia-Herzegovina as vice president of the country's High Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils. He returned to work in the Balkan country after resigning the state post in November 2004.
"John was a good man and a dedicated public servant who always strived to ensure the safety and well-being of the people of Hawaii," said Gov. Linda Lingle in a statement.
Louis Flores Ruiz
FRESNO, Calif. (AP) Louis Flores Ruiz, who built a modest San Joaquin Valley enchilada factory into the nation's largest producer of frozen Mexican foods, died Sunday. He was 88.
Ruiz died at his home in Dinuba. His health had been failing for the last three years, a spokeswoman said.
His privately held company, Ruiz Foods Inc., is the largest Latino-owned manufacturing firm in California, and had $326 million in revenue in 2005.
Ruiz was born Oct. 30, 1918 in Chihuahua, Mexico. His family moved to Los Angeles when he was 5 years old, after their land was seized by Pancho Villa. As a boy, Ruiz sold feather dusters door-to-door, and often held several jobs at once.
Ruiz became a U.S. citizen after joining the Army, and served in the Philippines as a military policeman during World War II, until he was honorably discharged in 1945.
In the 1950s, Ruiz moved his wife and young family to Tulare, where he opened an automated tortilla-making factory.
Ruiz retired from Ruiz Foods in 1990, and his grandchildren now oversee most of the company's operations.
Charles Werstler
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) Charles Werstler, a longtime trainer who raced for more than three decades at Keeneland and sent jockey Pat Day to his first stakes victory, died Thursday. He was 86.
Werstler died in Nashville, where he had lived since retiring, according to Keeneland racetrack in Lexington, Ky. The cause of death was not disclosed.
He trained 57 Keeneland winners and raced at the track each spring and fall from the 1960s to 1990s. One of his horses was Ironworks, whom Day rode in the first of his 95 stakes victories at Keeneland. Werstler also had winners in the 1981 Fayette Handicap and 1969 Breeders Futurity.
Werstler was born in Ohio and lived many years in Miami Springs, Fla.
 Load-Date: April 7, 2007

 

End of Document
