

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
November 4, 2008 Tuesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 782 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Ahmed al-Mirghani
KHARTOUM, Sudan (AP) Ahmed al-Mirghani, the former president of Sudan, died Sunday. He was 67.
The cause of death was not immediately known. A close family friend, Ali Ahmed al-Said, said the former president died in his home in Alexandria, Egypt, after returning from the hospital. He had suffered respiratory problems, al-Said told The Associated Press.
Al-Mirghani was removed from power 19 years ago by the military coup that brought the current regime to power. He came from a prominent Sudanese family that heads a Sufi Muslim sect in Sudan which traces its lineage back to the Prophet Mohammed.
Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir recently reached out to al-Mirghani, getting him to join a group lobbying for a new push for peace in Darfur. The group, launched by al-Bashir, is part of his efforts to gather supporters and opponents around what he calls a "final" call for peace in Darfur.
Madelyn Payne Dunham
HONOLULU (AP) Madelyn Payne Dunham, Barack Obama's grandmother, whose personality and bearing shaped much of the life of the Democratic presidential contender, died Sunday. She was 86.
Obama announced the news from the campaign trail in Charlotte, N.C. The joint statement with his sister Maya Soetoro-Ng said Dunham died at her Honolulu apartment after a battle with cancer.
Last month, Obama took a break from campaigning and flew to Hawaii to be with Dunham as her health declined. He told CBS that he "got there too late" when his mother died of ovarian cancer in 1995 at age 53 and wanted to avoid that mistake again.
The Kansas-born Dunham and her husband, Stanley, raised their grandson for several years in Honolulu while their daughter and her second husband lived overseas. Her influence on Obama's manner and the way he viewed the world was substantial, the candidate told millions watching him accept his party's nomination in Denver in August.
"She's the one who taught me about hard work," he said. "She's the one who put off buying a new car or a new dress for herself so that I could have a better life. She poured everything she had into me."
Domenico Leccisi
ROME (AP) Domenico Leccisi, the right-wing activist and politician who stole the corpse of Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini more than a half century ago died Sunday. He was 88.
Leccisi died at a retirement home in Milan after a battle with heart and respiratory problems, his son Gabriele said Monday.
In 1946, Leccisi and two other Italians marked the anniversary of the death of "Il Duce" by digging up Mussolini's body at night from an unmarked grave in a Milan cemetery. The theft sparked a nationwide manhunt for the group.
The three entrusted the body to two monks who buried it at a monastery near the northern city. Authorities located the remains there and returned them to the family years later for burial in Predappio, Mussolini's birthplace.
Leccisi was sentenced to six years in jail for stealing the body but benefited from an amnesty passed for some Fascist-era crimes, his son said. He worked as a right-wing journalist and later served as a lawmaker with a neo-Fascist party in the 1950s and 1960s.
Yma Sumac
LOS ANGELES (AP) Yma Sumac, the Peruvian-born soprano who wowed international audiences in the 1950s with her stunning vocal range and modern take on South American folk music, died Saturday.
She died at an assisted-living home in Los Angeles after an eight-month bout with colon cancer, Sumac's friend and personal assistant Damon Devine said Monday.
Few biographical details are clear about the reclusive, raven-haired songstress. She was surrounded by rumors about her life and origins, many of them myths of her own making.
Devine said Sumac was 86, based on her birth certificate, though Sumac had claimed she was born in 1927.
She claimed to be a descendant of the Inca emperor Atahualpa and played up her Andean origins.
Dubbed the "Peruvian Songbird" and the "Nightingale of the Andes," Sumac's soaring, warbling voice reported to span well over three octaves was matched by her flamboyant outfits, studded with gold and silver jewelry, designed to make her look like an Incan princess.
Terence Tolbert
NEW YORK (AP) Terence Tolbert, the Nevada director for Barack Obama's presidential campaign and a former top aide to New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, died Sunday. He was 44.
Tolbert died of a heart attack in Las Vegas, family spokesman Basil Smikle said Monday.
Tolbert was on leave from his job as the chief lobbyist for New York City's public schools at the state capital in Albany to work for the Democratic presidential nominee.
Tolbert also worked on the campaigns of Sen. Charles Schumer, former Gov. Eliot Spitzer and former presidential hopeful John Edwards.
 Load-Date: November 4, 2008

 

End of Document
