

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
November 22, 2006 Wednesday 3:26 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 875 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Robert Altman
LOS ANGELES (AP) Robert Altman, one of the most unique voices in American cinema with his satirical wit and staggering ensemble casts, died Monday. He was 81.
Altman, a five-time Academy Award nominee for best director whose vast, eclectic filmography ranged from the dark war comedy "M-A-S-H" to the Hollywood farce "The Player" to the British murder mystery "Gosford Park," died of complications from cancer at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, surrounded by his wife and children.
When he received a lifetime achievement Oscar in 2006, Altman revealed he'd had a heart transplant a decade earlier. He'd been nominated for "M-A-S-H," "Nashville," "The Player," "Short Cuts" and "Gosford Park."
While he was famous for his outspokenness, which caused him to fall in and out of favor in Hollywood over his nearly six decades in the industry, Altman was perhaps better known for his influential method of assembling large casts and weaving in and out of story lines, using long tracking shots and intentionally overlapping dialogue.
Born Feb. 20, 1925, Altman hung out in his teen years at the jazz clubs of Kansas City, Mo.
He was a bomber pilot in World War II and studied engineering at the University of Missouri in Columbia before taking a job making industrial films in Kansas City. He moved into features with "The Delinquents" in 1957, then worked largely in television through the mid-1960s.
Sir Edward Ford
LONDON (AP) Sir Edward Ford, the royal courtier who provided Queen Elizabeth II with the memorable phrase "annus horribilis" to describe her troubles in 1992, died Sunday. He was 96.
Ford, who was the queen's assistant private secretary from her accession in 1952 until he retired in 1967, died Sunday, his family said in an announcement published Tuesday in The Times newspaper. The cause of death was not announced.
In a letter to the queen in 1992, following the collapse of the marriages of Prince Charles, Prince Andrew and Princess Anne, and a devastating fire at Windsor Castle, Ford turned to Latin to commiserate with her at the end of a horrible year.
The queen used Ford's expression in a speech in November of that year marking the 40th anniversary of her reign.
"1992 is not a year on which I shall look back with undiluted pleasure," she said.
"In the words of one of my more sympathetic correspondents, it has turned out to be an 'annus horribilis.' I suspect that I am not alone in thinking it so."
Educated at Eton and Oxford, one of Ford's first jobs was as a private tutor to the heir to the Egyptian throne, Prince Farouk, who was then 15.
Ford practiced law from 1937 to 1939. During World War II he saw service campaigns in Tunisia and Italy.
He joined the palace staff in 1946.
Maurice Graham
NAPOLEON, Ohio (AP) Maurice Graham, who began hitching rides on trains as a teenager and was known as the "King of the Hobos," died Saturday. He was 89.
Graham, who recently suffered a stroke, died Saturday at the Northcrest Nursing Home, his family said.
Graham, nicknamed "Steam Train Maury," was a founding member of the National Hobo Foundation and helped establish the Hobo Museum in Britt, Iowa.
Graham in 1990 wrote "Tales of the Iron Road: My Life As King of the Hobos," telling his stories of hopping trains beginning at the age of 14 and living in hobo camps until 1980. He was named National Hobo King five times at the annual hobo convention in Britt, and was crowned Grand Patriarch of Hoboes in 2004.
Graham worked as a mason and founded a school where he taught the trade. He was a medical technician during World War II.
Hong Xuezhi
BEIJING (AP) Hong Xuezhi, a retired general who was a vice-commander of Chinese military forces during the Korean War, died Monday, state media reported Tuesday. He was 94.
The official Xinhua News Agency said Hong died from an illness, but did not give details.
In 1989, near the end of his long career, he lost his post as deputy secretary-general of the party Central Military Commission reportedly because he opposed the use of the army to crush the Tiananmen Square democracy movement.
During the 1950-53 Korean war, Hong was vice-commander and head of logistics of the Chinese People's Volunteers military forces that China sent to help North Korea against U.S.-led United Nations and South Korean forces.
He also participated in cease-fire negotiations and in 1955 was promoted to the rank of general.
Hong was purged from the party and his military post in 1959 because of his close links to then-Defense Minister Peng Dehuai. Peng was fired for criticizing Chinese leader Mao Zedong's disastrous "Great Leap Forward" economic experiment of 1958, the mobilization of peasants into self-sufficient "people's communes."
Red Guards harassed him during Mao's Cultural Revolution of 1966-76, when he served as director of Jilin province's agricultural and mechanical department and director of the petrochemical bureau.
In 1977, when the Cultural Revolution was over, he became director of national industry in the State Council and was made a member of the Central Military Commission, which sets military policy, where he was later promoted. His rank of general was restored in 1988.
He was named one of 28 vice chairmen of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference in 1990.
 Load-Date: November 22, 2006

 

End of Document
