

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
October 12, 2006 Thursday 2:25 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 652 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Harold Farb
HOUSTON (AP) Houston developer Harold Farb, who built more than 30,000 apartments in a career that spanned more than 50 years, died Tuesday of a heart attack at his River Oaks home. He was 83.
Farb became the leader in Houston's apartment complex business by the 1970s. He learned the real estate business from his father, Albert Farb, and established his own business by 1953. His first project was a 20-unit complex in the Montrose area.
"He was someone who built I guess in Texas it's OK to use the word an 'empire' and he did it the old fashioned way with hard work," former Texas Gov. Mark White said in a story in the Houston Chronicle.
The newspaper reported that Farb was landlord to more than 1 million people in his career.
Howard Kerzner
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Hotel tycoon Howard "Butch" Kerzner was among four people killed Wednesday when a helicopter they were traveling in crashed into a building on the Dominican Republic's north coast, an aviation official said. He was 42.
Kerzner, chief executive officer of Kerzner International Holdings Ltd., a Bahamas-based casino and resort operator, was in the helicopter when it went down at 2:15 p.m. in the tourist resort of Sosua, said Yolanda Manan, a spokeswoman for the Dominican airport authority.
Butch Kerzner's father, Sol Kerzner a South African casino tycoon who is chairman of Kerzner International's board, was en route to the Dominican Republic, the statement said.
Kerzner was surveying potential development sites when the helicopter crashed on the roof of a business that grows ornamental plants.
A commission was investigating the cause of the accident.
Kerzner International operates casinos in countries including Dubai, the Maldives, Mexico and Mauritius, as well as the Bahamas' Atlantis resort.
Nelson J. Leonard
CHAMPAIGN, Ill. (AP) University of Illinois organic chemist Nelson J. Leonard, who went from developing antimalarial drugs during World War II to decades of postwar research into the fundamentals of life itself, died Monday, his family said. He was 90.
Leonard published more than 400 scientific papers and directed the research of more than 200 graduate students and postdoctoral associates during his more than 40 years at the university.
Leonard was considered a master in applying organic synthesis to solving important problems in chemistry, biochemistry, and plant physiology.
He was a native of Bronxville, N.Y., and graduated from Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pa., before attending Oxford University as a Rhodes Scholar. Leonard's time in England was cut short by the outbreak of World War II in 1939.
Leonard earned his Ph.D. from Columbia University in 1942 with work on a naturally occurring antimalarial compound, which brought him to the attention of military authorities shortly after he joined the UI faculty in 1943.
He then joined a team researching the synthesis and production of the important antimalarial drug, Chloroquine, in time for its use in the Pacific theater.
Leonard later spent time in Europe as a scientific consultant and special investigator for Army Intelligence and the U.S. Department of Commerce.
On his return to the University of Illinois, he became a world leader in organic chemistry and a founder of the field of bioorganic chemistry.
Tom Riach
LOS ANGELES (AP) Tom Riach, captain of the 1951 Southern California basketball team, died Friday, the school said. He was 77.
Riach, who grew up in nearby Glendale, averaged 8.3 points per game in the 1950-51 season and led the Trojans to the Pacific Coast Conference Southern Division championship. He lettered in three seasons in basketball and baseball at USC, and was a seventh-round selection by Baltimore in the 1951 NBA draft.
After college, Riach played briefly in the Chicago White Sox organization and served two years in the Army. He then began a career as a developer of residential and commercial properties.
 Load-Date: October 12, 2006

 

End of Document
