

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
April 3, 2007 Tuesday 1:28 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 755 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Lloyd Brown
CHARLOTTE HALL, Md. (AP) Lloyd Brown, the last known surviving U.S. Navy veteran of World War I, died Thursday. He was 105.
He died at a veterans home in Maryland, the Navy District Washington said.
His death comes days after the death of the last known surviving American female WWI veteran, Charlotte Winters, who was 109.
According to the Department of Veterans Affairs, the deaths leave three known surviving American vets of WWI, all of who served in the Army.
Brown was born in 1901 in Lutie, Mo., a small farming town in the Ozarks. His family later moved to Chadwick, Mo. In 1918, the 16-year-old lied about his age to join the Navy and served as a member of the gun crew on the battleship USS New Hampshire.
Driss Chraibi
RABAT, Morocco (AP) Driss Chraibi, a Moroccan novelist who wrote about Islam, colonialism and the treatment of women in his homeland, died Sunday, the state news agency reported. He was 80.
Chraibi died in southwest France, the MAP agency reported.
He was born in 1926 in El-Jadida, a town near Casablanca on Morocco's Atlantic coast. He moved to Paris in 1945 to study chemistry and remained in France until his death. He wrote in French, his adopted tongue.
He worked as a chemical engineer, night watchman and laborer before his literary career began in 1954 with the publication of his first novel, "Passe Simple," an autobiographical work attacking Islam and the treatment of women in Morocco's taboo-laden society. He went on to write 18 more novels, most dealing with colonialism and Chraibi's memories of Morocco.
Chraibi received several awards for his writing at home and abroad.
Hans Filbinger
BERLIN (AP) Hans Filbinger, a former governor of Germany's Baden-Wuerttemberg state who resigned amid revelations about his past as a Nazi-era naval judge, died Sunday, the state government said Monday. He was 93.
Filbinger died at his home in Freiburg, a government statement said. It did not specify the cause of death.
Filbinger, a member of the conservative Christian Democrats, governed Baden-Wuerttemberg, a prosperous region in Germany's southwest, from 1966 until his past emerged as an issue in 1978, prompting his resignation in August of that year.
It emerged that Filbinger served as a naval judge late in World War II. He argued that he had been following orders and claimed that he had succeeded in heading off the conviction of several soldiers.
He eventually bowed to increasing calls to quit from inside his own party.
Filbinger, who studied law, joined the navy in 1940 and was later assigned to work as a naval judge, working in Norway between 1943 and 1945. He became a lawyer after the war and joined Baden-Wuerttemberg's state government as interior minister in 1960.
He was a popular governor and succeeded in expanding his party's majority in the state legislature.
Baron Bernd Freytag von Loringhoven
BERLIN (AP) Baron Bernd Freytag von Loringhoven, a witness to Adolf Hitler's final days who described the last throes of a despairing Nazi leadership trapped in a Berlin bunker, died in February, his publisher said Monday. He was 93.
Von Loringhoven died of natural causes in his home city of Munich, said Wolf Jobst Siedler Jr., who published the German-language version of his book, "In the Bunker with Hitler." Siedler did not have an exact date of death.
In an interview for the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II, von Loringhoven recalled the despair among the two dozen top Nazis and their entourage in the bunker as the Soviet army converged on it in 1945.
"They talked about whether they should shoot themselves or take poison," von Loringhoven told the Los Angeles Times. "And they talked about whether, if they shot themselves, they should put the gun in their mouths, or put it to their temples."
Von Loringhoven was born Jan. 24, 1914, in what is today Estonia. His family moved to eastern Germany to escape post-World War I turmoil.
Von Loringhoven considered a career as an attorney, but once the Nazis came to power in 1933 and party membership became a requirement for the profession, he instead turned to the military.
After escaping from the bunker, he managed to elude the Soviets and then allowed himself to be captured by the Western Allies. After two years as a British prisoner of war, he was released and reunited with his family.
After the war, von Loringhoven joined the West German army in 1956, later serving for three years in Washington as part of NATO's Standing Group. After a long career, he retired in 1973 with the rank of lieutenant general.
 Load-Date: April 3, 2007

 

End of Document
