

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
February 1, 2008 Friday 4:38 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1154 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Arif Ali
LONDON (AP) Arif Ali, regional product director for Europe, the Middle East and Africa for The Associated Press, died of cancer Thursday. He was 46.
Known within the AP for his courage under fire and the depth of his commitment, Ali was honored in 2007 with a Gramling Award, the news agency's top staff award for overseeing the creation and implementation of new AP services.
Over the past year, he shepherded the creation of the Arabic text service for the AP.
Born June 21, 1961, in Pakistan, Ali joined AP London in October 1982 as a field service technician.
His many assignments included a stint running AP technical operations in Somalia as clan warfare tore the country apart in the 1990s. Ali faced the task of keeping generators, satellite phones and satellite systems up and running all of which make it possible for the AP to take news to the world.
Later, Ali helped run other mammoth technical operations, such as the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia, and the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan.
"Arif had been seriously ill for some time, but had bravely been continuing his work," Mark Atkins, AP's director of Global Internal Support, said in a message to the London staff. "His fortitude was an example to us all."
Frantisek Capek
PRAGUE, Czech Republic (AP) Frantisek Capek, who won a gold medal at the 1948 Olympics in flatwater canoeing, died Thursday of an unspecified heart problem. He was 93.
Capek died in a sanatorium, said Jan Linger, the head of the Czech Foundation Sports Representation, which cares for elderly athletes.
Competing for Czechoslovakia, Capek won the 10,000-meter event at the London Games and a silver at the same distance at the 1954 world championships in France.
William E. Giles
BATON ROUGE, La. (AP) William E. Giles, whose 50 years in journalism included stints at The Wall Street Journal, The Detroit News and The Washington Times, died Tueday, of heart failure. He was 80.
The New Jersey native died at his home in London, Ky., said Joe Giles, one of Giles' five sons and a resident of Watson, a Baton Rouge suburb.
The younger Giles told The Advocate of Baton Rouge that his father said his proudest moment in journalism was when The Detroit News won the Pulitzer Prize for public service in 1982.
The paper's series about shipboard deaths in the Navy and the Navy's cover-up of those deaths led to reforms in naval procedures.
William Giles' career included stints as an editor at the Journal, executive editor of the News, and managing editor of the Times, where he worked from 1997 until he retired in 2002.
Bertram James
LONDON (AP) Bertram "Jimmy" James, one of the few British prisoners to avoid being executed for joining in the "great escape" from a German prison in World War II, died Jan. 18. He was 92.
James died at Royal Shrewsbury Hospital in Shrewsbury, in central England, following a brief illness. A funeral was held Thursday.
He was a pilot on a Wellington bomber that was shot down near Rotterdam in the Netherlands on June 5, 1940, and was captured the next day. Despite attempts to escape, he spent five years as a prisoner of war.
Attempting to escape, he once remarked, "was our contribution to the war effort." He made 13 attempts from various prisons, according to military historian Howard Tuck.
James was sent to Stalag Luft III, near Zagan in Poland, in 1943.
Joining in plans for a mass escape, James was put in charge of dispersing some 40 tons of sand taken from one tunnel.
On the night of March 24, 1944, James was the 39th man to escape. He and a Greek companion made their railway station and caught a train headed toward the Czech border, but were recaptured two days later.
Miles Kington
LONDON (AP) Miles Kington, author of the language-mangling classic "Let's Parler Franglais," died Wednesday. He was 66.
Kington, who had pancreatic cancer, died at his home near Bath in western England, his family said.
Kington, an amateur musician who played double bass in a jazz band, began his career in journalism in the 1960s as a jazz reviewer for The Times of London. He was a longtime contributor to the humor magazine Punch, as well as to The Times and The Independent, offering a lightly humorous touch to topics ranging from music to cricket to current affairs.
He also wrote plays and books, including the autobiographical "Someone Like Me: Tales From A Borrowed Childhood."
He was best known for the "Franglais" series of mock-language instruction books that began from the premise that "the trouble with French is that there are far too few English words in it."
"Let's Parler Franglais," published in 1979 and still in print, was followed by sequels including "Let's Parler Franglais Again!" and "Let's Parler Franglais One More Temps."
Marcial Maciel
MEXICO CITY (AP) The Rev. Marcial Maciel, a Mexican priest who founded the Legionaries of Christ religious order and who became the most prominent Catholic official to be disciplined by the Vatican over sexual abuse allegations, died Wednesday. He was 87.
He died of natural causes in Houston, Texas, where he lived in a group home with other Legionaries priests, Javier Bravo, spokesman for the order's Mexico office, told The Associated Press.
Founded more than six decades ago, Maciel's Legionaries became one of the fastest-growing religious orders in the Roman Catholic Church, winning him the unfailing loyalty of Pope John Paul II. But Maciel's final years were spent fending off accusations by former seminarians that he had sexually abused them.
Church officials have not said whether the accusations were determined to be true. But in 2006, a year after the election of Pope Benedict XVI, the Vatican said it had decided against a full-fledged church trial because of Maciel's age and ill health. Instead he was asked to conduct "a reserved life of prayer and penance, renouncing every public ministry."
The action meant Maciel could not celebrate Mass in public and effectively was a priest in name only.
Carlos Nieto
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) Singer Carlos Nieto, who emerged in the 1960s heyday of Argentine folk music and recorded more than 600 songs in a career spanning decades, died Thursday. He was 63.
He died in Buenos Aires after battling cancer, relatives said.
Born in the folk cradle of the Andean province of Salta, Nieto was a composer who wrote his own material, as well as songs later interpreted by Mercedes Sosa and other celebrated artists.
Unlike many of his contemporaries, who donned woolly Indian ponchos onstage, Nieto was known for performing in suit jackets and even the occasional tie. His booming voice and the trademark folk drum lashed at his side won over generations of fans who grooved on his stirring zamba and chacerara rhythms.
Nieto won a number of awards in his native country, while songs like "Captive Moon" and "On the Pampa of the Guanacos" made him an ambassador for Argentine folk music during tours of the United States, Canada and Europe.
 Load-Date: February 1, 2008

 

End of Document
