

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
December 23, 2008 Tuesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 589 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Coy Bacon
CINCINNATI (AP) Coy Bacon, a fierce pass rusher who spent 14 years in the NFL with Los Angeles, Cincinnati and Washington, died Monday. He was 66.
He died in his hometown of Ironton, Ohio, the Cincinnati Bengals said. The cause was not disclosed.
Bacon played for the Los Angeles Rams from 1968-72, when he made the first of his three Pro Bowls. He was traded to the Bengals for receiver Charlie Joiner. In Cincinnati, the defensive lineman blossomed as one of the league's top pass rushers in the days before sacks were recognized as an official NFL statistic.
"Coy was a tremendous player for the Bengals, the greatest pass rusher our team has ever had," Bengals owner Mike Brown said in a statement. "After he left the team, he worked hard to make life better for youths in the Ironton area. What he did was admirable, something all of us respect. We are saddened by his passing."
He made the Pro Bowl in 1976 and 1977 with Cincinnati, then finished his NFL career by playing four years for the Redskins. He was a motivational speaker after his retirement.
Lansana Conte
CONAKRY, Guinea (AP) Lesana Conte, dictator of the African nation of Guinea for 24 years, died Monday.
He died after a long illness, National Assembly leader Aboubacar Sompare said on national television.
Conte had ruled Guinea with an iron fist since grabbing power in a 1984 coup. The government has not disclosed his birth date, but he was believed to be in his 70s.
A. Carl Kotchian
REDWOOD CITY, Calif. (AP) A. Carl Kotchian, a former head of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. who admitted in the 1970s to paying millions in bribes in an international scandal that brought down Japan's prime minister, died Dec. 14. He was 94.
Kotchian died at Sequoia Hospital in Redwood City of age-related ailments, said his son, Robert Kotchian.
Kotchian's testimony before the Senate in 1976 sparked laws that prohibited U.S. companies from giving kickbacks abroad. Resulting investigations led to imprisonment of Japan's prime minister and upheaval in the Netherlands, Colombia, Italy and West Germany.
Lockheed was at the center of the bribery scandal, but ultimately upward of 400 U.S. companies acknowledged paying foreign officials more than $700 million a sum worth $2.5 billion today.
In later interviews, Kotchian defended his actions, saying it was how business was done at the time.
Robert Mulligan
Hartford, Conn. (AP) Robert Mulligan, the Academy Award-nominated director of "To Kill a Mockingbird," who later helped launch the career of Reese Witherspoon, died Saturday. He was 83.
Mulligan died at his home in Lyme, Conn., after a battle with heart disease, his wife, Sandy, said Monday.
Mulligan was nominated for an Oscar for "Mockingbird," the adaptation of Harper Lee's best-selling novel, a Pulitzer Prize-winning look at a child's world shaken by the racism of a Southern town.
The 1962 film starred Gregory Peck, who won the best-actor Oscar for his portrayal of Atticus Finch, the small-town lawyer who defends a black man falsely accused of rape.
Mulligan was also known as the director of Witherspoon's first film, "The Man in the Moon." The 1991 family drama, Mulligan's last movie, brought Witherspoon notice as the younger of two teenage daughters grappling with her first love in 1950s Louisiana.
Among Mulligan's other credits were "Fear Strikes Out," the 1957 drama starring Anthony Perkins as troubled ballplayer Jim Piersall; "Summer of '42," the 1971 wartime coming-of-age story starring Gary Grimes and Jennifer O'Neill; and the 1972 horror hit "The Other."
 Load-Date: December 23, 2008

 

End of Document
