

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
February 27, 2008 Wednesday 11:31 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 682 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Richard Baer
SANTA MONICA, Calif. (AP) Richard Baer, a prolific television writer who contributed to the hit sitcoms "Bewitched," "That Girl" and "The Munsters," has died. He was 79.
Baer died Friday at St. John's Health Center from complications that followed a heart attack he suffered last month, said his son, Matthew.
Baer's career began in the 1950s and spanned three decades. His first credit was for NBC's "The Life of Riley" in 1953.
He wrote for some two dozen shows, ranging from a single episode of "Have Gun Will Travel" to 34 for "Hennesey." He received an Emmy nomination for one episode of the show, which starred Jackie Cooper as a Navy medical officer.
His final TV script was an episode of the 1980s sitcom, "Who's the Boss?"
Baer also wrote a play, "Mixed Emotions," a comedy about the courtship of a widow and widower in New York, that ran for more than six weeks on Broadway in 1993.
Dan Shomron
JERUSALEM (AP) Former Israeli military chief Dan Shomron, the paratrooper who commanded the famed 1976 hostage rescue at Entebbe airport in Uganda, has died. He was 70.
He died Tuesday from the effects of a stroke, Sourasky Medical Center spokeswoman Aviva Shemer said. He never recovered after being rushed to the hospital in Tel Aviv on Feb. 5.
Born on a kibbutz collective farm near the Sea of Galilee in 1937, Shomron enlisted as a paratrooper in 1955 and fought in the Sinai war the following year, when British, French and Israeli troops invaded Egypt after it nationalized the Suez Canal.
The 1967 Middle East War saw him back in the Sinai fighting Egyptian troops again. According to his military resume, he was the first Israeli paratrooper to reach the canal.
Promoted to brigadier general in 1974, he was put in command of Israel's paratroopers and infantry.
It was in that post that he oversaw the daring Entebbe mission in 1976. His commandos landed at the Ugandan airport under cover of darkness and freed more than 100 airline passengers who had been held hostage by Palestinian and German hijackers for a week.
He served as head of the army's southern command in 1979-83, orchestrating the withdrawal of troops from the Israeli-held Sinai following Israel's historic 1979 peace treaty with Egypt.
Shomron was chief of the military staff in 1987-91, years during which the Palestinians launched their first uprising against Israeli control and Iraq fired Scud missiles at Israel during the U.S.-led war to liberate Kuwait.
After leaving the military in 1991, he became chairman of state-owned arms manufacturer Israel Military Industries.
He was called out of retirement in 2006 to head a military inquiry into Israel's inconclusive war with Hezbollah guerrillas in Lebanon that summer. It concluded the general staff failed to translate Prime Minister Ehud Olmert's policy objectives into defined military targets.
Tian Bao
BEIJING (AP) Tian Bao, who was one of the first Tibetans to embrace communism and join Mao Zedong's revolutionary army, has died, Chinese state television reported. He was 92.
Tian died Thursday in Chengdu in southwestern Sichuan province, state-run CCTV said. It said he died from illness but gave no details.
Tian held senior government and party posts in Tibet and neighboring Sichuan province after fighting during the Chinese civil war in the ranks of Mao's army, which later seized control of Tibet.
He was one of the few Tibetans to participate in the communist army's "Long March" to China's north to escape rival Nationalist troops. He encountered Mao's army in 1935, when he was about 18, and joined up as it retreated through western China.
Known in Tibetan as Sangye Yeshi, Tian was born in Kham, in the eastern part of traditional Tibetan territory that is now part of Sichuan. He held a series of senior posts, including being named deputy secretary of the regional Communist Party in Tibet in 1965.
Chinese Communist troops occupied Tibet in 1951 and Beijing continues to rule the region with a heavy hand. China claims Tibet has been its territory for centuries, but many Tibetans say they were effectively independent for most of that period.
 Load-Date: February 28, 2008

 

End of Document
