

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
October 29, 2008 Wednesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 778 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Dina Cocea
BUCHAREST, Romania (AP) Dina Cocea, one of Romania's best-known actresses, died Tuesday. She was 95.
Cocea died of a heart attack at Floreasca hospital, where she had been admitted several days earlier with a pulmonary infection, said Ion Caramitru, director of the National Theater.
Cocea performed on the stage and in movies for more than 50 years. Her career included many Romanian productions, spanning from the nation's communist past right up through the Romanian detective movie "Attack in the Library," which premiered in 1993.
Cocea a daughter of Romanian writer N.D. Cocea and actress Alicia Cocea began studying theater in Paris, with her debut on the French stage in 1934. A year later, she returned to Romania.
In addition to the many plays she performed in here, she also starred in a dozen films and represented Romania at UNESCO, the United Nations cultural agency.
Gerard Damiano
MIAMI (AP) Gerard Damiano, director of the pioneering pornographic film that lent its name to the Watergate whistleblower known as "Deep Throat," died Saturday. He was 80.
Damiano died at a Fort Myers hospital, his son, Gerard Damiano Jr., said. He had suffered a stroke in September.
Damiano's "Deep Throat" was a mainstream box-office success and helped launch the modern hardcore adult-entertainment industry. Shot in six days for just $25,000, the 1972 flick became a cultural must-see for Americans who had just lived through the sexual liberation of the 1960s.
Born in New York in 1928, Damiano worked as a hairdresser, spent time in the Navy and directed several adult films. The younger Damiano said he would often accompany his father on film sets as a child, but would be ushered out during "nitty-gritty" scenes.
After "Deep Throat" opened in Times Square, attention from media critics and outraged conservatives including repeated legal challenges helped turn it into a hit.
Karl Kassulke
EDEN PRAIRIE, Minn. (AP) Karl Kassulke, a former Minnesota Vikings Pro Bowl safety whose career ended when he was paralyzed in a motorcycle accident, died Sunday. He was 67.
Kassulke died in his Eagan home from a heart attack, the team confirmed.
Kassulke spent all 10 years of his career with the Vikings from 1963-72 and was considered one of the hardest-hitting defensive backs in franchise history. He started in the 1970 Super Bowl loss to Kansas City and was named to the Pro Bowl the following season.
His career was cut short just before training camp in 1973 when he was paralyzed in a motorcycle accident that kept him in a wheelchair for the rest of his life. His wife, Sue, was a nurse who helped him through rehabilitation.
Es'kia Mphahlele
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) Es'kia Mphahlele, a politically active South African writer celebrated for his vivid autobiography about the hardships of apartheid, died Monday. He was 88.
Mphahlele died at a hospital near his home in Lebowakgomo, in northern South Africa, said Raks Seakhoa, a close family friend. The cause of death was not given, but Seakhoa said the writer had been in poor health.
Mphahlele is best known for "Down Second Avenue," an autobiography published in 1959 that describes his early years in rural northern South Africa and later in a bustling Pretoria black township. The book ends with the writer's exile from apartheid South Africa in 1957.
Mphahlele lived in Kenya, Zambia, France and the United States, earning a doctorate in philosophy from the University of Denver.
He returned to South Africa in the 1970s.
With the end of apartheid, the writer emerged as an eloquent proponent of the need to nurture the arts to feed a culture traumatized by colonization and oppression.
Delmar Watson
LOS ANGELES (AP) Delmar Watson, a child actor who appeared in hundreds of movies and later became a photographer who snapped gritty crime scenes and Hollywood stars, died Sunday. He was 82.
Watson died at his Glendale home from complications of prostate cancer, said his nephew, Daniel Watson.
David Delmar Watson was 6 months old when he appeared in his first film in 1926. He appeared in more than 300 films, playing Peter the goat boy in 1937's "Heidi" and Jimmie Hopper in 1939's "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington."
Watson and three of his brothers were Coast Guard photographers in World War II. After the war, Watson and his six brothers all worked as photographers for newspapers, television or newsreels.
Watson joined the Los Angeles Mirror in 1948 and for many years worked the night shift for the tabloid, which ran large photographs of crime scenes.
After a decade with the Mirror, Delmar Watson went into commercial photography with his brothers, often shooting Hollywood celebrities for publicity shots.
 Load-Date: October 29, 2008

 

End of Document
