

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
August 8, 2006 Tuesday 3:05 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 977 words
Body




Stephen Dresch
HANCOCK, Mich. (AP) Stephen Dresch, a former state legislator, Michigan Tech University dean and forensic analyst, died Sunday of lung cancer. He was 62.
Peterson Funeral Home in Calumet, Mich., confirmed his death.
Dresch was elected to the state House in 1990, a rarity for a Republican in the Democratic-leaning district in the western Upper Peninsula. Instead of seeking re-election, he ran unsuccessfully for Congress two years later.
He made headlines last year after tipping off the FBI and members of Congress when a mobster imprisoned in Colorado told Dresch that explosives were hidden in the former home of Terry Nichols, who was convicted in the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing.
Agents found the explosives at the residence in Herington, Kan., but no evidence to support a rumor they had been intended for use in an attack coinciding with the 10th anniversary of the bombing on April 19, 2005.
Dresch had established a firm called Forensic Intelligence International and was acting as an informal advocate for mobster Gregory Scarpa Jr., who was being held in the same prison with Nichols.
While dean of the School of Business and Economics at Michigan Tech, Dresch helped expose fraud committed by a local economic revitalization group.
Michael Hartnack
HARARE, Zimbabwe (AP) Michael Hartnack, a veteran Associated Press reporter who chronicled Zimbabwe's rise to black rule and its struggles since, died Wednesday after suffering a stroke. He was 60.
He was a reporter who defied numerous obstacles to write about a troubled nation where journalists are constantly harassed.
Hartnack was born in Barotseland, in what was then Northern Rhodesia, before moving to Southern Rhodesia, where he worked for The Rhodesia Herald and the Zimbabwe Inter-African News Agency and then contributed to several foreign media, including The Times of London and Deutsche Welle. He joined the AP in 1984.
He covered the country's rise to black rule to become Zimbabwe in 1980, and then the country's decline as longtime President Robert Mugabe embarked on reforms that forced out white farmers and brought agricultural and economic disaster.
Hartnack's stories on the changes were widely used in newspapers across South Africa, Zimbabwe's neighbor, and prompted Rhodes University of Grahamstown, South Africa, to award him a doctorate in literature in 2003.
Bernard T. Pagano
WILMINGTON, Del. (AP) The Rev. Bernard T. Pagano, a Roman Catholic priest wrongly accused of being the "Gentleman Bandit" who pulled a string of holdups in 1979, died Aug. 1. He was 81.
Pagano died after a stroke, according to The (Wilmington) News Journal.
He was suspected of committing nine robberies in Delaware and Pennsylvania in which a polite, middle-aged man pulled a gun on store clerks and demanded money. A woman who claimed to have been his lover told authorities he may have been the robber.
During his trial in 1979, a string of witnesses said the priest was responsible for the robberies. Then, in a dramatic turn, Ronald W. Clouser, a man from Philadelphia, came forward in the middle of the trial with a lawyer and admitted he was the real Gentleman Bandit.
Prosecutors dropped the case against Pagano and apologized. Clouser pleaded guilty and went to prison.
The story was told in a 1980 made-for-TV movie, "The Gentleman Bandit."
After the trial, Pagano moved to New Jersey, where he was an advocate for people wrongly accused of crimes and a parish priest in New Brunswick.
Jim Pomeroy
YAKIMA, Wash. (AP) Jim Pomeroy, the first U.S. motorcycle racer to win a World Championship Motocross event, was killed Sunday in a car accident. He was 53.
Pomeroy died when his 1979 Jeep CJ5 went off the road near Tampico, about 20 miles west of his hometown of Yakima, hit a telephone pole wire and landed on its side, the Washington State Patrol said.
His 9-year-old daughter, Jamie, was treated for minor injuries at Yakima Valley Memorial Hospital and released, the troopers said in a news release.
The accident apparently was caused by driver inattention, investigators added.
Pomeroy was 20 when he became the first rider to win his debut world championship motocross, the Spanish Grand Prix in 1973. He was also the first U.S. racer to win a world Grand Prix event.
Pomeroy won many other top races before retiring from the tour in 1980. He then worked with young riders at motocross schools to help the United States dominate the sport's scene. In 1999, the American Motorcyclist Association inducted him into the Motorcycle Hall of Fame.
Pomeroy came from a long line of motocross racers, including his father, Don Pomeroy, who owned Pomeroy Cycle Shop in Sunnyside and Yakima before his death last year.
Daniel Schmid
LOCARNO, Switzerland (AP) Daniel Schmid, one of Switzerland's best-known film and opera directors, died Saturday after a battle with cancer, a producer said. He was 64.
Schmid died in his hometown of Flims in eastern Switzerland, said Marcel Hoehn, producer of Schmid's best known film "Il Bacio di Tosca" (1984), or "Tosca's Kiss."
He studied filmmaking at Berlin's German Film and Television Academy and began directing his own television films in 1970.
His first cinematic directorship was "Heute Nacht oder nie" (1972), also known as "Tonight or Never", about servants and masters in an old castle who switch roles for one night every year.
Schmid also directed documentaries, including "Tosca's Kiss," about elderly opera singers who live together in a special retirement home for musicians.
He also appeared in front of the camera in a number of films, including alongside Dennis Hopper and Bruno Ganz in "Der Amerikanische Freund" (1977), or "The American Friend."
Away from the screen, Schmid directed a number of operas at the Grand Theatre in Geneva and Zurich's Opernhaus.
In 1999, Schmid received a lifetime achievement award at the Locarno International Film Festival.
 Load-Date: August 8, 2006

 

End of Document
