

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
June 13, 2009 Saturday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 852 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Luke Cole
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) Luke Cole, founder of a legal advocacy organization that fought on behalf of minority communities unfairly targeted by polluters, died June 6. He was 46.
Cole died in a highway accident while on sabbatical with his wife in Uganda, according to the Center for Race, Poverty and the Environment. His wife, Nancy Shelbey, was severely injured in the crash.
In 1989, Cole co-founded the San Francisco-based center that helped create the environmental justice movement, which sought to blend environmentalism with civil rights.
Among his causes, Cole filed suit in 1993 on behalf of Spanish-speaking residents of Kettleman City to block Chemical Waste Management Inc. from building the state's first toxic-waste incinerator there. The case successfully argued that the community had been excluded from the decision-making process by Kings County, which had failed to translate environmental impact reports into Spanish.
The lawsuit led to Chemical Waste Management ditching its plans for the incinerator.
Cole and the center were involved in significant cases around the country, but most were based in California's San Joaquin Valley, where he helped low-income residents fight air pollution and other environmental problems caused by giant dairies.
Huey Long
HOUSTON (AP) Huey Long, a jazz guitarist whose career included stints with musical giants Dizzy Gillespie and Charlie Parker and as part of the famed Ink Spots vocal group, died Wednesday. He was 105.
Long died in a nursing home in Houston, said his daughter, Anita Long.
Huey Long was first drawn to music as a teenager when a group of minstrels visited his hometown of Sealy. He began playing the banjo and joined the Frank Davis Louisiana Jazz Band in the mid-1920s.
In the 1930s, Long by then a guitarist went to Chicago, where he recorded with pianist Lil Armstrong and joined with Fletcher Henderson's orchestra, who brought him to New York in 1943.
There, Long joined Earl "Fatha" Hines, whose big band included Gillespie, Parker and Sarah Vaughn. In 1945, Long was leading his own trio when vocalist Bill Kenny invited him to join the Ink Spots, whose velvet harmonies and flashy performing style had helped them become one of the first black groups to gain acceptance among white listeners.
The Ink Spots, whose recordings included classics such as "If I Didn't Care" and "I'll Get By," along with songs "I Cover the Waterfront" and "Java Jive" later reinvented for newer generations, were inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 1987 and into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1989. They are often credited with having a direct influence on the evolution of doo wop groups and rhythm and blues.
Long went on to form his own combo and studied music in California. He also lead a version of the Ink Spots in the 1960s.
Thembi Ngubane
CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) South African health activist Thembi Ngubane, whose radio diaries of her struggle against the AIDS virus won her audiences and admiration around the world, died Tuesday. She was 24.
Ngubane, who was from the Cape Town suburb of Khayelitsha, one of the areas worst affected by the dual AIDS-TB epidemic, died of tuberculosis. Joe Richman, who produced the diaries and became her friend, said Ngubane had drug-resistant TB that was diagnosed too late to save her.
Ngubane was 19 when she was given a tape recorder to make an audio diary about living with HIV in a country where nearly one-third of young women are infected with the virus.
Ngubane carried the recorder with her for more than a year. U.S. National Public Radio aired the tapes in April 2006, on her 21st birthday. She subsequently went on a five-city tour in the United States. Her story was subsequently broadcast in Britain, Australia and Canada, moving an audience of more than 50 million people with her eloquence and honesty.
Nugubane fought a very public battle against HIV. Like many South Africans, she suffered from the government's reticence to provide anti-retroviral drugs to people with the AIDS virus.
She seized the opportunity to be a contestant on Imagine Africa, an AIDS reality television show broadcast throughout Africa, and she and her boyfriend, Melikhaya, helped with South African prevention programs.
Roger Terry
LOS ANGELES (AP) Roger Terry, whose conviction for "jostling" a superior was reversed 50 years after he and other Tuskegee Airmen attempted to enter a whites-only officer's club, died Thursday. He was 87.
Theodore Lumpkin, president of the Los Angeles chapter of the World War II black fighters unit, said Terry died of heart failure at Kaiser Permanente West Los Angeles Medical Center.
An army lieutenant and bomber pilot, Terry and more than 100 black officers were arrested in April 1945 for refusing a general's demand they sign papers admitting they were wrong for protesting the segregated club at Freeman Field, a military airfield near Seymour, Ind.
Terry was court-martialed, convicted of "jostling" a white officer and dishonorably discharged.
In 1995, the U.S. military exonerated Terry. He was among 300 Tuskegee Airmen who received the congressional Gold Medal in 1997.
 Load-Date: June 13, 2009

 

End of Document
