

OPEC meets in Nigeria under the shadow of militant attacks on oil industry
The Associated Press
December 12, 2006 Tuesday 7:05 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 598 words
Byline: By DULUE MBACHU, Associated Press Writer
Body




LAGOS, Nigeria The West African host of this week's OPEC meeting has seen its oil industry hobbled by militant attacks and pipeline sabotage, making Nigeria a reminder of the vulnerabilities of world supplies as the cartel prepares to discuss production quotas.
OPEC was meeting for the first time in Nigeria, which currently holds the cartel's presidency. A small OPEC delegation visited the country in 1972, but a spokesman for Nigeria's oil ministry, Levi Ajuonuma, said the West African country had never hosted a general meeting of the organization.
Leading up to Thursday's meeting, leaders from various OPEC nations are sending mixed signals on the need for reducing output.
Prices have risen from recent lows to above $60 a barrel, removing some of the urgency behind calls from members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to cut production.
However, ministers are keeping a wary eye on inventories the amount of crude in stock in the United States and other major oil customers. The most recent complete figures, from the end of September, showed supplies in the major industrialized nations at 2.76 billion barrels, compared with 2.64 billion barrels a year earlier, according to the International Energy Agency.
Attacks this year by militant groups fighting for greater local control of the country's oil wealth, as well as criminal gangs in the Niger Delta, have reduced Nigeria's exports by roughly 500,000 barrels a day. More than 70 foreign oil workers have been taken hostage by armed groups, most of them freed after the payment of ransom, according to security contractors working in the region.
"It is all a question of resource control, both at the international and the local level," said analyst Peter Egom, an economist and research fellow at the Nigerian Institute of International Affairs. "And both questions need to be addressed urgently."
At the root of the creation of OPEC was the desire by producer nations in the Persian Gulf and other parts of the developing world to get a better deal from mainly Western consumer nations. The same "oil nationalism" has filtered down to places like the Niger Delta, Egom said.
While oil workers have been targeted for kidnappings in the Delta, they usually are released unharmed after ransoms are paid. But last month, a British hostage was killed during a rescue operation by Nigerian navy troops to free a group of foreign oil workers seized from an offshore oil production platform belonging to a subsidiary of Italian energy firm Eni SpA. The others were rescued.
In the latest attack Thursday on an oil export terminal run by Eni's Agip subsidiary, claimed by the main delta armed group, Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta or MEND, three Italians and a Lebanese were abducted. They continue to be held.
More than 90 percent of Nigeria's oil is pumped by joint ventures with the Nigerian government run by leading oil multinationals including Royal Dutch Shell PLC, Exxon Mobil Corp., Chevron Corp., Total SA and Eni SpA.
MEND claims to be fighting to free the Niger Delta from the partnership of the Nigerian government and international oil companies. Despite its oil and gas riches, the region remains one of the most impoverished regions of Nigeria. People from the region, inhabited mainly by ethnic minorities, accuse successive Nigerian governments dominated by people from the majority ethnic groups and international oil companies of depriving them of the wealth pumped from their backyards.
Oil prices traded Tuesday at $60.85 a barrel, down 37 cents on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
 Load-Date: December 13, 2006

 

End of Document
