

People in the News
The Associated Press
July 13, 2006 Thursday 6:17 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 881 words
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt, whose relationship was spawned on a film set, will again work together this time on a movie based on the life of Daniel Pearl, the Wall Street Journal reporter who was kidnapped and murdered in Pakistan.
Jolie will star as Pearl's wife, Mariane Pearl, in an adaptation of her book, "A Mighty Heart: The Brave Life and Death of My Husband Danny Pearl," it was announced Thursday. Pitt will produce the film, directed by Michael Winterbottom.
In an ironic twist, the movie will be produced by Revolution Films and Plan B, the production company Pitt and his wife, Jennifer Aniston, founded. Pitt and Aniston, who were divorced last year, remain co-owners of the company.
It is the first announced on-screen role for Jolie, 31, since the birth of daughter Shiloh Nouvel in Namibia in May. The couple have two older children, 18-month-old Zahara, adopted from Ethiopia, and 4-year-old Maddox, adopted from Cambodia.
Pitt, 42, and Jolie first collaborated as co-stars in last year's "Mr. & Mrs. Smith."
"I am delighted that Angelina Jolie will be playing my role in the adaptation of my book," Pearl said in a statement released by Paramount Vantage. "I deeply admire her work and what she is committed to."
There was no announcement about who would play Daniel Pearl or when shooting for "A Mighty Heart" would begin.
The movie will be based on Mariane Pearl's account of her husband's abduction in Karachi, Pakistan, in 2002, while researching a story on Islamic militancy. Months later, his beheaded body was found in a shallow grave in a compound on the outskirts of Karachi.
HONG KONG (AP) Coldplay doesn't want to impose their political beliefs on others, says frontman Chris Martin, but band members feel an obligation to use their celebrity for a good cause.
Coldplay supports Oxfam's fair trade campaign, which lobbies against trade policies that hurt developing countries, such as the influx of goods from developed countries.
"We don't want to be preachy, we just say those words (fair trade), and make sure people look it up themselves," Martin said at a news conference ahead of a concert Thursday.
He said the British rock band wants to put their name recognition to good use.
"When one or two people take pictures of us, we feel like we could start advertising something we care about," said Martin, 29, who has the Oxfam campaign's twin-striped logo tattooed onto his left hand.
He also said the band dislikes their debut album, "Parachutes," which was released in 2000.
"We know that's terrible music, and we always try to think about what we can do next," Martin said.
He declined to say when their next album will be released, but said it definitely won't be this year.
On the Net:
Coldplay: http://www.coldplay.com
LAKE PLACID, N.Y. (AP) Evan Springsteen, the 15-year-old son of Bruce Springsteen and Patti Scialfa, had to be pulled from an Adirondack lake by forest rangers earlier this month after his kayak overturned.
The incident occurred July 2, when the family was in Lake Placid, where the couple's daughter Jessica was competing in the resort village's annual horse show.
Officials with the state Department of Environmental Conservation said forest rangers on routine patrol spotted an overturned kayak some distance from shore. When they pulled up, they saw a teen in the water.
The rangers got the boy into their boat and took him to the rented lakeside camp where his family was staying.
The teen Springsteen wasn't hurt in the incident, which occurred while he was on an outing with friends.
A department spokesman said the 56-year-old rocker thanked the rangers for rescuing his son.
On the Net:
Bruce Springsteen: http://www.brucespringsteen.net/site.html
LONDON (AP) New York chef Al Yeganeh, who inspired the brusque "Soup Nazi" character on "Seinfeld," is taking his recipes to Britain.
Yeganeh and his partners plan to open 50 Original SoupMan franchises during the next year, chief executive John Bello said Wednesday. He said the first franchises would be in central London, Manchester and Birmingham.
The company also hopes to open outlets in Germany, Italy and Japan.
Yeganeh's takeout restaurant, Soup Kitchen International, became a midtown Manhattan tourist attraction after the 1995 "Seinfeld" episode in which Jerry, George, Elaine and Kramer have their soup orders abruptly cut off by a gruff man with a thick mustache.
Employees at the international locations will not yell the character's trademark "No soup for you!" at customers, but will enforce Yeganeh's strict rules "Have your money ready!" and "Move to the extreme left after ordering!"
"We think it will be an exciting concept that people in England will embrace," said Bello. "Al's an artist and very particular. ... His work is clearly soup. His life is his soup."
The London outlets will offer soups from seafood bisque and lentil to chilled gazpacho, and there are plans to package the product to sell in grocery stores, Bello said.
When new locations open, Yeganeh donates money to a hunger charity in the area, his spokesman, John Rarrick, said.
The original store opened in 1984 and closed in April 2004 to prepare for the franchise expansion, Rarrick said.
Original SoupMan has 20 franchises in North America, and hopes to expand to 1,000.
On the Net:
http://www.originalsoupman.com
 Load-Date: July 14, 2006

 

End of Document
