

People in the News
The Associated Press
September 16, 2006 Saturday 10:33 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 874 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: SYDNEY Australia
Body




A close friend of the late "Crocodile Hunter" Steve Irwin said Saturday that he was appalled at reports of people illegally cashing in on the exuberant entertainer's legacy.
A 20-year-old woman was arrested and accused of selling fake Steve Irwin stickers she said were to raise money for his Wildlife Warriors fund, the Australian Broadcasting Corp. reported Saturday.
The woman, whose identity was not immediately released, appeared in court early Saturday and was fined, the ABC said.
Irwin's close friend and manager, John Stainton, said he was devastated by reports that some people were using the entertainer's profile to turn a profit.
"Steve would be absolutely appalled by this," Stainton told ABC radio.
Irwin was killed Sept. 4 when he was pierced in the chest by a stingray's barb while filming a new TV show off Australia's Great Barrier Reef.
LONDON (AP) Leading British film and music stars urged the British government Saturday to help end fighting in the violence-wracked Sudanese region of Darfur.
Musicians Elton John and Annie Lennox, musician-campaigner Bob Geldof, and actress Emma Thompson were among those who signed a letter accusing the international community of failing to act.
"We call on our government to move Darfur to the top of its priority list until a U.N. force is deployed and the people of Darfur are protected," they wrote.
The conflict in Darfur began in early 2003 when ethnic African tribes revolted against the Khartoum government. The Arab-dominated Sudanese government has been accused of unleashing Arab militiamen known as Janjaweed, who have been blamed for widespread atrocities, including rapes and killings.
U.N. officials have estimated the death toll at between 180,000 and 200,000. More than 2 million people have been driven from their homes.
The mandate of an underfunded 7,000-strong African Union force in Darfur expires at the end of the month, and the Sudanese government has resisted the deployment of a multinational force authorized by the U.N. Security Council.
NEW DELHI (AP) Ram Gopal Varma, a popular Bollywood director, says he wants his heroines to be sensual, according to a news report Saturday.
"I don't like simple girls anymore," The Hindustan Times quoted Varma as saying in an interview.
Varma, who has made about 30 Hindi-language movies, is one of the rare Indian directors whose films don't feature the song-and-dance routines that often fill Bollywood films.
"My perception about a woman has changed over the years she has to be sensual and have the oomph factor," he said.
His recent movie about an underworld kingpin, "Sarkar," or "Boss," was a huge box office success. His forthcoming film "Nishabd," or "Wordless," features Bollywood icon Amitabh Bachchan, 63, and 19-year-old Jiah Khan.
In the film, being readied for a release later this year, Bachchan plays an aging romantic who falls in love with a young woman.
"Nishabd revolves around the fact that while the body aches, feelings don't. The film is strong on physicality, but that is needed to bring out the contrast between desires and reality," he was quoted as saying.
Varma recently said that "Nishabd" is inspired by Vladimir Nabokov's famous novel "Lolita" but that his characters are driven by love, not sexual obsession.
NEWPORT, R.I. (AP) In coming weeks, Newport residents and visitors may spot Vanessa Redgrave, Meryl Streep or Glenn Close around town.
The stars are in Rhode Island to film "Evening," a movie about a woman who remembers her romantic past in flashback as she lies on her deathbed.
Steven Feinberg, director of the Rhode Island Film and Television Office, said the stars would film in locations around Newport and Tiverton for eight weeks.
In "Evening," Redgrave plays Ann Grant, the dying woman, while Claire Danes plays Grant in her younger years. Streep plays one of Grant's college friends at an older age.
Toni Collette and Redgrave's real-life daughter, Natasha Richardson, play Ann Grant's daughters. Glenn Close and Streep's real-life daughter, Mamie Gummer, also are in the cast.
MALIBU, Calif. (AP) Pierce Brosnan and other celebrities protested plans to build a liquefied natural gas terminal off the coast of Southern California.
The Cabrillo Port Liquefied Natural Gas facility is being proposed by Australian-based BHP Billiton, one of the world's largest energy companies. The $800 million terminal would be located 14 miles off the coast of Malibu.
Opponents of the project said the terminal fails to meet federal clean air requirements, but BHP officials argued that it would provide a reliable source of low-polluting energy.
Brosnan said Friday he believes that if people do not speak out against the project now, they will regret it later.
"As a father and a concerned citizen and a resident of Malibu for 20-odd years, we are protesting this," Brosnan said. "Please let's consider this and let's look at it very clearly before we make any harsh moves."
A letter on Brosnan's Web site questioning the project's impact was signed by Barbra Streisand, Cindy Crawford, Martin Sheen, Tom Hanks, Sting and Charlize Theron.
The Environmental Protection Agency is preparing a draft air pollution permit for BHP but is still reviewing public comments. A decision is expected sometime next year.
 Load-Date: September 17, 2006

 

End of Document
