

People in the News
The Associated Press
November 1, 2006 Wednesday 7:33 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 782 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: BERLIN 
Body




The father of the African child Madonna plans to adopt praised the pop star for opening "the way for a better life" for his 13-month-old son and questioned legal attempts to delay the adoption.
"Madonna was like a bulldozer who has cleared the way for a better life for my son," Yohane Banda was quoted as saying in an interview in Bunte magazine, set to appear on newsstands Thursday.
Banda left his son, David, with a Malawian orphanage, where Madonna found him, after the boy's mother died shortly after childbirth a relatively frequent occurrence in the impoverished African nation that suffers from high rates of maternal and infant mortality. He lost two other children in infancy to malaria.
He rejected efforts by a human rights group to hold up the adoption to make sure no Malawian laws were broken.
"Madonna explained to me that she wanted to adopt my son," Banda was quoted as saying in the interview, which took place Friday. "She assured me she would take good care of David and raise him in peace."
"I told her that the most important thing for me was that she offered my son a good future. And then I agreed to the adoption."
The people in his village considered it an honor that Madonna had adopted one of their children, and Banda said he slaughtered a goat to celebrate with the whole family.
Banda was asked if it would have been better for the 48-year-old pop star to give him money so he could raise his son.
"She knows what to do with a lot of money, and I don't," he said. "I could not have started anything with the money, and in the end it would have only spoiled things for me and David."
Madonna has told NBC "Today" show co-anchor Meredith Vieira that Banda had refused her offer of financial assistance to help him keep his son.
"I said I would be happy to ... bring him back to your village and help you financially raise him. And he said no," Madonna said.
PALM BEACH, Fla. (AP) Donald Trump's display of patriotism is apparently too flamboyant for this chic oceanside town.
Palm Beach officials cited Trump for hoisting a large American flag atop an 80-foot pole at his lavish Mar-a-Lago estate and club.
Town officials said the real estate mogul has violated zoning codes with a flagpole taller than 42 feet and for erecting it without a building permit and permission from the landmarks board. Trump has until Nov. 27 to apply for approvals or face a Dec. 21 code enforcement hearing that could result in $250-a-day fines.
"You don't need a permit to put up the American flag," Trump said Tuesday. "The day you need a permit to put up the American flag, that will be a sad day for this country."
Lee Hanley, vice chairman of the town's landmarks commission, previously said the 15-by-25-foot flag makes the town look like "we have an Okeechobee car dealer," referring to a strip of auto dealerships along Okeechobee Boulevard in West Palm Beach.
Trump responded in a letter last week saying that "anyone who objects should not, in my opinion, hold a public office of any kind at least not in this country."
The flag appeared outside the estate Oct. 3.
LONDON (AP) Marilyn Monroe's lace-trimmed pantaloons and the hat John Lennon wore at the Beatles' last photo shoot are among more than 150 items of entertainment memorabilia that will go up for sale later this month.
Lennon's black cowboy hat is expected to fetch between $15,200 to $19,000, Bonhams auction house said Tuesday. Lennon wore it during an August 1969 photo shoot that followed the Beatles' final recording session.
The cream pantaloons that Monroe wore in the 1954 Western movie "River of No Return" are estimated to sell for between $3,800 to $5,700 at the Nov. 22 sale.
A handful of rare publicity posters for 2002's "Spider-Man" film will also be on the auction block. The posters, printed before Sept. 11, 2001, and recalled after the terror attacks, show the twin towers of New York's World Trade Center reflected in Spider-Man's eyes.
The auction will also include movie posters from early 20th-century hits such as "All Quiet on the Western Front" and concept sketches for the 1960s TV show "Thunderbirds."
"We are delighted to be selling such an important collection of TV memorabilia," Stephanie Connell, of Bonhams' rock and roll and film department, said Tuesday. "Rarely can one have an insight into the concepts of such an iconic series."
Derek Meddings, special effects supervisor for "Thunderbirds," also worked on the "Captain Scarlet," "Batman" and "Superman" shows. The sale includes his original drawings of the Batplane from the first of Tim Burton's "Batman" films and the designs of the Cox Gun used in the 1977 James Bond movie, "The Spy Who Loved Me."
On the Net:
Bonhams: http://www.bonhams.com
 Load-Date: November 2, 2006

 

End of Document
