

People in the News
The Associated Press
January 3, 2006, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 693 words
Dateline: ALBANY, N.Y.
Body




The Donald does not want to be the governor.
Donald Trump, mega-developer and star of NBC's "The Apprentice," said he has no interest in running for governor of New York this year.
"I'm not going to run for governor because I'm having too much fun doing what I'm doing now," Trump told the New York Post.
Trump - who also told the New York Daily News that "I have no interest in running for public office at this time" - didn't immediately respond to a telephone message left Tuesday at his New York City office by The Associated Press.
Trump had been suggested as a possible Republican candidate for governor by state Senate Majority Leader Joseph Bruno. Trump told the Post that Bruno's consideration was "a great honor."
Already seeking the GOP nomination for governor are former Massachusetts Gov. William Weld, former Assembly Minority Leader John Faso, former Secretary of State Randy Daniels and Assemblyman Patrick Manning.
Also eyeing the GOP nomination is billionaire businessman B. Thomas Golisano, the three-time losing gubernatorial candidate of the state Independence Party.
The only announced Democratic candidate for governor is state Attorney General Eliot Spitzer, who faces a possible primary challenge from Nassau County Executive Thomas Suozzi.
Trump told the Post he might support Spitzer for governor.
"He's done an amazing job," Trump said.
Republican Gov. George Pataki announced in July that he would not seek a fourth four-year term this year.
---
On the Net:
http://www.nbc.com/The-Apprentice-4/ 
---
ABOARD A MILITARY AIRCRAFT (AP) - How does an 18-year-old "American Idol" star stay fresh and pretty while traveling to seven countries in seven days to entertain the troops?
Diana DeGarmo says you sleep and eat on schedule - and it helps to bring along your mom.
"Some people might call me a party pooper," she told The Associated Press in an interview Tuesday on a military aircraft en route to Germany for the final stop of the tour. "But you just have to do it."
DeGarmo visited several U.S. bases in the Middle East and eastern Africa to host holiday shows with comedian Reggie McFadden and country singer Michael Peterson. They were traveling in a delegation led by the chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Peter Pace.
The weeklong United Service Organizations tour started at an air base near Doha, Qatar, and included stops in Iraq, Afghanistan, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Djibouti and the USS Theodore Roosevelt aircraft carrier somewhere in the central Arabian Gulf.
DeGarmo, last season's runner-up to Fantasia Barrino on the Fox "American Idol" reality show, said she had "learned that there's more to this war than sending troops overseas. They're missing so much and risking their lives."
The singer, who brought her manager and mother, Brenda DeGarmo, asked for several volunteers to come onstage for a dance contest in each performance and ended by singing "America the Beautiful."
She said one of the strangest moments on the trip was performing for dozens of shivering troops at Camp Victory in Baghdad, with helicopters flying overhead and people shouting. She also spent the night in one of Saddam Hussein's former palaces.
---
WOODY CREEK, Colo. (AP) - Hunter S. Thompson's widow will co-edit a new magazine called The Woody Creeker, which is expected to hit newsstands next month.
The gonzo journalist shot himself in his kitchen Feb. 20, apparently despondent over health problems.
"We have some good writers already," Anita Thompson told the Aspen Times for its Tuesday editions. Satirist and political commentator P.J. O'Rourke plans a profile of her husband based on interviews in 1987 and 1997, she said.
Anita Thompson continues to work on a book she calls "Hunter's Wisdom," a collection of witticisms, aphorisms and other expressions from Hunter S. Thompson's bibliography of 14 books, along with her personal notes.
The magazine is named after the community where the Thompson property is located. Anita Thompson said she came up with the idea as a way to celebrate the oddities and richness of her neighborhood.
"We're living the Woody Creek lifestyle," she said. "We should be recording it, at least."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NYET102 of Trump, AP Photo of Dec. 31: NY116 of DeGarmo,
 Load-Date: January 4, 2006

 

End of Document
