

People in the News
The Associated Press
October 23, 2006 Monday 5:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 943 words
Dateline: CHICAGO 
Body




Oprah Winfrey was scheduled to tape an interview with Madonna on Tuesday about the pop singer's planned adoption of a 13-month-old boy from the African country of Malawi.
The interview is scheduled to air Wednesday on Winfrey's talk show, a spokeswoman for Harpo Productions Inc. said Monday. It will be Madonna's first TV interview about the adoption.
Madonna traveled to Malawi on Oct. 4 with her husband, Guy Ritchie. They spent eight days visiting orphanages she is funding through her charity.
The child, David Banda, was taken to London last week after Malawi's High Court granted Madonna and Ritchie an interim adoption order.
Madonna, 48, has said she acted according to the law, but the toddler's father, Yohane Banda, said Sunday he didn't realize he was signing away custody of his motherless son "for good."
Madonna has two children daughter Lourdes, 9, and son Rocco, 6.
On the Net:
Oprah Winfrey: http://www.oprah.com
Madonna: http://www.madonna.com/
WINDHOEK, Namibia (AP) Wesley Snipes will continue filming as planned in Namibia despite the U.S. warrant for his arrest on tax fraud charges, said the producer of "Gallowwalker."
Joanne Reay said Snipes, who is the lead actor in the movie, was on location in the desert near the town of Swakob. Reay said Snipes had traveled to Namibia to shoot the film and not to flee U.S. justice. She said the plan was to stay until the third week in December.
"As far as we understand, Wesley is not going to be arrested in Namibia," she told The Associated Press.
"We are shooting and we are continuing to shoot," Reay said Monday. "We are aware of the issue around the tax charges but we are not discussing it."
Snipes, 44, was indicted last week on eight counts of tax fraud, accused of trying to cheat the government out of nearly $12 million in false refund claims and not filing returns for six years. If convicted of all the charges, he could face 16 years in prison.
At the time, prosecutors said they couldn't arrest Snipes because they didn't know where he was.
According to the indictment, Snipes had his taxes prepared by accountants with a history of filing false returns to reap payments for their clients. The firm, American Rights Litigators, would receive 20 percent of refunds from clients, according to the indictment.
Prosecutors said Snipes fraudulently claimed refunds totaling nearly $12 million in 1996 and 1997 on income taxes already paid.
The star of the "Blade" trilogy, "Jungle Fever" and "White Men Can't Jump" was also charged with failure to file returns from 1999 through 2004.
NEW YORK (AP) Foxy Brown would be arrested and thrown in jail if the 27-year-old rapper missed her sentencing Tuesday on assault charges, a judge said.
Brown, whose real name is Inga Marchand, failed to appear in Criminal Court on Monday. Her attorney, Frank Rothman, said Brown was recovering at home from a dental procedure.
"I don't take this kindly," said Judge Melissa C. Jackson. "I don't believe she is incapable of being here."
Jackson rejected a motion by Brown to withdraw her guilty plea and said the sentencing would be held Tuesday. The judge said that if Brown failed to show up, a plea deal sparing her jail time would be voided and she would be sentenced to a year behind bars.
Rothman said Brown would appear. "She's showing no disrespect," he told the judge.
Brown, whose albums include "Ill Na Na" and "Chyna Doll," pleaded guilty in August to misdemeanor assault charges stemming from a fight with salon workers over a manicure.
Prosecutors said Brown, known for her raunchy lyrics and revealing clothes, kicked one employee and smacked a second in the face in 2004 in an argument over payment for a manicure.
Brown claimed she had made her plea-deal decision under duress. "I find her plea was entered voluntarily," the judge said.
The deal would require Brown to serve three years' probation and take anger management classes.
TOKYO (AP) Janet Jackson said she is returning to her roots with her latest release, focusing on dance music 20 years after her breakthrough "Control" album.
"I miss dancing, so I wanted it to be a dance album," said Jackson, who appeared at a packed news conference Monday in a bright red kimono.  Her new album, "20 Y.O.," went on sale in Japan last week.
Jackson said bringing in producer Jermaine Dupri her boyfriend made its mark on the sound. "He added a rawness," the 40-year-old singer said. "He brought a freshness to the project."
Jackson said she is preparing a tour, with rehearsals to begin at the end of the year. She said she likely will be on the road from March or April and that Japan will be on her list of stops.
"I always enjoy myself in Japan, even though the majority of my time is work-related," she said. "I will definitely be back."
On the Net:
Janet Jackson: http://www.janet-jackson.com/
LOS ANGELES (AP) Nicolas Cage is leaving Bel-Air.
The 42-year-old Oscar-winning actor has put his home in the tony community on the market for $35 million.
He bought the seven-bedroom, seven-bathroom house for $7 million eight years ago.
The 11,000-square-foot Tudor-style home sits on an acre just above Sunset Boulevard. It has a two-story entrance, a front-yard fountain, an Olympic-size swimming pool and a two-bedroom guesthouse.
Tom Jones owned the home for 20 years before Cage, and before that, it belonged to Dean Martin.
Cage won't be lacking for places to stay. He owns other homes in Southern California, and earlier this year bought a castle in Bavaria and a private island in the Bahamas, according to People magazine.
He won a best actor Oscar for "Leaving Las Vegas." His screen credits also include "The Wicker Man," "World Trade Center" and "Adaptation."
 Load-Date: October 24, 2006

 

End of Document
