

People in the News
The Associated Press
July 1, 2006 Saturday 6:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 841 words
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Paul Simon's new tour is about music, not Art.
The Rock and Roll Hall of Famer launched his first solo tour in five years with a Wednesday show in Cleveland, supporting his critically acclaimed album "Surprise." His last time on the road in 2003-04, Simon teamed up with old friend Art Garfunkel, rather than going alone.
"The situation with Artie was unique," Simon said about their collaboration. "I really had to think about what would serve that show the best. ... But when I'm doing my own show, I do what I want to do with the show. I don't have to share responsibilities."
Simon, 64, said one of the challenges of this tour is re-creating the soundscapes from the album that came out of a collaboration with avant-garde musician Brian Eno.
"To a degree I try to do it; to a degree I don't," Simon said. "Every live performance is essentially different from the album. Everything stretches out, gets bigger, louder, longer. Here, the main thing is I don't have Brian. But to a degree, I can use some of the album sounds."
WESTFIELD, Mass. (AP) Police in this western Massachusetts town say they have seized a digital camera with images of celebrity couple Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie in Africa for an investigation by Los Angeles authorities.
Local police, accompanied by state police and Secret Service officers, went to the Westfield home of William Keys on Tuesday to recover a digital camera's memory stick after three photos that appeared on the Internet were tracked to Keys, police said Friday.
Officers then went to Precision Camera and Video Repair in Enfield, Conn., where Keys works, and recovered the camera. It remains in custody of Westfield police.
No one has been arrested or charged in the case. It was unclear who took the photos.
Keys did not return telephone calls Friday.
"It's an ongoing investigation, and we cannot comment," said Jane Robison, a spokeswoman for the Los Angeles County prosecutor's office.
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) South African singer Yvonne Chaka Chaka urged world leaders Saturday to wage war against malaria as she paid emotional tribute to a band member who died two years ago of the disease, which kills more than a million people every year.
Phumzile Ntuli was infected while on tour with Chaka Chaka in Gabon in 2004. Upon her return to South Africa, she fell into a coma, from which she never recovered.
"Malaria robbed South Africa of a wonderful musician; it robbed her son Menzi of his mother, her family of their daughter and me of a friend I valued and trusted," Chaka Chaka said at a memorial service in Durban intended to highlight the threat as the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria meets there to evaluate progress curbing the epidemics.
"But the real tragedy here is that her death was avoidable. She did not have to die, because malaria is preventable, treatable and curable."
Malaria, which is caused by a parasite carried by mosquitoes, remains the biggest killer of children in Africa.
Programs supported by the Global Fund have distributed 11.3 million insecticide-treated bed nets, among the most effective ways to ward against malaria, and are poised to rapidly scale up prevention efforts globally. However, the fund has a $800,000 shortfall for new grants in 2006.
ATLANTA (AP) Trisha Yearwood will perform at a July 15 concert celebrating the 10-year anniversary of Atlanta hosting the Olympic Games.
Yearwood, who performed in the closing ceremonies of the 1996 games, is a 41-year-old country singer with hits including "How Do I Live" and "She's in Love With the Boy."
She is the first performer announced for the free concert at Centennial Park in Atlanta, where 1996 Olympic volunteers and others are expected to gather on the anniversary of the games' opening ceremonies.
Yearwood is a native of Monticello, Ga. Her most recent album, "Jasper County," is named after her home county.
Other observances of the anniversary will include the launch of an Olympic museum at the Atlanta History Museum.
On the Net:
http://www.trishayearwood.com/home/index.html
HONG KONG (AP) Yasmin Le Bon says her marriage to Simon Le Bon of Duran Duran has lasted more than two decades because of similarities in the music and fashion worlds in which they live.
"I think part of why it's (the marriage) worked is that we understand each other's businesses so completely. They're so similar," Le Bon, 41, was quoted as saying in the July issue of Prestige Hong Kong magazine.
Le Bon began modeling in 1984. She has worked for Calvin Klein, Ralph Lauren, Chanel and Christian Dior.
She married Simon Le Bon in 1985, when Duran Duran was one of the world's hottest groups. The dashing British quintet were the quintessential '80s pop band, with hits such as "Hungry Like the Wolf" and "Girls on Film."
Duran Duran were at the forefront of the music video age and were famous for their innovative and exotic clips.
"If any band was going to understand the fashion business, it was going to be these guys," she said. "They really understand it and embrace it."
On the Net:
http://www.duranduran.com/
 Load-Date: July 2, 2006

 

End of Document
