

People in the News
The Associated Press
June 16, 2006 Friday 6:30 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 1183 words
Dateline: WINDHOEK Namibia
Body




Following in the steps of Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt, Britney Spears is considering a Namibian birth for her next baby, a government official said.
Deputy Environment and Tourism Minister Leon Jooste said officials have received an inquiry on behalf of the 24-year-old pop star, who has a 9-month-old son, Sean Preston, with husband Kevin Federline.
"She has shown interest to come over to Namibia," Jooste said by telephone Friday from a conference in neighboring South Africa. "Nothing has been confirmed yet, but there is a definite possibility of that happening."
He declined to provide further details, saying: "She wants to come in very low profile and have some privacy. She might change her mind if we reveal too much now."
There was no immediate response from Spears' New York-based representative, Leslie Sloane Zelnik, to requests by The Associated Press seeking comment.
Spears, who recently announced she is expecting a second child, has taken a beating in the tabloids, which have questioned her parenting skills. She has been photographed driving with Sean Preston in her lap, and nearly dropped him when she tripped outside a New York City hotel.
In an interview with NBC's "Dateline" on Thursday night, Spears said the criticism has crossed the line and that she feels like a "target."
"I know I'm a good mom," she said.
Spears, who cried several times during the interview, also said that reports of marital difficulties with Federline are inaccurate.
"He helps me. He has to. I'm (an) emotional wreck right now," she said, referring to the fluctuating hormones of her second pregnancy.
Spears would probably appreciate some of the peace and privacy that Pitt and Jolie enjoyed when their daughter, Shiloh Nouvel Jolie-Pitt, was born last month in the sleepy southwest African nation.
The Namibian government shielded the Hollywood couple from the paparazzi, insisting that visiting journalists obtain permission in writing to cover them.
On the Net:
http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/3032600/
NEW YORK (AP) The "Law & Order" revolving door has brought in Alana De La Garza as the latest cast addition to the long-running NBC drama, the network has confirmed.
De La Garza joins the series this fall replacing Annie Parisse, who played Assistant District Attorney Alexandra Borgia for a season and a half, NBC said Friday. Borgia was killed off last month on the finale for the show's 16th season.
De La Garza appeared on CBS' "CSI: Miami" last season as the wife of Miami cop Horatio Caine (series star David Caruso). Her character was gunned down by drug dealers.
She follows Parisse as the latest in a succession of actresses playing young female prosecutors paired with Assistant District Attorney Jack McCoy (Sam Waterston), including Jill Hennessy, Carey Lowell, Angie Harmon and Elizabeth Rohm.
Another newcomer to the "Law & Order" fold, Milena Govich, was announced recently. She replaces Dennis Farina, who played dapper police Detective Joe Fontana for two seasons. He in turn had succeeded Jerry Orbach.
Govich was most recently a regular on NBC's short-lived drama "Conviction" (like "Law & Order," produced by Dick Wolf) as Jessica Rossi, a New York assistant district attorney.
On the Net:
http://www.nbc.com/Law & Order/
TOKYO (AP) When Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi tours Graceland later this month with President Bush, he will be representing a big constituency Japan has droves of Elvis Presley fans, and the biggest Elvis fan club in all of East Asia.
Koizumi, of course, is the most famous.
Last year he serenaded Bush with "I Want You, I Need You, I Love You" at a birthday party for the president. Apparently it made quite an impression Bush and his wife, Laura, will accompany Koizumi on his June 30 visit to Presley's estate in Memphis, Tenn.
"It's exciting," Jack Soden, chief executive of Elvis Presley Enterprises, said Wednesday of the upcoming visit. "Two world leaders, plus Elvis, plus Graceland."
Koizumi is just one of thousands of die-hard Japanese Elvis lovers.
The Elvis Presley Fan Club in Japan claims to be the largest in Asia with a 5,000-strong membership. Another 2,000 people or so belong to the recently formed Elvis Presley Society in Japan, said society president and occasional Elvis impersonator Tomikazu Taguchi. The even newer C'mon Elvis Fans in Japan is on a much smaller scale, with a membership in the dozens.
Koizumi, who notes with pride that he shares a Jan. 8 birthday with Elvis, will be in the United States June 28-30. He is scheduled to visit the White House on June 29.
LONDON (AP) When Princess Margaret's children decided to sell off many of her possessions to raise money to pay Britain's strict inheritance tax, they probably didn't expect to double their tax bill.
Viscount David Linley and Lady Sarah Chatto planned to use some of the proceeds to pay an estimated $5.5 million in inheritance taxes.
But with most items selling for far more than their estimated worth, the two-day auction at Christie's this week earned far more than anticipated raising $24.6 million.
Linley and Chatto now face a separate capital gains tax from the sale that experts believe will likely equal the inheritance tax bill.
Bob Rothenberg of the London-based firm Blick Rothenberg said the two would be subject to capital gains tax charged at up to 40 percent of the increase in the value of Margaret's possessions between when they inherited them and when they were sold.
He based his estimate on an estate originally valued at $14 million.
Margaret, the younger sister of Queen Elizabeth II, died of a stroke in February 2002 at age 71. Her glamour seemed to lend cachet to the furniture, silver, china and decorative items on the auction block, with the 595 items selling for an average of four times their estimated price.
The late princess' cigarette case a gift from her father, King George VI fetched $187,725, 20 times its original estimate.
The family also sold nearly 200 lots of jewelry.
Christie's Jewelry Department Head Raymond Sancroft-Baker said any proceeds remaining after taxes would be donated to charity.
COPENHAGEN, Denmark (AP) Danish harpsichordist and conductor Lars Ulrik Mortensen has won the 2007 Sonning Music Prize, the country's top music award.
Mortensen will receive $101,500 in prize money during a concert in Copenhagen on June 2, the awards committee said Thursday.
In its citation, the committee called Mortensen "one of our time's greatest harpsichordists and conductors of baroque music."
Mortensen studied at the Royal Academy of Music in Copenhagen and has performed in Europe, the Americas and Japan.
The prize, named after Leonie Sonning, has been awarded annually since 1959 to an internationally renowned composer, musician, conductor or singer. Sonning, who died in 1970, was the widow of Danish editor Carl Johan Sonning.
The 2006 recipient is cellist Yo-Yo Ma, who will receive the award during a concert in Copenhagen on Dec. 10.
Previous winners include Igor Stravinsky, Leonard Bernstein, Mstislav Rostropovich, Anne-Sophie Mutter, John Eliot Gardiner, Miles Davis and Keith Jarett.
On the Net:
http://www.sonningmusik.dk
 Load-Date: June 17, 2006

 

End of Document
