

Questions and answers on the US-sponsored Mideast peace conference in Annapolis, Md.
The Associated Press
November 24, 2007 Saturday 10:38 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 648 words
Byline: By JOSEF FEDERMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM 
Body




In his boldest foray into Mideast peacemaking, President Bush has invited the Israeli and Palestinian leaders, along with representatives from nearly 50 nations and international groups, to next week's conference in Annapolis, Md. Some questions and answers about the summit.
What is the goal of Annapolis?
Bush wants Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas to declare a formal resumption of peace talks, in the presence of a large international audience. Talks broke down in violence seven years ago. The U.S. hopes renewed talks will lead to a peace deal before Bush leaves office in January 2009.
Why now?
The U.S. wants the conference to boost moderates in the Middle East. Bush proposed the conference last summer, shortly after the Islamic militant Hamas group routed pro-Abbas forces and seized control of the Gaza Strip. The U.S. is eager to bolster Abbas in his rivalry with Hamas, and also wants to send a message to Iran, which it views as the main source of instability in the region because of its support for Hamas and other violent Islamic groups.
Who will be in Annapolis?
Participants from nearly 50 countries will attend, including the United Nations secretary-general; former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, who now serves as the international community's Mideast envoy; top European Union officials; Arab League chief Amr Moussa, and top officials Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Jordan. Arab participation, particularly by nations that don't have relations with Israel, is considered essential to the success of Annapolis.
What have been the key obstacles in preparations?
Israel and the Palestinians had hoped to present a joint declaration at the conference outlining their vision of a future peace agreement. But months of negotiations have made little progress. The Palestinians want the statement to address, at least in general terms, the core issues at the heart of the conflict with Israel. They also have sought a deadline for a peace deal. The Israelis want a much vaguer declaration without a firm timetable. However, Olmert says he is ready to begin discussing core issues immediately after Annapolis, and he believes a deal can be reached next year.
What are the core issues?
The Palestinians want to form an independent state that includes the West Bank, Gaza and east Jerusalem the areas captured by Israel in the 1967 Mideast war. A peace agreement must work out the final borders of the Palestinian state, the status of Jerusalem and the fate of millions of Palestinians refugees who lost homes during Israel's war of independence in 1948. Israel wants to retain parts of the war-won land where some 450,000 Israelis live today. It also opposes any return of Palestinian refugees to Israel. The Palestinians want east Jerusalem to be their capital. Olmert has signaled he is ready to relinquish outlying Arab neighborhoods of the city. But he wants the Old City home to Jewish, Christian and Muslim holy sites to remain under Israeli control. The dispute over Jerusalem has derailed past peace talks.
What are the chances of success?
U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice says it's a long shot. But there are reasons for optimism. Bush, Olmert and Abbas are all relatively weak leaders who are hungry for an achievement. Opinion polls show majorities on both sides favor a settlement. Moderate Arab nations appear ready to provide their support to counter Iran's growing influence in the region.
What obstacles remain?
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators remain far apart on the core issues. If talks make progress, Olmert could run into trouble with hawkish coalition partners, who have threatened to bring down the government if he makes too many concessions. On the Palestinian side, Hamas, which opposes a deal with Israel, remains firmly in control of Gaza, raising questions about Abbas' ability to carry out any peace agreement.
 Load-Date: November 25, 2007

 

End of Document
