

Questions and answers about the Darfur conflict
The Associated Press
October 24, 2006 Tuesday 9:42 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 627 words
Byline: By JASPER MORTIMER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO Egypt
Body




Sudan's expulsion of the top U.N. envoy adds a new complication to international efforts to send U.N. peacekeepers to Darfur, where fresh fighting threatens to worsen the plight of 2.5 million refugees.
Here are questions and answers about the Darfur conflict:
Q. How did the conflict begin?
A. It began in February 2003 when members of Darfur's ethnic African tribes took up arms against the Arab-dominated government in Khartoum, accusing it of decades of neglect and discrimination. There had long been tension over land and grazing rights between the African farmers and the Arabic-speaking nomads. The government launched a counterinsurgency operation in which pro-government Arab militia, called janjaweed, were widely alleged to have destroyed hundreds of villages, killing the inhabitants, raping women and stealing livestock.
Q. How many people have been affected by the conflict?
A. Most experts believe at least 200,000 people have died many from disease and starvation. About 2.5 million people have fled their homes.
Q. What has been done to resolve the conflict?
A. The African Union negotiated two cease-fires in 2004 but neither held. After the first one, the AU sent troops to monitor the truce. Last May, the AU with U.S. support negotiated a broader agreement that was signed by one of the main rebel groups. But other rebels rejected the accord and fighting continued.
Q. Why can't the AU stop the fighting?
A. The 7,000-strong AU monitor force is too small for an area three-quarters the size of Texas. Their mandate is to monitor a cease-fire, not disarm combatants.
Q. What is the role of the janjaweed?
A. The janjaweed roughly translated as 'hordes' in colloquial Arabic are Arab militiamen who appear to have been armed by the government to fight the rebels. The government has denied arming them and insists they are outside its control. However, members of the janjaweed have told journalists that they received state support and U.N. investigators found the government had backed the janjaweed.
Q. What role does the U.N. play?
A. U.N. agencies supply hundreds of thousands of refugees with food, water and medicine. The U.N. has described Darfur as the world's worst humanitarian crisis. In 2005, U.N. investigators reported widespread atrocities, accused Khartoum of backing the janjaweed, and recommended 51 people face war crimes charges. In August, the U.N. Security Council approved a resolution to replace the AU forces with 20,000 U.N. peacekeepers.
Q. Why aren't U.N. peacekeepers on the ground?
A. Sudan's government refuses to allow U.N. peacekeepers to go Darfur, saying they would be "neocolonialists." The government believes the U.N. should pay for the AU troops to stay.
Q. Why did Sudan expel the chief U.N. envoy?
A. The government ordered the envoy, Jan Pronk, out of the country last Sunday after he wrote in his personal Web blog that government troops had suffered two major defeats in Darfur and was deploying more soldiers and Arab militias to the region in violation of Security Council orders. Sudan said his remarks amounted to "psychological warfare."
Q. Does that mean the U.N. mission in Sudan will close?
A. No. The U.N. summoned Pronk to New York for consultations and says he's still the special envoy. The Sudanese have promised to work with a new envoy. Clearly, however, the Sudanese move signals more problems between the government and the U.N. Pronk's departure would deprive the U.N. of a frank and outspoken advocate for Sudan's refugees.
Q. Are neighboring countries involved?
A. About 200,000 refugees fled across Sudan's western border into Chad. The Sudanese government accuses Chad of supporting the Darfur rebels. Chad in turn alleges that Sudan is backing Chadian rebels. Each denies the other's allegations.
 Load-Date: October 25, 2006

 

End of Document
