

Questions and answers about the rebel attack on African peacekeepers in Darfur 
The Associated Press
October 1, 2007 Monday 7:19 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 813 words
Byline: By LEE KEATH, Associated Press Writer
Body




Darfur rebels overran a base of African Union peacekeepers over the weekend, killing 10 and looting their position in the worst attack on the force since it deployed in June 2004. Some questions and answers about the attack and events in Darfur:
Q: Why are rebels attacking peacekeepers? I thought the peacekeepers were sent to stop the Sudanese military's crackdown in Darfur and attacks by their militia allies, the janjaweed, on civilians.
A: Anger over government and janjaweed attacks was a main reason for the African Union deployment in the minds of Western governments. But the 7,000-man African Union force is too small and underequipped to stop the fighting, and violence between the government and rebels, and janjaweed attacks have only increased.
Ethnic African refugees in Darfur widely resent the peacekeeping force, saying they are not protecting them from the janjaweed. Some rebels go further, accusing the African Union of favoring the Sudanese military and even of providing it with information on the rebels. The African Union denies this, insisting the peacekeepers are neutral and are doing all they can. But the fact that the African Union troops at the Haskanita base had to be rescued by Sudanese troops only hurts their image. Rebel attacks on peacekeepers have increased over the past year, though Sunday's was the deadliest and most dramatic.
Q: Who are the rebels?
A: The rebels behind the attack are believed to be from SLA-Unity, a splinter group of the Sudan Liberation Army fighting alongside the Justice and Equality Movement. The main SLA, led by Minni Minawi, signed a peace deal with the government in 2006. But all other rebel groups refused, and the SLA itself split into factions, all of which except the small group Minawi still leads continue to fight.
The rebel ranks are highly factionalized, making peace talks difficult. For example, how many SLA factions are there? Estimates range from four to 18, depending on who's allied with whom at any given moment. The Justice and Equality Movement, whose full-time fighters are believed to number in the hundreds, has emerged as the most cohesive and potent military force. But coalitions of various SLA factions can assemble more fighters. African Union peacekeepers said about 1,000 SLA fighters took part in the Haskanita attack.
The rebel groups are well armed and organized, often beating government forces in battle. They all are made up of ethnic Africans, who rose up in 2003 complaining of discrimination by the Arab-led government in Khartoum.
Q: A combined United Nations-African Union force is supposed to start deploying in October. How will this attack affect that?
A: The U.N. was struggling to put together enough troops to fill out the incoming force to 26,000 and this attack doesn't help. It has already prompted misgivings from some key African contributors.
Nigeria has one battalion, or about 800 troops, on the ground in Darfur and has said it will likely send another battalion for the joint force. But its army commander said Monday the attack could cause them to reconsider. Senegalese President Abdoulaye Wade repeated his threats to quit the force, though he said his country still plans to send 1,600 troops to the hybrid force.
The Haskanita attack paints a nightmare scenario: that the incoming peacekeepers will just become a target in the chaotic violence between Darfur's various armed groups.
But the hope is that the bigger, more robust hybrid force which will be backed by high-tech weapons such as attack helicopters will command more respect. If it can show that it can prevent government and janjaweed attacks, then presumably the rebels would lay off it as well.
Q: Will peace talks, due to start this month in Libya, still take place after this attack?
A: All sides will likely want to pretend Haskanita did not happen once they get to the negotiating table there's that much riding on the talks.
The 2006 peace deal was a bust, with only Minawi signing on from the rebel side.
The Justice and Equality Movement has agreed to join this round of talks and most SLA factions, including SLA-Unity, have indicated they would attend. The rebel factions are demanding a better deal that wins them political concessions and a peacekeeper-enforced end to the government-janjaweed crackdown.
The U.N. and African Union hope a deal emerges with as many sides as possible signed on in order to have at least a relatively peaceful environment for the new peacekeeping force.
Whether a peace deal can be reached and hold is another matter entirely. Ahead of the talks, the combatants have been trying to better their position on the ground in new violence. The Haskanita attack took place as government troops and the janjaweed were waging a heavy new offensive in the area, with fierce battles against rebels over the past two weeks, even though Khartoum had called a cease-fire.
 Load-Date: October 2, 2007

 

End of Document
