

Reaction to Obama's speech to the Muslim world
The Associated Press
June 4, 2009 Thursday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 836 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Notable reaction to President Barack Obama's speech Thursday to the Muslim world:
"President Obama is a brave president. ... We hope he will open a new chapter with the Islamic world and Arab nations in particular." Mithwan Hussein, a Baghdad resident.
"Bush and Clinton said the same about a Palestinian state, but they've done nothing, so why should we believe this guy?" Ali Tottah, 82, a Palestinian refugee at the Baqaa refugee camp in Jordan.
"There is a change between the speech of President Obama and previous speeches made by George Bush. But today's remarks at Cairo University were based on soft diplomacy to brighten the image of the United States." Fawzi Barhoum, a Hamas spokesman in Gaza.
"Obama's speech is an attempt to mislead people and create more illusions to improve America's aggressive image in the Arab and Islamic world." A joint statement by eight Damascus, Syria-based radical Palestinian factions, including Hamas.
"We share President Obama's hope that the American effort will herald the beginning of the end of the conflict and a general Arab recognition of Israel as the state for the Jewish people living in security and peace in the Middle East." an Israeli government statement.
"Why did he not come here to Gaza, instead of going to Egypt? He is welcome to come and see, to inspect with his own eyes, to see the war crimes and the new Holocaust." Mohammed Khader, 47, whose house in Gaza was leveled by Israeli troops during the offensive against Hamas.
"It was actually better than we expected, but not as good as we hoped. ... His stance on democracy was very general, a bit weak, we hoped for more detail." Ayman Nour, an Egyptian dissident recently released from prison.
"I grew up as a Muslim, and some religious leaders told us to hate other people. So he was speaking directly at me, telling us to stop hating Israelis and Jews. He is the most powerful man in the world and millions of people around the Middle East will see hope in what he said." Hani Ameer, an Iraqi immigrant in London.
"It still was a speech about what America wants. Maybe that's only natural, because he wants to protect American interests in the region. ... But I really do believe he envisions a world that is pluralistic, where different religions can live peacefully together, with respect, as he himself experienced in Indonesia." Edi Kusyanto, a teacher at the school in Indonesia where Obama went as a child.
"Obama's attempt was positive but not effective. As long as the U.S is supporting Israel there will be no hope for better U.S.-Islamic relations." Niloofar Mirmohebi, an Iranian student in Tehran.
"The part of Obama's speech regarding the Palestinian issue is an important step under new beginnings. ... This is the beginning of a new American policy and this policy is creating a new atmosphere to build the Palestinian state." Nabil Abu Rdeneh, a spokesman for Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas.
"There also hasn't really been any other Western leader who has expressed such commitment to fighting negative stereotypes regarding Muslims." Chandra Muzaffar, president of the International Movement for a Just World think-tank in Malaysia.
"This vision is so out of touch with reality. ... You can have your speechwriters find every good thing a Muslim has ever done. But more modern history is that the Muslim world is at war with the Western world." Aliza Herbst, 56, a spokeswoman for Yesha, the West Bank settlers' council.
"It was very positive. A president with the middle name of Hussein being in Cairo talking about collaboration means a lot for Muslims." Malek Sitez, an international law expert in Kabul, Afghanistan.
"Obama's speech was full of vision, a courageous speech that requires hard work by all parties involved in advancing the Middle East peace process." Shimon Peres, Israel's figurehead president and Nobel peace laureate.
"It was an historic speech. It will have far-reaching impact throughout the region, all throughout the region and beyond. I issued a statement strongly welcoming and supporting what President Obama said." U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, at the White House, prior to a meeting with Vice President Joe Biden.
"I think there should have been apologies from him for the deaths and misery caused by wrong American policies against Muslims, whether it be in our region or in other places." Muhsin Karim, 45, an engineer in Baghdad.
"I challenge any Arab leader to go to the U.S. or the West and quote the Bible like Obama quoted the Quran." Rabah al-Mutawa, a Saudi woman in Riyadh.
"Whatever wounds America has inflicted on the world, they are very deep and they cannot be erased away by only one speech." Pakistani political analyst Siraj Wahab, speaking on Aaj TV.
"This is the first president we see in the United States that is talking about the Palestinian issue, resolving the Palestinian issue in the first six months of his presidency. Usually, it's in the last two months of the presidency." Saad Hariri, leader of Lebanon's parliamentary majority.
 Load-Date: June 5, 2009

 

End of Document
