

Recent newspaper endorsements of the candidates
The Associated Press
October 14, 2008 Tuesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 944 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The Boston Globe endorsed Democrat Barack Obama on its Web site Monday night:
"Come January, a new president will take charge of a nation diminished, an America that is far shakier economically, less secure militarily, and less respected internationally than it was eight years before. The nation needs a chief executive who has the temperament and the nerves to shepherd Americans through what promises to be a grueling period and who has the vision to restore this country to its place of leadership in the world."
Unlike many of his rivals this year of either party, Obama isn't refighting the political or cultural battles of the 1960s. Instead, he is asking Americans to take responsibility for the nation's problems now; no one else will take care of them, and the consequences of years of disunity and profligacy should not be visited upon future generations."
The Globe also said the historical significance of his bid as the first black major-party presidential nominee "is impossible to ignore."
"Voters can make no more powerful statement about America's commitment to inclusion and opportunity than to put forward this man Barack Hussein Obama, son of a father from Kenya and a mother from Kansas as the nation's representative to the world."
The St. Louis Post-Dispatch endorsed Democrat Barack Obama on Sunday:
"Over the past nine months, Mr. Obama, the junior senator from Illinois, has emerged as the only truly transformative candidate in the race. In the crucible that is a presidential campaign, his intellect, his temperament and equanimity under pressure consistently have been impressive. He has surrounded himself with smart, capable advisers who have helped him refine thorough, nuanced policy positions.
In a word, Mr. Obama has been presidential.
Meanwhile, Mr. McCain, the senior senator from Arizona, became the incredible shrinking man. He shrank from his principled stands in favor of a humane immigration policy. He shrank from his universal condemnation of torture and his condemnation of the politics of smear.
He even shrank from his own campaign slogan, "Country First," by selecting the least qualified running mate since the Swedenborgian shipbuilder Arthur Sewall ran as William Jennings Bryan's No. 2 in 1896."
The Daily Sentinel in Grand Junction, Colo., endorsed Republican John McCain on Friday:
"When McCain talks about his ability to 'reach across the aisle' it is more than election year bombast. It is the truth. In fact, according to an analysis by the Washington Times, McCain has often partnered with Democrats. He was with the Democrats 55 percent of the time during the past four years. That is in stark contrast to Barack Obama's record of being with the GOP only 13 percent of the time.
In the age of superheated hyper-partisanship, the ability to bring the two parties together may be more important than any single policy initiative.
We can't recall an election that wasn't billed as 'critical' or the 'most important election ever.' Many of those claims were hyperbolic. This presidential election really is the most important in generations. In addition to the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the country is facing the biggest financial crisis it has seen since the Great Depression. Any solution, and solutions are likely to be elusive, will require bipartisanship that hasn't been seen in Washington for years. That kind of leadership can only be provided by McCain."
The Tennessean newspaper in Nashville endorsed Democrat Barack Obama on Sunday:
"This newspaper believes Obama would be an inspiring choice at an extraordinary time for the nation. The country needs a fresh, energetic face in the White House. Every race for president is important, but the current confluence of events, including the war on terror, mountainous challenges in the economy and a growing strain upon the nation's health care system make the current race a call for vigorous new approaches and enthusiasm. ...
Throughout a lengthy, trying campaign, Obama has simply emerged as the right person at the right time to lead the nation when leadership is at a premium. The nation could ask for no more. Obama has the opportunity to lift the United States at a time when its burdens are heavy. His campaign has carried a theme of 'Yes We Can,' which is exactly the message the nation needs to hear most now."
The Wisconsin State Journal endorsed Barack Obama on Sunday:
"Obama is best-equipped this election to make America feel good about itself again. That's a powerful feeling one that could go a long way toward invigorating our economy and national sense of purpose.
Obama is convincing in his call for a new kind of politics in Washington. His life story and history-making bid for the White House also have forced the rest of the world to view America in a new and more positive way."
The Boston Herald endorsed Republican John McCain on Oct. 1:
"Another sobering start to an exceedingly sobering week but one which points to the need for a political leader who is steady in the face of crisis, mature in judgment and able to reach across the aisle to break the gridlock that has for too long gripped Washington.
That man is Sen. John McCain and at this critical moment in history, this paper is pleased to endorse his candidacy for president of the United States."
The Herald pointed to what it described as McCain's efforts at budget reform and at controlling congressional earmarks and also noted his dramatic personal history as a prisoner of war in Vietnam and said "being commander in chief isn't the place for on-the-job training."
The newspaper had also endorsed McCain during the Republican primaries, over former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney.
 Load-Date: October 14, 2008

 

End of Document
