

RICE NOTEBOOK: You can't see the bombs from here
The Associated Press
January 17, 2007 Wednesday 8:05 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 719 words
Byline: By ANNE GEARAN, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: BERLIN 
Body




Iraq looks placid from 37,000 feet.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice spent a lot of time talking about Iraq's troubles during five days in the Middle East, but the closest she came to the country was on an airplane ride Wednesday as she left the region on a crystal blue day. The flight took Rice smack between the violent cities of Baghdad and Fallujah.
Windows on her plane's left side offered a tranquil view of rolling river valleys. On the right was the sprawling capital, where a suicide car bomb struck a market Wednesday in the Shiite district of Sadr City, killing more than a dozen people. Later Wednesday in Baghdad, a convoy carrying members of a U.S. democracy group was ambushed and four workers, including an American woman, were killed, an official with the group said.
Electronic maps in the Air Force plane's passenger section charted the aircraft's path across what was labeled "Mesopotamia," southern Iraq's name in ancient times.
Rice had made the rounds of Arab leaders to ask for support for President Bush's new plan to secure Baghdad and salvage a war that most Americans, and many Arabs, do not support.
In Kuwait, she met with foreign ministers from eight nations whose governments are friendly to the United States despite broad anti-American feeling among their populations. Rice got what she came for or as much as she might have really expected: a bland statement from the group welcoming the U.S. commitment in Iraq.
Kuwait is next to Iraq, as much of the world was reminded when Saddam Hussein invaded his much smaller, militarily weak neighbor in 1990. But Rice does not talk so often anymore about how Iraqis are much better off since the dictator's overthrow.
Rice's flight to Berlin, where she briefed European leaders on her trip, provided a footnote to the troubled U.S.-Iraq history. Her route to Europe bisected the old southern Iraq "no-fly zone," imposed after the 1990-1991 Gulf War but rendered moot by the U.S.-led invasion in 2003.
Rice is known for keeping a punishing pace on the road. Packed schedules frequently include stops in two or more countries in a single day.
She is not much for taking in the sights, so it was notable when word came that Rice and her party would tour the fabled ruins of the ancient Temple of Luxor in Egypt. It was only about 20 minutes on the schedule, but what a 20 minutes it would be: Sphinxes! An obelisk! Nefertiti!
Alas, Rice was running late so her tour was scrapped.
She might have caught a glimpse of the stunning temple from her motorcade en route to meeting Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, who had invited her to the southern Egyptian city, where the west bank of the Nile holds the celebrated Valley of Kings. Usually the leaders meet in the smoggy capital, Cairo.
While Rice worked, a small group from her party wandered happily among the statues and walls.
Rice began the trip with sessions in Jerusalem and the West Bank intended to energize the stalled Israeli-Palestinian peace process.
As usual, Rice saw Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas in his headquarters in the West Bank town of Ramallah. The complex is barely recognizable as the same one where Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat holed up under Israeli siege in 2002. He died two years later.
The rubble is gone. Construction crews are busy building a mosque and burial shrine for Arafat.
The Bush administration refused to deal with Arafat and clearly was relieved by the election of the moderate Abbas as his successor. The U.S. now is looking for ways to bolster Abbas in his power struggle with Hamas radicals.
Visiting Abbas at the headquarters has symbolic value, showing respect for Palestinian self-rule. But Arafat's lingering presence is a delicate matter for U.S. officials.
Arafat's picture is everywhere in the complex, although Abbas' has often been added alongside. A portrait of a grinning Arafat that once hung over the dais where Rice and Abbas speak to reporters was gone this time.
On previous visits, Rice's motorcade swept past Arafat's temporary glassed-in burial shine without a pause. Other leaders and diplomats would walk over to the building, which resembled nothing so much as a suburban car dealership, to lay a wreath.
This time, Rice's motorcade entered the complex from the opposite direction. She did not pass by the site.
 Load-Date: January 18, 2007

 

End of Document
