

RICE NOTEBOOK: Big bugs, coca leaves, Elmo and buff swimmers as U.S. diplomat circles the world
The Associated Press
March 18, 2006 Saturday 4:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 722 words
Byline: By ANNE GEARAN, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: PAGO PAGO American Samoa
Body




Condoleezza Rice is flying around the world and then some. Whether she breaks a record by a secretary of state will have to wait for a thoughtful assessment free of jet lag.
Rice finishes a 10-day, 31,263-mile odyssey on Sunday that took her to three continents. She crossed four oceans and the international dateline twice. A trip around the world at the equator is only about 25,000 miles.
Her diplomatic tour of Chile, Indonesia and Australia probably breaks Madeleine Albright's 1997 record for the most miles flown by a secretary of state on a single trip, although State Department spokesman Sean McCormack could not say for sure.
The Rice trip included a punishing, 23-hour slog that may set its own State Department record for most continuous miles. She flew from Santiago, Chile, to Windhoek, Namibia to refuel her plane, to Mauritius to refuel again, and then to Jakarta, Indonesia.
That's a strange hopscotch across the Southern Hemisphere. The Air Force, which operates Rice's Air Force Two plane, insists it's faster than a more direct route because of favorable winds.
There were some odd moments along the 60-hour journey around the world.
Bolivian President Evo Morales gave Rice a musical instrument shellacked with coca leaves. The gift stayed behind in Santiago, Chile, where Rice and Morales were attending the inauguration of Chilean President Michelle Bachelet. Coca growing is legal in Bolivia, even if the ultimate use of much of the crop is not.
"There was some question about the legal regulations" imposed by the U.S. Customs Department, McCormack said. "She was very pleased to receive it," he offered, well, diplomatically.
In Windhoek, the tarmac was carpeted with beetles drawn by the lights required for Rice's middle-of-the-night arrival. Really, really big beetles. She did not get off the plane and thus missed the local fauna.
The Windhoek airport is reported to be the site of a secret U.S.-run detention center for terrorism suspects. Reporters who ventured to the darkened edge of the tarmac, in sight of a string of low, nondescript buildings, met a muscular guard with a gun who materialized from the darkness.
A huge and eerily beautiful moon hung over the scene, beetles and all.
In Mauritius, some in Rice's party boarded a bus for a quick, delightful trip to a beach while the plane was refueled and the Air Force switched crews.
In Indonesia, Rice toured an Islamic elementary school that receives U.S. funding. Announcing an $8.5 million grant to bring "Sesame Street" to Indonesia, Rice posed with an actor dressed head to toe in a red, furry Elmo suit.
In Sydney, Australia, Rice got a little rattled by anti-war protesters who interrupted her during a speech. "Sir, do you have something you'd like to say?" Rice asked a young man who called her a war criminal.
"Iraqi blood is on your hands and you can't wash that blood away," he shouted over and over until guards led him away.
Rice had a comeback, noting that democracy is alive and well both in Sydney and in Baghdad, but her voice grew thin.
For a woman who habitually rises at 4:30 a.m. to exercise and bounds into her office two hours later, Rice's trip had a relaxed feel.
Rice actually played the tourist for the first time in her 14-month tenure as the top U.S. diplomat.
She took in a boxing match and several swimming events at the Commonwealth Games in Melbourne, Australia, near the end of the trip. She hung medals around the necks of three Australian swimmers and chatted with swim star Ian Thorpe.
She looked like she was having fun.
What do you do for 60 hours on an airplane? Work, eat, read, sleep, eat some more. And listen to your iPod.
Most of Rice's staff and traveling party were equipped with the popular digital music devices, with tastes ranging from Vivaldi to Tupac.
Rice senior adviser Jim Wilkinson offered a tour of his iPod: Def Leppard, Kid Rock, Kanye West. Speechwriter Chris Brose listens to Spoon, Rufus Wainwright and Miles Davis.
Reading material for reporters and aides ranged from "Assassin's Gate," George Packer's account of the early phase of Iraq reconstruction, to Truman Capote's "In Cold Blood." Rice was reading Doris Kearns Goodwin's new biography of Abraham Lincoln.
"When you fly 60 hours, at some point everyone goes mad," Wilkinson said. "You just pray that it happens at different times along the way."
 Load-Date: March 19, 2006

 

End of Document
