

Rockets are again at the heart of a Mideast war
The Associated Press
January 1, 2009 Thursday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1169 words
Byline: By HAMZA HENDAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt 
Body




Most of the Hamas rockets targeted at Israel are rudimentary, cobbled together in small metal shops in densely populated Gaza. But a growing number are more sophisticated, longer-range weapons, believed made from parts thought to originate in Syria or Iran and smuggled in through tunnels from Egypt.
Despite that new capacity, Hamas' missile arsenal is still much smaller than that of another anti-Israeli militant group, Hezbollah. The Lebanese group, also supported by Syria and Iran, is not fettered by a tight border blockade and finds it easier to obtain arms.
Hamas' homemade rocket, known informally as the Qassam, is grossly imprecise, carries a small warhead of about 22 pounds of explosives. They have caused casualties but more often just spark panic.
The imported missiles, Katyushas, are better guided, travel farther and cause more damage because they have a warhead of up to 44 pounds, roughly the weight of a cannon shell from one of Israel's Merkava tanks.
Such rockets were at the heart of the monthlong war between Hezbollah and Israel in 2006. Hezbollah fired up to 4,000 rockets at Israeli towns even as Israel's warplanes pounded launch sites and its troops took large swaths of southern Lebanon.
Now, it's the turn of the Palestinian militants of Hamas. Israel's air assault in the Gaza Strip, which began Saturday, will be a major test of the military's ability to stop Hamas rocket fire into southern Israel.
Israel vowed to destroy Hezbollah's rocket capabilities in the 2006 war, but while it inflicted heavy losses on the movement's fighters, it couldn't stop missile firing. And Hezbollah's leaders boast the group has rebuilt its arsenal to some 30,000 rockets.
Israeli leaders were sharply criticized at home for failing to break the Shiite militant group in Lebanon. Failure to stop Hamas's rockets could have the same repercussions and leave Hamas more entrenched in Gaza.
Since its fighters violently seized control of the Gaza Strip 18 months ago, Hamas has shifted away from its hallmark suicide bombings of past years, likely because Israel's closure of the tiny territory's border and the West Bank separation barrier have made it hard for bombers to sneak into Israeli cities.
Hamas has taken up rockets as its main weapon because they make such walls irrelevant and enable it to cause casualties without sacrificing fighters in ground raids. Also, while rockets cannot match the firepower of Israel's military, they are highly effective in spreading fear among residents of Israel's southern cities.
Hamas has fired at least 5,500 rockets since seizing Gaza in 2007, killing four Israelis before the air campaign was launched, according to the Israeli military.
But the impact goes far beyond casualties. Fear of the rockets pervades Israeli border towns, constantly sending residents dashing to bomb shelters, hampering businesses, disrupting schools and causing stress-related disorders, like anxiety and bed-wetting. Experts say industries in Israel's south have lost up to $2 million a day because of disruptions from rockets.
Since Israel launched its Gaza offensive, the Hamas barrages have intensified, with hundreds fired, killing four more Israelis, including a soldier.
More significantly, the range of Hamas' rockets has increased, with Katyushas reaching as far as Beersheba, 22 miles from Gaza, nearly twice the range of the Qassams. Israeli officials say at least a tenth of the country's 7 million people and some of its largest cities are now in range of the missiles.
Even more of Israel is within reach of Hezbollah's rockets, but so far that group has stayed out of the conflict. It is widely thought to be reluctant to start hostilities with Israel because it does not want a repeat of the widespread damage to Lebanon from the 2006 war and because of its new place in Lebanon's unity government.
Israeli defense officials estimate that Hamas had 3,000 rockets before the fighting began Saturday and that around 1,000 of those have been either fired or destroyed by Israeli airstrikes.
"Rockets have come to symbolize asymmetrical warfare, but they are more about just symbolism in the Arab world," said Amal Saad-Ghorayeb, a Hezbollah expert in Lebanon. "They are not designed to defeat the enemy, just to wear it down."
Israel has been focused on protecting itself from long-range missiles particularly from Iran and has put in place an elaborate defense system to intercept and neutralize missiles before they hit.
But Israel's high-tech army has yet to find an effective way to deal with the Hamas and Hezbollah rockets, which have shorter trajectories and are fired by small teams, able to dart into an area, fire and run. Since they are in the air for only seconds, they are almost impossible to stop
The Israelis are working on a defense system called "Iron Dome" that would be deployed in southern and northern Israel to shoot down rockets. The system, according to Israeli media reports, may be operational by 2010.
In past days, Gaza residents have seen Hamas fighters firing rockets from inside Gaza City. When the fighters shoot off one of the 6-foot-long Qassams, the rocket visibly wobbles and shakes as it ascends, but 9-feet-long Katyushas fly fast and straight.
"There is no doubt that Hamas has increased its capacity and its expertise in manufacturing and storing missiles and this has been a function of Hamas' total control of Gaza," said Michael Hanna, a Middle East expert at the Century Foundation, a U.S.-based think tank.
Since seizing Gaza, Hamas has sought to build up its military capabilities, including acquiring mortars, anti-tank missiles, roadside bombs and longer-range rockets, according to Israel's Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center, a research body thought to be close to the Israeli military.
The center says the buildup was backed by Iran and Syria and made possible by the smuggling tunnels under the Gaza-Egypt border, which Israeli jets have repeatedly bombed since last weekend.
There has been no sign Hezbollah is shipping rocket parts to Hamas, perhaps because Iran is arming the Palestinians directly. Iran openly gives millions of dollars and has provided training to some Hamas police, but it denies supplying weapons.
Israeli ballistics experts say they have identified Iranian origins of missile components from paint, tool work and Latin lettering on rocket fragments, some of which have been shown to the public. But it hasn't publicly released clear evidence proving Iranian involvement.
An Israeli army spokeswoman, Maj. Avital Leibovich, said Thursday that Hamas' Katyusha rockets originated in Iran and were being smuggled into Gaza. An average of 100 tons of explosives a year is being smuggled in, compared to three or four tons in 2006, she said, saying some of the explosives are used to arm Hamas' rockets.
Israeli military officials say the Katyushas carry an anti-personnel warhead that is small enough to smuggle easily through tunnels and spews out small pellets designed to injure large numbers of people.
 Load-Date: January 2, 2009

 

End of Document
