

Small number of CDC quarantine officers labor on the front lines in fight against disease
The Associated Press
July 14, 2007 Saturday 4:58 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 735 words
Byline: By CARLA K. JOHNSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHICAGO 
Body




A day's work for Lt. Cmdr. Rendi Murphree Bacon can mean face time with lab rats, frozen specimens or a baboon-hunting trophy. It can bring refugees from far-flung nations where the crippling polio virus has resurfaced or a traveler with a human skull souvenir.
The 40-year-old biologist with the U.S. Public Health Service is a quarantine officer for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at O'Hare International Airport, one of the busiest hubs in the world.
Her duties include investigating reports of illness on international flights, checking the health of arriving refugees, inspecting animal products and screening cargo. She can seize articles that lack proper permits.
Once there were hundreds of officers like her working on the front lines to prevent potential health threats from entering the U.S. Now there are fewer than 100 a number the CDC has been rebuilding since the Sept. 11 terror attacks and the 2003 SARS outbreak.
The recent international scare involving Andrew Speaker, the Georgia lawyer with drug-resistant tuberculosis who flew to several countries before being ordered into isolation, has focused fresh attention on health threats on airlines. The quarantine order in Speaker's case was the first issued by the federal government since a patient with smallpox was isolated in 1963, according to the CDC.
CDC quarantine officers have the legal authority to detain anyone who may have cholera, diphtheria, infectious tuberculosis, plague, smallpox, yellow fever, viral hemorrhagic fevers, SARS and pandemic flu.
In an emerging influenza pandemic, Bacon could force the hospital isolation of ill passengers and quarantine even healthy passengers.
"In my lifetime I may never see that, which is fine with me," Bacon says.
The officers don't provide medical care themselves, leaving that to local emergency personnel.
On one recent day, Bacon greeted 35 refugees arriving from Kenya, where polio recently surfaced among Somali refugees.
"How are you feeling?" Bacon asks the crowd, with help from a Kenyan woman who spoke English. "Any sickness in your group? Welcome."
This group was healthy.
Every year, about 120 million people enter and leave the United States through 474 airports, seaports and land border crossings, according to the private Institute of Medicine.
With triumphs in public health such as the eradication of smallpox, the U.S. quarantine system shrank from 600 employees in 1953 to 70 employees in 2004. It now has 83 workers and an $11 million budget.
Last year, Bacon's office handled 311 reports of illness on international flights. It also helped with 14 investigations that involved tracking down passengers who sat near people whose illnesses arose after their flights.
The staff monitored 7,356 refugees and cleared paperwork on 10,125 dogs, 1,767 cats, 4,520 rodents and one turtle.
"There's an art in what they do," says Dr. Georges Benjamin, executive director of the American Public Health Association. "This is detective work at the highest level."
The international effort to track SARS cases turned a spotlight on the system's inadequacies, including underfunding and a lack of medically trained officers, says Benjamin, who led a 2005 Institute of Medicine study on the issue.
Significant progress has been made since then, Benjamin says. But no matter how much money is allocated to the quarantine system, he says, the speed of air travel outpaces the incubation period of many diseases meaning a contagious person can cause an outbreak without so much as a warning sniffle aboard a plane.
In her leisure hours, Bacon is reading "The Great Influenza," the account of the 1918 flu pandemic that killed 50 million to 100 million people worldwide.
"We've allowed ourselves to be vulnerable to a repeat of the 1918 influenza because we take our good health for granted," she says.
She's never bored. Recently she fielded a question from another airport about a man who wanted to enter the country with his own amputated leg bone. She learned that the leg was amputated 17 years ago in a hospital because of an injury.
She reasoned that any hospital would have incinerated the limb if the man had an infectious disease. And time made a difference.
"Those germs would have been long dead with 17 years of drying. So we allowed him to bring his bone in," she says. "I tell you, there's stuff like that all the time."
On the Net:
CDC Quarantine: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dq/
 Load-Date: July 14, 2007

 

End of Document
