

Somalia's two cities reveal the country's divisions
The Associated Press
July 25, 2006 Tuesday 8:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 720 words
Byline: By CHRIS TOMLINSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAIDOA Somalia
Body




Somalia's two main cities tell the tale of a country divided.
In the capital, Mogadishu, an upstart Islamic movement uses the language of holy war and force to empty the streets of gunmen and quash any challengers. In the country's breadbasket, an internationally recognized government floods the streets with foreign gunmen and tells the people not to report what they have seen.
In two towns, two leaders representing two ideas of how to move their country forward prepare for a potentially explosive face-off in a rivalry that has lasted two decades.
For the first time in 15 years, the factions fighting for control of Somalia have been reduced from nearly a dozen to just two. On Tuesday, a U.N. special envoy visited the headquarters of the transitional federal government and the Supreme Islamic Courts Council in hopes of averting what many fear is an inevitable civil war.
Francois Lonseny Fall, the U.N. secretary-general's special representative, flew first to Baidoa, 150 miles northwest of Mogadishu, where residents reported seeing hundreds of heavily armed troops from neighboring Ethiopia roll into town last week.
Both the Ethiopian and Somali governments have denied the accounts. The government can little afford to be seen looking to the country's traditional rival, and a Christian country at that, in these tense times.
Residents said Tuesday the Ethiopians have withdrawn from Baidoa just a few miles to three camps east, west and north. Residents also said they have been told not to venture out to see the camps, or to talk about them with outsiders under threat of severe punishment.
Fall brought with him three international journalists. While he met with President Abdullahi Yusuf, Prime Minister Ali Gedi and Speaker of Parliament Sharif Hassan Sheikh Aden, Somali officials told the photographer and video cameraman not to film the men in their new uniforms, carrying new rifles or driving new four-wheel-drive trucks.
Some of the military officers may have been Ethiopian or Somali; it was impossible to tell.
Fall said one of the subjects of his discussions was the U.N. arms embargo, which bars the introduction of weapons or military equipment into Somalia. A U.N. committee that monitors the embargo has reported that Ethiopia has supplied weapons and advisers to Yusuf's government, something he has vehemently denied. Some supporters of Yusuf's government have suggested easing the embargo so he can build up his security forces.
The No. 2 leader in the Islamic group was much more gracious in welcoming Fall to Mogadishu after a short flight from Baidoa. Almost as soon as Fall walked through the door, Sheik Sharif Sheik Ahmed invited him and any other Muslims to join in afternoon prayers.
Journalists photographed the courts' militiamen and street scenes with ease. Waiters served the delegation Coca-Colas in an apparent attempt to refute rumors that there was a boycott on the most American of soft drinks. The delegation was driven around the capital to show it was now united and its streets empty of gunmen.
Later, Fall was visibly stunned when Sheik Ahmed did not ask anyone, including journalists, to leave when their meeting started. He met Sheik Ahmed's steadfast resolve and unflinching criticism of the United Nations with confidence.
But while officials in Baidoa were receptive when Fall encouraged them to resume peace talks with the Islamic group, Ahmed was adamant about his single demand: all foreign troops must leave Somalia before a deal can be reached.
Ahmed's superior, Sheik Hassan Dahir Aweys, set the policy and he told the Associated Press on Tuesday that it was irrevocable. Aweys has called for a holy war to drive out the Ethiopian troops.
After Tuesday's shuttle diplomacy, Fall had to accept that while both sides were ready for dialogue, the scheduled start, Aug. 1, might be too soon.
In the meantime, Yusuf and Aweys will continue to shape their cities into examples of the Somalia they hope for. The men, both over 70 years old, have competed for years; Yusuf promotes a sectarian Somalia and Aweys seeks to shape the Horn of Africa nation into an Islamic state.
In Baidoa, the soldiers wave the Somali national flag, a field of sky blue with a single white star. In Mogadishu, the Islamic courts carry a black banner, emblazoned with a Quranic verse and a saber.
 Load-Date: July 26, 2006

 

End of Document
