

Somalis willing to risk death to reach rich Arab states in the Gulf
The Associated Press
March 28, 2007 Wednesday 7:13 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 793 words
Byline: By MOHAMED OLAD HASSAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU Somalia
Body




Asha Igal walked into a bus station in Somalia's capital Wednesday and spent a year's savings on a ticket the first step in a journey that she knows might kill her.
Her trip started with a four-day bus ride from the capital to northern Somalia, where she'll find a ride to the bustling port city of Bossaso. From there, she hopes to pay smugglers to ferry her in a crowded, rickety boat across the treacherous Gulf of Aden, and onward to richer Arab countries were she hopes to make new life.
Last week, at least 31 people died during a similar journey when smugglers trying to flee Yemeni security forced hundreds overboard in stormy seas. Survivors said those who resisted were beaten or stabbed.
Even when the smugglers aren't brutal, the boats are overcrowded and barely up to the two-day journey that can cost $200 per person.
But Igal, 17, is among an increasing number of Somalis willing to risk death to escape the chaos and poverty of a bloodstained country. She worked as a maid in Mogadishu but lost her job when her employers fled the capital. Now she hopes to find work as a housekeeper in Yemen or Saudi Arabia.
"I know my death might be inevitable but I have to test my luck," Igal said before handing over her $24 ticket and boarding the bus. "A better life and money to support my mother are my only goals."
The port of Bossaso is the main departure point for tens of thousands of Somalis looking to escape this beleaguered country, which has not had an effective central government in more than a decade.
Mogadishu is in the midst of a growing Islamic militant insurgency, with mortars raining down almost daily. On Wednesday, two people were killed in a gunbattle, including Somalia's former ambassador to the United Arab Emirates.
Last year, about 26,000 people made the voyage to Yemen, mostly refugees from Somalia and Ethiopia. At least 330 migrants died and 300 others were missing, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees said. Waves of migrants leaving West Africa for Europe make similarly perilous journeys.
In December, boats carrying migrants sank when Yemeni coast guard patrols fired on them, and dozens were believed killed. Two months later, more than 100 people died when a boat in a migrant convoy capsized, and smugglers in the other vessels forced passengers overboard so they could reach shore quickly, according to a Yemeni human rights activist whose group helped the survivors.
Some of the bodies found after last week's incident were mutilated and several women were raped during the voyage, the UNHCR said. The smugglers stabbed passengers who resisted jumping overboard or beat them with wooden and steel clubs. Some of those who went into the water were attacked by sharks.
A video released by UNHCR showed a girl's body in the surf and clothes strewn across the beach. Men carried bodies from the water and placed them in shallow graves on the beach. At least 90 people were still missing.
"We were extremely shocked when we discovered dead bodies on the beach," one of the survivors, Zeinab Ali Addon told UNHCR.
With renewed fighting in Somalia, the U.N. warned the migrant crisis is likely to worsen.
"We fear that until the root causes of poverty, persecution and conflict are addressed, desperate people who have nothing left to lose will continue to risk their lives," said Erika Feller, UNHCR's assistant high commissioner for protection.
Yemen, one of the poorest Arab countries, is struggling with the refugee influx. All but 4,000 of the 88,000 registered refugees in Yemen are Somali, UNHCR said.
Another danger for migrants is rampant piracy off Somalia's nearly 2,000-mile coastline. The pirates are trained fighters and use speedboats equipped with satellite phones and Global Positioning System equipment. Armed with automatic weapons, anti-tank rocket launchers and grenades, they target passenger and cargo vessels.
The route from Bossaso to Yemen is a well-known arms smuggling route that became a destination for human traffickers in the past decade, said Isaac Munyae of the International Organization for Migration in Nairobi, Kenya.
Migrants who reach Yemen face an uncertain future.
"Those who get through without being detected get hooked up with international criminal networks who exploit them because they have to find jobs," Munyae said.
Aden Abdirisaq Shino, 30, said he would soon leave Mogadishu and was willing to risk his life because he cannot get a job.
"I am a Muslim, I believe I have a date to die," Shino said. "So instead of living a desperate and frustrated life, I am going to venture out."
Associated Press writers Salad Duhul and Mohamed Sheikh Nor in Mogadishu, Ahmed Al-Haj in San`a in Yemen, Elizabeth A. Kennedy in Nairobi, Kenya, and Frank Jordans in Geneva contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: March 29, 2007

 

End of Document
