

Somalia government troops advance toward the capital as Mogadishu's clan leaders debate allegiances
The Associated Press
December 27, 2006 Wednesday 10:43 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 906 words
Byline: By SALAD DUHUL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU Somalia
Body




For months, Radio Jowhar broadcast nothing but news bulletins and readings from the Quran, under strict orders from an Islamic militia that called love songs sacrilegious.
But on Wednesday, music played again after the Islamic forces that once controlled most of southern Somalia made a hasty retreat.
"Now we feel we have freedom to do what we want," said Siid Abdulle Kheyre, 25, who was celebrating after Somali government soldiers, backed by troops from Ethiopia, recaptured Jowhar and bore down on Mogadishu, the capital.
The Council of Islamic Courts seemed invincible after seizing Mogadishu in June, but their forces are no match for Ethiopia, which has the strongest military in the Horn of Africa.
Ethiopian forces crossed the border Sunday to reinforce the internationally recognized Somali government, which was previously bottled up in the town of Baidoa, 140 miles northwest of Mogadishu.
The capital became the militias' final stronghold Wednesday, but their control seemed tenuous. Islamic courts fighters were seen changing out of their uniforms into civilian clothes. Women selling qat the popular leafy stimulant banned by the militias crowded the streets.
Taxi driver Hussein Mudde said he hopes his livelihood will improve if the Islamic militias leave.
"Since the Islamic courts have taken control, people are walking instead of hiring a taxi," he said. "They don't have money because the Islamic courts closed the cinemas and music halls. Poets and artists and performers have been jobless."
On their drive to the capital Wednesday, Ethiopian and Somali government troops drove Islamic fighters out of Jowhar. As troops entered the town, an independent radio station began blasting Western music, which the militias had banned.
In Baidoa, government officials introduced journalists to a dozen soldiers who said they were forced to fight on behalf of the militias. "I was in school before the war, but the Islamic courts forced me into their army," said Mohamed Hussein Mohamed, 15.
The U.N. refugee agency said Wednesday it was "particularly concerned about reports of civilians, including children, being forcibly recruited to join the fighting."
In the past, refugees from Somalia had complained of forced enlistment by the Islamic Courts Union, UNHCR spokesman Ron Redmond said in Geneva.
Mogadishu residents close to the Abgal clan said elders were debating whether to drop their support for the Islamic movement and side with the government, to avoid a bloody struggle for the capital.
The residents discussed the issue on condition of anonymity for fear of retribution from Islamic militias, who want to rule Somalia by the Quran.
Government spokesman Abdirahman Dinari confirmed that talks for the peaceful surrender of Mogadishu were under way.
"Islamic courts militias are already on the run and we hope that Mogadishu will fall to our hands without firing a shot," Dinari said.
An Islamic courts official said, meanwhile, that his forces were preparing for a new phase in their battle.
"Our snakes of defense were let loose, now they are ready to bite the enemy everywhere in Somalia," said Sheik Mohamoud Ibrahim Suley. He did not elaborate, but some Islamic leaders have threatened guerrilla warfare including suicide bombings in Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital.
Kenneth Menkhaus, professor of political science at Davidson College in North Carolina, said the war will likely be "prolonged, inconclusive, low-intensity and asymmetrical."
"This is a war that will not end any time soon," he said. "Neither side has the capacity to defeat the other."
Somalia's complex clan system has been the basis of politics and identity here for centuries. But fighting between clans has prevented Somalia from having an effective government since 1991. That's when clan-based warlords overthrew a dictator and turned on one another.
Competition for control of Mogadishu since 1991 has involved the Abgal and Habr Gadir clans, who joined to support the Islamic council earlier this year.
If Abgal elders switch sides, probably in return for key government posts, urban warfare between the Abgal and Habr Gadir clans seems certain to resume.
The Islamic courts tried to supplant the influence of the clans by appealing to Somalis as Muslims. Many Somalis were grateful for the order the courts' militias imposed.
But many also chafed at the movement's strict enforcement of Islamic codes.
"Since the Islamic courts have taken control, people are walking instead of hiring a taxi," said Hussein Mudde, a taxi driver in Mogadishu. "They don't have money because the Islamic courts closed the cinemas and music halls. Poets and artists and performers have been jobless."
Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi said Tuesday he had unconfirmed reports that as many as 1,000 people had died and 3,000 were wounded since the fighting began on Saturday.
The Red Cross reported 850 people injured at hospitals supported by the relief agency in Mogadishu and Baidoa, but had no figure for fatalities.
The U.N. refugee agency said Wednesday it was readying staff, trucks and emergency relief items in neighboring Kenya and Ethiopia for up to 50,000 fleeing Somalis.
The agency said it had received reports of thousands of displaced civilians within Somalia fleeing the fighting.
Associated Press writers Mohamed Olad Hassan in Mogadishu, Les Neuhaus in Baidoa, Chris Tomlinson in Nairobi, Kenya, and Sarah DiLorenzo in New York contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: December 28, 2006

 

End of Document
