

Somalia's warlords agree to disarm and join the army, says official
The Associated Press
January 12, 2007 Friday 7:01 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 811 words
Byline: By MOHAMED OLAD HASSAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU Somalia
Body




Somalia's warlords met with the president Friday and promised to enlist their militiamen into the army, a major step toward bringing calm to this city after years of chaos. But outside the peace talks, a clan fight over parking left at least six people dead.
The meeting between President Abdullahi Yusuf and the clan warlords aimed to establish enough security in the capital so international peacekeepers can deploy and protect the government until it can establish an effective police force and army.
"The warlords and the government have agreed to collaborate for the restoration of peace in Somalia," said government spokesman Abdirahman Dinari. "The agreement means they have to disarm their militia and their men have to join the national army."
One of Somalia's most powerful warlords, Mohamed Qanyare Afrah, told The Associated Press after the meeting the clans were "fed up" with guns and ready to cooperate.
But another warlord issued a warning to the government.
"If the government is ready to reconcile its people and chooses the right leadership, I hope there is no need to revolt against it," said Muse Sudi Yalahow, whose fighters control northern Mogadishu. "If they fail and lose the confidence of the people, I think they would be called new warlords."
The government was only able to enter Mogadishu after Ethiopian troops routed an Islamic movement that had controlled most of southern Somalia for the past six months. Now it must deal with clan divisions that have spoiled the last 13 attempts to form an effective government since the last one collapsed in 1991.
There are believed to be around 20,000 militiamen in Somalia and the country is awash with guns. Other obstacles include remnants of the Islamic movement some are believed to be hiding in Mogadishu and resentment among some Somalis of Ethiopia's intervention in the war.
The fighting Friday began when clan gunmen fired a rocket-propelled grenade and briefly exchanged gunfire with government troops. The exchange, which one militiaman said was sparked by a dispute over where to park an armored car, left at least six dead and 10 wounded.
Since Tuesday, there have been several attacks on government forces and their Ethiopian allies, and five people have been killed, witnesses said. In addition, assailants threw a grenade into a Mogadishu hotel Thursday, killing a government soldier, said lawmaker Jini Boqor. The hotel is used by Somalia's police chief.
The United States, United Nations and the African Union all want to deploy peacekeepers to stop Somalia from returning to clan-based violence and anarchy. But so far no African governments have responded to the call for an 8,000-strong peacekeeping force for the country, although Uganda has indicated it is willing to send 1,500 peacekeepers as part of a wider mission.
On Thursday, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urged the international community to redouble efforts to stabilize Somalia and reiterated his concern that U.S. attacks were harming civilians and could have "unintended consequences."
Eritrean President Isaias Afwerki said in a statement on a government Web site Friday that U.S. involvement in Somalia is creating turmoil in the Horn of African region and would "incur dangerous consequences." Eritrea and Ethiopia are bitter rivals.
Ethiopian and U.S. forces are pursuing three top al-Qaida suspects believed to be in Somalia. The U.S. has repeatedly accused the Somali Islamist movement of harboring the suspects, wanted in connection with the 1998 U.S. Embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania.
Recent air attacks against the fleeing Islamic movement have killed 70 nomadic herdsmen in the last four days, British charity Oxfam said Friday, citing its local Somali partner organizations. It said the deaths occurred near Afmadow, about 220 miles southwest of Mogadishu.
The United States has said it conducted one airstrike and no civilians were killed. The Ethiopian military has used attack helicopters against militants in Somalia.
The U.N. food agency said it has started distributing food to 18,000 Somalis, including many women and children who fled fighting in the south. The agency said ongoing military activity meant they could not get food to 190,000 more people who were desperately in need.
Somalia has not had a functioning government since clan-based warlords toppled dictator Mohamed Siad Barre in 1991 and then turned on each other, sinking the country of 7 million people into chaos.
Ethiopia sent in troops Dec. 24 to attack the Islamist movement. Most of the Islamic militiamen have dispersed, but some fled south toward the Kenyan border and the Indian Ocean. Others hiding in the capital have threatened to wage guerrilla war.
Associated Press Writers Salad Duhul in Mogadishu, Celean Jacobson in Johannesburg, South Africa, and Edith M. Lederer at the United Nations contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: January 13, 2007

 

End of Document
