

Somalia: A look at the state of the troubled African nation
The Associated Press
January 2, 2007 Tuesday 6:50 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 653 words
Byline: By CHRIS TOMLINSON, Associated Press Writer
Body




Somalia now has the best chance in 15 years to end anarchy and establish an effective government, following the defeat of an Islamic militia that had controlled most of the country's south.
Here, in question-and-answer form, is a look at Somalia's future:
Q: Is the fighting over?
A: Probably not. Islamic leaders say they are now willing to talk to the government about sharing power, but they will fight a guerrilla war against the Ethiopian troops who backed government forces and helped bring about their defeat. The warlords are also back in Mogadishu and some are re-establishing their militias to extract concessions from the government and possibly challenge it.
Q: What is the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia?
A: It was formed in 2004 after two years of talks in neighboring Kenya between clan leaders, and encompasses five major clan groups and dozens of factions, each a potential spoiler capable of extreme violence. Seats in the parliament and in the Cabinet are assigned based on clan. The government is recognized by the United Nations, but has had little military strength. It is trying to build a strong army, while depending on Ethiopian forces for now.
Q: What is the Council of Islamic Courts?
A: Without a government, Somalis turned to religious leaders to resolve disputes according to Islamic law. One of those leaders, Sheik Hassan Dahir Aweys, is a fundamentalist who has wanted an Islamic government for Somalia for decades. He is also on a U.S. list of people with suspected ties to al-Qaida. Aweys united small courts across the country to form the council and transform it into a military force that defeated clan warlords in June and then moved on the government.
Q: Why were the Islamic Courts fighters defeated so quickly and where are they now?
A: Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi sent at least 4,000 well-trained troops into Mogadishu on Dec. 24. Using artillery and MiG fighter jets, they pushed back the Islamic militiamen, many of whom deserted after just a few hours under the withering artillery barrages. The council also reportedly split between hard-core fundamentalists and moderates who were ready for peace talks after the first battles. After two weeks of fighting, the Islamic militia evaporated into the forested southern tip of Somalia, squeezed between the ocean and Kenya, which supports the government and the U.S.-led war on terror. The whereabouts of Aweys and the other leaders are unclear.
Q: What's next?
A: The United Nations, the United States and the African Union all say the government needs urgent help. More than 500,000 people have been left homeless by the worst flooding in 50 years and hundreds of thousands more depend on food aid even in the best of times. Since the government's own military is weak and Ethiopian soldiers are unpopular and their prime minister says they will pull out soon the government also wants peacekeepers to help maintain order.
Q: Didn't the United Nations go to Somalia before, and didn't it end badly?
A: Somalia was at civil war from 1987-1991, when the last effective government fell apart and warlords began fighting over the country. The fighting exacerbated an already devastating drought and the United Nations intervened to stop a famine that killed 500,000 people. In 1993, U.S. troops tried to capture one of the worst warlords, but a Black Hawk helicopter was shot down and 18 U.S. servicemen were killed. After that, the U.S. pulled out and the U.N. operation was scaled down.
Q: Will it be different this time?
A: It's hard to say. This is the first government since 1987 that does not face an organized military threat, at least for now. A proposed peacekeeping unit would be mostly African troops and much smaller than the U.N. operation in the early 1990s. The Somali people have also suffered much over the last 15 years, and most are likely to embrace any regime that will bring them peace and stability.
 Load-Date: January 3, 2007

 

End of Document
