

The new frontier: Mideast stocks
The Associated Press
April 4, 2007 Wednesday 2:54 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 928 words
Byline: By JOANNA SLATER, The Wall Street Journal
Body




Even as many of the world's markets climbed last year, stock prices in the Persian Gulf tanked. Now, with global markets unsettled, some shares in the Middle East are looking steadier.
Consider this: The Morgan Stanley Capital International Arabian Markets stock index (excluding Saudi Arabia) is up 3.3 percent in dollar terms since the start of this year. In contrast, the MSCI Emerging Markets Index, which has highfliers like China and India, has risen 2.7 percent in the same period, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average is essentially flat.
Those gains in the Mideast, while relatively modest, are prodding foreign investors to take a fresh look at companies in places like Kuwait, Oman, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. These nations are flush with wealth from oil and natural gas, and bursting with infrastructure spending. Markets in Egypt and Jordan are up, too.
Of course, these markets also respond to political turmoil elsewhere in the region, such as the recent detention of British military personnel by Iran. Last week, that tension, coupled with local concerns, helped drive shares lower in the U.A.E. and Saudi Arabia.
Still, "institutional players are starting to look at the region more seriously," said Mark Gordon-James, a fund manager at Aberdeen Asset Management PLC in London, which has $8 billion in emerging markets. His firm, for example, is examining stocks in Qatar and Oman.
Last year, stock markets in the region were the last place investors would have wanted to be. A three-year rally driven by local individual investors came to an end in 2006, when several markets collapsed by 50 percent or more.
Now, the apparent lack of connection between these markets and the rest of the world is an important part of their appeal. When stocks from China to Europe to the U.S. tumbled in lock step in late February, the search for places isolated from the broader downturn became a priority.
For emerging-market managers, that means going beyond places like India and Brazil to "frontier markets." Stock markets in the Persian Gulf which generally comprise Saudi Arabia, the U.A.E., Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman and Qatar fit the bill.
These markets aren't "just off the radar screen, they're off the map to such an extreme that the countries aren't in any global indices," said John Niepold, a portfolio manager who focuses on the Middle East at Emerging Markets Management LLC, Arlington, Va., which has $21 billion in client assets.
There are plenty of reasons for caution. The possibility of a geopolitical crisis whether continued instability in Iraq or a conflict involving Iran casts a shadow over these markets. So, too, does the relative lack of transparency by listed companies.
The overall momentum is toward greater openness in the region, both in terms of what companies disclose and where foreigners can invest. The most important constraint is that foreigners aren't permitted to buy shares in Saudi Arabia, the region's largest market, though they can invest in some Saudi mutual funds. Certain stocks in the U.A.E. also are subject to restrictions on foreign investment.
What is interesting about last year's meltdown, said Andrew Howell, an analyst at Citigroup Inc. in New York, is that it wasn't caused by a major change in economic fundamentals but by the bursting of an enormous speculative bubble. "Dutch tulip-type stuff," he said.
Today, prices in the region have fallen to reasonable levels while earnings prospects for high-quality companies are bright, which some see as translating into a run-up in stock prices.
"These are extremely attractive markets, and they aren't terribly well known outside the region," said Kingsmill Bond, an emerging-markets strategist at Deutsche Bank AG in London.
Mr. Bond recommends investors explore companies with high market values in the U.A.E., Egypt and Qatar, but prepare for periods when local investors drive markets lower. "At the end of the day, these aren't markets driven by foreign investors," he said.
Oil companies would seem like a natural choice to an outside investor, but energy firms in the region remain firmly in government hands and far from the gyrations of the stock market. The same isn't true, however, for banks, property developers and telecommunications companies.
In a recent report, Merrill Lynch & Co. suggested that large, inexpensive companies with good dividends as compared with the emerging-market average would be a good bet. These would include: Emaar Properties PJSC of the U.A.E.; Public Warehousing Co., a logistics and warehousing company in Kuwait that operates under the name Agility; and Industries Qatar QSC, a diversified steel, petrochemical and fertilizer company.
According to Citigroup, Emaar has a market value of $18 billion and trades at 11.8 times its 2006 earnings. Agility, meanwhile, trades at 10.1 times its 2006 earnings, with a market capitalization of $5.5 billion, said Thomson Financial. This year, Agility's stock is up 26 percent.
There still is comparatively little analysis on companies in the region. "I can't just push a button and get 10 reports on every company," said Mr. Niepold of Emerging Markets Management. "That isn't a bad thing in our view," he said, since it means there are pockets of opportunity to be discovered with a little digging.
As awareness of the region spreads, that will probably change. Citigroup, which tracks just six companies in the region, plans to expand its research in the Middle East in the coming months to include finance and property stocks. Deutsche Bank also is ramping up its research coverage.
 Load-Date: April 5, 2007

 

End of Document
