

The Hague, a city for international justice for 100 years, is about to add one more court
The Associated Press
April 17, 2006 Monday 9:19 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 592 words
Byline: By ARTHUR MAX, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: THE HAGUE Netherlands
Body




In the century since The Hague hosted the world's first peace conference, this city of palaces and canals has become home to an array of international courts, law enforcement agencies and weapons watchdogs.
Among the best known are the U.N. tribunal that heard the case of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, the new International Criminal Court set up to try future war crimes and the International Court of Justice, better known as the World Court.
One more may soon join the list: The U.N.-backed special court for Sierra Leone has asked to make use of facilities at the ICC to try Charles Taylor, the former president of Liberia.
Taylor is accused of directing rebels in Sierra Leone to rape and murder, recruit children and traffic in guns and diamonds during a decade-long civil war. Judges at the Sierra Leone court deemed it too risky to hold his trial in Sierra Leone, where Taylor's supporters could cause trouble.
The choice of The Hague was natural. Dutch police are experts in guarding the world's most infamous war crimes suspects and shuttling them between jail and courthouse. The government has "host country" agreements with the courts for providing visas and facilities for jurists, witnesses and journalists.
The Hague has been a center of international diplomacy since 1899, when Russia's Czar Nicholas called a conference in neutral Holland with the goal of a 10-year freeze on Europe's madcap arms race.
"The Hague proved an inspired choice," wrote the U.S. historian Barbara W. Tuchman. With its smiling citizens, flowering summer countryside, windmills and canals, "the once quiet town, a 'gracious anachronism' of brick houses and cobblestone streets, bustled with welcome."
Parts of the city of 700,000 retain a 19th-century veneer, despite its sprawling glass city hall and tall, imaginative office blocks.
Still small and manageable, it nonetheless is home to some 150 international organizations and 12,000 expatriates, many of them with healthy U.N. salaries and expense accounts, who contribute 5 percent of the city's economy.
Jurists from the various courts mingle often for drinks and gossip.
"It's a small community here," said Rosalyn Higgins, the British president of the World Court.
But the proliferation of courts can be bewildering.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, housed in the former headquarters of an insurance company, was created in 1993 to prosecute Balkan war suspects. It has indicted 161 people and convicted 44 of them.
Last month, Milosevic died of a heart attack in his prison cell just months before his four-year-long trial was to end.
The International Criminal Court set up shop in 2002 in a former telecommunications tower, overcoming a vigorous U.S. campaign to block its creation. The world's first permanent war crimes tribunal, it received its first, and so far only, suspect last month the former Congolese warlord Thomas Lubanga. It also is investigating war crimes suspects in Uganda, the Central African Republic and the Sudanese district of Darfur.
The International Court of Justice, often called the World Court, occupies the neo-Baroque Peace Palace in the city center.
Among its landmark opinions were findings that the use of nuclear weapons is legal in some circumstances and that Israel's security barrier in the West Bank violates international law.
The Hague also is home to the Europol police agency; Eurojust, an umbrella group for European prosecutors and the U.N chemical weapons watchdog, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
 Load-Date: April 18, 2006

 

End of Document
