

The real charlie wilson
The Associated Press
December 21, 2007 Friday 3:35 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1119 words
Byline: By NANCY DEWOLF SMITH, The Wall Street Journal
Body




On Saturday from 8-10 p.m. ET, the History Channel will show "The True Story of Charlie Wilson," a documentary featuring some of the real people portrayed by actors in the new movie, "Charlie Wilson's War." The gist of both accounts is that Mr. Wilson, a flagrantly hedonistic congressman from Texas, basically won the Cold War by almost single-handedly making sure that Afghan mujahideen got the money and weapons they needed to defeat the Soviet army. There is something offensive about this notion, though Mr. Wilson at least has the grace to point out that the real credit goes to the Afghan people. Repellent in another way is the confident claim being revived in the wake of the movie that supporting Afghans gave the world Islamic terrorism.
But nuances and complicated facts can get in the way of a good story, and it's crucial in Hollywood particularly to have a Westerner in the leading role. The History Channel documentary, too, can tell only a very abbreviated version of events recounted in George Chile's book, "Charlie Wilson's War." So it features the juicy bits. They include Mr. Wilson's formative experience as a boy, when his dog was deliberately killed by a local politician, an act Mr. Wilson avenged by contributing to the politician's electoral defeat. From revenge we move to a eureka moment many years later, when Mr. Wilson says he was sitting in a Las Vegas hot tub full of babes and happened to catch "Gunga Dan" Rather reporting from the edges of the Afghan War. After a visit to the hospitals and refugee camps of Pakistan, Mr. Wilson, like most foreigners who witnessed the suffering and sacrifice there, becomes committed to the Afghan cause. He and his muse, a rich, vivacious anticommunist named Joanne Herring, set out to serve it any way they could.
At first, that meant money and, later, weapons, with Mr. Wilson using his influence on House appropriations subcommittees to steer multimillions in covert funds to the resistance. He and Ms. Herring lured purse-string holder Rep. Clarence Long into an overseas trip that would make him a fan of the mujahideen. Yet the most spectacular seduction, to hear Mr. Wilson tell it, involved Egypt's defense minister. Egypt had warehouses of Soviet-made weapons, which could be sent to the mujahideen to help maintain the fiction (never really a secret) that the resistance was not getting foreign support, but using only captured guns. So Mr. Wilson went to Cairo with an American lady he knew and offered the Egyptian official a private belly dance. Re-enacted here with narration by Mr. Wilson and the wriggler herself, the performance involved a sword which she whirled about before moving it provocatively below the man's belt.
When Mr. Wilson first went to war with the bureaucracy, the official U.S. strategy for Afghanistan was to help the resistance put up only a token fight that no one expected them to win. Yet while Mr. Wilson battled a cynical CIA, he created hurdles of his own. A Justice Department probe of congressional drug use nearly snared him (the Vegas hot tub) and on the eve of a crucial trip to Pakistan to arrange funding for the mujahideen, Mr. Wilson drank nine Manhattans, hit a car on Washington's Key Bridge and fled the scene.
We're meant to understand that since no one was hurt, it's a good thing he wasn't nabbed that night, since otherwise the Soviet Union might be alive and well today. But what a reckless stunt, with so much at stake. Mr. Wilson's admirers tell us in the documentary that he drank in part because the plight of the Afghan people was so depressing. Yes it was, but many millions of Afghans, and thousands of foreigners who lived and worked among them (I was among them for several years), saw far worse things, more often, than Mr. Wilson ever did. Incapacitating depression was a luxury few of them could afford or gave in to.
"The True Story of Charlie Wilson" is full of holes, but on balance it is a fascinating account of how a few nutballs, in the right place at the right time, were able to affect the course of history. The documentary does give Ronald Reagan the only time he is mentioned here credit for ordering that Afghans receive the Stinger missiles which turned the tide of the war after 1986. Certainly, many other people in the U.S. and around the world, worked to support the Afghans. Without Mr. Wilson and his female helpers, however, it is possible that the wheels in Washington might have turned too slowly for the resistance to have survived as a viable force until 1986.
At the end, "The True Story" tries to shoot down criticism that by arming the Afghans, Mr. Wilson gave us the Taliban and al Qaeda. What it doesn't say is that arming the Afghans was not the real mistake anyway recruiting and training Arabs was. Many resistance leaders and mujahideen argued passionately against the importation of foreign fighters, whom they neither wanted or needed, and generally loathed. The Afghans were vetoed by American and other officials who claimed that the Arabs were necessary to give the impression that this was a pan-Muslim jihad against Soviet communism, and not a Western war.
Mr. Wilson could not have foreseen this sort of gross error, and in all likelihood he neither knew or cared about the details. He was a kind of bull in a china shop, driven by a desire to whup the Russkies and help the noble Afghan, and way too gung-ho to think beyond the excitement of it all. Like the poor, barefoot Afghans, though, he saw a great wrong and tried to right it. Can those of us who have attempted nothing and accomplished less claim a higher moral ground?
The last episode of the HBO series, "Extras: The Extra Special Series Finale" first aired earlier this week, and most of the coming repeats (beginning midnight Saturday-1:30 a.m. ) are at odd hours. They are nonetheless worth looking for, since nowhere will you find a funnier, more clever or more devastating indictment of the fame game. British actor-writer Ricky Gervais plays former humiliated movie extra Andy Millman, now the humiliated star of a stupid, smutty sitcom. Why can't he have the luck of an old friend who has rocketed to success and respect playing opposite Clive Owen in movie about Byron? Never mind that Mr. Owen, in a parody of himself, is a jerk rejecting an extra hired to play a prostitute because, he sneers, a man with his handsome looks would never bed a less-than-beautiful woman: "If I'd just slept with that, I wouldn't throw the food on the floor, I'd throw it in her face."
Yes, it's a cruel world in show biz. Andy's inexorable descent into hell even includes a shouting match with chef Gordon Ramsay before he finally sees the light and heads for a truly uplifting exit.
 Load-Date: December 22, 2007

 

End of Document
