

Today on the presidential campaign trail
The Associated Press
May 14, 2008 Wednesday 11:20 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1382 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Edwards gives long-awaited endorsement to Obama ... Obama tries to build support with working-class voters in key swing state ... Clinton says she won't quit race before primaries end June 3 ... McCain's wife sells more than $2 million in Sudan-related investments ... Clinton pledged delegate switches to Obama in Maryland ... Obama, Clinton sign joint fundraising agreement with the DNC ... Obama picks up endorsement of abortion rights organization
Edwards chooses Obama
GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. (AP) Democrat John Edwards endorsed former rival Barack Obama on Wednesday, a move designed to help solidify support for the party's likely presidential nominee even as Hillary Rodham Clinton refuses to give up her long-shot candidacy.
Edwards made a surprise appearance here with Obama, as the Illinois senator campaigns in a critical general election battleground state.
The endorsement came a day after Clinton defeated Obama by more than 2-to-1 in the West Virginia primary. The loss highlighted Obama's challenge in winning over the "Hillary Democrats" white, working-class voters who also supported Edwards in significant numbers before he exited the race in late January.
Edwards, who received a thunderous ovation when Obama introduced him to a crowd of several thousand, said, "brothers and sisters, we must come together as Democrats" to defeat McCain. "We are here tonight because the Democratic voters have made their choice, and so have I."
Edwards also praised Clinton, saying "we are a stronger party" because of her involvement and "we're going to have a stronger nominee in the fall because of her work."
Obama woos working-class voters in Michigan
WARREN, Mich. (AP) Democrat Barack Obama, campaigning in a state that poses several challenges for him in the fall, appealed to working-class voters Wednesday with a pledge to pump billions of dollars into efforts to revitalize the nation's manufacturing sector.
One day after blue-collar workers overwhelmingly rejected him in West Virginia's presidential primary, Obama came to this auto-making suburb of Detroit to announce plans to create an "advanced manufacturing fund" to promote industries likely to keep jobs in the U.S. rather than move them overseas.
Obama couched it as part of a previously announced plan to spend $150 billion over 10 years to develop and deploy "clean technologies."
He also stepped up his criticisms of Republican John McCain, saying the Arizona senator offered no solutions when he told Michigan voters in January that many of their lost jobs would not come back.
McCain spokesman Tucker Bounds said the GOP candidate "is committed to breaking down trade barriers so American automakers can sell more cars abroad" and has outlined a plan "to provide real job training and assistance for displaced workers."
Clinton to continue in Democratic contest
NEW YORK (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton on Wednesday renewed her pledge to remain in the Democratic presidential contest until the final primaries next month.
"You don't walk off the court before the buzzer sounds," Clinton said in a televised interview with CNN. "You never know, you might get a three-point shot at the end."
Clinton also hinted that the protracted contest with rival Barack Obama would end shortly after the primaries conclude and predicted the party would select a nominee before its national convention in August.
The former first lady spoke to the major news networks in Washington as her campaign looked to parlay her lopsided victory in West Virginia into a last-ditch effort to persuade superdelegates to give her flagging candidacy another look.
Badly trailing Obama in fundraising and cash on hand, Clinton was hosting some 50 of her top national fundraisers at her home Wednesday to seek their help in raising money to compete in the final five contests in Kentucky, Oregon, Puerto Rico, Montana and South Dakota.
McCain's wife sells Sudan-related investments
WASHINGTON (AP) Cindy McCain, whose husband has been a critic of the violence in Sudan, sold off more than $2 million in mutual funds whose holdings include companies that do business in the African country.
The sale on Wednesday came after The Associated Press questioned the investments in light of calls by John McCain, the Republican presidential nominee-in-waiting, for international financial sanctions against the Sudanese leadership.
McCain, who was campaigning in Ohio, said neither he nor his wife were aware of the Sudan-related holdings.
Last year, at least four presidential candidates divested themselves of Sudan-related holdings.
According to McCain's personal financial disclosure, Cindy McCain's investments include two mutual funds American Funds Europacific Growth fund and American Funds Capital World Growth and Income fund that are listed by the Sudan Divestment Task Force as targets for divestment.
Maryland Clinton delegate switches to Obama
SUITLAND, Md. (AP) A pledged delegate for Hillary Rodham Clinton said Wednesday he now supports Barack Obama, becoming the first pledged delegate to publicly announce he is switching sides in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination.
Jack Johnson, county executive of Prince George's County outside Washington, D.C., said he believes Obama has sealed the nomination and that Clinton has "fallen a little short of the line" needed to be the party's candidate in the general election.
Democrats apportion delegates to their August convention based on the size of the vote candidates receive in each state primary. Clinton won 36 percent of the vote in Maryland's Democratic primary on Feb. 12. She was awarded 28 pledged delegates, including Johnson. However, delegates are not required to uphold their pledge and can change their vote at the convention.
Dems raise money together
WASHINGTON (AP) Democratic presidential rivals Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton can agree on one thing they want their party to have more money, no matter who is the nominee.
The Democratic National Committee announced Wednesday that it had signed agreements with both campaigns to begin raising money together.
As part of the agreement, donors can contribute up to $33,100 to the newly created Democratic White House Victory Fund. Most of the money will benefit whichever candidate becomes the nominee.
Officials at the DNC said Chairman Howard Dean has been working with both campaigns on the idea since February.
At the end of March, the DNC had $5.3 million in the bank, compared to $31 million for the Republican National Committee.
NARAL Pro-Choice America backs Obama
NEW YORK (AP) Democrat Barack Obama has won the endorsement of NARAL Pro-Choice America, a leading abortion rights advocacy organization that has supported rival Hillary Rodham Clinton throughout her political career.
The organization announced the endorsement of its political action committee on Wednesday.
"Today, we are proud to put our organization's grass-roots and political support behind the pro-choice candidate whom we believe will secure the Democratic nomination and advance to the general election," NARAL President Nancy Keenan said in a statement.
Officials said NARAL's political committee board was about evenly divided among Clinton and Obama supporters and that the decision to endorse was hard fought. Ultimately, the board voted unanimously to support the Illinois senator.
DAILY TRACK
Barack Obama holds a 6-point lead nationally over Hillary Rodham Clinton, 50 percent to 44 percent, in the Democratic presidential race, according to the latest Gallup Poll Daily tracking update.
THE DELEGATE BREAKDOWN
Barack Obama: 1,887
Hillary Rodham Clinton: 1,718
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton is in Washington. Barack Obama discusses the economy with workers and holds a rally in Michigan.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain raises campaign cash in Columbus, Ohio.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"For Barack Obama, I think he ought to kiss Johnny Edwards on the lips to kill this 41-point loss." David "Mudcat" Saunders, an Edwards adviser, on the timing of Edwards' endorsement after Obama's loss in West Virginia.
STAT OF THE DAY:
About six in 10 Democratic voters in West Virginia supported Hillary Rodham Clinton's proposal to suspend the federal gas tax for the summer and three-quarters of those voted for her, according to exit polls.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: May 15, 2008

 

End of Document
