

Today on the presidential campaign trail
The Associated Press
May 28, 2008 Wednesday 11:43 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1239 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama, under pressure, considering Iraq visit ... Obama: Poor job of teaching foreign languages hurting U.S. in world economy ... Obama willing to give Clinton most of delegates from Mich., Fla. ... Pop star Ricky Martin backs Clinton ... All 3 presidential candidates pledge to seek an end to violence in Darfur ... Obama wins support from four superdelegates; loses one to Clinton
Obama considering Iraq visit
WASHINGTON (AP) Barack Obama is considering a visit to Iraq this summer, his first since becoming a presidential candidate.
Obama revealed his plans to The New York Times. He has been under criticism from Republican rival John McCain for failing to visit Iraq since 2006. Obama also declined McCain's invitation for a joint trip, saying he didn't want "to be involved in a political stunt," according to a report Wednesday on the newspaper's Web site.
"I think that if I'm going to Iraq, then I'm there to talk to troops and talk to commanders," he said in the interview. "I'm not there to try to score political points or perform. The work they're doing there is too important."
Obama's campaign has been considering an overseas trip since last year to beef up his foreign policy credentials, but the extended fight for the Democratic nomination with Hillary Rodham Clinton has delayed those plans.
Obama spokesman Bill Burton confirmed that a trip is under consideration, but said no final plans have been made.
Obama took his only trip to Iraq in January 2006, when he traveled as part of a congressional delegation. McCain has been criticizing him for not returning, and the Republican Party joined the attack Wednesday by launching an online clock to count the days since Obama last visited.
"This is about leadership and learning," McCain said in Nevada, where he was campaigning. "To say that we're failing in Iraq and not succeeding does not comport with the facts on the ground, so we've got to show him the facts on the ground."
Dems seek end to delegate dispute
WASHINGTON (AP) With the Democratic presidential nomination in sight, Barack Obama is willing to give rival Hillary Rodham Clinton the lion's share of delegates from Florida and Michigan but is stopping short of her demand to fully recognize both states.
The Democratic National Committee is trying to work out a compromise to the long-running dispute over Michigan and Florida. In violation of party rules, the two states held primaries in January and were stripped of their delegates. The DNC's Rules and Bylaws panel meets Saturday.
The DNC could decide to send half the delegates to the convention. Another option is to seat all the delegates with half a vote. Then the issue becomes how should those votes be split between Clinton and Obama.
Whatever decision is made during Saturday's meeting delays a resolution of the Democratic contest, just as Obama is fewer than 50 delegates from the 2,026 delegates needed to win the nomination.
Clinton has been pushing for the DNC to seat all 368 delegates from Florida and Michigan. She won both contests after all the candidates had agreed not to campaign in either state. Obama also wasn't on Michigan's ballot.
Obama: Weakness in foreign languages hurts U.S.
THORNTON, Colo. (AP) Democrat Barack Obama said U.S. students must learn a second or even third language or the country will struggle to compete in a global economy.
"We as a society do a really bad job teaching foreign languages, and it is costing us when it comes to being competitive in a global marketplace," the Illinois senator said at a school here Wednesday. He said India has a "huge advantage" because most people speak English besides their native language.
Obama speaks a little Spanish and some rusty Indonesian from his childhood, aides said.
"Understand that my starting principle is, everybody should be bilingual or everybody should be trilingual," he said.
Obama said immigrant students must learn English eventually so they can fully assimilate into American society. But he said he was open to teaching them in their native languages if that is the best way to help them learn.
Ricky Martin endorses Clinton
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Pop star Ricky Martin is backing Hillary Rodham Clinton ahead of Puerto Rico's primary on Sunday.
The Grammy-winning singer on Wednesday said Clinton has shown a commitment to the needs of the Hispanic community.
Martin is one of the territory's top-selling artists, whose hits including "She Bangs" and "Livin' la Vida Loca."
Clinton recently wrapped up a three-day campaign swing in Puerto Rico and is expected to return Friday. Her family has been campaigning there in her absence.
On Wednesday former President Clinton encountered nearly as many picture-snapping American tourists as Puerto Rican voters as he strolled through a narrow street in colonial Old San Juan.
"Right now, I'm just trying to get a big turnout," Bill Clinton told The Associated Press as he and his daughter Chelsea worked a crowd of cheering onlookers along a rope line.
Presidential candidates urge end to Darfur
WASHINGTON (AP) In a rare show of bipartisan unity, the three presidential candidates lent their names to a newspaper ad Wednesday accusing the Sudanese government of genocide in the Darfur region and urging an end to the violence.
Democrats Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton joined Republican nominee-in-waiting John McCain in signing the ad in The New York Times.
"We stand united and demand that the genocide and violence in Darfur be brought to an end," the ad says, followed by the candidates' signatures. The ad says the candidates also have pledged to seek an end to the violence in Darfur if elected.
It was paid for by the SaveDarfur Coalition.
Obama gets four superdelegates; loses one to Clinton
WASHINGTON (AP) Barack Obama picked up support from superdelegates in Colorado, Oregon and Guam on Wednesday, but lost one in the Virgin Islands to Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Kevin Rodriquez on Wednesday became the first Obama superdelegate to publicly switch to Clinton.
At least 13 have gone the other way.
"I decided to switch because that's my right," he told The Associated Press on Wednesday. "I don't want to say why I decided. It's not about me ... It's about America and what's best for America."
Two state Democratic party chairs Pat Waak in Colorado and Meredith Wood Smith in Oregon announced they will vote for Obama, who also added Oregon superdelegate Wayne Kinney. Guam superdelegate Ben Pangelinan also came out for Obama.
DAILY TRACK
Barack Obama holds a 6-point lead nationally over Hillary Rodham Clinton, 50 percent to 44 percent, in the Democratic presidential race, according to the latest Gallup Poll Daily tracking update.
THE DELEGATE BREAKDOWN
Barack Obama: 1,981 45 short of the nomination
Hillary Rodham Clinton: 1,780
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton met with voters in South Dakota. Barack Obama toured a school and held a town hall meeting in Colorado.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain raises campaign cash in Reno, Nev., and Los Angeles.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Why don't you go learn something about the monument?" Hillary Rodham Clinton, to reporters at Mount Rushmore who asked whether she or former President Clinton might one day be added to the monument.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Sen. Bob Kerrey of Nebraska won South Dakota's Democratic presidential primary in 1992 with 40 percent of the vote. Sen. Tom Harkin of Iowa garnered 25 percent and Bill Clinton got 19 percent.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: May 29, 2008

 

End of Document
