

TV Lookout: highlights (and lowlights) for the week ahead, Nov. 18-24
The Associated Press
November 17, 2007 Saturday 5:00 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 763 words
Byline: By FRAZIER MOORE, AP Television Writer
Body




He's a retired show-biz veteran about to settle down, at last, in a retirement home.
Then Bert O'Riley, 80, learns that his long-estranged daughter has been in a car crash and is hospitalized in intensive care. He learns something else: that he's the instant guardian of a 10-year-old granddaughter he never knew he had.
Bert is startled by this turn of events, while the child isn't happy being stuck with an old man she had only heard her mother say bad things about. They've both got some catching up to do.
Legendary actor Ernest Borgnine (himself age 90) stars in "A Grandpa for Christmas," a new Hallmark Channel film. Juliette Goglia plays Becca, the little girl who gets her Christmas wish. Tracy Nelson is the daughter whose accident leads to the family's reconciliation. Richard Libertini and Jamie Farr are also featured.
A warm family film about mending the past for the holidays, "A Grandpa for Christmas" premieres Saturday at 9 p.m. EST.
Other shows to look out for:
 He can be found gracing the $20 bill. But viewed elsewhere, Andrew Jackson's image remains problematic even after two centuries. So vehemently did he champion the cause of the common man that his political style was called "Jacksonian Democracy." But his contempt for Native Americans was such that he brutally displaced thousands of them, blazing the infamous "Trail of Tears." And yet, as president, the man nicknamed "Old Hickory" paid off the national debt, took on corruption in Washington, D.C., and secured westward expansion. A man both lionized and damned, even today, he's the subject of new documentary on the History Channel. "Andrew Jackson" airs Sunday at 8 p.m.
 The leader of the world's largest animal rights organization is profiled in the provocatively titled "I Am an Animal: The Story of Ingrid Newkirk and PETA." Co-founded by Newkirk in 1980 and now claiming more than one million members, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals seeks "total animal liberation," meaning a dietary ban on meat or dairy, as well as no aquariums, circuses or fur and leather products. PETA opposes using animals for medical research, and even seeing-eye dogs. In this portrait of Newkirk, this new HBO documentary chronicles the staging of a protest against "fur abuser" Jean Paul Gaultier, as Newkirk and her PETA colleagues take over his Paris boutique, smearing fake blood on themselves and the store windows. The film premieres Monday at 8 p.m.
 Khartoum's newfound oil wealth set the stage for conflict with the long-neglected region of Darfur in western Sudan, where rebel groups emerged to claim a share of the country's burgeoning wealth. In response, the Sudanese government armed a proxy militia and unleashed the so-called "Devils on Horseback" on the rebels and civilian farmers in a stampede of brutality. Over the past four years, at least 200,000 people have been killed, 2.5 million driven from their homes, and mass rapes used as a weapon of war. Now PBS' "Frontline" asks why the international community and the United Nations has failed to stop the slaughter, in the documentary "On Our Watch," airing Tuesday at 9 p.m. (check local listings).
 A new season of PBS' "Great Performances" begins as Daniel Barenboim, Pinchas Zukerman and Zubin Mehta lead a special birthday gathering. It's "The Israel Philharmonic 70th Anniversary Gala Concert," with music including the Bruch Violin Concerto No. 1 and Brahms' first great orchestral work, the D-minor Piano Concerto No. 1. The concert was recorded in Tel Aviv last December and premieres Wednesday at 9 p.m. (check local listings), marking another milestone: the start of "Great Performances'" 35th year.
 Feel your love for practical gadgets on "Cool Tools," a new DIY Network series focusing on home improvement tools you may or may not know about, but will probably want when you discover them. You'll learn about gloves that help you see in the dark, tape measures you can write on, and mowers that seem bred from a racecar. Each episode also takes you on factory visits to see how some of the coolest tools are made. The series launches Thursday with a full evening of "Cool Tools:" four half-hour editions starting at 8 p.m., followed by a one-hour special, "Cool Tools: The Hardware Show," at 10 p.m. Among its highlights: a portable workbench that folds flat in seconds and a power source for your tools that's so small it hooks on your belt. Your heart beating faster yet? Chris Grundy is host.
EDITOR'S NOTE Frazier Moore is a national television columnist for The Associated Press. He can be reached at fmoore(at)ap.org
 Load-Date: November 18, 2007

 

End of Document
