

TV Lookout: highlights (and lowlights) for the week ahead, Oct 8-15
The Associated Press
October 4, 2006 Wednesday 3:40 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 845 words
Byline: By FRAZIER MOORE, AP Television Writer
Body




It was the world's first man-made dam a massive wall that protected Egypt's capital, Memphis, from the raging flood waters of the Nile five thousand years ago. Overseeing the construction was Menes, the first pharaoh of Egypt's first dynasty and a fellow determined to impose his will on Mother Nature with the help of innovative engineering technology.
Menes is one of the reigning figures in a new History Channel series, "Engineering an Empire," which focuses on the architectural triumphs of numerous great civilizations. Future episodes will examine the Aztecs, Greece and China, up through the age of Napoleon.
But the series begins with a two-hour portrait of a land where, nearly two millennia before the Romans fashioned their first mud huts, ancient Egyptians created edifices so vast and architecturally sophisticated they remain among the most impressive structures ever built.
Without benefit of computers, cranes, trucks or power tools, Egypt's mighty pharaohs commissioned monumental masterpieces pyramids, temples, fortresses, harbors and canals whose scale, beauty and craftsmanship still boggle the mind. Pioneering Egyptian engineers "knew they wanted to represent the power of the pharaohs," says one expert, "and yet, looking at the landscape, they only had Nature to guide them."
With dramatizations, computer graphics and interviews, "Egypt" ranges from the First Dynasty in 3000 B.C. to the end of the reign of Ramesses the Great in 1212 B.C. Actor Peter Weller is host when "Engineering an Empire" premieres Monday at 9 p.m. EDT.
Other shows to look out for:
 Daniel Pearl and Omar Sheikh were both highly educated individuals from privileged backgrounds, but they saw the world very differently. Pearl became an accomplished journalist and spent most of his career reporting from the Muslim world as part of a quest to promote cross-cultural understanding. Sheikh was radicalized by events that he regarded as the global persecution of Muslims, and became an Islamic militant who chose violence to achieve what he believed in. After 9/11, their paths crossed tragically in Pakistan, when, in early 2002, Pearl, reporting on al-Qaida for The Wall Street Journal, was kidnapped by Sheikh and executed a week later. A new documentary, "The Journalist and The Jihadi: The Murder of Daniel Pearl" tracks their parallel lives through the words of Pearl's family, friends and colleagues, as well as FBI agents and State Department employees involved in negotiations for Pearl's release, and those who knew Sheikh best, including former schoolmates and associates. Narrated by journalist Christiane Amanpour, the film airs on HBO at 8 p.m. Tuesday, which would have been Pearl's 43rd birthday.
 Here's the OTHER new series inspired by "Saturday Night Live." Screwball comedy "30 Rock" will join freshman drama "Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip" on the NBC schedule when it premieres at 8 p.m. Wednesday. Created and starring former "SNL"-er Tina Fey, "30 Rock" takes a zany inside look at the workings of a fictitious NBC series called "The Girlie Show," a sketch-comedy show where Fey plays head writer, and fellow "SNL" alum Tracy Morgan plays a wacked-out performer on the show-within-a-show. The third corner of this loony triangle: Alec Baldwin as a too-smooth-to-be-sane network exec who loves to meddle. As a silly send-up of TV behind the scenes, "30 Rock" rocks.
 To live and dye in New York: "Hair Trauma" will give viewers a hair-raising look at the life of a stylist to the stars. The six-episode reality series captures the highlights and kinks of LaVar Hair Designs, the Manhattan salon run by Ellin LaVar, whose client roster includes Donnatella Versace, Farrah Fawcett, Bono, Whitney Houston, Kevin Bacon, and Venus and Serena Williams. Also on hand: LaVar's staff, including her brother, a former opera singer, and her fun-loving but trouble-making sister, whom Lavar has previously fired more than a dozen times. Clearly a cutting-edge show, "Hair Trauma" premieres Wednesday at 10 p.m. on WE: Women's Entertainment.
 East-West cooking is a simple thing on "Simply Ming." In 26 new episodes, Chef Ming Tsai cooks up a brand-new array of master rubs, sauces, and vinaigrettes designed to bring zing to a variety of delectable dishes. From a tangy, rich Kaffir Lime Avocado Puree to a spicy, sweet Ginger Jicama Kiwi Salsa, Ming creates the foundations for simple East-West meals sure to impress anyone from the novice cook to the discerning foodie. Guest chefs joining him include Sara Moulton, executive chef at Gourmet magazine, Mary Ann Esposito of PBS's "Ciao Italia," Hubert Keller of Fleur De Lys in San Francisco, Eric Ripert of Le Bernardin in New York, and Jasper White of Summer Shack in Boston. And among his side trips, Ming will take viewers to the Dunkin' Donuts test kitchen for a few tricks of the donut-baking trade. PBS' "Simply Ming" begins its fourth season Saturday at 12:30 p.m. (check local listings).
EDITOR'S NOTE Frazier Moore is a national television columnist for The Associated Press. He can be reached at fmoore(at)ap.org
 Load-Date: October 5, 2006

 

End of Document
