

TV Lookout: highlights (and lowlights) for the week ahead, Aug 20-26
The Associated Press
August 16, 2006 Wednesday 5:09 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 841 words
Byline: By FRAZIER MOORE, AP Television Writer
Body




Moses leading the Israelites in flight from Egypt to the Holy Land that dramatic tale is a cornerstone of Judaism, and plays a key role in Christian and Islamic traditions. But does ancient archaeology support the biblical story of the Exodus?
After six years of research, investigative journalist Simcha Jacobovici claims to have discovered the answer to this riddle. In "The Exodus Decoded" he sets forth his theory on how events unfolded, with plausible scientific explanations for each facet of the story from the deadly series of plagues that beset the Egyptians to Moses' parting of the sea.
In addition, Jacobovici has tracked down and identified ancient relics that support his theories, including a 3,500-year-old image of what could be the lost Ark of the Covenant, and the biblical Joseph's royal signet ring.
"The science of archaeology has looked at the Exodus and kept coming up blank," James Cameron, co-executive producer with Jacobovici, told The Associated Press, calling his partner a genius for how "he connects the dots between people working in disparate fields of archaeology who don't step back and look at it from a holistic perspective."
Jacobovici said Cameron was an invaluable counselor on the use of special effects for "The Exodus Decoded," including a computer-generated image of a massive "time machine" that helps guide viewers through the complex chronology.
"What we were trying to do here was actually imbed a documentary in a virtual environment," he said "kind of what `The Matrix' did for feature films."
The two-hour documentary premieres Sunday at 8 p.m. EDT on the History Channel.
Other shows to look out for this week:
 The fall season kicks off Monday with the debut of Fox's "Vanished," a suspenseful melodrama about a U.S. senator's wife (young and beautiful, of course) who disappears into thin air during a gala dinner held in her honor. FBI Agent Graham Kelton (series star Gale Harold) is brought in to lead the investigation, and he immediately clashes with the distraught senator and husband. How could Sara Collins have been abducted at such a public event? And why? And is it possible it's all a sham in which other members of the senator's family, or even Sara herself, could be conspiring? The questions pile up, and so do the suspects. This could be fun. It premieres at 9 p.m., an hour after the second-season premiere of "Prison Break." Watch out! Those inmates are on the run!
 It isn't far into HBO's "When the Levees Broke" that then-FEMA chief Michael Brown is declaring, "We are ready, we are going to respond." He is speaking to CNN one day before Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans; events didn't turn out as he forecast. Directed by Spike Lee, "When the Levees Broke: A Requiem in Four Acts" frames the tragedy that unfolded instead as a morality play. Some 100 witnesses are consulted, from major figures like Mayor Ray Nagin and Louisiana Gov. Kathleen Blanco, to activists like Al Sharpton and Harry Belafonte, to traumatized residents of the flooded 9th Ward District. The Louis Armstrong classic, "Do You Know What It Means to Miss New Orleans," is heard as the film begins. Spike Lee means for viewers not to miss any of the devastation and neglect. Parts one and two of the film air Monday from 9 to 11 p.m., with the conclusion airing Tuesday at 9 p.m.
 "On Native Soil: The Documentary of the 9/11 Commission Report" captures the events of that terrible day as well as the nation's civilian and government response. Created with the support and involvement of 9/11 victims' families, the film includes never-before-seen interviews with family members. It also details the efforts by a group of citizens who worked together to ensure that the 9/11 Commission would be convened and information disseminated to the public in the "The 9/11 Commission Report." Narrated by Kevin Costner and Hilary Swank, and directed by Emmy Award-winning news producer Linda Ellman, the film will premiere, commercial-free, on Court TV at 10 p.m. Monday.
 While the world marked the 25th anniversary of the first reported cases of AIDS this summer, one important story was largely ignored. ABC News' "Out of Control: AIDS in Black America" zeroes in on the AIDS epidemic among blacks, an epidemic that is spreading fast but has attracted little attention. Black Americans make up 13 percent of the U.S. population but account for over 50 percent of all new cases of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. That infection rate is eight times the rate of whites. Terry Moran reports on the crisis in "Primetime" Thursday at 10 p.m., exposing the failure of leadership that has allowed the epidemic to spiral into a crisis. Included in the report is a group interview conducted by the late Peter Jennings shortly before the ABC anchorman's cancer diagnosis. Jennings, who played a significant role in the program's conception, speaks with a group of HIV-positive black men in Atlanta.
EDITOR'S NOTE Frazier Moore is a national television columnist for The Associated Press. He can be reached at fmoore(at)ap.org
 Load-Date: August 17, 2006

 

End of Document
