

U.N. nuclear watchdog agency reports Iran to the U.N. Security Council
The Associated Press
February 4, 2006 Saturday 1:51 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 817 words
Byline: By GEORGE JAHN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIENNA Austria
Body




The U.N. nuclear watchdog Saturday reported Iran to the U.N. Security Council in a resolution expressing concern that Tehran's nuclear program may not be "exclusively for peaceful purposes." Iran retaliated immediately, saying it would resume uranium enrichment at its main plant instead of in Russia.
The landmark decision by the International Atomic Energy Agency's 35-nation board sets the stage for future action by the top U.N. body, which has the authority to impose economic and political sanctions.
Still, any such moves were weeks if not months away. Two permanent council members, Russia and China, agreed to referral only on condition the council take no action before March.
Twenty-seven nations supported the resolution, which was sponsored by three European powers Britain, France and Germany and backed by the United States.
Cuba, Syria and Venezuela were the only nations to vote against. Five others Algeria, Belarus, Indonesia, Libya and South Africa abstained, a milder form of showing opposition.
Those backing the referral included India, a nation with great weight in the developing world whose stance was unclear until the vote.
Iran reacted immediately, saying a proposal by Moscow to enrich Iranian uranium in Russia was dead.
"Commercial scale uranium enrichment will be resumed in Natanz in accordance with the law passed by the parliament," Javad Vaeidi, deputy head of the powerful National Security Council, told Iran state television in a telephone interview from Vienna.
Iran removed some U.N. seals from its main uranium enrichment facility in Natanz, central Iran, on Jan. 10 and resumed research on nuclear fuel including small-scale enrichment after a 2 1/2-year freeze. Full-scale uranium enrichment can produce the fissile core of nuclear warheads.
The Kremlin had proposed that Iran shift its large-scale enrichment of uranium to Russian territory to allay world suspicions that Iran might use the process to develop a nuclear bomb.
Vaeidi also said that after approval by the Iranian council, Iran would stop honoring an agreement with the IAEA allowing its inspectors broad powers to monitor and probe Tehran's nuclear activities.
Iran says it wants to enrich only to make nuclear fuel, but concerns that it might misuse the technology accelerated the chain of events that led to Saturday's Security Council referral.
The IAEA resolution refers to Iran's breaches of the nuclear nonproliferation treaty and lack of confidence that it is not trying to make weapons.
It expresses "serious concerns about Iran's nuclear program." It recalls "Iran's many failures and breaches of its obligations" to the nonproliferation treaty, and it expresses "the absence of confidence that Iran's nuclear program is exclusively for peaceful purposes."
It requests IAEA Director General Mohamed ElBaradei to "report to the Security Council" steps Iran needs to take to dispel suspicions about its nuclear ambitions.
The resolution calls on Iran to:
 Reestablish a freeze on uranium enrichment and related activities.
 Consider whether to stop construction of a heavy water reactor that could be the source of plutonium for weapons.
 Formally ratify an agreement allowing the IAEA greater inspecting authority and continue honoring the agreement before it is ratified.
 Give the IAEA additional power in its investigation of Iran's nuclear program, including "access to individuals" for interviews and to documentation on its black-market nuclear purchases, equipment that could be used for nuclear and non-nuclear purposes and "certain military-owned workshops" where nuclear activities might be going on.
The draft also asks ElBaradei to "convey ... to the Security Council" his report to the next board session in March along with any resolution that meeting might approve.
Agreement on the final wording of the text was reached just hours before Saturday's meeting convened, after Washington compromised on Egypt's demand that the resolution include support for the creation of a nuclear weapons-free zone in the Middle East. Egypt and other Arab states have long linked the two issues of Iran's atomic ambitions and Israel's nuclear weapons status.
The resolution recognized "that a solution to the Iranian issue would contribute to global nonproliferation efforts and ... the objective of a Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction, including their means of delivery."
A Western diplomat at the meeting said the United States felt strongly about not linking Israel to nuclear concerns in the Middle East when it considers Iran the real threat. But the Americans relented in the face of overwhelming European support for such a clause.
Support for Iran shrank after Russia and China lined up behind the United States, France and Britain the other three permanent Security Council members earlier in the week.
Associated Press reporter Palma Benczenleitner in Vienna contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: February 5, 2006

 

End of Document
