

Ugandan election campaign showcases the promises and problems of democracy in Africa
The Associated Press
February 22, 2006 Wednesday 6:29 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 712 words
Byline: By CHRIS TOMLINSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KAMPALA Uganda
Body




Uganda's presidential campaign has demonstrated both the vitality and difficulty of elections in Africa, showing that democratic challenges are now commonplace but entrenched regimes will work ruthlessly to stay in power.
President Yoweri Museveni appeared likely to win the most votes Thursday, according to opinion polls, but it was unclear whether he would get more than 50 percent and avoid a runoff. He faces four challengers.
After several democratic, but problematic, elections in a number of African countries, Uganda's vote is important not only for 27 million Ugandans, but as a symbol for the rest of the continent.
Ethiopia held the most free elections in its history in May, but the vote was marred by widespread irregularities. Some parliamentary contenders appealed the tallies, but in every case, the ruling party candidate emerged the winner.
International observers monitoring November's elections in Zanzibar said voting was mostly free and fair; opposition leaders complained their supporters were denied the right to vote.
Thursday's vote in Uganda will be the first multiparty elections in the country since 1980, a step forward after nearly 20 years of Museveni's "no party politics." But the same change to the constitution that allows the participation of political parties also removed term limits on the president. That means the 62-year-old Museveni can run as many times as he wishes.
Museveni has frustrated international donors by intervening in neighboring Congo's civil war, increasing military spending and refusing to retire from politics as he had promised to do in 2001.
Last year, European nations suspended more than $32 million in budget support for the government. The cuts were accompanied by a warning that Uganda appeared to be backsliding into authoritarian rule.
After opposition leader Kizza Besigye returned from self-imposed exile last year to run against Museveni for a second time, prosecutors charged him with treason and rape. Besigye was charged in both civilian and military courts, and Museveni supporters also filed civil cases seeking to nullify Besigye's candidacy.
Besigye has repeatedly proclaimed his innocence and accused the government of trumping up the charges so he would spend more time with his attorneys than on the campaign trail.
"This election right from the word go could never have been free of fair," Besigye told The Associated Press. "Our objective was to further expose this position both locally and internationally and to use what ever space would be available during the campaign to educate the population ... and to hopefully use the tremendous popular discontent to override all of these unfair situations."
The New York-based Human Rights Watch has expressed concern about Uganda.
"Since 1986 under Museveni, (Uganda) has been the apple of the donor's eye, but now it is beginning to spoil," said Jemera Rone, the group's East Africa coordinator. "The demotion of Museveni from international favor to a slightly lower rank is an acknowledgment of a lot of the structural problems and corruption this government has been plagued with."
Museveni's government has rejected all criticism. He advised Ugandans to ignore "foreign meddlers" and bragged about how he strengthened his power.
"The constitution had been written in such a way that the president had been held hostage to parliament, I therefore didn't know whether to resign ... or use the old discredited means of force," Museveni said. "Recently we amended the constitution to make it impossible for parliament to paralyze the president."
There are many groups monitoring Uganda's vote. Human Rights Watch has appealed to the observers to consider more than the mechanics of balloting when judging whether the elections are free and fair.
The key question will be whether the elections are conducted freely. And how the international community treats Uganda after the elections will help determine how sincerely other African leaders embrace democracy in the future.
In Chad, President Idriss Deby recently changed the constitution so that he can run again.
"The motivation of course is to stay in power, which is something that seems to grab hold of a lot of leaders across the world when the time comes for them to transition gracefully," Rone said.
 Load-Date: February 23, 2006

 

End of Document
