

UNDATED: the habit. ...
The Associated Press
February 8, 2006 Wednesday 5:50 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 1271 words
Body




Feb. 7
Egyptian Gazette, Cairo, on freedom of speech:
In a desperate bid to assuage anger, which has erupted across the Muslim world over published cartoons lampooning the Prophet Muhammad, Western media and officials cite freedom of speech as an excuse. The argument is downright faulty. It adds insult to injury. Who said that free speech should be offensive to others?
The drawings, which first appeared in a Danish newspaper and later reprinted in European papers, mock a symbol that means a lot for Muslims. For sure, freedom of the press is not without limits or responsibility. The European media, which provoked Muslims' fury, have not shown enough consideration by running those images, deemed offensive by ordinary Muslims inside the West and far beyond.
The cartoons could not have been more ill-timed. They were published with the West and Muslims seen on a collision course. No one could be happier than propagators of racial hatred and advocates of the "clash of civilizations" theory.
In a multicultural world, the media everywhere should demonstrate a sense of responsibility and play a role in bringing people of different faiths closer. By no means does this lofty role contradict freedom of expression.
On the Net:
http://www.eltahrir.net
Feb. 7
Asahi Shimbun, Tokyo, on prophet drawings:
Freedom of expression is a basic right that shores up democracy. But how far are people allowed to assert that right when it comes into conflict with the dignity of religion? This vexing question is raised afresh by the row between European countries and the Islamic world over caricatures satirizing the Islamic prophet Mohammed.
While we are concerned about the violence, we also fear that, as things stand, the ruckus could isolate Islamic countries and Muslims scattered in many parts of the world. Calm must be restored early so that the conflict will not become a "clash of civilizations."
In the Islamic world, only a handful of countries allow their people to freely express their views. And partly because they are left behind by Western countries in economic terms, many people in those countries have twisted sentiments.
Under such circumstances, what would happen if some in the West press Muslims with "the prophet's cartoons" by wielding the principle of freedom of expression? It is obvious that such action would be seized by agitators and used as an outlet for venting the pent-up frustration of the discontented masses.
Freedom of expression is something very precious. But consideration must also be given to the religion that is the very basis of people's thoughts.
Moderation must be exercised to securely protect such freedoms.
On the Net:
http://www.asahi.com/english/Herald-asahi/TKY200602080152.html
Feb. 8
Corriere della Sera, Milan, Italy, on democracy and elections:
The resounding victory of Hamas in the Palestinian elections has raised a problem that was debated already in the 1940s: Whether democracy could kill democracy.
Because Hamas is not only a terrorist organization, but it's also an expression of Islamic fundamentalism that refuses the very idea of democracy.
But we cannot turn a blind eye on Islam. The problem is too big, and it's also a new and different problem. In the Western world, dictatorship was preceded by democratic systems and was installed through an instrument, elections, of the pre-existing democracies. Therefore, it was correct to ask oneself if a democracy must consent to its own suicide.
It's not true that if there's an election then there's a democracy, or that elections produce democracy. On its own, an election is merely a way to choose the leaders.
So elections are an instrument of democracy if, and only if, they take place in the context of a system of democratic structures, and only if they are managed by parties that profess democratic values.
On the Net:
http://www.corriere.it
Feb. 5
Bergens Tidende, Bergen, Norway, on violent Islamic protests of cartoons:
At the moment, it can seem that caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad printed in Denmark's Jyllands-Posten and then Norway's magazines have ignited a fire that can be hard to put out. ...
Many are surprised by the violent reactions in some Muslim countries over what some see as relatively harmless cartoons. But the rage in Muslim countries must be seen as an expression of a deep and lasting frustration over humiliation by the West, life in poverty, and a future that seldom looks bright.
In that situation, the cartoons were seized by extremists and turned into a fighting cause. If these extremist groups were waiting for a symbolic cause, they got it from Jyllands-Posten and magazines...
It started as a case about free expression. The right to speak out, even provocatively, stands.
We cannot and will not accept religious extremists answering the printed word, no matter how offensive, by burning embassies.
But even we defenders of free speech must understand that political authorities, in this case (Norwegian) Foreign Minister Jonas Gahr Stoere, also have other considerations when trying to control a situation that can seem out of control.
In that case, dialogue can be more beneficial than protests based on strong and inflexible principles.
On the Net:
http://www.bt.no
Feb. 8
The Times, London, on peaceful protests:
Forget all this namby-pamby peaceful protesting. The only way to grab a politician's ear is to do so with force. That's the loud and clear message from the authorities. The police record clearly shows they take a softly-softly approach toward religious extremists who threaten violence, but a sledgehammer approach when faced with peaceful protesters. The Islamic protests last weekend in London have led to questions in Parliament about why the police failed to arrest those holding placards advocating mass murder. Meanwhile, the police have shown no delay in arresting peaceful protesters. ... Police have arrested 28 people protesting peacefully for taking part in "unauthorized demonstrations" in the "designated area" around Parliament since August 2005. The Met arrested 57 peaceful protesters outside an arms trade exhibition in September 2005. These protesters went so far as to dance in the street; a few climbed on top of a standing train.
You can see the mistake made by these deluded activists. They clung to the belief that the Government rewards those who play by the rules with a listening ear. But the Serious Organized Crime Act makes it an offense to protest peacefully outside Parliament. The Government sees no difference between dancing in the street and inciting beheading.
Peaceful protests are the steam valves for a democratic society, so by criminalizing all protests, no matter how participants behave, the temptation is to say: "What the hell, let's go for it!" And this is exactly what has come to pass. Just look at Fathers4Justice. Hundreds of law-abiding families and lobbyists tried for years to reform the failing family justice system. Then suddenly a gang of thugs invades Parliament, throws condoms at the Prime Minister and posts letters of excrement to the head of the Family Court and before you know it bam! The family courts are reformed.
This is a dangerous message for any government to send out to its people. For it is a drawn-out process to achieve change peacefully. Those treading the path must feel their efforts may be rewarded. Instead, the vast powers of the police to arrest are influenced by politics and political correctness. On one hand they are tough on the peaceful; on the other they are soft on the thugs who march under the banner of Islam.
On the Net:
http://www.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,6-2029731,00.html
End Editorial Rdp
 Load-Date: February 9, 2006

 

End of Document
