

UNICEF wants a positive message from the World Cup
The Associated Press
June 29, 2006 Thursday 6:11 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 1052 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




This World Cup has been anything but peaceful at times on the pitch. UNICEF and others remain confident that soccer's world showcase can still deliver a powerful message for good.
But Tokyo Sexwale, a member of South Africa's 2010 tournament organizing committee, says players have to remember their responsibilities to the millions watching. Bad behavior has its consequences.
Sexwale, a former political prisoner who served more than a decade behind bars with Nelson Mandela at Robben Island, says he understands "a moment of tension" can happen in any sport. Still players need to remember that nothing escapes the TV camera.
"This product is a global product. It's a television product," he said Wednesday. "It brings each one of things that you do and you don't do into the living rooms of people. So there's a greater responsibility.
"It's a game, it's beautiful, but it must be handled with responsibility."
The World Cup has seen 310 yellow cards and 25 red cards in 56 games. In games like Netherlands-Portugal, angry players have confronted each other in groups. In others, referees have struggled to differentiate between real fouls and simulation.
Sexwale says players will eventually pay the price at a tournament whose cumulative TV audience is expected to surpass 30 billion.
"Television is going to bring it into the living room. The referee may not have seen it because he's human, but the world is seeing," he said. "And such a player runs the risk of ruining his own reputation and that of his team and when you are playing at international level, that of his own country.
UNICEF is using the World Cup to promote non-violence, tolerance and peace through its Unite for Children, Unite for Peace campaign.
"The simple game of football, celebrated in the World Cup, can break down barriers and bring people together," UNICEF executive director Ann Veneman told a news conference Wednesday.
UNICEF's campaign features 15 star players from around the globe, from England's David Beckham to France's Thierry Henry and Ivory Coast's Didier Drogba. The 15 have done their part for fair play, collecting just nine yellow cards among them.
The UNICEF web site (http://www.unicef.com/football) also tells stories of children whose lives have been changed by sport despite growing up among street violence in Angola, civil war in the Ivory Coast, the slums of Colombia or a refugee camp in Chad.
"When you go out and visit people in these countries, whether it's in Africa or East Asia, so many children have so little about which to have hope," Veneman said. "And sometimes participating in a team sport or getting involved with some other kind of activity or even getting into school gives their life a turn and gives them hope that they might not have otherwise had."
PRESSURE IS ON: Germany must reach the World Cup final, Juergen Klinsmann warns, or the country's euphoria over his young team will fade and the country's soccer will be in trouble again.
The Germany coach demanded the German Soccer Federation and influential figures such as Franz Beckenbauer throw their weight behind the philosophy he has stamped on the Mannschaft in two reform-minded years: playing at a high pace, being physically fit and dictating how the game will be played instead of playing defensively.
"If we lose against Argentina Friday, then the debate starts all over: Wouldn't it be better to play more cautious? First secure the defense? Wait for a counterattack?" Klinsmann told the Die Welt weekly. "That is why it is so important that we advance to the final."
Klinsmann's ruthlessness in shaking up a slipping Germany team, which has been on a downhill slide since winning the last of its three World Cups in 1990, has earned him a lot of enemies inside the country's soccer establishment. Klinsmann said he was only doing what everyone in the country knew was necessary, despite his carping critics he was bringing Germany's soccer up to international standards again.
"It's clear, if we don't want to fall behind international soccer for years, then a huge jolt has to go through football in Germany. Most of all the German Soccer Federation has to take a stand," he said. "Is it behind this philosophy of how you play the game? Or isn't it behind this philosophy?"
A week before the World Cup started, just 10 percent of the Germans believed its young team led by Klinsmann under fire for everything from living in California to ruining his players with American fitness trainers would win the title. Four convincing wins later and the country has become believers.
A poll by the sports news agency SID said 87 percent of the Germans now expect their team will beat Argentina in the quarterfinals and 53 percent anticipate a fourth title.
"Argentina is coming at exactly the right time. We can test ourselves, make a significant jump," Klinsmann said. "This is exactly what we need right now."
BABY BOOM: Babies keep disrupting Portugal's World Cup preparations.
Luis Boa Morte became the latest player to skip training and fly out of Germany to be present when his wife gave birth. The Fulham winger caught a plane to London on Tuesday.
Portugal meets England in the quarterfinals on Saturday, though Boa Morte has not so far been included in the starting lineup.
A few days after Portugal arrived at its training camp in northwest Germany in early June, Chelsea defender Paulo Ferreira flew to Portugal for the birth of his first child.
Portugal coach Luiz Felipe Scolari, who has two grown children, gave both players a leave of absence.
IN CHINA: Wang Nan, a TV journalist for China Central Television, showed up at Argentina's training camp and one of her first questions was: "Is Messi going to play?"
Told the 19-year-old striker was unlikely to start, she said that would disappoint his fans in China.
"But even if he doesn't play, people like him because he is young and exciting," Wang said.
Wang said Messi picked up a following in China last year when he was chosen the best player in FIFA's World Youth Championship, which Argentina won.
She ran off a string of other Argentina favorites in China: striker Hernan Crespo and midfielder Esteban Cambiasso.
Asked if most Chinese fans were rooting for Argentina, she shook her head. "They just want to see exciting soccer, and it doesn't matter if it's Italy, England or Argentina."
 Load-Date: June 30, 2006

 

End of Document
