

US Embassy moving into its new home in Berlin ahead of the official Fourth of July ceremony
The Associated Press
May 19, 2008 Monday 12:27 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 599 words
Byline: By DAVID RISING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN 
Body




The U.S. mission in Berlin this week moves back to its historic location in the center of the German capital, which it abandoned after Nazi Germany declared war on the United States in 1941.
Ambassador William Timken told reporters Monday that the embassy's return to Pariser Platz will be officially marked on the American Fourth of July holiday with speeches by Chancellor Angela Merkel and former U.S. President George H.W. Bush, followed by traditional Independence Day fireworks over the Brandenburg Gate.
The actual move, however, comes this weekend and the building will be opened Tuesday, the day after the U.S. Memorial Day holiday, Timken said.
"This is the closing of a long circle dating back to before 1940..." Timken told reporters. "This is not simply turning a key on a new facility this is history in the making."
The original embassy building was damaged in a fire in 1931. By the time U.S. diplomats moved into it in April 1939, Washington had already recalled its chief envoy to protest an anti-Semitic pogrom.
Remaining diplomats left in 1941 after Germany declared war on the United States, a few days after the Nazi's ally Japan bombed Pearl Harbor, and Washington responded in kind.
Like many buildings in downtown Berlin, the building was heavily damaged during World War II and then later razed by communist East Germany. For nearly three decades during the Cold War, the site stood in the heavily fortified no man's land behind the Berlin Wall.
In 1987, U.S. President Ronald Reagan stood just a few yards (meters) away on the western side as he urged Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev to "tear down this wall."
World War II allies France and Britain already have built their embassies in the same area as the U.S. site, while America has been operating out of a temporary facility a few blocks away. Germany's national Holocaust memorial is across the street.
One hurdle to the new U.S. mission was a law passed after the 1998 bombing of U.S. embassies in Africa, requiring all new American embassies to be built at least 30 meters (100 feet) from the nearest road. Berlin officials balked at agreeing to the demand, saying it would cut into the city's main park. Washington broke the logjam in 2001, by easing the law's requirements for the Berlin project.
Another stumbling block came after the U.S. Congress slashed the original US$180 million budget to US$130 million, which meant the embassy design had to be modified losing a planned basement, among other things, Timken said.
The bustling Pariser Platz will be shut off to the public for the July 4th celebration, which some 4,500 invited guests are expected to attend. In addition to Merkel and Bush who was president at the time of German reunification in 1990 and is U.S. President George W. Bush's father a group of U.S. pilots who flew missions in the 1948-49 Berlin Airlift will also be on hand, Timken said.
The airlift came after the Soviets blockaded all land and water traffic to Berlin in an attempt to squeeze the allies out of the city in 1948. In one of the most significant Cold War confrontations, the Western allies flew some 280,000 flights keeping the 2 million citizens of Berlin supplied with fuel and food until the Soviets backed down 11 months later.
"Those pilots were most certainly all too familiar with the original embassy ... as it stood in ruins beside the Brandenburg Gate," Timken said. "I can imagine how moving the grand opening of our new embassy on the same site will be for these pilots who will be returning. Their sacrifice has come full circle."
On the Net:
http://germany.usembassy.gov/
 Load-Date: May 20, 2008

 

End of Document
