

US says it will try to close Israeli-Palestinian peace deal in the next year
The Associated Press
November 21, 2007 Wednesday 5:23 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 724 words
Byline: By MATTHEW LEE
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said Wednesday the United States will try to close a peace deal between Israel and the Palestinians before President Bush's term expires, but she cautioned that there is no guarantee of success.
Rice said Israeli and Palestinian leaders have pledged to work for a deal setting up an independent Palestinian state before President Bush leaves office.
"We all know how long that is it's about a year," Rice told reporters. "That's what we will try to do."
Rice said there is no guarantee of success in that time frame.
Rice and Bush are hosting Israeli and Palestinian leaders in Washington and at an international conference in Annapolis, Md., next week that leaders say will launch the first direct negotiations on a peace deal in seven years.
The top U.S. diplomat said the Annapolis session is an important launchpad for talks to settle Israel's conflict with the Palestinians, the dispute over land, nationhood and rights that underlies the Jewish state's other problems with Arab neighbors.
But Rice said the United States will give room for those other conflicts to be aired at Annapolis, including Syria's dispute with Israel over the Golan Heights.
She did not say exactly who will attend, and the guest list is not expected to be final until the weekend.
Bush called Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas on Wednesday to discuss the conference, and also phoned Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak about the session, the White House said.
Egypt is one of only two Arab states that have negotiated peace deals with Israel, and the country is serving as something of a go-between for other Arab nations in the run-up to Annapolis. Egypt has pledged to attend the session.
The invitations to the three-day session went out Tuesday after months of intense diplomacy. The Bush administration announced few details beyond the dates and a cursory schedule.
The two sides are expected to present a joint statement on resuming peace talks at Annapolis, yet less than a week before their delegations are to arrive in the United States, the document exists only in vague form.
Rice said the document's focus changed during weeks of preliminary meetings between Olmert and Abbas, and ultimately became less important as the two leaders decided between them that they wanted to begin full negotiations.
The conference will be anchored around a marathon session Tuesday at the U.S. Naval Academy to be opened by Bush, who will meet with Olmert and Abbas and address a dinner of all participants in Washington the day before.
Back in Washington on Wednesday, Bush plans to see Olmert and Abbas privately again for a third time in as many days, ostensibly to seal their intent to create a Palestinian state by the end of his second term.
The intense White House involvement in a meeting that was planned to be run almost entirely by Rice when first broached in July took some by surprise and was seen as a sign that Bush is making a serious bid for a Mideast foreign policy success. He leaves office in January 2009.
"This conference will be a launching point for negotiations leading to the establishment of a Palestinian state and the realization of Israeli-Palestinian peace," said White House National Security Council spokesman Gordon Johndroe.
Aside from Olmert and Abbas, who received their invitations ahead of the 47 other countries, organizations and individuals on the U.S. list, there were few immediate public commitments to participate at the foreign minister level.
The invitation list includes select members of the Arab League, the five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council and U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the international diplomatic "quartet" on the Middle East and its special envoy Tony Blair, the Group of Eight industrialized nations and the European Union.
In the Muslim world, there has been great suspicion of the conference, with many nations questioning the Bush administration's ability to forge peace, particularly between two leaders Olmert and Abbas who have been weakened by internal political turmoil.
U.S. officials, led by Bush and Rice the secretary has made eight trips to the region this year insist that the talks will be "serious and substantive," not merely a picture-taking event, and also will address the issue of a broader Arab-Israeli peace.
 Load-Date: November 22, 2007

 

End of Document
