

Year of the underdog: US, Chinese set low expectations for Beijing Olympics
The Associated Press
March 5, 2008 Wednesday 10:43 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 1044 words
Byline: By EDDIE PELLS, AP National Writer
Dateline: DENVER 
Body




First, the Americans cried underdog. Not to be outdone, the Chinese are now warning their fans not to expect too much, either.
Which leads to the big question: Does anyone actually think they can walk out of the Beijing Olympics as the big winners?
Two of the top teams at the Beijing Olympics in August, the United States and China, are staging woe-is-me routines that would put former Notre Dame coach Lou Holtz the king of the sandbaggers to shame.
The latest came Wednesday from China's Deputy Sports Minister Cui Dalin: "We've got to take a pretty sober, objective view toward this," he said. "Overall, we're not a big sporting nation."
China, a country of 1.3 billion, a country spending $40 billion to put on the biggest sports extravaganza in the world, is not a big sporting nation? Sounds almost as ridiculous as saying America, easy winner of the medal count in the last three Olympics, heads to Beijing as an underdog.
But that's what they've saying over and over at the U.S. Olympic Committee.
Just 10 days ago, chief executive Jim Scherr and chairman Peter Ueberroth reasserted the mantra they've been preaching for more than a year now.
"We have no illusions," Scherr said. "This will be a very difficult competition."
A quick reality check:
The United States won 102 medals at the Athens Olympics, 20 more than second-place Russia and 39 more than third-place China. In the gold medal count, which is more important to almost every country outside America, it was United States 34, China 32.
The Athens Olympics marked the third straight time the United States eased to the medals victory at the Summer Games, dating to 1996, the first time the athletes comprising the former Soviet Union didn't compete as a unified team. In fact, U.S. victories became so routine that the USOC delegation's task became not so much to predict victory, but only how many medals it expected.
Surely, the landscape has changed since the last Olympics, with China preparing to host the games and in no mood to be beaten on its home turf.
But measuring the changes is an inexact science. In 2006, China did very well at several world championships, in some cases at the United States' expense. Then last year, things shifted.
At key world championships last year, the United States won four of six gold medals in women's gymnastics (a record), 20 in swimming (best in 29 years) and 14 more in track (nine more than second-place Kenya).
Granted, none of those competitions was held in China, and track and swimming are not sports China normally excels in. But they are among the biggest, and the fact that no other countries chipped into America's dominance seems to be a good sign for the United States.
Ueberroth doesn't buy it.
"In most sports, we sent the same competitors in '06 and '07," he said. "China had teams that blitzed through all sports they competed in in '06, then they did well again in '07 with different people. They could send two teams to most of these events. They're going to do very well."
Cui insists, "In the competition altogether, the United States and Russia are still well above our level."
Despite his objections, there are many reasons to believe China will do well this year maybe even top the medal chart.
The Chinese have enjoyed almost exponential improvement, going from five to 32 gold medals from 1988 to 2004.
Dating to 1996, Summer Olympics hosts have experienced an 8 percent increase in medals over the previous Olympics. Australia enjoyed a 41 percent increase from 1996 to 2000.
Some of the improvement can be attributed to home crowds and home cooking from judges. As much or more can be credited to the ramp-up in resources a country on the verge of hosting an Olympics will pump into its sports programs.
Nobody is ramping things up more than China.
According to a recent report from a Chinese sports scientist, the country has 195 state-run training departments involving nearly 20,000 elite and emerging elite athletes. USOC chief of sport performance Steve Roush has spent ample time at Chinese athletic performance centers, watching the athletes of tomorrow train.
"China has spent incredible resources over the last few years to improve their prospects," Roush said. "You see a lot of things happening in their favor. We'll be a competitive team. We're not yielding to them, but it is an uphill battle."
Never before has the rest of the Olympic competition been so deep. Russia, a power even after the breakup of the Soviet Union, has made little secret of its desire to return to the top.
Meanwhile, a number of the countries four through 10 in the last medal standings Australia, Germany, Japan, France, Italy, South Korea, Britain have added resources and money to their efforts. That means they could win medals that once would have been presumed to go to the United States, Russia or China.
In talking about China's medal expectations, Cui cites everything from rules changes to limited medals in sports like badminton and table tennis, where China often dominates.
Two other sports where China is traditionally solid gymnastics and diving have more to do with poise and controlling adrenaline than displays of raw speed or power. That could leave Chinese athletes more susceptible to nerves or pressure than, say, an American athlete running a 100-meter sprint or a Russian on a weightlifting platform.
Among the few outspoken optimists on the American side has been USA Gymnastics president Steve Penny, who knows he has good teams but is also aware of the pros and cons of competing at home.
"Either you accept the challenges and use the advantages to have your best day, or that can end up providing a great deal of pressure and stress," Penny said. "And if you don't have your best day, it can be compounded by the fact that you're in front of your home crowd."
But Penny certainly isn't speaking the USOC's party line, which so far is to promise less and maybe surprise some people if the American athletes deliver more.
That's the same direction the Chinese seem to be going, too. Cui demurred when asked to predict China's medal haul.
"The beautiful thing about athletic competition," he said, "is that you never know the result until the competition is over."
Associated Press writer Christopher Bodeen in Beijing contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: March 6, 2008

 

End of Document
