

'Only the Likud Can Do It': But in the End, it Couldn't
The Associated Press
June 24, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 617 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Yitzhak Shamir fell victim to a troubled economy, divisions in his Likud party, the frustrations of jobless Russian immigrants and the new realities of the post-Cold War era.
Less than two years ago, the Israeli leader looked indestructible. His people were prospering. The influx of Soviet Jewish immigrants was bathing him in a warm Zionist glow. The looming Gulf crisis had eased the pressure on him to make concessions for peace.
Likud had been in power for most of the past 13 years, and nothing, it seemed, could dislodge it.
But many factors that had earned Shamir the label of "the lucky prime minister" were to turn against him.
Likud's power rested heavily on the constituency that swept it to power in 1977 - deprived Sephardis. These Jews of Middle East descent backed Likud not just as a party but as a guardian angel that would protect them from the Arabs on the outside and the European-descended Ashkenazis on the inside.
"Only the Likud can do it," went the party's slogan. But then came the Gulf War, and the discovery that even the Likud, which bombed Iraq's nuclear reactor in 1981 and drove the PLO out of Lebanon in 1982, could do nothing to stop Iraqi missiles crashing into Israeli cities.
With the defeat of Saddam Hussein, the Bush administration turned its attention to the Arab-Israeli conflict, and the frictions between Jerusalem and Washington became evident.
The demise of superpower rivalry in the Middle East seemed to diminish Israel's strategic importance and strengthen the Bush administration's leverage over Shamir.
When Shamir refused President Bush's appeals to freeze the construction of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories, Bush retaliated by withholding loan guarantees for absorbing the immigrants.
Israelis were shocked by Bush's hostile tone and readiness to use money as a club to beat concessions out of Shamir.
Shamir insisted Israel would manage without the loan guarantees. The public was skeptical.
Labor, on the other hand, demonstrated an openness to change.
It adopted a new system of grassroots internal democracy that swept fresh faces into its top offices. In February it made what was to be its winning move: it elected popular Yitzhak Rabin as its candidate for prime minister.
Although no newcomer to politics - he had already served as prime minister - Rabin came across as a new and credible alternative. A war hero, his image combined a balance of hawk and dove that had appeal across the spectrum.
As a former ambassador to the United States, he was seen as a man who knew his way around Washington and could fix the strained relationship with Israel's ally.
While Labor marched sure-footedly through the election campaign, nothing seemed to go right for Likud.
The peace process seemed to make no headway. Likud's divisions grew uglier as Moroccan-born Foreign Minister David Levy publicly accused the party of anti-Sephardi bias.
Unemployment among the immigrants rose to 40 percent, and they took their revenge by voting massively for Labor.
Likud's strong card - a reputation for being tough on Arab terrorism - was undermined by a fresh wave of knife attacks by Arabs from the Gaza Strip.
Rabin, in his deep, soothing voice, offered a seductive formula: speed up negotiations for a settlement that would get Gaza off Israel's back.
On the campaign trail, Shamir told Israelis they were under siege by a world intent on driving them out of the occupied territories. Rabin again had a neat answer: by cutting back on settlements, Israel could divert the money to create jobs, and simultaneously regain U.S. good will and secure the loan guarantees.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Marcus Eliason, the AP bureau chief in Israel, covered the election campaign.

 

End of Document
