

'The Booms Have Gotten Louder': Saddam's Missiles Hit West Bank
The Associated Press
February 3, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 705 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OCCUPIED WEST BANK
Body




In the opening days of Saddam Hussein's missile offensive on Tel Aviv, the explosions were a faint echo to the Jewish settlers in the occupied West Bank. By Sunday, things had changed.
"There is more fear. The booms have gotten louder here," said Rachel, who works for the municipality at one of the Jewish settlements in the West Bank.
At least four Scuds have reportedly landed in the West Bank in recent days, causing minimal damage and no injuries, and indicating that Saddam's warheads are falling increasingly short of the populous coastal plain.
At first the Israelis assumed Iraq was unlikely to target the West Bank, especially since its 1 million Palestinians are among Saddam's most fervent supporters.
"When the missiles fell in Tel Aviv we heard them, but they were fainter," said Rachel. "Now they're louder, and last night we had to stay in the sealed rooms longer than anywhere else. It's not a pleasant feeling, but I hope we'll get over it."
She was referring to the sealed rooms in which the population is supposed to take cover in case the missiles carry chemical warheads. The country has been divided into areas to make it easier for the army to give a gradual all-clear.
Writing in the daily Yedioth Ahronoth, commentator Ron Ben-Yishai explained that Iraq's mobile missile launchers were being forced back by allied bombing and mines.
The missiles are programmed to travel 370 miles, and therefore are no longer able to reach Tel Aviv, he said.
Israel has so far withheld retaliation for the missile attacks, but Maj. Gen. Ehud Barak, the deputy chief of staff, said Sunday the military had "very good operational plans" to eliminate the remaining mobile Scud launchers in western Iraq.
Israel could mount an attack without coordinating with the United States, he said, while adding that joint planning would be preferable.
If the military is putting out conflicting signals on how it might retaliate, it has been equally opaque about where the Scuds are landing. When the media are able to pinpoint the locations, military censors forbid them from being published. They deleted the names of settlements, junctions and surnames from this report.
The aim is to keep the Iraqis confused, but the confusion can be contagious.
Two missiles fell in the West Bank during the night, and on Sunday morning the Israeli army invited foreign journalists to see where one of them landed.
Be at a certain junction at noon, where an escort officer will take you to the site, said the military spokesman's office.
Journalists duly turned up at the desolate, wind-whipped crossroad. They waited an hour, but instead of an army escort, a policeman arrived waving a piece of official-looking paper. "This is a closed military area. You must leave," he declared.
Frantic phone calls failed to resolve the muddle, and finally it was decided that as Scud hunts go, this one was a bust. The army spokesman's office either didn't know exactly where the missile landed, or it had belatedly decided not to tell. At any rate, the escort officer who was supposed to be at the junction turned out to be at the Tel Aviv Hilton.
But it was not all in vain.
The West Bank has been off limits to the media since the Persian Gulf War broke out, so the opportunity to drive along the Trans-Samarian Highway through the heart of the occupied territory was informative.
The curfew, imposed by the army to squelch pro-Iraqi riots and demonstrations, seemed absolute. The lone exception was a gnarled old Arab hurrying his goats through an olive grove alongside the highway.
Under a military curfew, those in affected areas are ordered confined to their homes.
The streets of Arab villages looked deserted. Little Arab traffic was noticeable on the main road, only military vehicles and cars driven by Jewish settlers.
West Bank drivers are recognizable by their flowing headdresses and blue number plates. Settlers, most of them orthodox Jews, are recognizable by their yamulkas.
At the junction, 30 miles inland, soldiers manned a roadblock, checking the papers of all Arab cars passing through. Only drivers on essential business were on the roads - a van full of loaves of bread; a car with a sign of the Red Crescent, the Palestinian equivalent of the Red Cross.

 

End of Document
