

--- Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
 The Associated Press
December 25, 1995, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 612 words
Dateline: KARACHI, Pakistan
Body




He swam for more than 20 hours. He slept, floating on a life preserver made from his pants. He thought about his family and how he never got to say goodbye. And he prayed.
With bags under his eyes and a sunburnt face, Lance Cpl. Zachary Mayo recounted Thursday how, after a strong wind knocked him off the aircraft carrier USS America, he floated alone for 36 hours in the Arabian Sea until his rescue.
"I never expected I would be off the ship," the 20-year-old Marine told reporters here. "I prayed to God every minute I was in the water. That helped me to keep going."
The aviation maintenance crewman from Osburn, Idaho, had insomnia early Saturday so he stepped outside for a breath of fresh air and a peek at the stars. A strong wind and a jolt from a swinging door knocked him overboard; his shouts weren't heard on the empty deck above.
The Navy gave him up for lost after a lengthy search, and Mayo bobbed helplessly for a day and a half in the ocean until Pakistani fishermen picked him up and took him to their village.
Mayo enlisted in the Marines in 1993 and, after boot camp, attended school to become an aircraft hydraulics mechanic. He was assigned to the Marine Tactical Electronics Warfare Squadron Three, a group of EA-6B radar jamming planes based in Cherry Point, N.C.
Neatly shaved and wearing civilian clothes, Mayo fidgeted nervously during a press conference at the U.S. Consulate. He briefly described his thoughts as he floated alone at sea. "What came to mind were all the things I've never done before," he said. "I thought that I would never be able to say goodbye to my parents and to my friends."
Mayo said he swam for "20 hours, maybe 30." Overcome by exhaustion, he put his Marine training to use by tying his pants in a knot and inflating them as a life preserver.
The Pakistani fisherman who found him took him to Gwadar, their remote village close to the Iranian border on the Arabian Sea coast. As soon as he could find someone who spoke English, he called his parents. He said village residents welcomed him as a celebrity.
"I'd like to thank everybody for taking care of me and feeding me and taking care of my needs," Mayo said.
 
 Use the information from the story to answer the following true and false questions:
 
 .… 1. Zachary Mayo, a United States Marine, was rescued after swimming for more than 20 hours in the Persian Gulf.
.… 2. Lance Corporal Mayo joined the Marines in 1993 and was trained to take care of airplanes.
.… 3. Mayo had insomnia (difficulty sleeping) because there was no fresh air in his room.
.… 4. A strong wind knocked the 20-year-old Marine off the deck of the aircraft carrier USS America.
.… 5. When the Ohio crewman fell overboard, he was too scared to call for help.
.… 6. At first, Mayo's shipmates did not realize that he was missing.
.… 7. To stay afloat, the U.S. Marine inflated (filled with air) his life jacket and tied it around his waist.
.… 8. A Pakistani fisherman found the extremely tired Marine sleeping in the village of Gwadar.
.… 9. The Pakistanis who helped care for the American thought that he might be dangerous.
.… 10. One of the first things that the young Marine did after arriving in Gwadar was to write to his parents.
.… BONUS: After reading this article, you can guess that the water temperature in the Arabian Sea must have been above freezing.
 
 -----------
 
 Answer Key: 1)F 2)T 3)F 4)T 5)F 6)T 7)F 8)F 9)F 10)F BONUS)T
 
 PART TWO:
A NOTE OF THANKS:
Many people willingly help others in need. Imagine that you found yourself in a situation that required help from a family member or a friend. Explain the problem in a few sentences and write a thank-you note to the person who came to your rescue.
 Load-Date: December 25, 1995

 

End of Document
