

3,000 Barrels a Day Leaking Into the Gulf, Group Says
The Associated Press
April 8, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 626 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KUWAIT CITY
Body




Some 3,000 barrels of oil are still spilling daily into the Persian Gulf, adding to the woes of those trying to clean up one of the world's largest oil slicks, an environmental group said Monday.
The oil is flowing from a sunken Iraqi oil tanker, broken pipelines at oil terminals and damaged offshore rigs in southern Kuwait, said Kerry Plowright of Honolulu, Hawaii-based Earthtrust.
"A lot of oil is coming onto the beaches south of Kuwait City," said Plowright, who recently flew over the oil spill. "Where there should be thousands of birds this time of year, there are only hundreds."
He said the estimate of daily spillage comes from Gary Ott, a science support coordinator for the U.S. National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration. Ott joined Plowright on the recent overflight.
The sunken tanker and broken pipelines are near the Kuwaiti port of Shuaiba, and the damaged oil rigs are about four miles offshore, near the Kuwait-Saudi Arabia border, Plowright said.
There is no visible effort to stop the spills, which form long thin slicks, he said.
The little slicks have yet to link up with the main slick, created when Iraqis pumped oil into the gulf in January and by allied bombing raids that hit oil installations.
The latest estiamte by Saudi Arabia's Meteorology and Evironmental Protection Administration says the big slick, centered mostly off Saudi Arabia, contains 3.3 million barrels of oil. A barrel of oil contains 42 gallons.
The biggest oil slick on record came from the blowout of the Ixtoc I oil well in Mexico's Bay of Campeche in 1979. An estimated 4.2 million barrels of oil gushed into the bay, in the Gulf of Mexico.
The Saudi government has been leading cleanup efforts, which mostly involve skimming oil still on the surface and placing booms to protect sensitive areas.
But "a greater concerted effort is needed or the beaches will all turn into tarmac," said Plowright. "This slick will kill for years to come."
Michael Bailey, also of Earthtrust, said the areas that have suffered the greatest damage are along the Saudi coast north of Jubail.
Eight dead dolphins and two dugongs washed ashore recently on the northern edge of Bahrain several days after tar balls began appearing on the beach, Bailey said.
Thousands of birds have been killed by the slick, which is on a major spring migratory path between north Africa and Iraq, Iran, Europe and the southern Soviet Union, Bailey added.
Flocks may be avoiding the oil slick, but many of birds are still likely to die because they need to feed on the gulf's coastal areas before flying on, Bailey said.
The oil is also working its way into estuaries, which Plowright described as the "most productive marine habitats."
Crabs, snails, turtles, fish, lichen and seas grasses will suffer and the effects will be felt throughout the food chain, the environmentalists said.
Earthtrust is trying to coordinate efforts among various environmental groups, Bailey said. British, French and Chinese teams all were testing air quality in Kuwait recently, he said - but none knew of the presence of the others.
In the battle to clean the gulf air, polluted by thick black smoke from more than 500 oil-well fires, firefighters Monday extinguished a blaze at the Greater Burgan Oil Field and capped the well - the first time the full process had been completed.
On Sunday, the first of the fires was put out by firefighters who were testing their techniques. No capping operation was ready at the time, and the oil spewing out of the fire was relighted to prevent it from flooding the area.
Also Monday, water reached the Greater Burgan field for the first time from a newly completed pipeline linked to the Persian Gulf. This will vastly increase the volume of water available for firefighting.

 

End of Document
