

A Brief Look at the Kurdish People
The Associated Press
March 30, 1991, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 516 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The proud mountain people of Kurdistan have fought fiercely for their independence for centuries. Here is a brief look at the people and their struggle.
 
 The People
Kurds are traditionally Sunni Muslims, having converted to Islam in the 7th century. Kurdish ethnic origins are unclear, however the Kurdish dialects belong to the northwestern branch of the Persian language spoken in Iran. Originally tribal, nomadic herdsmen, some modern Kurds remain semi-nomadic while others have become farmers. About 3.5 million Kurds live in Iraq, and 7 million others live in the Turkish and Iranian areas of the historic Kurdistan region.
The Land
Kurdistan, a Persian word meaning "land of the Kurds," lies across the Zagros mountains of Iran, the Taurus mountains of Turkey, the upper reaches of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, small parts of Syria and Soviet Armenia, and south across the Mesopotamian plain of Iraq.
 
 History
Kurdistan was conquered by the Arabs in the 7th century, and was held by the Seljuk Turks, the Mongols and then by Turkey's Ottoman Empire.
After centuries of struggle to free themselves from Ottoman rule, the Kurds believed after the defeat of the Turks in World War I that they would be granted their independence.
The Treaty of Sevres, which liquidated the Ottoman Empire, provided for the creation of an autonomous Kurdish state. But the revival of the Turkish military under Kemal Ataturk caused the treaty to be superseded by the Treaty of Lausanne, which did not mention Kurdish autonomy.
-In 1925 Sunni Muslims rose up against the Kemalist government in eastern Turkey. Turkish forces crushed the revolt.
-In 1946 the Soviet-backed Kurdish Republic was formed in Iran. The movement was joined by mullah Mustafa Barzani, an Iraqi Kurd. The Soviets, seeking oil concessions from Iran, pulled out of Iranian Azerbaijan and Kurdistan, leaving the Kurds to face the Iranian army alone. The Kurdish Republic fell apart.
-Barzani fled to the Soviet Union, but returned in 1958 when the Iraqi monarchy was overthrown in a military coup, gained control of the Kurdistan Democratic Party and launched the most sustained of any national Kurdish rebellion.
-After the Baath Party took over Iraq in 1968, it attempted to pacify the Kurds with an offer of autonomy. The 1970 offer included a constitutional change saying the Iraqi nation was made of "two main nationalities, Arabs and Kurds." The offer was rejected. War broke out again. Iranian intervention kept Barzani from being overwhelmed.
-In 1975, the Shah of Iran and Saddam Hussein signed the Algiers Agreement. In return for Iran halting aid to the Kurds, Iraq agreed to share sovereignty of the frontier Shatt-al-Arab waterway. The Kurdish movement split between a faction of the Kurdistan Democratic Party and the left-wing Patriotic Union of Kurdistan.
-They allied again during the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq war, supporting the Iranians. When the war ended in August 1988, Saddam took revenge. His army waged a brutal, scorched-earth campaign against the Kurds, using poison gas and forcibly resettling up to 100,000 in the southern desert.

 

End of Document
