

A Breathtaking Day for the Middle East; Now Comes the Hard Part
The Associated Press
October 19, 1991, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 660 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Setting up the Arab-Israeli peace conference took James Baker eight Middle East shuttles and eight months of backbreaking negotiation, battered emotions and repeated frustration.
That was the easy part. Now that the parties are to meet in Madrid on Oct. 30, the real issues that have bedeviled the Middle East for decades will be back in all their daunting complexity: land, peace, settlements, the arms race and the Palestinians.
But for now, Baker is entitled to savor his triumph. In a single breathtaking day Jerusalem witnessed:
- An unequivocal promise by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to attend the conference.
- The first-ever meeting between a U.S. secretary of state and a Soviet foreign minister in Israel, another stunning example of how the world has changed since the Cold War ended.
- The restoration, after a 24-year rupture, of diplomatic ties between Israel and the Soviet Union - a move that met a key Israeli condition for attending the conference, and which will do much to ease Israel's sense of diplomatic isolation.
The real test will not come during the ceremonials in Madrid but afterward, when the conference becomes face-to-face negotiations between Israel and each Arab state as well as the Palestinians.
That's what Israel wants, and that's what Baker promised.
Israel held out for the direct talks, plus separate multilateral negotiations on regional issues, because it sees these as a test of the Arabs' readiness to accept the Jewish state as a friendly neighbor.
To the Arabs, the heart of the matter is the land they lost to Israel in the 1967 Mideast war, and the Palestinians who were made homeless by Israel's creation.
The Israelis' conditions for talking to the Palestinians are revealing: They reject not just the Palestine Liberation Organization, but any Palestinian living outside the West bank or Gaza Strip.
To do otherwise, in the Israeli view, would be to acknowledge that the Palestinians who live abroad in their so-called diaspora have a claim on not just the occupied territories, but Israel proper.
The Palestinians want a state of their own. Israel does not recognize Palestinians as a separate nation; the best it offers is autonomy in an Israeli-controlled West bank and Gaza Strip.
Except for the most dovish Israelis, no one here would accept a withdrawal to the pre-1967 war borders, and no Arab leader has ever offered to settle for anything less than that. So the gap is enormous.
The Israelis say the test of Arab intentions is their willingness to discuss matters of good-neighborliness, like sharing water and ending the arms race. But Syria, Israel's most formidable foe, says it doesn't want to attend talks on these matters.
The Arabs say the test of Israel's good faith is whether it will agree to stop building Jewish settlements in the occupied territories. Israel's government, which regards the territories as its biblical birthright, says it won't do that.
Then there is the vexing issue of Jerusalem. Israel captured its Arab sector from Jordan in 1967 and proclaimed the city united as Israel's capital. To Israel, Jerusalem is non-negotiable. The Palestinians want the Arab half to be their capital.
Many Israelis say that they could go a long way to compromising, but only over a span of years, during which the two sides would gain confidence in each other's peaceful intent.
But they worry that the United States, in its impatience to settle the conflict, will use its economic clout to push Israel back to the borders that divided Jerusalem and constricted the populous coastal plain into a 15-mile-wide waistline.
"We have no illusions about the hard work that lies ahead," Baker said in Jerusalem.
Shamir echoed him, saying the road would be "tough, full of obstacles, tortuous."
"There may be all sorts of crises along the way," he said, "but we mustn't dodge the risk of taking this road, because there is no other."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Marcus Eliason is The Associated Press bureau chief in Jerusalem.

 

End of Document
