

A Hawk on the Gulf with a Friend in the White House
The Associated Press
January 1, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 938 words
Byline: By JIM DRINKARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Early in the Persian Gulf crisis, Sen. Richard Lugar was invited for a private dinner with the president and a few advisers in the living quarters upstairs at the White House.
For an hour and a half, they talked about Lugar's public assertion earlier in the day that Saddam Hussein must either leave power "or be removed."
President Bush "heard very well everything I had said," the Indiana Republican later recalled in an interview. When Lugar told him he planned to repeat the same ideas in a speech the next day in Indiana, Bush did not try to dissuade him, even though the thought of removing Saddam went well beyond any public administration position.
Asked whether he was pushing Bush to go farther, or giving voice to things the president couldn't say himself, Lugar paused, then smiled and said: "Maybe both."
After five months of dealing with the crisis, it is clear that some of the administration's toughest messages have been delivered through Lugar, the most respected foreign policy voice in the Senate.
Lugar is sure to play a big role in the new session of Congress, likely to be dominated by the gulf crisis. After reassembling Wednesday, the nation's lawmakers will have to decide whether the president can send American forces into an offensive war without first obtaining congressional consent.
To its own surprise, Congress also must look for a way to pad the impact of the economic downturn at a time when the deficit is growing beyond all expectations. And it confronts the possibility that the nation's banks will need a shoring up - if not a full-scale bailout.
On the gulf issue, Lugar is sure to be heard. He pressed - unsuccessfully - for an emergency congressional session to vote on a resolution endorsing Bush's gulf policy. He has aligned himself with a new group of congressional hawks formed to support a hard-line approach.
"In general, he is the point man for the administration on the Foreign Relations Committee," said Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill., a member. "My assumption is that whatever he says, he is also speaking for the administration or with their approval."
The crisis is giving still more prominence to Lugar. At 58, he is graying but trim, a jogger, a Senate workhorse. He was elected mayor of Indianapolis when he was 35 and he remains loyal to Bush even though it must have been painful when Bush reached over him to select his junior partner in the Senate, Dan Quayle, as his running mate in 1988.
Not that everything Lugar says on the gulf pleases Bush. Lugar has been the nagging voice asking some unpopular questions:
-What does the United States do if Saddam Hussein withdraws from Kuwait but remains in power in his own country with a million-man army and nuclear ambitions?
-Who starves first if the international food supply to Iraq is cut off - soldiers, or children?
-Why should Congress be allowed to criticize the U.S. military buildup and snipe at the administration's policy without a formal vote on whether it is willing to use military force to remove Iraq from Kuwait?
"Somebody in the public dialogue has to raise these questions," Lugar said. He denied that he was the launcher of White House trial balloons, but added, "My thinking is a fairly careful fit with the way they see the world."
That has not always been the case. He earned his foreign policy credentials during the Reagan administration, most often by pushing the administration to do things it resisted.
Lugar was the key to a policy shift that gave up on keeping Ferdinand Marcos in power in the Philippines and he was a decisive vote when Congress forced Reagan to accept economic sanctions against South Africa. He also has been active in other arenas from Central America to Southeast Asia.
And the only foreign aid authorization bill to be passed by Congress during the past decade came during Lugar's brief tenure as chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee in 1985-86, when the GOP controlled the Senate.
These days, he's not even the senior Republican on the committee. That job belongs to Jesse Helms of North Carolina, who pulled seniority to beat Lugar out of the post four years ago. The bitterness lingers, and the two senators barely speak to each other.
But Lugar's credibility on foreign policy comes not from his standing on the committee but his personal contacts and study around the globe.
"He reads and studies issues, visits with a number of specialists, and travels a fair amount," said colleague Nancy Kassebaum, R-Kan., who added that Lugar's game plan in foreign affairs isn't always clear. "He tends to keep his cards very close to his vest," she said.
Some have suspected that his toughness on the gulf issue might be a form of political inoculation against a pre-invasion stand opposing sanctions on Iraq for using poison gas against its own citizens.
Sanctions would have hurt American farmers, an important constituency for the Indiana senator, and would have damaged administration efforts at the time to strengthen Iraq as a counterweight to Islamic fundamentalism in neighboring Iran.
But Lugar denies that he's bending over backwards to make up for that stand, saying he still opposes the use of food embargoes as a foreign policy tool because it starves the innocent.
Instead, he says, he wants to help shape what Bush has called "one of the defining moments in history."
"We are really coming to a crucial point as to whether there is the potential for the world's people to unite in a crisis," he said. "That seems to be a … pretty sober responsibility. Things are going to happen, and the consequences are going to be very substantial. … I just see this as an amazing opportunity."

 

End of Document
