

A Major Pitfall for 'Desert Storm' Is, Ironically, the Weather
The Associated Press
January 19, 1991, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 831 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: IN SAUDI ARABIA
Body




Three days into the fighting, weather is ironically the biggest trouble for allied forces so far in operation Desert Storm.
The wondrous accuracy of highly sophisticated U.S. weapons is drawing raves and raising hopes among Iraq's enemies in the Persian Gulf war, but the American-organized effort to free Kuwait is not without its problems.
Weather has been a big one. The Arabian Peninsula has not experienced any of its nasty winter sandstorms since the war began early Thursday. But heavy clouds over Iraq and Kuwait have kept many sorties from dropping their bombs.
The delays have slowed the aerial campaign so crucial to the allied forces in their bid to defeat Iraq's entrenched army in Kuwait.
And unexpected heavy rains in the days just before the attack left some vital passes in the northern Saudi desert muddied or in a few cases washed out, complicating troop movements as the allied forces prepare for what most believe is an inevitable ground assault.
Minor complications include late shipments of some supplies, unexpectedly tough resistance from crude but deadly Iraqi anti-aircaft fire, trouble with equipment rented from Saudi companies, strains on maintenance crews and simple bad luck.
A good portion of the planned air attacks on Friday were stymied by the cloud cover, forcing pilots to return to base with their payloads because they could not see their targets from above the clouds and it was considered too dangerous to drop below the clouds to attack.
Dozens of Air Force F-16A pilots returned to an airbase in central Saudi Arabia on Friday still carrying all their bombs. The scene was similar at a Marine base elsewhere in the gulf region, where more than 40 F/A-18 Hornets returned still carrying their 500-pound bombs instead of dropping them on Saddam Hussein's elite Republican Guard troops.
Col. Hal Hornburg, 45, of Dallas, commander of the 4th Tactical Fighter Wing Provisional, said the weather hadn't affected "the momentum" of the aerial campaign. But he said, "I think certainly there may have been a velocity change."
And other pilots were grimly aware of the potential price of being unable to strike their targets, which included Iraqi missile launchers.
"Some are going to slip through, Air Force Capt. Deane Pennington, 32, of Columbia, S.C., said of Iraq's Scud missiles. "It's going to take a little bit to find them all."
For ground forces, the past three days have been spent maneuvering toward the Saudi-Kuwaiti border, awaiting word that the aerial campaign has softened Iraqi defenses enough to begin an all-out ground push to free Kuwait.
For some units, the going has been rough.
Members of the 37th Engineers, a combat battalion, have spent much of their time since the Jan. 15 deadline passed digging vehicles out of the desert mud. Other units trudging through the desert north have encountered "lakes" where days ago only sand existed.
"The worst routes were the ones that earlier were the best routes," Marine Capt. Rob Scogin of Roanoke, Va., said Wednesday. Road conditions were said to be improved considerably by late Friday.
The sudden rain, the first since U.S. troops began arriving in August, also brought rust to equipment already strained by the desert heat. "This is definitely not an environment suited for weapons - or human beings," said Lance Cpl. Jimmy Brown, 20 of Kings Park, N.Y.
Some equipment wasn't moving at all, but the weather wasn't to blame.
Heavy trucks the 37th Engineers rented from a Saudi firm to take the load of the unit's lighter, air-droppable equipment, were sitting broken.
"We get a lot more done with our equipment, even though it's smaller," said one driver in the unit. "At least it works, where the Saudi stuff is always broken down."
As the ground forces move farther north, the Army is rushing to equip some newly arrived armored units with specially made kits carrying 30 days of supplies that are expected to be most needed in combat, including tank filters and lubricants.
Some of those loads are just leaving the United States, although Army officials insist they have enough supplies in Saudi Arabia to sustain the force if ground skirmishes began today.
Working overtime to keep their equipment in the air are Air Force, Navy and Marine aircraft maintenance crews. The stress of combat leaves sensitive jets in greater need for repairs.
For example, several F-15 engines just taken from plastic wrap were stacked near a maintenance hangar Friday on one Saudi airbase, and an airman was towing another F-15 engine, this with a charred afterburner, toward the shop hangar.
"Keeping busy, that's for sure," was all the man would say as he went past a reporter visiting the base.
Bad luck thwarted at least one American bombing sortie, and put an American pilot in a dangerous situation.
The F-16 pilot had attempted to drop his bombs Thursday but they failed to drop when he hit the release button in his cockpit. The pilot was forced to return to base with the hung bombs and made a dangerous landing.

 

End of Document
