

A Year After The Air Raids: Should Israel Have Struck Back?
The Associated Press
January 17, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 666 words
Byline: AP Photo planned, By G.G. LaBELLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




A year ago Saturday, Israelis were jolted awake by the whining air raid sirens that would define their role in the Gulf War: sitting fearfully in their gas masks while the air force awaited orders to strike back.
The orders never came, although Iraq fired 39 Scud missiles at the Jewish state. The damage was small compared to the devastation in Iraq and Kuwait. Perhaps the greatest wound was to Israel's pride.
Today, Israelis are still debating whether it was wise to abandon their usual policy of hitting back fast and hard to make the Arabs think twice about attacking.
Many are skeptical about the Arab-Israeli peace talks pressed for by the United States after the war. A third round ended this week without progress. Far-right leaders have quit the Cabinet in fear the talks might lead to surrendering occupied land.
Oddly, the most public Gulf War memorial was a general strike Friday by Palestinians, whose backing for Saddam Hussein lost them the sympathy built up by their uprising against Israeli occupation.
For Israelis, the anniversary was marked mostly by broadcasts looking back at the war and introspective newspaper columns.
Defense Minister Moshe Arens, who warned throughout the war that Israel would retaliate when and where it wanted, again stressed Friday that the military had been ready to attack at any time.
"Had the war not ended when it did, had it continued for a few more days, then you would have seen the IDF (Israel Defense Forces) in western Iraq," he said on Israel radio.
Referring to Israeli restraint, he added as a warning to the Arabs: "You cannot assume that this thing will repeat itself."
Arens recalled the "special circumstances" behind the restraint. An Israeli attack could have torn apart the U.S. coalition against Iraq - which included Arab states - and turned the conflict into another Arab-Israeli war.
Israelis were ready for an attack following Saddam's threats to "incinerate half of Israel" with chemical weapons. The army had distributed gas masks and instructed the public to seal rooms in their houses.
When the first sirens sounded just after 2 a.m. on Jan. 18, 1991, Israelis went into sealed rooms with their children and their gas masks and waited anxiously for the all-clear.
The experience was repeated 18 times until the last Scud attack Feb. 18.
Twenty missiles struck. None had a chemical warhead. Two people were killed in direct hits. This week, the national insurance company agreed to pay compensation for 72 others who suffered fatal heart attacks or suffocated in gas masks.
After the first missile attack a year ago Saturday, residents of the Tel Aviv neighborhood it hit stared in disbelief at four ruined houses, an apartment building with part of its facade blown off, smashed cars and a huge 10-foot crater in the street.
Much of the destruction has since been repaired. Newspapers this week published side-by-side photographs showing war-damaged buildings and how they've been fixed.
During the war, U.S.-developed Patriot missile batteries were rushed to Israel to battle the Scuds. The missile attacks became the subject of cartoons and humorous TV skits.
But none of this calmed the realization that for the first time since 1948, it was the average Israeli sitting at home who was in danger, not the soldier at the front.
Gerald Steinberg, a political scientist at Bar-Ilan University, argued in The Jerusalem Post that restraint had been a mistake, since the United States broke its pledges to supply more arms to Israel in return.
"The next time an Arab dictator aims his missiles at Israel, our pilots will not be ordered to sit passively in their cockpits," Steinberg wrote.
Noam Blum, a Jerusalem fourth-grader, had other thoughts about the war. Speaking on Israel radio, he remembered he liked being in the sealed room with his family as his father comforted the younger children.
"I miss the sealed room, not for the missiles that Saddam dropped on us, but because it was nice to be together with the family," the boy recalled.

 

End of Document
