

A Year After the War, No One Talks Much About It
The Associated Press
January 8, 1992, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1039 words
Byline: By LISA LEVITT RYCKMAN, AP National Writer
Body




When the Gulf War began a year ago, one son of a Vietnam veteran imagined himself fighting his father's war all over again.
Rick Winslow registered for the draft and worried it might mean the end of best-laid plans for college and career. He and his father, who flew a helicopter in Vietnam, argued about the latest war over the dinner table in their Estes Park, Colo., home. The younger Winslow spoke from fear; the elder, from experience.
"My dad kept saying he was against it, but if we were there, we'd better get the job done right," the 19-year-old said. "I didn't understand what he was saying, but at the end, I didn't understand why we didn't go all the way to Baghdad.
"The war cost billions of dollars, Saddam is still in power terrorizing his people, and the public has mostly forgotten about it," said Winslow, who is studying political science at William Jewell College in Liberty, Mo. "Nobody at school ever talks about it. We had our war for the decade, but is that all that matters?"
A year later, Americans reflected with mixed emotions on a war most of them had supported without question. An Associated Press poll of 1,004 adults this month found that 65 percent still approved of the decision to go to war, but the same number believed U.S. troops should have continued to fight to force Saddam from power. And they were split over whether the war was a success.
"At the time, everyone put on a yellow ribbon and put out a flag," said Mel Bornstein, 63, as he sat in his cab on Boston's Broad Street waiting for a fare. "Three weeks after it was over, it was forgotten. It's a non-entity now. It was an exercise in futility.
"I approved of Bush's actions, but he should have done a complete job and gotten rid of Hussein," he added. "Now I don't know what the war was for - headlines? If you go into a war, you go in to win.
"I don't think he followed through," agreed Symme Price, a 60-year-old retired store manager in Miami. "He should have done the whole job and gotten out."
Ms. Price's views were shaped by three weeks spent in a military camp along Israel's Sea of Galilee helping Israeli reservists as one of about 1,000 Volunteers for Israel from the United States.
"The man" - Saddam - "is a murderer," she said. "It's like leaving Hitler to sit there, and we're saying 'We trust you to finish it nice.' Well, it isn't nice."
A year ago, commuters sporting yellow ribbons snatched up papers at David Madden's newsstand in Boston's South Station, eager to learn the latest Persian Gulf developments. Those glory days are long gone.
"People are more concerned about the economy," Madden said, "which is having a larger effect on their lives than the war did."
That is true even of some who went to war. Gary Bardon's contracting company died when his Navy reserve unit left for Rota, Spain, to help administer the Operation Desert Storm supply line.
The Pembroke, Mass., carpenter returned in April to New England's unrelieved recession. Now the unemployment checks have stopped, and his family of four lives on charity, credit and $ 138 a week in veterans aid.
"At least while I was overseas, we were financially stable," said Bardon, who has a temporary job driving a truck for a window manufacturer. "We had a paycheck coming in every month, so we didn't have to worry about that. Plus we had health insurance, which we don't have now."
A Navy survey of 300 New England Gulf War veterans found that 21.5 percent - three times the national average - were unemployed.
"I thought there would have been more for them," said Bardon's wife, Juanita.
And some Americans wonder what is left for the people of Iraq. The country was home to Paul Vincent for the first nine years of his life. Now he lives in Detroit, where he's an attorney, but the sense of responsibility to his birthplace lives on. His group, Victims of War Inc., has raised more than $ 600,000 in cash and $ 500,000 in medicine for the Iraqis in the last year.
"I think it was a tragic chapter for both countries, despite the hoopla surrounded by the great feeling," Vincent said. "We were vindicating ourself of the Vietnam monkey on our back. When the truth came out and we killed literally hundreds of thousands of soldiers … a tremendous foreign confrontation turned out to be a massacre."
Paul Cox fought in the Vietnam War and protested the Gulf War, and he hasn't been able to put either behind him. The Oakland, Calif. civil engineer still feels shocked and saddened by the devastation.
"I think the American people have turned their backs on the war. It was like a not-so-memorable Super Bowl game: too one-sided to be any fun," he said. "You look back at that war and what it accomplished. It killed 150,000 to 200,000 people and Saddam Hussein … is still sitting high in the saddle. I'm glad not a lot of Americans died, but I also have a great deal of grief in my heart for the people who did."
Joe Hanlon, 47, a bartender at the Ames Plow Tavern in Boston's Quincy Market, said he supported the war when it started, but he has changed his mind in the last year.
"Now I think it was stupid," said Hanlon as he polished glasses in preparation for the lunchtime crowd. "(Saddam's) still doing what he wants to do. The whole idea was to get him out of power."
"A lot of people around here say that."
Still, there are many places across the nation where people do not make those kinds of comments, no matter what they might think. Janet Kelly-Merrill's town is one of those.
"There is no way we could have guessed in our wildest dreams that this community, which would have potential for real devastation, could have come out of it whole," said Kelly-Merrill, who runs the United Way in Killeen, Texas, home to Fort Hood and 38,500 soldiers.
At midnight seven months ago, she and her 13-year-old son, Nick, waited for the bus carrying Chief Warrant Officer Van Merrill, home at last. "It was like getting somebody back from the dead," she said.
"It was awful to lose my family and friends for whatever period of time. But if we had it do all over again, the Merrills would do it all over again, because that's what our job was," Kelly-Merrill said.
"I stand in support of what my soldier had to do. And my soldier stood in support of his country, right or wrong."

 

End of Document
