

Advice to Grads: Seize the Day (Before It Seizes You)
The Associated Press
June 14, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1031 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Body




"I am supposed to tell you graduating seniors what to do with the rest of your lives," physicist-philosopher Freeman J. Dyson told the graduating seniors at Bates College in Lewiston, Maine. "As if I knew."
"Carpe diem," said White House assistant Frederick D. McClure, seizing the opportunity to use a Latin phrase before his fellow Texas A&M Aggies. "Seize the day!"
"You do get out of life pretty much what you put into it, in the long run," Mark McCormack, chief executive officer of International Management Group, assured the graduates at St. Lawrence University in Canton, N.Y. "And you're in it for the long run."
Dyson, a professor at the Institute for Advanced Studies at Princeton, N.J.; McClure, President Bush's assistant for legislative affairs; and businessman McCormack were among a few thousand successful Americans who shared the ritual of delivering commencement addresses to graduating seniors at colleges across the land this May and June.
Given the chance to sum up a lifetime's lessons for those just starting out, the speakers put their hearts into it. Even after the obligatory disparaging quip on the length and forgettability of speech and speechmaker, they were full of advice.
W. Nathaniel Howell, who was U.S. ambassador in Kuwait when Saddam Hussein invaded, told University of Virginia graduates that he couldn't remember the pearls of wisdom that were "undoubtedly cast before us" at his own commencement on the same lawn in 1961.
"I'm prepared to share that fate today," he said, gamely.
Elizabeth B. Lacy, a justice of the Virginia Supreme Court told her audience at James Madison University in Harrisonburg, Va.: "Commencement addresses are spring's ritualistic exercise, a brief, bittersweet purgatory between apparent education and presumed employment."
Justice Lacy's advice was down to earth.
"Save an old building."
"Coach a team, any kind of team."
"Recycle everything in sight."
"Read to the young, the old, the blind."
"...Whatever it is, do it with your heart."
McClure offered his "seize the day" counsel to the graduating class of the College of Veterinary Medicine at Texas A&M, his alma mater. The line came from Horace, the Latin poet, by way of the movie, "Dead Poets Society."
"From this day forward," advised McClure, "I charge you to be an individual of consequence."
"Resolve, at any cost, to be true to your best self," Louis W. Sullivan, secretary of health and human services, told seniors at both the University of Miami and the University of Louisville.
Yevgeny Yevtushenko, the Soviet poet, offered brooding advice at Juniata College in Huntingdon, Pa, opening his speech with a startling question:
"Why is it that so many young people commit suicide?"
His answer was that they are prepared, by schools and parents, only for happiness, not for the "science of human suffering."
"Do not be afraid when you suffer," said Yevtushenko. "Remember that full pessimism is no less stupid than full optimism."
In the same dark vein, he went on: "Forget the vulgar, insultingly patronizing fairy tale that has been hammered into your heads since childhood that the main meaning of life is to be happy. The only true happiness is to share the sufferings of the unhappy."
William Dehning, director of choral activities at the University of the Pacific, deplored a "cult of sameness" among the young. He said it is a "crime to be dull" and he pleaded guilty to being an elitist.
"Well, take a look at me, will you?" he said. "I am a skinny, 48-year-old Caucasian male educated at two of the finest universities in the country, taught by some of the most gifted musical mentors in the world.
"I teach at a small private university which purports to be one of the best of its kind, in the most populous state in the union, and in a subject which represents some of the finest achievements of humankind during the 50,000 years or so that we have been sticking to this planet.
"Of course I'm an elitist! Is there someone here who would want me to be anything else?"
Oscar Arias Sanchez, former president of Costa Rica and recipient of the 1987 Nobel Peace Prize, told Washington University graduates in St. Louis that living under a democracy conveys special duties.
"People who live under tyranny are not responsible for the abuses committed by dictators," he said. "People who live in a democracy share the mistakes and victories of their leaders."
Thomas Pickering, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, speaking at Willamette University in Salem, Ore., counseled forbearance as Americans watch other countries reach for freedom.
"Americans have benefited from an entire infrastructure of values, rules and institutions we take for granted," he said. "We must remember these took us more than 200 years and a civil war to work out. For a great many other countries, however - including many trying it once again today - the experiment with democracy failed with disastrous consequences. We have a responsibility to help them get it right this time."
Frederick Coolidge Crawford, 100 years old, founder of the company that became TRW, Inc., lectured on eternal ethics at Ohio's Denison University, to which he's been a benefactor since 1943.
"Some friend will say, 'Don't be a sissy, I've got a great business, come and join me," he said. "'It isn't quite legal, it isn't quite ethical but nobody knows and I'm making a pile of money."'
Don't do it, advised Crawford: "One bad decision can ruin a life."
"When I was at Columbia," recalled Alvin Poussaint, the Harvard psychiatrist, speaking at Connecticut College in New London, Conn., about the need for diversity in education, "we took a course for two years in contemporary civilization and for those two years I read nothing except Western culture. There was nothing from Asia. There was nothing from Africa. There was nothing from South America. That was miseducation."
At St. Mary's College of Maryland, in St. Mary's City, Benjamin C. Bradlee, executive editor of the Washington Post, offered advice on how to read a newspaper: "skeptically, as a first draft."
"Be patient," he counseled. "You who are so young and so promising are going to outlast all efforts to cover up the truth. Know that and rejoice in it."

 

End of Document
