

After the War: U.S.-Israel Defense Treaty?
The Associated Press
February 13, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 769 words
Byline: By LARRY THORSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




When the dust settles in the Persian Gulf, will the United States want to transform its security obligations to Israel into a formal defense pact?
Israeli doves say such a treaty could eventually persuade the Jewish state to make territorial compromises and settle the Palestinian question. Even the right-wing government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir might not reject a U.S. defense treaty outright.
While Israelis take pride in defending themselves, few objected to the arrival of hundreds of GIs with Patriot anti-missile batteries after Iraq fired Scud missiles in the first days of the Persian Gulf War.
"Israel wasn't part of the (U.S.) scenario for the Persian Gulf. This crisis has forced both countries to deal with a lot of areas that they wouldn't have coordinated in the past," said Dore Gold, a scholar at Tel Aviv University's Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies.
Gold, a specialist on U.S. defense policy, said a treaty obligating the United States to defend Israel could be part of Middle East security arrangements that may emerge after the war.
The first treaty, he predicted, would be between the United States and Saudi Arabia, where U.S. troops were immediately sent after Iraq seized Kuwait, even though the United States also has no formal obligation to defend the Saudis.
"If the United States upgrades with the Saudis, what about a treaty with Israel, where the United States has longer and deeper involvement?" he asked.
Eliahu Ben-Elissar, chairman of the Defense and Foreign Affairs Committee in Israel's Parliament, said he felt the government would be "absolutely in favor of a treaty," but with two major caveats:
- A "cornerstone of Israel's military thought and national policy" is to defend itself without foreign troops. Thus, basing American troops permanently in Israel is out.
- Israel does not want foreign security guarantees to take the place of defensible borders or peace with its neighbors. A treaty would be welcome on top of such a situation, but not before it, Ben-Elissar said in an interview.
Given the poor prospects for quick solution of the Palestinian issue, Israel would be ready only in many years for a peace treaty under the requirements of Ben-Elissar, a steadfast opponent of the international Mideast peace conference demanded by the Arabs.
Yet he advocated regional arrangements to forestall a post-war arms race.
"Whoever advocates an international conference for the Middle East, let them start with this among themselves," he said, suggesting that arms suppliers to the Middle East agree to stop or limit their sales.
Ben-Elissar said the Arab countries would never agree to join a U.S.-led regional security pact that included Israel.
But Gold said the past decade has shown that the United States can deepen its military ties with Israel and not alienate the Arabs.
The breakthrough, the analyst said, was the 1983 U.S.-Israel strategic cooperation pact, which heightened exchanges of intelligence and brought regular meetings to coordinate policy.
"It was seen as natural by Arab states, something that was true all along," Gold said.
The Gulf War, he said, showed that the Arabs and Israel have mutual interests as partners of the United States. "Iraq hurling missiles at Tel Aviv and Riyadh gave them a common ironic destiny," he said.
Israeli doves argue that a U.S. defense treaty could give Israel confidence to make territorial concessions in order to settle the Palestinian issue.
This is precisely why rightists reject having a treaty if it were to be part of moves to create a Palestinian state in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip - lands the current government vows never to give up.
A treaty also could inhibit Israel from the pre-emptive strikes and cross-border bombings that dominate the country's military doctrine.
Foreign Minister David Levy argues that Israel is well-served by present U.S. security guarantees.
"When they (Washington) say guarantee, it doesn't mean that they are taking upon themselves to fight for us, but in time of need to supply what is needed to Israel," Levy told reporters when asked about a possible U.S.-Israeli defense treaty.
The idea of a defense treaty has been around since the 1970s and erupts again and again.
Last week U.S. Rep. Tom Lantos, D-Calif., said he brought the treaty idea up during a meeting with Shamir and reported the prime minister looked on it favorably.
Israeli officials said it was more likely that Shamir was simply being polite to a friendly American visitor.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Larry Thorson, a former AP bureau chief in Israel, is temporarily back in the country from his current post in Berlin.

 

End of Document
