

After 75 Years, World Still Entangled in The Great War
The Associated Press
November 7, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1075 words
Byline: By PATRICK McDOWELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ARMISTICE CLEARING, France
Body




Officially, World War I ended here, in a railroad car where Allied and German commanders signed an agreement to halt the butchery that had taken 12 million lives.
But 75 years after all fell quiet on the Western Front, the conflict soldiers called The Great War remains unfinished for their great-grandchildren in such places as Bosnia, the Middle East and the former Soviet Union.
World War I baptized the 20th century as the bloodiest in history. It shredded centuries-old empires into squabbling states, shattered notions of civilization, spawned Nazism and Leninism, bred intractable conflicts.
Although The War to End All Wars formally ceased on Nov. 11, 1918, its embers smolder in small wars and affect the foreign policies of nations wary of bigger ones.
"I can fully understand why there's no real intervention in the former Yugoslavia," said Modris Eksteins, a historian at the University of Toronto in Canada.
Sarajevo is a textbook example of the changed attitudes toward military intervention. According to Eksteins, a lesson has been learned, and arrogance humbled.
The world plunged into a cataclysm because of an assassination in Sarajevo in 1914. This time, despite the Serb siege, atrocities throughout Bosnia and what many see as a threat to Western values, the United States, France, Britain and Russia have found reasons not to be dragged into the Balkans.
It was different in 1914, before instant media, when arrangements that changed the course of history often were made in private. Europe had finished a century of relative peace. The Industrial Revolution gave the ruling classes faith in progress.
But Europe was divided among seven powers largely equal in military strength. They nurtured alliances and armed for a war many thought inevitable, even desirable.
In 1914, Sarajevo lay in the southern reaches of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, whose holdings included what are now Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina. Next door to them was the Kingdom of Serbia, suspected in Vienna of fomenting Slav separatism within the empire.
A Serb nationalist shot Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria to death in Sarajevo on June 28, 1914, and Austria-Hungary threatened Serbia with retaliation.
Serbia appealed for aid to its ally, Russia. Austria called on Germany. Russia demanded help from France, which coaxed Britain in. By August, armies were mobilized and soldiers were dying in France, Belgium and the Balkans.
Before the year was out, the Ottoman Empire - what is now Turkey and the Middle East - joined Germany. Japan cast its lot with the Allies, Italy did the same in 1915 and the United States followed in 1917.
Fighting spread to the the Arabian peninsula, the Dardanelles and central Asia, even to Africa, China and the Falkland Islands.
The world encountered total war. Germany sent submarines to sink passenger liners it suspected of carrying war supplies. Aircraft bombed London. Britain blockaded Germany. Turks massacred Armenians.
Women's liberation got a boost when, a generation before Rosie the Riveter, French women worked in munitions factories so men could go to the front.
Every available man went, tens of millions from the belligerent nations and their far-flung empires.
They found war of attrition on a scale unimagined and Industrial Age weapons - machine guns, poison gas, rapid-fire artillery, airplanes, tanks, siege guns that could flatten a city block - entrusted to generals weaned on Napoleon's campaigns.
Under mind-shattering barrages of high-explosive shells, men huddled in trenches in a misery of mud, lice, poor food and disease until ordered over the top into the hell of no man's land.
Generals promised decisive victories in short battles. They delivered neither. Millions of men died at such places as Verdun, Ypres, the Somme, Champagne.
Gallipoli, a peninsula on the Dardanelles strait between Europe and Asia, became synonomous with the futile waste of lives. Some 213,000 soldiers from the British Empire, most of them Australians, were killed or wounded on the beaches by Turkish fire from the cliffs above.
The war ended only when weary, hungry Germany cracked under an Allied counteroffensive in autumn 1918 that rolled back the German army's spring gains. Revolution was in the air at home. Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicated Nov. 9.
German negotiators were already meeting with Marshal Ferdinand Foch, chief of the Allied forces, behind French lines in the Compiegne forest. A cease-fire took effect the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month.
"Happily, the alliances aren't the same today as they were in 1914, or there'd be a world war all over again in the Balkans," said Veronique Harel, chief archivist at the Historial de la Grande Guerre, a museum and research center in the Somme town of Peronne.
At the Versailles peace conference in 1919, France, the victor that had suffered most, exacted crushing retribution.
Huge war reparations bankrupted the weak Weimar Republic. Germans were infuriated by the stationing of French troops on their soil. A sense that "traitors," not the army, had lost the war eventually made an Austrian former corporal, Adolf Hitler, the dictator of Germany.
"The 1914-18 war finished in 1945," said Jean-Pierre Thierry, chief of the Historial's research center. "The last act of The Great War was Hitler's surrender."
Perhaps that was true in the West. But the war still reverberates in eastern Europe and the Middle East, where the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman empires were broken into small nations whose borders became new battle lines.
Russia was beaten to its knees in 1917. Germany added to the instability by returning an exiled revolutionary, Vladimir Lenin, who gave the 20th century a new kind of authoritarian rule.
Now the Soviet Union he created is dead and Central Asian regions the czars and Ottoman Turks fought over are independent. But Azerbaijan and Georgia are fighting internal wars, and October's street battles in Moscow demonstrate that the turmoil begun in 1917 has not ended.
Perhaps the greatest legacy of World War I and its thrice-bloodier successor is the change in mood from the jaunty jingoism of 1914 to the caution of today.
Public opinion no longer tolerates the slaughter of soldiers, or even unexpected losses.
"Look at all the fuss being made about one soldier in Somalia," said George Mosse, a history professor at the University of Wisconsin. "World War I was Europe's first confrontation with mass death. You can't sustain a war like that now."
 Load-Date: November 7, 1993

 

End of Document
