

After All the Attack Talk, Somehow It Was Still a Surprise
The Associated Press
January 17, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 733 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In a town accustomed to leaks, President Bush managed to keep the timing of the U.S. strike against Iraq a secret - from most aides, some U.S. allies and, presumably, Iraq. Even Soviet Leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev apparently joined the conspiracy of silence.
Noting the relative lack of resistance to U.S. planes, the Pentagon said, "We appear to have achieved tactical surprise."
Administration officials said the final die for the invasion, including the probable timing, was cast at a meeting Sunday at the White House among Bush and his top national security advisers.
Bush entrusted details of his decision to seven men, the sources said: Vice President Dan Quayle, Secretary of State James A. Baker III, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft, Deputy National Security Adviser Robert Gates and Chief of Staff John Sununu.
Though there was wide speculation that attack was imminent, the secret of the timing held.
Shortly before the air raid began, the administration briefed congressional leaders and gulf allies, said the officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
That the massive U.S.-led air raid appeared to catch Iraqi air defenses off guard is even more surprising in light of the fact that - with the advantage of hindsight - it came at the least surprising time possible.
Bush had said he would move "sooner rather than later" if Saddam continued to scorn the Jan. 15 U.N. deadline to withdraw his forces from Kuwait.
And, the soonest time he could move after that deadline - assuming he wanted a cover of darkness - was pretty much just when he ordered the strike. A new moon was in the sky on the night of the invasion, providing an added measure of darkness that would not reoccur until Feb. 14.
Bush managed to keep his own counsel, going so far as to write his own speech to the nation rather than entrusting it to White House speech writers.
He began the speech three weeks ago at the presidential retreat at Camp David, spokesman Marlin Fitzwater has said.
That was well in an advance of the U.N. deadline.
In reality, Bush may have decided that he would have to use force when he sent U.S. troops to the gulf region in early August; or perhaps when he decided to send reinforcements in November.
Bush made the decision all but final on Tuesday, signing a national security directive committing U.S. forces to war - but leaving the date, at least temporarily, blank.
The initial stages of the attack produced almost no return fire from the Iraqis.
"Where was this guy, where was Saddam Hussein? He must have been on vacation or asleep," said Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan.
Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, while urging against euphoria, said: "We appear to have achieved tactical surprise."
Was Saddam Hussein really caught that much off guard? "We don't know," Fitzwater said on Thursday. "Obviously there was not a lot of resistance last night but we don't know why."
Calls to congressional leaders and U.S. allies began about 5 p.m., just two hours before the first wave of bombers and missiles reached their targets.
Bush called some world leaders personally, while Baker placed calls to others. It was Baker who notified Gorbachev, giving the Soviet leader about an hour's heads-up on the strike.
The Soviet Union has been an ally of Iraq, and was a source of many Iraqi planes and missiles. But the Soviets have joined in the pressure for Saddam to pull his forces out of Kuwait.
The U.S. government and the armed forces - here and in the field - sought to project normalcy in the hours before the attack.
About two hours before the attack became clear, the air over Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, was filled with the roar of aircraft.
But when a reporter checked with an aide to Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of the U.S.-led forces, the staff member was casually eating a sandwich in the press hotel and dismissed the noise as "just a routine tanker flight or something."
Fitzwater said that Bush didn't even tell his overnight guest, the Rev. Billy Graham, about his decision in advance.
And, even after the fact, when it came to disclosing just when the president made his decision to go to war, Bush aides still appeared to be maintaining a protective lid on information.
Fitzwater, operating on details provided by the president's close advisers, gave three versions in as many hours on when Bush made the decision to attack.

 

End of Document
