

Allies Strike From the Sky, Step Up Preparations on the Ground
The Associated Press
January 28, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1108 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia
Body




From far-flung desert bases, allied bombers took wing today on the 12th day of their stinging air offensive. But the success of one crucial mission - to staunch the world's worst oil spill - remained to be seen.
International experts arrived in the region today to work on cleaning up the slick in the Persian Gulf, which U.S. officials said was begun by Iraqi occupation forces in Kuwait.
A Norwegian ship equipped with cleanup equipment was off the coast of Bahrain, and a British consortium was flying in more than 70 tons of equipment including booms and suction skimmers. Coast Guard and Environmental Protection Agency experts met with Saudi officials to put together a cleanup plan.
During the weekend, U.S. F-111 fighter bombers blew up the pipeline valves pinpointed as the source of the giant slick, estimated at 300 million gallons.
U.S. officials expressed confidence the attack significantly reduced the flow of crude to a 35-by-10-mile slick that could threaten desalination plants on which Saudis - and allied forces - rely for fresh water.
Allied officials, meanwhile, cast a wary eye toward officially neutral Iran, where increasing numbers of Iraqi aircraft have been seeking refuge.
Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of U.S. forces in the gulf, said Sunday that 39 Iraqi aircraft have flown to Iran since the war began - 23 of them in the previous 24 hours.
Iran has said it would confiscate the planes for the duration of the war, but U.S. officials said they had to consider the possibility that the move was a ploy to shield Iraq's air force, still largely unscathed by allied bombing.
"We would be absolutely not worth our salt as military people if we ignored the fact that those planes could fly back out of Iran after us," Schwarzkopf said Sunday.
Before dawn today, Saudi time, American soldiers in sand-strewn camps and on ships in the hazy Persian Gulf gathered around radios and televisions for a Super Bowl memorable for more than the play on the field.
Clad in protective gear, gas masks at the ready, troops quaffed non-alcoholic beer - alcohol is illegal in Saudi Arabia - and wondered whether they would make it home for next year's matchup.
"It feels weird to be watching this here," said Sgt. Kevin Duclos, 26, a Buffalo Bills fan from Rochester, N.Y. "I thought I'd be home having chicken wings and real beer."
The troops - along with millions of citizens of Saudi Arabia and Israel - had a rare respite from the Iraqi missiles that have rained from the sky almost nightly. No missile launches were reported Sunday night or this morning.
Since the war began, Iraq has hurled 51 Scud missiles - 26 at Saudi Arabia and 25 at Israel, the allies said.
Scud missile launchers have been a principal target of the coalition bombers, but The Washington Post, citing well-placed but unidentified officials, said today only eight of 30 fixed Scud missile launchers had been hit as of Friday - and that there was no photographic proof of any mobile Scud launchers being destroyed.
The Post also reported that 65 percent of Iraq's airfields are operational, along with 8,000 to 9,000 pieces of high-grade, anti-aircraft artillery.
The allies took advantage of clear skies again today to press relentless air strikes. French Mirage and Jaguar warplanes pounded Iraq's elite Republican Guard troops in Iraqi territory near the border with Kuwait, and Italian Tornado fighter-bombers took part in an allied mission.
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney says that although air attacks against Iraq have scored some successes, they alone will not drive Iraq from Kuwait. U.S. soldiers will be prepared "before the end of February" to launch a ground offensive, he said Sunday on NBC's "Meet the Press."
Preparations for the ground confrontation continued around the clock.
In the northern Saudi desert, front-line troops dug foxholes and bunkers to protect them from Iraq's top-line artillery. Army engineers are working to finish airstrips and roads.
In a sober assessment of the potential impact of a ground war, American commnanders have warned Army doctors to expect some frontline units to suffer casualties of more than 10 percent in 30 days, if current secret plans for a ground attack are implemented.
The prediction is tentative, officers familiar with the warning stressed, and applies only to the forwardmost units which would be called upon to break through Iraqi defensive lines or drive deep into heavily defended Iraqi-held territory.
A ground battle would pit 675,000 allied troops - including 480,000 Americans - against 540,000 Iraqi soldiers in and near occupied Kuwait.
Much of the allied bombing is aimed at "softening up" the Iraqi ground forces. Schwarzkopf said the pilots are trying hard to keep from causing civilian casualties, making the risky business of bombing runs even more dangerous.
"By requiring that the pilots fly in a certain direction of flight or use a certain type of munition that requires them to go to altitudes that they wouldn't ordinarily be required to go to, those pilots are at much more risk than they would be otherwise," he said.
The Baghdad government has repeatedly accused the United States of targeting civilian areas.
At the Jordanian border, at least two refugees fleeing Iraq said today they had seen allied warplanes bombing civilians convoys trying to flee toward Jordan, killing and wounding some people. Hundreds of evacuees were fleeing into Jordan after Iraq reopened its border.
Baghdad radio said Sunday night that President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, whose country has deployed the second largest foreign contingent in the allied force, should expect to be assassinated by a fellow Egypian.
The radio called Mubarak "stupid," "a frightened coward" and "lacking in manliness" and said he appeared more Zionist than his "Zionist friends in Tel Aviv."
Today, the Iraqi military issued a communique saying the allies had carried out 118 bombing sorties against Iraq since Sunday - a small fraction of the number of sorties reported by the allies.
Schwarzkopf said Sunday the allies had flown more than 22,000 sorties since the war began Jan. 17.
The allies said two F-15s shot down four Iraqi MiG-23s Sunday southeast of Baghdad, and that no U.S. planes were lost in the past 48 hours.
Schwarzkopf told reporters in the Saudi capital, Riyadh, that U.S. warplanes using "smart bombs" attacked a coastal complex of pipes linking oil fields with an offshore loading buoy for tankers late Saturday. He said a videotape taken after the air strike indicated much less oil was flowing from the loading buoy after the attack.
"I think that we have been successful," he said, "but only time is going to tell."

 

End of Document
