

Americans Offer Their Lives for Their Country, as the Ticker Rolls On
The Associated Press
January 27, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1044 words
Byline: By NANCY SHULINS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It's roughly 6,500 miles from the Persian Gulf war to Manhattan. But the little Armed Forces recruiting station in the heart of Times Square is as good a place as any to feel its vibrations.
The men and women who crowd into the booth these cold winter days to offer up their young lives for their country have only to turn their gaze upward for news of the war to hit home.
Bright red letters scroll continuously past on the electronic sign that girdles 1 Times Square, America's New Year's Eve headquarters: "… NAVY PLANES HAVE SUNK 2 IRAQ SHIPS IN NORTHERN PERSIAN GULF AND CHASED 2 OTHER BOATS FROM AREA ..." reads one headline, a service provided by New York Newsday.
1st Sgt. James Ellis, the Army recruiter, reads the sign frequently. This marks the second time he's remained Stateside while others have gone off to war, and "yes, it is hard. I think about it all the time." The 39-year-old paratrooper enlisted in 1972 only to sit out Vietnam at Fort Bragg, N.C.
"There was a greater need for me here," Ellis is quick to add. He understands in a way others might not the motivation of people like Cephus Arrington, 26, a bicycle messenger who has yet to pass the Army's screening test but who has already quit his job in his eagerness to join up.
"There are basically three reasons why people enlist: service to country, education and training, travel and adventure," Ellis says.
While an Army-financed education might not seem anywhere near the bargain it did a few weeks ago, the Persian Gulf war has produced a surge in patriotism and pride that's almost palpable within the glass-walled recruiting station.
"The service-to-country category is up," Ellis says, as are supportive comments from strangers, who smile and wave and yell "Way to go" as he strides by in his starched Army uniform.
Enlistments by professionals may be on the rise, too. Last week, a 30-year-old New Yorker traded a law practice for an Army uniform, and a woman fresh out of medical school signed up to serve.
For a recruiter, these are good days. Says Air Force Staff Sgt. Ronald W. Watford, who shares the cubicle with Ellis and others, "The people coming in are people who want to fight."
 
 "… IRAQ TO USE PRISONERS AS 'HUMAN SHIELDS': U.S. CALLS MOVE A WAR CRIME ..."
 
 Owen Jerez needs to go on a diet.
"Right now you weigh 204. You need to weigh 179," Watford tells Jerez, peering at the numbers on the scale at the back of the cubicle, midway between the Navy and the Marines. Jerez vows to return in a month, minus some of his extra pounds but none of his enthusiasm.
"I've always been interested in the Air Force," says Jerez, a muscular 19-year-old with three years of college accounting and a hint of a swagger.
Nonplussed by the TV camera recording his weigh-in for an Italian news show, he says he would have signed up eventually, war or no war.
But the nightly footage of Air Force pilots dropping their loads with deadly precision hasn't been lost on Owen Jerez. "Did you see it? It's great. They put those bombs right through the windows!"
 
 "… BAGHDAD ACCUSES U.S. FORCES OF BOMBING MUSLIM SHRINES: SAYS THEY WILL BE AVENGED BY GUERRILLA SUICIDE MISSIONS ..."
 
 Robert Schnickel dropped out of high school in ninth grade. Now 17, he has a new incentive for earning his high school equivalency diploma:
Without it, the Army won't take him.
Already, he talks like a soldier. The gulf war, he says, "is something we got to do. That's what we're out there for - to get the job done."
By the time he trades his stonewashed jeans and black leather jacket for Army fatigues, America may no longer be at war. "I hope I get there before it's all over," says Schnickel, his dark hair slick with gel and one ear studded with earrings. He watches the action on television every night.
He thinks it would be "an experience. War changes the course of people's lives. Mentally, I would age a couple of years. But I would be getting training to survive in the world."
One potential obstacle looms. "My mom is overprotective. She doesn't want me to die."
 
 "… IN 5 DAYS OF WAR, ALLIED PLANES HAVE FLOWN OVER 10,000 SORTIES; NO ALLIED PLANES LOST IN 24 HOURS ..."
 
 The Marines are looking for a few good men. Kevin Miranda thinks he may be one of them. Miranda, 18, hopes to enlist in July, after picking up the three additional college credits he needs to qualify.
"I feel there's a good reason to fight right now. It isn't oil. It's Saddam. If we don't take him out now, in five years, he'll be bigger. It's better to get him out now when he's a little crazy, instead of later when he's crazier. My family says I'm signing my own death certificate. But if it's my time to die, I'll die."
Like his friend Robert Schnickel, the boyish, sandy-haired Miranda thinks going to war would make a man of him. Among his buddies, he says, "I'm kind of the kid of the group. In the Marines, I'd get discipline. I'd learn how to survive in life. It would be a very big adventure."
He already has an idea what it would be like.
"I've gone to those war games, where you shoot paint at each other. It's not the exact same thing, but so far, I've survived most of the rounds."
 
 "… WALL STREET STOCKS LOSE GROUND AS GULF WAR DRAGS ON .. ."
 
 Robert Brigande Jr., a 29-year-old accountant, is spending his lunch hour finding out how to go about joining the Army or Navy Reserves. His ambivalence shows, but he's here. "I am anti-war, but I would like to do my part. To be part of what others have done for us."
He'd had those same thoughts before, but wanted to finish school before acting on them. He now has an MBA and a new sense of urgency. For a week, he's been watching CNN by night and reading newspapers by day.
"Nothing happens in a vacuum," he says. "My father was in the Navy. He went to Korea. And I have cousins who left on Sunday for the gulf."
Already, he says, he feels part of something bigger than himself. "Last night, I heard this officer on TV. He really touched me. He was saying, what is it you're fighting for? It isn't oil. When you're out there on the battlefield, you're fighting for your fellow soldiers, for each other. It's love. That's what you're really fighting for."
 
 " … ALLIED LOSSES: 17 PLANES LOST IN COMBAT INCLUDING 9 AMERICANS; 24 SERVICEMEN MISSING IN ACTION INCLUDING 13 AMERICANS . .."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto available

 

End of Document
