

Amid Battlefield Chaos, Lessons in the Emotions of War
The Associated Press
June 13, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1026 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




"Chaos, total chaos!" 18-year-old Pfc. Jason E. Kick screamed into a tape recorder inside his Bradley fighting vehicle. "One just got one of our guys."
It was Kick's fellow cavalryman, Sgt. Nels A. Moller, whose Bradley took a direct hit from an Iraqi tank round - "like somebody hit us with a sledgehammer," one soldier said.
Moller was killed. "Can't let this, can't let this affect us or get us down or we're all gonna die," Kick said into his recorder. "And he wouldn't want that. He don't want that. But I'm scared."
Kick and the other members of the 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment managed to control their emotions and went on to a smashing victory in a little known but classic cavalry engagement that has come to be called the Battle at 73 Easting.
Like most of the major battles against Iraq, only the soldiers themselves witnessed up close the Battle at 73 Easting.
The violent clash on a featureless patch of desert just west of Kuwait lasted only six hours and its outcome was hardly in doubt from the opening shot. The Iraqis were taken by surprise and crushed. More than 2,000 of them surrendered.
Few Americans are likely to know of the Battle at 73 Easting, but the Army is taking an extraordinary interest in its most minute details.
With the help of the U.S. soldiers who actually fought it, the Army is reconstructing key pieces of the Battle at 73 Easting: the tank-on-tank firings, the helicopter assaults, the exploding Iraqi armor, the U.S. commanders' orders to their troops, even the deadly strike on Moller's Bradley.
The reconstruction gives an unusual and sometimes telling look at the way the Army fought the war. It also provides a glimpse of the grim side of war, the death and destruction, the fear and anger, that the Pentagon managed largely to keep from the American public during the war.
This is not history for history's sake. The Army intends to use the data to create a computer-driven simulation of the battle. From inside a training simulator, a soldier will experience the "reality" of war without actually being there.
Simulators, complete with full-color video displays, a sound system and motion devices, have been used for years for military training. But never before has an army attempted to design a simulation entirely from the details - including the weather, the exact terrain and the results - of an actual battle.
Col. Michael D. Krause, deputy chief of military history at the Army Center of Military History, said he expects the simulation to be finished in about six months.
In attempting to recreate the exact circumstances of the Battle at 73 Easting, Krause and other members of the project interviewed soldiers of the 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment, which fought the battle against the Tawakalna Division of the Iraqi Republican Guard - one of the ablest of Iraq's armored divisions.
Krause incorporated the soldiers' comments - including those which Kick spoke into his tape recorder - in a comprehensive report he wrote about the battle. Kick's remarks and early accounts of the battle were first reported by the Seattle Post-Intelligencer and the military newspaper Stars and Stripes.
The fighting took place on the afternoon of Feb. 26, the third day of the four-day ground war. It was the first clash between allied forces and the Republican Guard.
The battle's name was taken from its location. The 73 Easting is a grid line on a U.S. military map of southern Iraq. Ironically, this stretch of empty desert was a peacetime training ground of the Republican Guard. It will, if the simulation is successful, serve the same purpose for the U.S. Army for years to come.
The 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment had eight 150-man "troops," or companies, engaged in the battle, but to make the project manageable the historical recreation includes just three of them: Eagle Troop, Ghost Troop and Iron Troop.
Krause and the others also reviewed battlefield "situation reports" of the three troops, voice recordings of the battlefield communications and after-action reports. They spent two weeks at the site in early April and, with the soldiers, reconstructed the battle, shot by shot, mile by mile, from start to finish.
They even made a rough estimate of how many Iraqis were killed in the battle - something the Pentagon says it did not and will not attempt for the war as a whole. The historians estimated that Eagle, Ghost and Iron troops killed 590 Iraqis and destroyed 50 tanks, 36 armored personnel carriers and 37 infantry bunkers.
Six members of the regiment were killed in the battle. For his fellow cavalrymen, Moller's death became a source of inspiration as the battle raged on.
"Boom. Hit. Hit and kill," Kick said into his recorder as he watched U.S. gunners fire at two Iraqi tanks. "He hit it. That's revenge for Sergeant Moller."
The 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment crossed into Iraq from Saudi Arabia on Feb. 23, one day before the official start of the ground war. On the 25th intelligence officers advised that the Tawakalna Division's main defenses were set up at the 73 Easting to cover for the withdrawal of the Iraqi Army from Kuwait.
On the afternoon of the 26th, the battle began in a fierce sandstorm.
In their comments to the historians, the soldiers described a wild - and wildly successful - attack on Iraqi forces who apparently were caught by surprise as the American M1A1 tanks and Bradley Fighting Vehicles blasted away from long range.
"Enemy tank turrets were hurled skyward," said Capt. Dan Miller of Mawnee, Ohio, commander of Iron Troop. "The unforgettable odor of burning diesel, melting metal and plastics, expended munitions and anything else that happened to be burning in bunkers hung heavy in the air."
Capt. Hebert R. McMaster of Philadelphia, commander of Eagle Troop, said the fighting was so intense, and the weather so bad, that it was not until the next morning that he and his men saw the full extent of the devastation they had wrought.
"I had grossly underestimated enemy losses," he told the historians. "Countless enemy tanks, personnel carriers, trucks and bunkers were still smoking or in flames. We were faced with the gruesome sight of a battlefield covered with enemy dead."
 Graphic



 
With LaserPhoto

 

End of Document
