

An AP New Dimensions Feature - HEAD: Fourth World Moves Out Of The Shadows
The Associated Press
May 24, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 823 words
Body




---
 
 By JOY ASCHENBACH
National Geographic
For AP Newsfeatures
The plight of the Kurds, one of the largest groups of stateless people, has thrust the invisible Fourth World out of the shadows.
Millions of people belong to an estimated 5,000 "nations," some of them centuries old. They live under the political control of the world's 170 nation-states, most of whose boundaries were carved out by colonial powers after World War II.
What makes a nation? People sharing a common identity, language, culture, history and some form of political organization and territorial base.
There are, for example, about 130 nations in the Soviet Union, about 180 in Brazil, 350 in India, 300 in Indonesia and 90 in Ethiopia.
At least 75 percent of the world's wars today are fought by Fourth World nations, battling each other or the states that claim them. In many regions, "it's the Fourth World against the Third World," says one expert.
The longest-running war in Africa has been bloodily waged for nearly 30 years by secessionists in Ethiopia's northernmost province, Eritrea. Anti-government rebels of the Tigray People's Liberation Front in the neighboring province are negotiating with the Ethiopian government for the right to determine their own destiny.
Most of the more than 15 million refugees worldwide are the legacy of such Fourth World conflicts.
With an estimated 20 million people, the Kurds have a population greater than that of three-quarters of United Nations member states. But their mountainous homeland, Kurdistan, is split among five nation-states: Iraq, Iran, Turkey, Syria and the Soviet Union.
"The Kurds are never going to be Iraqis; they have a completely different identity," says Bernard Nietschmann of the University of California at Berkeley. "Most states control many nations and try to make one people out of those who never consented to their fate. You can suppress, but you cannot eradicate identity."
In their struggle with Iraq, the Kurds want recognition of their language and culture, administrative control over the three provinces where most of their people live and a significant share of the profits from oil near Kirkuk, part of their historical homeland.
"Indigenous peoples today have been reduced to islands in a sea of modern states," Nietschmann says.
Such stateless people are found on nearly every continent: the Basques in Spain, Palestinians in the Middle East, numerous Indian tribes throughout the Americas, Zhuang in China, Tamil in Sri Lanka, seminomadic Efe in Zaire and Aborigines in Australia.
Unlike the Fourth World, the First, Second and Third worlds are internationally recognized. The nation-states of the First World are rich, industrialized countries, including the United States and Soviet Union; Second World, communist countries or those between the superpowers and the Third World; Third World, the economically developing countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America.
"The Second World is shrinking quickly, if it still exists," says geographer William Wood of the State Department.
These shorthand designations can be confusing. Some experts say Fourth World denotes only the poorest of the poor - the disaster-plagued people of Bangladesh or tribes such as those in Africa's stricken Sahel region.
In their quest for independence, not all Fourth World peoples want to secede and become sovereign states, Nietschmann tells National Geographic. Many seek degrees of autonomy over their homelands, political structures and natural resources within nation-states.
On the ecologically rich Mosquito Coast of eastern Nicaragua, an innovative strategy protects 5,000 square miles of Mosquito Indian lands. By setting the area aside for conservation, the Nicaraguan government permanently recognizes this Mosquito territory.
"The movement by nations pushing for power-sharing demands that the world evolve a new kind of geopolitics - decentralized federalism - or be gripped by worse cycles of violence," says Jason Clay, research director at Cultural Survival, a human-rights organization based in Cambridge, Mass.
"The thawing of the Cold War may make things bloodier," Clay says he fears. "It doesn't take much money for machetes or AK-47s. It just takes a will to fight, and there's plenty of that out there."
"In the great global readjustment, there is both an outburst of nationalism leading to the breakup of states into their constituent national parts, such as in Yugoslavia, and there is a taking down of boundaries by the members of the European Community to create a superstate," says geographer George Demko of Dartmouth College.
"All Soviet border republics, from the Baltics to Central Asia, will be independent nation-states in 10 years," predicts political scientist Walter Clemens of Boston University. "For the borderlands, confederation is not a viable solution. It's too weak."
"The Western notion of the melting-pot state is not the future," Clay contends. "It's not what the people want."
 Graphic



 
ART: Two LaserPhotos move overnight Sat-Sun May 25-26

 

End of Document
