

Arafat, Assailed on All Sides, Plays His Hand Out to the Last
The Associated Press
August 24, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 777 words
Byline: By ED BLANCHE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NICOSIA, Cyprus
Body




Yasser Arafat has wriggled his way out of more crises than he can count over the last quarter-century. But as Middle East peace talks bog down, he is now under attack from his own people and seems to be looking to his Israeli foes to rescue him.
In recent days, criticism from within the Palestine Liberation Organization of Arafat's peace talks strategy and his high-handed style of leadership, a bone of contention for years, has reached unprecedented levels.
On Tuesday, one of his military commanders publicly told him to resign. In the last week, two highly respected members of the movement's ruling Executive Committee have resigned and insiders say more may follow.
The PLO chairman has quarrelled fiercely with the Palestinian delegates negotiating with Israel.
On Thursday, the 18-member Executive Committee is scheduled to meet in Tunis, where the PLO leadership in exile has its headquarters, to discuss the crisis.
It seems certain to be a stormy session. The outcome could well have a major impact on the U.S.-sponsored peace talks due to resume in Washington Aug. 31.
After 21 months of largely fruitless negotiations, the Palestinians have precious little to show for the concessions they have had to make under U.S. pressure. On the other hand, Syria and Jordan appear to be making some headway.
On the peace talks front, pressure has been building on Arafat since he accepted that the basis for negotiations was an interim period of limited self-rule for the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, not the independent state the Palestinians want.
This has alienated many of the 1.8 million Palestinians in the occupied territories, who have been waging an uprising against Israeli rule since December 1987. That, in turn, has bolstered Muslim fundamentalists who oppose the peace process.
In the face of Israeli stonewalling, Arafat has had to make concessions just to stay in the game. The more concessions he's made, the greater the grassroots pressure has grown to pull out of the talks.
These convulsions peaked earlier this month when Arafat, without consulting the Palestinian negotiating team or anyone else outside his coterie of advisers, presented proposals which lay the foundation for a five-year interim period of Palestinian self-rule.
He seems to be prepared to settle for self-rule initially only for the turbulent Gaza Strip, a hotbed of extremism which the Israelis would like to be rid of anyway, and the ancient West Bank city of Jericho.
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel said in Copenhagen on Tuesday: "The Palestinians have expressed willingness to try autonomy in Gaza first, and I think the Israeli government is ready to do so."
Arafat's critics believe that in return for settling for self-rule initially only for Gaza and Jericho, Arafat hopes Israel will recognize the PLO as a full negotiating partner.
That would give him greater political clout and ensure his place in history as "Mr. Palestine," embodiment of the Palestinian struggle.
One of Arafat's greatest problems in recent years has been the emergence of a new generation of leaders in the occupied territories who are challenging his authority.
Some Palestinians feel that he believes cutting a profitable deal with Israel would undercut his challengers and perhaps inject some life into the peace talks.
But this risks a violent reaction from Arafat's opponents, who consider anything less than an independent sovereign state a betrayal.
It also risks a backlash from hard-line Israelis, who have made clear they are prepared to fight Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's government if it gives an inch to the Arabs.
All this leaves Arafat, who has dominated the PLO by guile, largesse and muscle for the last 23 years, in a precarious position in which he must gamble for his survival.
His dictatorial methods and his policies have long been criticized. But this has intensified since his support for Iraq during its occupation of Kuwait drove the oil-rich Gulf states to cut off funds and plunged the PLO into a financial crisis.
Arafat has been forced to take severe austerity measures, including slashing payments to hundreds of thousand of Palestinians in refugee camps and the families of slain guerrillas, further eroding support.
All this has rekindled accusations of corruption and gross mismanagement, as well as demands for more democratic debate and collective decision-making.
PLO officials in Tunis say the movement there is demoralized and disheartened as never before as Arafat fires large numbers of staff while the movement tears itself apart from within.
 
 ---
Editor's note: Ed Blanche, The AP's Middle East news Editor, has covered the region since 1985.

 

End of Document
