

At the Crossroads, a Look at America
The Associated Press
November 1, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 987 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Here are two voters, Rich Dunbar and Joe Vesely, and their stories say something about America's state of mind as it takes stock and makes its presidential choice on Tuesday.
Rich Dunbar, a lifelong but disenchanted Republican, runs a hardware store in Greentree, Pa., outside Pittsburgh. He flirted with Ross Perot, but finally decided the Texas independent was "too unpredictable, too spontaneous." So he'll vote for George Bush ("the lesser of three evils") in tribute to the end of the Cold War.
"Peace of mind is worth a dollar," Dunbar says.
Joe Vesely, 76, a one-time farmer, is a retired prison guard living in Topeka, Kan. Disgusted with the economy and the country's direction, he rejects Bush. He's for Bill Clinton.
"All I have to do is read the papers," he says. "Our economy is runaway with jobless. We are increasing by leaps and bounds our national debt. Everything seems to be out of control."
For much of 1992, the country - like these two voters - has debated about where it is, where it's been, where it wants to go.
It is a ritualistic stocktaking, a quadrennial option to start fresh in a country that likes fresh starts. Every four years, to the bewilderment of the rest of the world, the conversation resumes.
So now the stocktaking is drawing to an end, and Americans, 100-some million strong, will end the debate by picking a president, and a direction, for the next four years.
Where do the American people stand this time around? How has the country changed in the 12 years - a dozen years makes an era, by America's impatient standards - since it opted for the Reagan-Bush course?
Everyone knows the big changes - the collapse of 45 years of nuclear nervousness and East-West confrontation that led to two ugly wars in Asia, a binge of prosperity and debt in the '80s, two recessions. But other changes are not as obvious. The country that elected Ronald Reagan 12 years ago is not the same place that passes judgment on his heir Tuesday.
The World Series championship moved outside of territorial USA, and the republic did not wobble. The blood-splattered Berlin Wall came down, its rubble sold as souvenirs. And the United States went from being the world's banker to the world's borrower.
Americans commuted in Toyota cars to work on Toshiba computers and saw their president go overseas to peddle Buicks to the Japanese.
On the Reagan-Bush watch, the country fought two small wars in Grenada and Panama - wars critics called unworthy - and a medium-sized one in Iraq that ended somewhat unsatisfactorily, the goal gained but the foe unvanquished. Saddam Hussein - a foe Bush compared to Hitler - sits defiant in defeat. And, for America, victory has never tasted so sour.
Reagan presided over the country's longest peacetime expansion but also oversaw the worst recession since the Depression - far worse than Bush's. But Bush's timing was lousy; Reagan's bad news came at the start of his time, removed from an election.
The rich, as suspected, got richer. The Congressional Budget Office said 60 percent of the additional wealth earned by people in the Reagan years went to the country's richest 1 percent.
And the poor faltered. In June, one American in 10 was on food stamps, the first time that's happened. And a tragic subculture known as the homeless emerged.
Reagan went down as the greatest borrower in history. He increased the national debt by more than all 39 presidents before him combined. Bush added another trillion to it.
What of race, that persistent divider?
"We can deal with the economy," said the Rev. Joseph Lowery, a scarred veteran of the civil rights movement, upon his retirement last June. "If we lose our souls, what, then, is there for us?"
Rodney King, the videotaped black motorist beaten by Los Angeles police, had a question, too: "People, I want to say, you know, can we all get along? Can we stop making it horrible for the older people and the kids?"
It took looting and arson, damage approaching $ 1 billion, 53 deaths, 2,383 injuries and 16,000 arrests in Los Angeles last spring to tell Americans what they already knew - in race relations, hostility runs deep and change comes slow.
And yet the commonwealth of Virginia, seat of the Confederacy, elected a black as its governor during the Reagan-Bush years, and in this election the number of blacks and Hispanics in Congress is expected to increase by a third - one member in Congress out of every eight a member of a racial minority.
AIDS, barely noted when Reagan first ran for president, became a new national, headshaking worry. AIDS killed 31 Americans in 1981; last year, the toll was 44,000.
Millions of families, nearly one in five, these days dutifully separate bottles from cans from plastics from paper and put it out on the front curb, a ritual less commonplace 12 years ago. And the country stops logging a vast stretch of the Northwest to save a bird whose hoot few have ever heard.
America has been educated, as never before, about relationships between the sexes.
In an anything goes era - a $ 50 book of dirty pictures of Madonna is the No. 1 best seller - the country learned some of the thou-shalt-nots of behavior between the sexes.
They were spelled out in airing Anita Hill's charges of sexual misconduct against Clarence Thomas, an event that seems to have stuck in the memory of everyone who watched on television and in the craw of women's throats.
The earnings gap between the sexes has narrowed a bit. In 1979, the average woman earned 62 cents for every dollar earned by a man. In 1991, the woman's figure was 70 cents.
Nonetheless, the average woman with four years of college earns no more than the average man with only a high school diploma.
All these changes occurred against the backdrop of a conservative government. Now the Rich Dunbars and Joe Veselys of America determine whether a midcourse correction is called for. It is an election, a rite of democracy, an act of renewal and affirmation.

 

End of Document
