

Away in a Soup Kitchen: Christmas in the Modern Mangers
The Associated Press
December 15, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1046 words
Byline: By DAVID BRIGGS, Associated Press Writer
Body




Marty spent last Christmas in a Saudi Arabian desert as part of Operation Desert Storm. Ivan spent it drinking in a small room in South Dakota. Gary spent the day in prison in Colorado.
This year, these three clean-shaven young men will celebrate Christmas in a homeless shelter in Bismarck, N.D. And they will share a new understanding of the experience of a child born in humble surroundings nearly 2,000 years ago.
"It's pretty sad that it took this to make me realize what Christmas really is," said Marty, 23. "People put too much weight on the commercialism part instead of focusing on the birth of Christ. That's what we should be celebrating."
After two milleniums, the story of a child born in a Bethlehem manger finds its echoes in a shelter in North Dakota, soup kitchens in Las Vegas and New Orleans and a home for the severely retarded in Tennessee.
In the Gospel of Luke, Mary gives birth and then places Jesus in a manger "because there was no place for them in the inn."
Scholars debate whether this was a cave or a stable, or even whether Jesus was born in Bethlehem. But most interpreters agree the Gospel writer wanted to identify Jesus with the poor of his time.
"It is obvious that Jesus at his birth was a homeless person. Those who claim to be his followers … will find their satisfaction in a modern journey to places of need," said William L. Hendricks of Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in Louisville. "Soup kitchens, shelters for the homeless and institutions for the marginalized are the modern counterpart of the manger."
Some find joy in this identification with the Christ child. Amid broken dreams of prosperity that drew them to Las Vegas from New Mexico, the Sandoval family is planning to spend their best Christmas ever in a homeless shelter a few blocks from the casino-lined Strip.
"What we're going through reminds me of what Mary and Joseph went through in Bethlehem," said Lorraine Sandoval, 28, as she watched her two boys, ages 4 and 3, play with other children at the Crossroads shelter. "Nobody wanted us, then we found this place, we found a home."
Mark Anthony, 46, has lived on the streets for 10 years and plays his harmonica in New Orleans' French Quarter. His meals are free at the Center of Jesus the Lord, and if he makes $ 3.75 he can sleep in a city shelter.
"I call that a blessing, not luck," Anthony said. "I blow my harmonica and sing and think about how at least I got that. That's a blessing from God and a Christmas present for life."
But others in the modern mangers find it hard to keep the spirit of Christmas alive. The secular aspects of the holiday can weigh heavily on poverty-stricken families.
Cassandra Cohn, 24, also lives on the edge of the French Quarter. Amid the world-famous restaurants that dot nearly every block, she brings her four kids for the free lunches at the Center of Jesus the Lord.
Seven-year-old David wants a bike and 4-year-old Ashley wants a doll, but Ms. Cohn only gets $ 277 a month in welfare and her rent is $ 195.
"I tell them about the real meaning of Christmas, about how the baby Jesus was poor and cold," Cohn said. "They know how he felt, I guess."
Hazel Greiser, a 58-year-old widow who is among the mountain poor of West Virginia, said faith is the only thing that prevents her from dreading Christmas. She is unable to give her two pre-teen daughters the things they desire.
"They know we're poor, but sometimes I hear them when they don't know I'm listening. They have their dreams, but they look and dream knowing that they cannot have things. … It just seems like everyone is more interested in what they can get rather than what they can give," she said. "Ask kids what Christmas is about and they tell you it's presents and Santa Claus. It's never about the Christ child and how he came into the world."
He did not come into the world in the beatific fashion of Christmas cards and paintings by the 15th-century artist Fra Angelico, most scholars say. There is nothing romantic about giving birth in a stable.
"I don't think the Gospels romanticize the poor," said the Rev. Cynthia Campbell of First Presbyterian Church in Salina, Kan. "It glorifies one who has the option to side with the poor. … The one who has everything sets it aside in order to stand with those who have nothing."
In the Gospel, the poor were always with Jesus, even from the beginning when an angel of the Lord called shepherds standing watch over their flock to be the first to greet the child. The shepherds, considered peasants in that era, also were the first to bring the glad tidings to others.
"Those who are poor and dispossessed can claim him in a way others cannot because of his complete identification with them," Hendricks said.
Some 95 percent of the residents of the Clover Bottom Developmental Center on the outskirts of Nashville are severely or profoundly retarded, with an IQ of 20 or less. The gift they ask for - a home of their own - is not easy to give, but they have a special understanding of Christmas.
"He (Jesus) wanted more friends. That's what he was sent down for. But people wouldn't believe," says one resident, Marilyn.
Jose Dubon, an Atlanta native who has searched for work in several states, said he finds "great joy" in Christmas at the City Mission in Buffalo, N.Y.
"That's what Christmas is all about. Speaking about Jesus, he came from a manger because he did not have a place, he gives a hope for all of us who don't have a home. It's a special day, Christmas is," says DuBon, 31.
Not for Carolyn Nunley. "What's Christmas? Another day," she says.
Nunley is 37 but looks more like 50 as she panhandles for change in front of a porno theater in Boston's red light district, known as the Combat Zone.
"What's a holiday without family?" she says. She wears a knit cap pulled low, a ragged overcoat and a button that reads, "I Am Somebody."
But in that same city, a young mother seeks a clothing voucher at a Salvation Army center to buy a hat and scarf for her 2-year-old son. She has faith and optimism to spare.
Sheila Beasley, 23, said this Christmas will be more austere than those of her childhood, but the glitter is not as important as the love of a child.
"It will be a happy Christmas, just by seeing my child happy," she said. "He has everything I want him to have."
 Graphic



 
With LaserPhoto

 

End of Document
