

Baker, Aziz Meet, With War Or Peace Hanging On The Outcome
The Associated Press
January 9, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 900 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: GENEVA
Body




Secretary of State James A. Baker III met today with Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz in a tense diplomatic bid to avert war that could follow next week's United Nations deadline for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait.
The White House said the high-level U.S.-Iraq talks had been substantive, but declined further characterization "that might prejudice the situation."
Baker and Aziz resumed their critical talks after lunch, following two hours of morning discussions.
With tensions rising and oil prices fluctuating with every rumor, the world sought a signal that there might be a break in the impasse which has led the United States and its allies toward a desert showdown with Iraq. In Saudi Arabia, U.S. military forces were buzzing with activity as the diplomats went to the table.
Baker billed the session as a last chance for peace, and he carried with him a letter from President Bush to Iraq's President Saddam Hussein warning of devastating consequences should Baghdad ignore the deadline.
Aziz arrived in Geneva promising an open mind in what he hoped would be "positive, constructive talks," but saying that "Iraq does not yield to pressure." He suggested, once again, that the United States must be willing to discuss Middle East issues other than the Aug. 2 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
After a perfunctory handshake across a long conference table covered by a dark blue cover, Baker and Aziz began the highest-level deliberations between the United States and Iraq since Iraq conquered Kuwait.
The meeting cleared one anxious hurdle when it didn't collapse in the opening moments. Iraq said last week the meeting could be over in five minutes if Baker only intends to deliver a letter from Bush demanding full withdrawal by next Tuesday - Jan. 15.
"They talked for about 15 minutes," White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater told reporters in Washington. He declined to say whether the president was pleased or hopeful about the course of the talks, or disclose any of the content of Bush's talk with his emissary.
"We don't want to say anything that might prejudice the situation at all," he said.
There were no smiles nor replies to reporters' questions at the picture-taking session at the outset. Baker and Aziz faced each other across a large, angular table in a room known as the Salon of Nations. They were flanked by eight deputies. Among those with Aziz was Barzan Ibrahim, one of Saddam Hussein's three half-brothers who serves as Iraq's representative to the U.N. Conference on Human Rights in Geneva.
The American delegation was dominated by State Department officials, but tucked into the group were Lt. Gen. Howard Graves, an assistant to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Sandra Charles of the president's National Security Council.
Outside the hotel, about 100 protesters chanted, "We want peace."
In Paris, foreign minister Roland Dumas said France will pursue an all-out quest for peace "until the last minute" before the U.N. deadline, and there was speculation about a mission to Baghdad.
The world's anxiety was expressed in oil prices and border privileges. European traders pushed up the price of oil slightly, then down slightly. Jordan closed its border with Iraq, blocking an exit route for refugees from Iraq and Kuwait.
Baker has ruled out negotiating with Aziz or going to Baghdad later to see Saddam. But he was prepared to listen to the Iraqi leader's emissary and has not ruled out a surprise.
Baker arrived here after spending most of Tuesday trying to hold together an anti-Iraq alliance with France, Germany and Italy. During a stop in Bonn, Baker said there must be "no walking back in any way from the United Nations Security Council resolutions."
Aziz, arriving shortly after Baker, said if Baker tried to restrict the discussion to Kuwait, "we are going to give the proper answer. … The decision of war is the decision of Mr. Bush, not our decision."
Ever since it overran Kuwait, Iraq has tried to link discussion of its annexation to broader talks on Palestinian claims against Israel. But the administration has brushed that idea aside, declaring that Saddam did not "rape" his oil-rich neighbor for the sake of the Palestinians.
During his visits in Europe, Baker preached unity as the best way to force Iraq to quit Kuwait. But France seemed poised to strike out on its own in the event of a deadlock. The French, backed by Germany and Italy, have proposed dangling the prospect of a Middle East peace conference to entice Saddam to leave Kuwait.
Baker planned to fly to Ankara tonight to resume discussion with Turkish leaders of a united front against Iraq.
In Saudi Arabia, the roads were clogged with military convoys hauling war supplies north and airports were bustling with civilians leaving the Gulf region. U.S. troops continued to move their camps farther north, nearing the Kuwait border and falling in just behind Saudi and other Arab forces.
"We have been creeping north. We're about as far north as you can go," said Marine Lt. Col. John Himes of the 1st Marine Division's 7th Regiment.
Israel's military was on heightened alert, and Foreign Minister David Levy said Israel would respond forcefully to any Iraqi attack on the Jewish state even if it would hurt the U.S.-led coalition forces in Saudi Arabia. Levy's comments came a day after Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak was quoted as threatening to withdraw from the coalition if Israel entered hostilities.

 

End of Document
