

Baker Tells Pilots "We Pass the Brink" at Midnight Tuesday
The Associated Press
January 11, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 880 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: TAIF, Saudi Arabia
Body




Secretary of State James A. Baker III told American combat pilots Friday that "we pass the brink" of war with Iraq precisely at midnight next Tuesday.
In a tough speech, clearly aimed at Saddam Hussein as well, he said the deadline will not be extended and the Iraqi leader will be making "his most tragic miscalculation" if he fails to pull his troops out of Kuwait by then.
Baker, who made the remarks to the 48th Tactical Fighter Wing, which is normally based in England, was cheered loudly. Afterward, he signed autographs, telling airmen, "Hang in for us."
He then flew to Cairo, where he will meet Saturday with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
Officials on the Baker trip said his reference to a precise deadline meant Tuesday night at midnight, Eastern Standard Time, since the Jan. 15 date was set by the U.N., based in New York City in the Eastern time zone.
Baker's Mideast visit followed a breakdown in U.S. diplomatic efforts to persuade Saddam to withdraw the 500,000 Iraqi troops before the deadline the U.N. Security Council set last November.
Other diplomacy continued, however, and Baker spoke by telephone from Abu Dhabi, one of his three gulf stops, to Jacques Poos, the foreign minister of Luxembourg who is leading efforts by the 12-nation European Community to persuade Saddam to quit Kuwait.
U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar was to meet with Saddam Saturday in Baghdad after winning European support for his idea of sending a U.N. peacekeeping force to the Persian Gulf.
Baker, asked for comment, said, "If there is a peaceful withdrawal it would be appropriate, I think, to give consideration to how security will be maintained, and there's no reason why one part of that consideration should not be … a possible United Nations peacekeeping force."
In addition, President Bush said Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had telephoned to say the Soviet Union was pursuing new diplomatic avenues in hopes of resolving the crisis. There was no elaboration.
Also, Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger was being sent to Israel for talks Saturday night with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. President Bush telephoned Shamir on Thursday, officials in Washington said.
The Bush administration wants Israel to hold its fire unless it is attacked, fearing the Arab coalition against Iraq would splinter otherwise.
Saddam has threatened to bomb Jerusalem in the event of war. And U.S. officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Baker had received fresh assurances during his talks with Arab leaders that they would not break away if Israel retaliated.
In Saudi Arabia, Baker told the pilots and crews assembled in a hangar, "You are the combat crews who will join in the liberation of Kuwait."
Baker recalled that when he spoke to many of the same pilots at the same base last September he was unable to say when they might be called into action.
"Now as the clock ticks down to midnight Jan. 15," he said, "I cannot give you a definitive answer. But I can tell you that you will not have to wait much longer for an answer to that question."
Baker directed the speech also to Saddam, saying the Iraqi might miscalculate "where the brink really is" and wait to make a move.
"Just so there is no misunderstanding," Baker said, "let me be absolutely clear: We pass the brink at midnight, Jan. 15."
The deadline "is real," Baker said. "Efforts to extend it or postpone it will not succeed. Saddam can believe that or not, but if he doesn't he will have made his most tragic miscalculation."
Earlier Friday, Saudi Arabia pledged to bear 40 percent to 50 percent of the costs of confronting Iraq in the Persian Gulf, but U.S. and Saudi officials refused to estimate how much that might be in dollars.
Prince Bandar, the Saudi ambassador to the United States, announced the pledge after Baker met in Riyadh with Prince Saud, the foreign minister, and other Saudi officials over breakfast.
Both Bandar and Baker declined to say whether the Saudis were increasing their proportional share of the costs of Operation Desert Shield.
"The kingdom has been very generous during 1990," Baker said. "At the same time that we had those discussions, we said we would have discussions regarding 1991 if the crisis continued into 1991 and we have had those discussions and I am very satisfied with those discussions."
Saudi oil profits have soared since Iraq invaded Kuwait last August and the U.N. Security Council imposed a worldwide boycott on Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil in an attempt to force Iraq out.
Some members of Congress, complaining of windfall profits, argue that the Saudis' contribution of about $$1 billion a month until the end of 1990 represented a small fraction of what they took in.
Baker also stopped Friday in the oil-rich United Arab Emirates for a meeting with President Zayed bin Sultan el Nubayyan and Foreign Minister Rashid Abdallah Ali-el-Nuaymi.
A U.S. official, insisting om anonymity, said Baker had talked to Sheik Zayed about making additional contributions to support the anti-Iraq campaign.
Baker then returned to Saudi Arabia to meet with the fallen emir of Kuwait, Jabir el-Ahmad al Sabah and to make his speech to the U.S. pilots.
It was his fifth meeting with the emir since he was ousted, and he said, "I hope that next time will be in Kuwait City."

 

End of Document
