

Battle For Khafji Swings To The Saudis
The Associated Press
January 31, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 761 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KHAFJI, Saudi Arabia
Body




Allied troops retook most of Khafji from an Iraqi invading force today, but the Iraqis continued shelling U.S., Saudi and Qatari forces with mortar fire throughout the afternoon.
The fighting raged for several hours after the allied military command announced the Saudi frontier town had been "completely liberated."
After nightfall, U.S. sources said the town was all but rid of Iraqis, but that those left but have to be ferreted out by dangerous, door-to-door searches. Many Iraqi vehicles also were able to avoid attack and return to Kuwait, pilots said.
Marines sent AH-1 Cobra helicopters in to root out stubborn Iraqi forces who kept up the fight hours after Saudi army units had taken over most of the deserted town. A Marine vehicle also fired a TOW anti-tank missile and destroyed an Iraqi vehicle on the outskirts of Khafji.
Marines also directed repeated volleys of artillery at Khafji to soften Iraqi positions in the eastern sector of the town.
Despite those actions, and the destruction of an Iraqi armored personnel carrier by a Marine firing a shoulder-launched missile in Khafji, the U.S. command insisted at its daily briefing in Riyadh that Marines were not "engaged" in the battle for Khafji.
"Saudi forces have retaken and secured the city," said Brig. Gen. Pat Stevens IV. He said U.S. forces had provided air support, "but the action was a coalition action without ground U.S. troops involved."
There were no immediate reports of allied casualties in Khafji, which is eight miles from the Kuwaiti border. Several Saudis were witnessed being treated for injuries and transported in Red Crescent combat ambulances.
Stevens said two U.S. soldiers - a man and a woman - apparently were missing. But he said they were not involved in the ground fighting. Baghdad claimed in a communique that it had taken a number of U.S. male and female soldiers prisoner.
There was speculation today that Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein was planning yet another incursion into Saudi territory. Marines said they had been told of reports Saddam was massing five or more divisions just north of the Saudi border town of Warfa, about 35 miles west of Khafji.
The allied campaign to retake Khafji began late Wednesday, but met fierce resistance from the Iraqis. Saudi armored columns and accompanying Marine units moving up the main north-south road were pounded with rocket-propelled grenades, mortars and perhaps small artillery.
"Let's get the hell out of here!" said a Marine captain. "I have no idea where they're shooting from." At least one allied light armored vehicle was afire, and several explosions were heard.
The allies regrouped and attacked again an hour later from the south and west.
Fighting continued through the night and the battle to the west seemed to be the largest, with intermittent aerial bombings and the sky laced with tracer bullets.
By mid-morning, the allies were said to be in control of most of the city.
The Saudis fought pitched battles within the city center with Iraqi troops, apparently reinforced with tanks and BMPs - Soviet-made armored personnel carriers, each armed with a 30mm cannon and 7.62mm machine gun.
Forces from the Persian Gulf state of Qatar repeatedly dashed in for sharp exchanges of cannon fire and heavy machine guns, then retreated beyond the city line to regroup.
The Qatari force included about 24 French-made AMX tanks and scores of wheeled armored personnel carriers mounted with cannons and TOW anti-tank missile launchers.
"These guys are real fighters," said a Marine captain. "They are very aggressive."
Marines poised on the edge of the city fired supporting volleys from 155mm cannons throughout the evening and morning.
The sky was ablaze with rose-colored tracers and blinding yellow flashes from the pitched tank battles as the multinational forces assaulted the city again and again.
Their foe had an extensive arsenal - including a SAM missile-launcher and anti-aircraft artillery that they fired at aircraft making bombing runs.
One SAM fired this morning apparently missed. In its aftermath, there were loud explosions and heavy clouds of smoke through the town.
The fighting caused heavy damage to Khafji, a crossroads and vacation spot that once housed 20,000 people.
The Marines were somewhat taken aback by the ferocity of the Iraqi reaction to the first assault late Wednesday. They had believed that most Iraqis had been routed Wednesday morning and little heavy equipment was left in the city.
Evidently, they later said, most of the weaponry was brought into the city across the border after the earlier fighting.

 

End of Document
