

Battle Scene: With the Marines
The Associated Press
January 31, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 746 words
Byline: By FRED BAYLES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KHAFJI, Saudi Arabia
Body




The incessant barking of a dog somewhere in the desert rose above the low rumble of idling Saudi and Qatar armor assembled in the parking lot of a looted gas station.
The rows of tanks, armored personnel carriers and Marine humvees were set for a final assault to evict Iraqi troops from this Saudi border town.
It was the Saudi Army's job, but Marines had a stake in the operation: two of their reconnaisance teams were trapped in Khafji.
"We're going to hold things down until they're able to come through," said Capt. Jamal, a Jordanian-born Marine who did not give his first name.
In the liquid moonlight, it seemed too peaceful a night for war. Then, as the column started off, the night turned to chaos.
Lazy, rose-colored machine gun tracers stitched across the road from two directions. Rocket-powered grenades shot into vehicle ranks, setting one armored personnel carrier ablaze.
Marines at a gas station on the edge of town also came under fire. Everyone scrambled for humvees, the Army's modern version of the jeep. They roared off to the south, out of range.
In the middle of the ragged pack of fleeing vehicles, a speeding tank, turrent swung to the rear to cover the retreat, fired its cannon, adding to the night a blast of yellow light. A humvee swerved in the shock of the concussion and kept going.
"War sucks, sir," said the driver, his voice squeaky with fear and exhileration.
"Oh yeah," Jamal answered breezily. "War sucks bigtime."
As the humvees, tanks and armored personnel carriers rushed down both sides of the two-lane highway, Jamal waxed philosophical.
"Sometimes the best intelligence you can get is when people shoot at you," he said.
So began a long night's watch for the mechanized 3rd Division Marines, who huddled around humvee radios, listening for their brethren.
"I was worried earlier tonight when we couldn't raise my man," said Capt. Kevin Monahan, a forward air controller assigned to the regiment. "Once I heard him tonight, I felt a whole lot better."
The recon team members had plenty to say. They reported on enemy positions, kept an eye on troop movements. They tried to stop the Qataris when they accidently hit Saudi positions.
The regiment even listened as one recon member stalked an Iraqi personnel carrier with a shoulder-launched anti-tank missile.
The radio traffic was punctuated by a rainbow of flares, anti-aircraft tracers, distant bomb explosions. Unseen jets streaked overhead, firing flares to mislead mobile surface-to-air missiles brought up by the Iraqis.
But the flares and fire were only a sideshow to the aerial attacks along the northwest horizon, miles from Khafji, where a heavy concentration of Iraqi troops were said be massing. The dull thud and distant flashes of heavy bombing came in intervals throughout the night.
The stretches of silence were interrupted by Qatari forces roaring up and down the highway in counterattack. They went into Khafji, guns blazing, at least a half-dozen times, pulling out to regroup and rearm.
Each sortie was greeted by the red tracers of Iraqi heavy machine gun fire. They were answered by the hot white flashes of tank cannons.
After one early morning attack, Marines along the roadway were startled to see a knot of five Qatar soldiers straggling up the road, laughing and smoking, guns balanced on their shoulder.
Monahan went to see what had happened. One big Qatari stepped from the group. "Qatar," he said, pounding his chest. He then gestured to town with a shrug. "Tank," he said.
The Marines spent the night mostly huddling in the chilly vehicles, waiting for word of the recon unit. It came later in the morning when the first missing team drove up to the staging area. They were greeted with handshakes and back slaps.
Among them was Cpl. Ben Banner, carrying a scorched Iraqi AK-47 assault rifle. Banner claimed it from an enemy armored vehicle his team destroyed with two anti-tank missiles.
An exhausted Banner told of eating ration packs of instant coffee to stay awake the 48 hours he played a tense game of hide-and-seek with the Iraqis.
"Everything was crazy," he said.
Banner began to gulp water from a liter bottle. It trembled slightly in his hands.
Was this his first combat? he was asked. What was it like?
"Not what I expected," he said. His hand shook and he drank more water. "When you're a kid you play cowboy and Indian. This is a whole other thing."
He looked at the now empty bottle in his hand with slow surprise.
"Damn," he said. "I didn't know I was that thirsty."

 

End of Document
