

Biggest Nuclear Threat: The Islamic Crescent, Former Soviet Republics
The Associated Press
February 2, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 727 words
Byline: Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Western specialists believe the race by Iran and other Islamic nations to build the bomb poses the most serious threat of spreading nuclear weapons in the post-Cold War era.
They say North Korea and India are also major nuclear threats, and that the nuclear arsenal of the former Soviet Union, divided among four republics, poses a potentially greater danger to the world now than it did during the Cold War.
In the early 1960s, U.S. officials feared massive nuclear proliferation would produce dozens of nuclear powers by the turn of the century, said Dr. Martin Navias, a lecturer in the Department of War Studies at King's College, University of London.
About 40 to 45 nations have attained the technical capability to develop nuclear warheads, he said, "but the fact is that very few countries have succeeded in developing nuclear weapons."
He said the declared nuclear powers - the United States, the four Soviet republics, Britain, France and China - have been joined by only four undeclared nuclear states: Israel, South Africa, India and Pakistan.
Navias gave two reasons: Some nations with nuclear potential decided it was not in their interests to develop weapons, and some who tried found it more difficult than anticipated.
With the Soviet collapse, the possibility of buying ready-made weapons or components, and the experts to put them together, increases the likelihood that new members will join the nuclear club.
"The most frightening potential is … through the former Soviet Central Asian republics, into the Indian subcontinent, into Indonesia," said Paul Beaver, publisher of Jane's Defense Weekly.
Before the Gulf War, Iraq had the most advanced nuclear program in the Arab world. U.N. experts charged with dismantling it discovered three projects to make weapons-grade uranium, but said success remained several years away.
Iraq's ability to run three separate programs proves, Beaver said, that "if you throw a lot of money at a project and get the right people, you can do anything."
The Iraqis remain a problem, Navias said, because they might still be hiding nuclear material and facilities.
"One of the things we learned about Iraq is that we don't know how much we don't know," he said.
Navias and the other experts now see Iran as a greater short-term threat.
"It has the money and the motive and the capability to build a nuclear and missile program and to pay for the people who are needed to do it," said Gary Milhollin, director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control in Washington.
Beaver said Iran sees itself as the leader of the Muslim countries of the Middle East and is determined to have the nuclear weapons it feels befit a regional power.
Tehran insists its objective is developing nuclear energy, not weapons. It has a small U.S.-built nuclear research reactor, a small Chinese reactor said to be for medical diagnosis and nuclear physics research, and is trying to buy a 10-megawatt nuclear reactor from India.
Iran's main opposition group, the Mujahedeen Khalq, claimed in July the government had spent more than $ 200 million on developing nuclear weapons.
The current issue of Jane's Defense Weekly quotes the Mujahedeen Khalq as saying Iran has a nuclear facility at Moallem Kelayeh near Qazvin, 95 miles northwest of Tehran, and is building a uranium enrichment plant near Darkhovin, 400 miles southwest of the capital.
Libya also has the motive and money to acquire nuclear weapons, Milhollin said, "but they are not as far advanced and I think (Moammar) Gadhafi is not as capable as the Iranian leadership."
Western experts say North Korea must be considered a serious threat until it opens nuclear installations to international inspection, even though it signed the nuclear safeguard agreement Thursday.
According to Western intelligence, North Korea may have the capacity to develop nuclear weapons by 1993. The North Koreans say their nuclear program is peaceful.
Washington has demanded North Korea dismantle reprocessing and uranium enrichment facilities said to exist at Yongbyon, about 60 miles north of Pyongyang, the capital.
India and Pakistan already can deploy nuclear weapons on short notice, Milhollin said, and the next step will be for them to build nuclear warheads for missiles.
"Russian scientists could help both countries field nuclear-tipped missiles that would put the region on a hair trigger," he said.

 

End of Document
