

Blacks Question Gulf War, Support the Warriors
The Associated Press
January 23, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 713 words
Byline: By RICK HAMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Body




A black American, polls show, is less likely than a white American to support the war in the Persian Gulf, but more likely to be fighting in it - a paradox that burdens the black community's response to the conflict.
The war's critics say an "economic draft" forced disproportionate numbers of young blacks into the all-volunteer military. Supporters point with pride to Army Gen. Colin Powell and the many other blacks in the military.
As a group, "black people are caught on the horns of a dilemma," says Andrew Cooper, publisher of The City Sun, a black weekly in New York City.
Blacks are leading protests in church and on campus; many turned King Day ceremonies this year into peace rallies.
"We support the troops," said the Rev. Herbert Daughtry, a civil rights activist who attended a peace rally Monday at the United Nations. "That's why we want them home."
Recent polls indicate that slightly less than half of blacks support the decision to attack Iraq, compared to more than three-quarters of whites. And a USA Today poll found that only 21 percent of blacks said they were angered by anti-war protests, compared to 56 percent of whites.
Although less than 13 percent of the U.S. population is black, blacks account for 21 percent of all U.S. military personnel in all branches. About a third of the Army forces in the Persian Gulf are black and almost half of U.S. servicewomen in the gulf are black.
Anti-war blacks say these disproportionate ratios are the result of social and economic injustices at home that forced blacks who wanted job skills or college funds to volunteer for the military. The war, they add, will eat up money and energy that could correct the conditions that forced blacks to enlist in the first place.
They point to young blacks like Ricky Williams of Seattle, who joined the Army after high school and was trained as a medic. But when he returned home the best job he could find was stocking shelves; he re-enlisted. He's now in the gulf region.
"Either way, it's a battle for black kids. If it's not in Saudi Arabia, it's here on the streets," said his father, Johnnie Williams.
Ricky Williams' re-enlistment may not have been a bad decision.
A study published last year in the Journal of the American Medical Association concluded that during peacetime, black men in uniform were safer than their civilian counterparts, who were five times more likely to die from disease and 12 times more likely to be homicide victims.
Black leaders against the war include the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who calls it "the president's war" and George Bush "the commander in chief who vetoed the (1990) civil rights bill"; Eleanor Holmes Norton, the District of Columbia's congressional delegate, who said if her son signed up for service in the gulf she'd take him to a psychiatrist; and former Atlanta Mayor Andrew Young, who has called for a cease-fire.
Black veterans have been conspicuous mostly for their opposition to the war. Many fought in Vietnam and remember that "the folks who cheered you on were nowhere to be found when you got home," according to Job Mashariki, director of Black Veterans for Social Justice.
All but one of the 25 voting members of the Congressional Black Caucus voted against the House war resolution Jan. 12 which passed 250-183. And opposition has extended from entertainers such as Spike Lee and Harry Belafonte to Martin Luther King's wife, daughter and son.
Martin Luther King III, a commissioner in Fulton County, Ga., has urged black soldiers in the gulf to refuse to fight and say, "This is not my war."
The war does have black support, and it may be understated. Political writer Juan Williams has complained about leaders who are "casting the war in racial terms (and) seem determined to drive a wedge between black America and its troops in combat as well as mainstream America."
Roy Innis, chairman of the Congress of Racial Equality, accuses black war critics of trying "to stab the black soldier in the back."
Innis says blacks have wisely seized the military's opportunities for advancement: "It's not like the wars when we were porters and ditch diggers. We have Colin Powell and (Lt. Gen.) Calvin Waller. When I met black soldiers at Fort Bragg, the only problem they had with the war was that they hadn't been sent over yet."

 

End of Document
