

Briefs From Around the World
The Associated Press
March 23, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 775 words
Dateline: HELSINKI, Finland
Body




Timber truck drivers are throwing away their maps and consulting satellite-linked computer screens on their dashboards to find their way through Finland's forests.
The Enso-Gutzeit forestry group has installed $ 13,000 worth of computer equipment in four trucks and plans to have the entire fleet of 200 equipped by the end of the year.
"There's no way I'm going to use maps again. This is so much easier," said driver Markku Pulli, who spoke Tuesday by mobile phone 60 miles east of Helsinki.
The computer screens are linked to the company's database through the Global Positioning System satellite, used by the U.S. military, said Tauno Juutistenaho, Enso-Gutzeit's communications chief.
Managers can plan routes better, and drivers can find timber loads along forest trails where rocks and moss serve as the only road signs.
Without computers, managers spend hours driving new truckers through forests to show them the location of timber loads, or they send them off with hand-drawn instructions or maps that don't show all the small trails.
---
SAN'A, Yemen (AP) - Yemeni Jews are emigrating to Israel after the government apparently relaxed restrictions on travel for the remaining members of an ancient community that once numbered more than 50,000.
Reports that Yemen's Jews, now estimated to number only 1,200, were leaving first surfaced in the London-based Saudi newspaper Asharq Al-Awsat.
The newspaper reported last week that the government in San'a had bowed to pressures exerted "by the network of Western Zionist organizations" on behalf of Yemen's Jewish community.
Foreign Minister Abdul-Karim al-Iryani confirmed the report this week, but said: "We do not sanction their travel to Israel."
Middle East Watch, based in New York, said in November that members of Yemen's Jewish community had experienced problems obtaining passports for traveling.
Arab countries except Egypt are still technically at war with Israel, and their citizens are not allowed to travel to the Jewish state.
The Arabs are particularly sensitive about the migration of Jews to Israel on the grounds it would lead to more settlements in the occupied territories at the expense of the Palestinians.
---
PARIS (AP) - Former Iranian President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr said Tuesday that he and 26 other countrymen in exile in Europe and the United States are on a hit list drawn up by agents of Iran's Islamic regime.
Other prominent Iranians have been targeted in the past, most notably Shapour Bakhtiar, last premier under the shah of Iran. Bakhtiar was killed in Paris in 1991.
"I feel in great danger," Bani-Sadr said in a telephone interview from his home in Versailles, outside Paris. "They wait for their victims with great patience."
Bani-Sadr said police have stepped up security outside his home in recent days. He said German police have confirmed the authenticity of the list, and that it included human rights leaders, political figures and businessmen.
There was no immediate comment from German police, and telephone calls to French officials either went unanswered or were not returned.
Berlin Tageszeitung and other German newspapers have been reporting existence of a "death list."
Bani-Sadr, 59, was an aide to the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini during the Islamic revolution in 1979, was deposed by the Iranian parliament in June 1981, accused of being a counterrevolutionary.
---
LUCERNE, Switzerland (AP) - The International Chess Federation said Tuesday it will not let champion Garry Kasparov and challenger Nigel Short play its 1993 world title match because they failed to agree to the group's chosen site.
The federation, known by its French acronym FIDE, said it will invite former world champion Anatoly Karpov of Russia, Kasparov's archrival, and Jan Timman of the Netherlands, whom Short defeated in the candidates' final, to play for the world title.
It was a new twist in the power struggle between FIDE's Philippine president Florencio Campomanes and the two star players, who essentially have accused the federation of managing world chess unprofessionally.
Kasparov and Short pulled out of FIDE last month, formed the breakaway Professional Chess Association and invited their own bids.
FIDE said it acted because Kasparov and Short failed to meet its Tuesday deadline for approving a $ 1.8 million bid from Manchester, England, to stage the 24-game match in August.
The federation said the action against the players was in accordance with its rules.
It also said it had received "overwhelming expressions of support from federation and grandmasters the world over for the maintenance of an orderly structure for the world championship cycle and chess in general."

 

End of Document
