

Brief Sketches of the Seven Discovery Astronauts
The Associated Press
April 28, 1991, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 909 words
Dateline: SPACE CENTER, Houston
Body




Discovery's seven astronauts face a packed schedule on their eight-day trip into space as they conduct a series of experiments devoted to "Star Wars" research.
The all-male crew will work in split shifts around-the-clock on a series of tests designed to study the atmosphere and the shuttle's exhaust plumes and chemical and gas releases. The military will use the information to develop sensors for tracking enemy missiles.
A satellite will be deployed to track a variety of shuttle maneuvers before it is then retrieved by the astronauts. Another payload will remain in the shuttle's cargo bay.
It is the first unclassified shuttle flight for the Pentagon, and NASA officials consider it one of the most complex missions ever because of all the intricate maneuvering required.
The astronauts said the information they hope to gather could be used to develop systems similar to the Patriot missiles used to thwart Iraqi Scud missile attacks in the Persian Gulf War.
"A lot of people think (Star Wars is) a waste of money," said Discovery mission specialist Guion S. Bluford Jr. But "in a world where there are more and more countries developing Scud-type missiles and nuclear capabilities, we need to develop the technology to defend against that."
Bluford and Discovery commander Michael L. Coats are space veterans, while the other five crew members are shuttle rookies.
 
 ---
Coats, a Navy captain and former test pilot, is a two-time space traveler who has made all his shuttle trips on Discovery.
The 45-year-old astronaut last flew into space as commander of a 1989 flight in which the crew deployed a communications satellite.
Coats first flew into space as a pilot on Discovery's maiden flight in 1984. Three satellites were deployed and the astronauts, nicknamed the "icebusters," used the shuttle's robot arm to scrape hazardous ice off the shuttle.
During this flight, the astronauts will collect data for the Defense Department.
"When they came up with SDI (Strategic Defense Initiative), we were worried about the Russians. Well, people don't tend to worry about the Russians anymore, but I think one thing we've learned from Iraq is that there's other people out there who can hurt us," Coats said in an interview earlier this year.
Coats was born in Sacramento, Calif., and grew up in Riverside, Calif., where he graduated from Ramona High School.
An Annapolis graduate, he also earned two master's degrees - one in administration, science and technology from George Washington University and the other in aeronautical engineering from the U.S. Naval Postgraduate School.
Coats flew 315 combat missions in Southeast Asia in the early 1970s. He also was a naval flight instructor before attending the U.S. Naval Test Pilot School in Patuxent River, Md.
Coats, selected as an astronaut in 1978, served as acting chief of the astronaut office from May 1989 to March 1990.
He is married and has two children.
 
 ---
Bluford, a mission specialist aboard Discovery, is a veteran of two previous shuttle flights.
During his third space trip, Bluford's main responsibility is to operate a $$160 million Air Force apparatus that will study such phenomena as the northern lights, cirrus clouds and the atmosphere.
"We're doing an awful lot on this flight," he said. "This flight requires much more training than any of the previous flights that I've flown on."
Selected as an astronaut in 1979, Bluford was the first black to fly in space on an August 1983 mission aboard Challenger. The flight also featured the first night launch and landing of a shuttle.
He next flew in October 1985 aboard the German spacelab mission.
Bluford, 48, was born in Philadelphia, where he graduated from Overbrook Senior High School.
He earned a bachelor's degree in aerospace engineering from Pennsylvania State University and a master's degree and doctorate in aerospace engineering from the Air Force Institute of Technology. He also earned a master's degree in business administration four years ago from the University of Houston at Clear Lake.
As a pilot, Bluford flew 144 combat missions in North Vietnam. He has logged more than 4,800 hours jet flight time in seven different types of aircraft, including 1,300 hours as a T-38 instructor pilot. The astronauts train in T-38s.
He is married and has two children.
 
 ---
Air Force Maj. L. Blaine Hammond, a space rookie and pilot aboard Discovery, is responsible for assisting the commander as needed throughout the military mission.
Discovery's flight, with its many goals and ambitious schedule, is "sort of considered the grand slam of all missions," Hammond said.
While several of the other astronauts operate the satellite once it is deployed, Coats and Hammond will be busy putting the shuttle through a variety of maneuvers so the spacecraft can study the orbiter's exhaust plumes.
"There's a lot for me to do - help Mike (Coats) get everything set up and be his second set of eyeballs," Hammond said. "There's just so much to learn and so much to do."
Hammond, 39, was born in Savannah, Ga., and graduated from Kirkwood High School in Kirkwood, Mo.
He attended the U.S. Air Force Academy, earning a bachelor's degree in engineering science and mechanics. He also earned a master's degree in the same field from Georgia Institute of Technology.
He attended the Empire Test Pilot School in Britain and was a test pilot school instructor at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. He was selected as an astronaut in 1984.
He is married and has two children.

 

End of Document
