

Briefs From the Homefront
The Associated Press
January 16, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 974 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




A company that makes waterproof material for baby cribs is filling a rush order from the Defense Department for 16,000 body bags.
Those who help turn out the giant bolts of cloth at Aldan Rubber Co. in Philadelphia want the body bags to end up in a warehouse.
"I hope nothing is going to happen that means we have to use these," said factory worker Winston Parker.
The 100,000 yards of material will be sewn into 7-foot, 10-inch bags by three other companies, then shipped overseas to the Middle East, where war began Wednesday.
Aldan's chloroprene-coated fabric used for the waterproof bags is usually used for crib bedsheets, scuba-diving life vests and firefighters' gear.
Aldan has also been making an additional 15,000 yards weekly for the past six months for use in chemical suits and protective hoods, a spokesman said.
 
 SPRINGFIELD, Mo. (AP) - From somewhere in the Saudi Arabian desert, Tim White called home and learned of Faith.
Faith Hope White was born Monday night at St. John's Regional Health Center, as her father prepared for the war that began Wednesday night, thousands of miles away.
A Marine reservist, White telephoned Tuesday morning to check on his wife, only to learn he was a father.
"It was perfect," Edie White said. "Just as he called here at the hospital, they were wheeling Faith into my room. While we were talking she began to cry, so I let Tim listen to her cry over the phone.
"Before long, all three of us were crying."
The 7-pound, 9-ounce girl shares her mother's birthday.
"I wanted to hold out until the 17th, because that's Tim's birthday," Edie said. "But having her on my birthday is OK, too."
 
 AUGUSTA, Ga. - Sign painter Rusty Mullins has a huge message for a friend and former employee stationed in Saudi Arabia.
Mullins is painting a 5-by-30-foot mural on the side of the building housing his Wooden Features Inc.
It spells out the words "Desert Shield" in giant letters, each of which will contain a scene or image relating to Persian Gulf crisis leading up to the war that began Wednesday night.
The mural also contains a message to Staff Sgt. Jeffrey McDavid, who left for Saudi Arabia with Fort Gordon's 1148th Transportation Company in November: "A thought and a prayer from your brothers of the brush."
Mullins explained, "A lot of people in the sign trade refer to each other as 'brothers in the brush.'
"I just want to do something for him because we all kind of miss him around here," said Mullins.
 
 PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) - The war in the Middle East means good business for the Oregon Peace Institute.
The institute's retail store has enjoyed a big boost in sales, as people have become more and more concerned about tensions that eventually erupted in war Wednesday night.
After a peace rally Saturday the downtown store was swamped.
T-shirts, buttons and bumper stickers that said "Suppose Kuwait's main export were broccoli?" or "U.S. out of the Gulf" and "No Blood for Oil" were the biggest sellers.
The store sold out of buttons with "Peace" printed in Arabic, Hebrew and English.
The store also sells clothing items, bumper stickers, jewelry and post cards protesting everything from South Africa's policy of apartheid to the decimation of Brazil's rain forests. It carries leaflets and gives out information about peace issues.
As the United States grew closer to a possible war in the Middle East, the peace message translated to unprecedented sales.
"This is the one issue that has brought the most response, far more than the Central American issues," said Chris Boberg of the institute. "People want ways of expressing themselves about a possible war."
The money from sales is used for educational programs, including an anti-violence campaign for children.
 
 NEW ORLEANS (AP) - It wasn't known if the war that broke out in the Middle East Wednesday night would affect plans for Mardi Gras, which was canceled during both World Wars and the first year of the Korean War.
Decisions about canceling or even curtailing the dozens of parades and balls held during carnival season had not been made, officials said before the actual fighting began.
"If there's a shooting war going on, that would be a major factor," said Beau Bassich, chairman of the Mayor's Mardi Gras Coordinating Committee.
"Certainly, we're all thinking about it. But it's up to so many different people, we just don't have a feeling yet. What we have is a wait-and-see attitude."
As of Tuesday, all plans for carnival were still on track, officials said.
There are parades and parties over about two weeks leading up to Mardi Gras, which falls this year on Feb. 12.
 
 SUMTER, S.C. (AP) - An airman who briefly left a tire-inflation device outside at Shaw Air Force Base returned to learn a bomb squad had blown it up.
"I think we were perhaps a little oversensitive to the situation. And that's good at a time like this," Lt. Col. Jerry Stafford of Shaw's public affairs office said Wednesday.
Shaw has been on heightened security since Friday, when the Tactical Air Command issued a general alert for possible terrorist activity in response to Middle East tensions leading up to the war that began Wednesday night.
The air cylinder was reported to base police by a civilian construction worker.
Bomb-sniffing dogs were brought in but had "negative findings," a base spokesman said. Shaw's Explosive Ordinance Disposal Team then took the device to a nearby ball field and detonated it with a small explosive charge.
Stafford said the airman had been using the air cylinder to inflate a low tire on his truck. As the pressurized air escaped, the canister became ice cold. The airman said he wrapped it in cardboard to make it easier to hold, but with little success.
"He decided to lay it down and let it warm up," Stafford said, adding that the airman went to check his mail in the interim. "The last thing he heard was somebody was blowing it up."

 

End of Document
