

Bringing Sports to the Troops in Saudi Arabia
The Associated Press
January 13, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 883 words
Byline: By JOHN NELSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Somewhere in the Nafud desert, a U.S. Army truck beams low-powered, high-frequency signals to a group of soldiers huddled in a tent against the cool night air of Saudi Arabia.
There might be 25 to 30 in the group, watching intently as a saw-edged voice cuts the silence:
"Islander goal!"
It's Jigs McDonald doing TV play-by-play of the Los Angeles Kings-New York Islanders hockey game from SportsChannel America, via the Armed Forces Radio and Television Service broadcast center.
"War or no war, we'll have the same timely programming for the soldiers in the Gulf that they would get if they were home," said George Balamaci, chief of news and sports for the AFRTS center. "Live is the name of the game. That's what they want to see. It makes them feel close to home … not left out."
AFRTS is beaming 20 to 22 hours of live sports play-by-play a week to the Persian Gulf, as well as to American military personnel throughout the world.
Its broadcast center in Sun Valley, Calif., takes the feeds either via satellite or a fiber-optics line from the three networks in nearby Los Angeles. It then relays the signal via its own satellite network.
"With recreation being what it is over there, I imagine TV, radio and mail from home are the big three items," Balamaci said. "We feed about 1.5 million military and dependents and have about 30 zones around the world where the signals are dropped."
Radio still is the biggest source of communication in the Gulf. Because of restrictions by Muslim religious leaders who monitor incoming communications, AFRTS is using three or four low-powered transmitters in trucks in the desert. Balamaci isn't sure of their range, but it's probably not more than 50 miles.
"We get to 85 or 90 percent of the audience in the Gulf with radio, and TV is witnessed probably by only 50,000 or 60,000 live, maybe 75,000," Balamaci said. "The rest see it on videotape."
About 160 U.S. Navy vessels, including many in the Indian Ocean, are now linked to AFRTS via the International Marine Satellite System, or Inmarsat, and can receive radio programming on their own satellite dishes, Balamaci said. But as far as shipboard TV goes, it's all videotape.
"We're not at that point in the state of the art yet where they can receive live programming on ships - unless they're tied up at the island of Bahrain, which has a dubbing facility," Balamaci said. "Then they can be tied into cable."
Balamaci said there were several TV receiving stations in major Persian Gulf cities "where we have embassies, but most of our people are out in the desert, and right now, live TV is limited. We're making great efforts to get videocassettes out, sometimes the same day of the event."
The U.S. military transmitters aren't allowed to broadcast 24 hours because of "inhost country sensitivities," Balamaci said, but Saudi religious leaders haven't had any objections to the content of the sports shows since they were briefed on cheerleaders.
"The only things we've had problems with are some entertainment shows like Arsenio Hall and 'Entertainment Tonight' - shows with a lot of T&A in them. The religious monitors at Saudi sites get upset about that," Balamaci said. "Most of that's been smoothed over now. For example, when they see cheerleaders along the sidelines in a football game, they know its part of the American culture.
"Some programs we send over, we've got to give our people the 'heads up' as to what's coming, that there might be something in there the Saudis would consider sensitive," he said. "Then they can review it before it goes on the air. We have to respect the Saudi culture. They're the host country."
A typical weekend of television for U.S. troops in the desert started last Thursday night with the Kings-Islanders game. During the game, SportsChannel America and AFRTS arranged a live hook-up between several soldiers in the Gulf and the Islanders' Pat LaFontaine and McDonald from Uniondale, N.Y.
"It was 3:30 in the morning in Saudi Arabia, and I don't how many people could watch it at the time," SportsChannel America spokesman Dan Martinsen said. "But already we've gotten some mail from servicemen and their families, thanking us for the program."
Saudi time is eight hours ahead of Eastern Standard Time.
Martinsen said it was announced at Nassau Coliseum a day early that the game would be broadcast to the Gulf the following night. Fans were urged to bring banners in support of their servicemen.
"We had an amazing number of banners, from family members and friends, sending greetings," Martinsen said. "It was very touching, really, like moms sending messages to sons."
Balamaci said AFRTS also had a college basketball game Thursday night from ESPN, NBA from Ted Turner's TNT network Friday night, and all four NFL playoff games over the weekend from CBS and NBC.
Soap operas, game shows and sitcoms all go via videocassettes because they're not timely, Balamaci said.
If the case of war, some programs will be pre-empted by news and other special reports. The main business of AFRTS is information, but morale fits in there somewhere.
"That's the way it was in Vietnam, and I imagine that's the way it'll be this time as well. … With the January 15th deadline coming, who knows what's going to happen," Balamaci said. "I don't know if they'll have much time to watch TV."

 

End of Document
