

Broken Lives - The Siege At A Prairie Fortress
The Associated Press
April 24, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1279 words
Byline: By MIKE COCHRAN, Associated Press Writers
Dateline: WACO, Texas
Body




Two pickups pulling livestock trailers, their cargo masked by tarpaulins, edged along the grassy state highway that misty Sunday morning.
As they pulled onto the curved road in front of a cluster of buildings called Mount Carmel, helicopters appeared on the horizon. On the ground, a voice picked up by police scanners said: "There's no guns in the windows. Tell them it's a go."
With that, dozens of flak-jacketed agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms fanned out. In a flash, the prairie was ablaze with gunfire. One of the most bizarre episodes in American criminal history had begun.
It ended, 51 days later, in the apparent self-immolation of 86 people, including 17 children, followers of a doomsday religion preached by David Koresh.
He claimed to be the Son of God.
---
David Koresh, born Vernon Howell, promised eternal life to those who joined his spiritual home on the Texas prairie.
His followers, called Branch Davidians, believed he had divine power to interpret the Seven Seals, which prophesize the end of the world in the biblical Book of Revelation.
Koresh, 33, recruited followers around the country and in Australia, the United Kingdom and Israel. His homemade films depicted a sunny life of songs and inner peace.
But the films showed neither the rigor of their existence nor the devotion expected by Koresh. They did not reveal that their messiah took the women members for his sexual purposes. And they did not show the guns.
More than a year ago, the ATF began receiving reports that Koresh and his 90 adult followers were amassing an arsenal for Armageddon.
Neighbors complained about gunfire at the compound, sometimes called Ranch Apocalypse, and informants said some cultists were being held against their will.
Separately, but almost simultaneously, federal agents and the Waco Tribune-Herald began investigating Koresh in the summer of 1992. Eight months later, on the Saturday before the siege, the newspaper published the first of a series of stories on "The Sinful Messiah."
After months of planning and a few days of practice at nearby Fort Hood, the ATF obtained search and arrest warrants and moved to serve them Feb. 28.
But authorities were unprepared for what hit them that cold, misty Sunday - modified semiautomatic rifles and even .50-caliber machine guns powerful enough to ground their helicopters.
Four agents died, and 16 were wounded. Gunfire killed six cult members, Koresh reported later. "It was very ferocious," said John McLemore, a Waco TV reporter who followed the agents into the maelstrom.
For days, investigators insisted someone phoned to tip cult members minutes before the raid began. They later learned a cultist had seen their agents at a staging area.
"Someone eliminated the element of surprise," said ATF director Steven Higgins, "and our agents walked into an ambush."
Later that day, Koresh said the invaders fired the first shots.
"I fell back in the door and bullets started coming through the door," he said in a radio interview. He said he hollered: "Go away. There's women and children in here. Let's talk."
But the ATF said Koresh met the agents, "smiled defiantly" and slammed the front door. Gunfire then began from 40 to 50 positions inside.
That night, Koresh agreed to let some children leave if a Dallas radio station relayed a religious message on the air.
"There are a lot of children here," Koresh told CNN. "I've had a lot of babies these past two years. It's true that I do have a lot of children and I do have a lot of wives."
Previously, Koresh maintained he had just one wife and two children.
Koresh had another surprise that day. He claimed he sustained bullet wounds in the arms and pelvis. And he envisioned his own end.
"They shot me and I'm dying, all right?" he said in a message left on the answering machine at his mother's home near Tyler. "But I'll be back real soon, OK? I'll see y'all in the skies."
 
 Journalists from around the world hustled to Waco. By Monday evening, 40 TV satellite trucks lined the two-lane farm-to-market road near the compound.
Law officers talked with Koresh and two or three other cult members throughout the day. Federal agents also diverted the compound's phone, cutting off Koresh's access to the news media.
Still, as promised, Koresh released several more children.
"The problem is we were outgunned," ATF spokeswoman Sharon Wheeler offered as an explanation for why the raid failed. "They had bigger firearms than we had."
Tuesday morning, two elderly women and six more children left the group.
A few hours later, ambulances, buses and military vehicles raced past reporters to a staging area near the compound, prompting speculation surrender was near.
At the request of authorities, radio stations in Dallas and Waco and a national Christian network broadcast a rambling, 58-minute sermon Koresh had recorded.
"We made an agreement with ATF agents that they would allow me to have national coverage of this tape … if I would do this - that all the people here at the facility here, at the compound, will give ourselves over to the world," the message said. "This is what I promised. This is what I am going to keep."
In a Waco motel room, Koresh's mother and stepfather, Roy and Bonnie Haldeman, watched the drama unfold on television.
"It's the suspense that kills you," Mrs. Haldeman said. But she and her husband were optimistic.
"He's always done what he said he'd do," the mother said.
But Koresh lied.
"Koresh stated he had received a message from God instructing him to wait," Jeffrey Jamar, the lead FBI agent on the scene, disclosed the next day.
Two mobile home-type buildings arrived for a makeshift command post, along with tons of sandbags and food for the hundreds of law officers standing watch.
"The goal is to resolve this situation ultimately in federal court with no further bloodshed," Jamar said.
An 11-year-old boy walked out of the compound the next morning, the 20th child allowed to leave.
Negotiators said they were on the phone virtually round-the-clock now with Koresh or others inside the compound. Their efforts focused on the children. Worried relatives of cult members - some angry, some sullen - arrived from around the world. Reports indicated there were 16 Australians, 13 Britons and an Israeli inside.
Belinda Ganem, mother of cult member David Thibodeau, who would survive the siege's final day, hoped relatives would be asked to help break the deadlock.
"I really feel there needs to be that middle ground, a faction, a voice that is not empowered by guns, but is empowered by love," she said.
The next day, March 4, Koresh put down fears - raised because of the biblical teaching that Jesus Christ died on a Friday - of a suicide scheme.
"He has been specifically asked if there is an intent on his part to commit suicide," said FBI Special Agent Bob Ricks. "He has denied that."
Ricks also said Koresh would not order the mass suicide of his followers.
At week's end, negotiators appealed to Koresh and his clan to surrender and promised they would not be harmed.
But negotiations soured.
"We were making good progress, I believe, in getting the children out of the compound," Ricks grumbled. "It seems that we have … somewhat of a stalemate."
The stalemate lasted seven days, with no children or adults leaving Koresh's grip.
"We are ready for war," Koresh told federal agents.
"We go from discussions of belligerency to one of he wants to be a peacemaker and send his peace message throughout the world," Ricks said on the siege's 10th day. "So we have two irreconcilable tracks with which we are dealing."
The cultists signaled their desire for a new track, unfurling a banner from a window. "God Help Us," it read. "We Want the Press."

 

End of Document
