

Bush: With Desert Storm, "The Battle Has Been Joined" to Free Kuwait
The Associated Press
January 16, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1170 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush summoned American and allied forces into war with Iraq on Wednesday night, declaring solemnly that "the battle has been joined" to free Kuwait. Operation Desert Storm began with an aerial assault that met little resistence, military officials said.
"We will not fail," Bush vowed as F-15E fighter bombers were locking onto their strategic military targets across Iraq and Kuwait. Hostilities were well under way when the president spoke to the nation at 9 p.m. EST.
The president expressed hope "this fighting will not go on for long, and that casualties will be held to an absolute minimum."
Congressional leaders, informed in advance by the president, swiftly pledged backing for American troops. Sen. Sam Nunn, who led the opposition to war authority, said, "Our servicemen and women will be given all the resources to do the job. I believe we will prevail in a matter of days or weeks."
About 100 anti-war protesters maintained a vigil in the dark drizzle outside the White House.
The president marshalled a potent international alliance to challenge Iraq's occupation of the oil-rich kingdom of Kuwait and issued his war order less than 24 hours after the expiration of a United Nations deadline.
Within moments of Bush's comments, Defense Secretary Richard Cheney told reporters that the first foray was conducted by hundreds of American, British, Saudi Arabia and Kuwaiti aircraft. "So far there has been no air resistance" from the Iraqis, Cheney said.
He provided no details on casualties, but said reports were "very encouraging," and said the battle plan was designed to "focus on military targets, to minimize U.S. casualties, and to do everything possible to avoid injury to civilians in Iraq and Kuwait."
Bush spoke slowly, somberly, unsmilingly, and stumbled over several words. He said "all reasonable efforts" to resolve the Persian Gulf by diplomacy had failed, that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein "met every overture of peace with contempt."
A Secret Service agent held a gas mask in a green military bag outside the Oval Office as Bush spoke.
Shortly afterward, Bush ordered the government to tap 1.12 million barrels of oil a day from the nation's Strategic Petroleum Reserves for the next 30 days. Bush said he took the action "to promote stability in world markets."
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said Bush had asked the Rev. Billy Graham to spend the night at the White House.
Forces from 28 nations, including the Arab League were "standing shoulder to shoulder" and would drive Iraqi troops out of Kuwait and destroy Iraq's nuclear potential and chemical warfare facilities, Bush said.
One hundred and fifty Saudi aircraft were in the first wave, according to embassy spokesman Fred Dutton, who called the attack "saturation bombings" of Iraq. A Pentagon official said "a wave of Cruise missiles" were fired from U.S. Navy ships at preprogrammed targets in Iraq.
Bush said he had been assured by Army Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the American military commander in Saudi Arabia, that the air operations were succeeding. Bush said no ground forces were involved in the assault against Iraqi positions in Kuwait and Iraq.
"Why act now? The world could wait no longer" for Saddam to withdraw, Bush said. He said it had become clear that economic sanctions alone would never compel a withdrawal.
His brief speech included a sharp denunciation of the Iraqi leader. "While the world prayed for peace, Saddam prepared for war," the president said. He said, "We have no argument with the people of Iraq … it is my hope that somehow the Iraqi people can convince their dictator to lay down their arms."
Bush repeated his oft-standing pledge that "this will not be another Vietnam," vowing, "I have said this before and I repeat this here tonight, our troops will not be asked to fight with one hand tied behind their back. Our troops will have the best possible support."
Neither is it Panama, said Cheney, where military victory was essentially achieved after one night.
Earlier, a somber announcement that the country was at war came from spokesman Marlin Fitzwater at the White House. Quoting Bush, he said, "The liberation of Kuwait has begun."
Bush won congressional backing Saturday for the use of force and telephoned congressional leaders with his decision to strike. Senate President Pro Tem Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia told Bush his prayers were with the president. "We'll fully support the troops in the field," said Speaker Thomas Foley, D-Wash.
By unleashing an overnight aerial bombardment, Bush attempted to take advantage of the darkness of a new moon by unleashing overwhelming U.S. air superiority. Iraq's strength rested in day fighting by ground forces.
More than 1 million troops were massed on opposite sides; 425,000 of them Americans who were deployed as part of Desert Shield, a code-name that gave way under combat to Desert Storm.
A few blocks away, at the Iraqi Embassy, Secret Service agents armed with shotguns stood guard. A sign in front read, 'Hey Hey, ho, ho, Saddamn Hussein has got to go."
Secretary of State James A. Baker III monitored events Wednesday from his 7th floor State Department office, keeping contact with allies, including the new Soviet foreign minister.
A Saudi spokesman said Baker discussed the war decision in a conversation Wednesday with Prince Bandar bin Sultan, the Saudi ambassador who was in touch with King Fahd by telephone. The White House said the consultation process did not involve approval from any of the allies.
All major television networks scrapped regular programming in favor of full-time war reporting, and their early accounts from Baghdad held much of wartime Washington in thrall.
The Pentagon withheld details until Bush spoke, but the plan was well known in advance. Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told restive U.S. troops last month they would not have to wait long past the Jan. 15 deadline for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait.
"When we launch it, we will launch it violently, we will launch it in a way that will make it decisive so we can get it over as quickly as possible and there's no question who won," Powell said.
The crisis began Aug. 2 when Saddam sent troops to invade Kuwait. "This will not stand," Bush said at the time, and he later announced the deployment of more than 200,000 troops in defensive positions in Saudi Arabia.
That force swelled to more than 400,000 by the time diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis gave way to hostilities.
The anti-Iraq alliance - including the United States and the Soviet Union, a host of NATO powers and such Arab countries as Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Syria - was fighting to enforce a United Nations resolution calling on Iraq withdraw from Iraq and restore its government.
The deadline lapsed at midnight, as Tuesday turned to Wednesday and final preparations turned to war. President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and Francois Mitterand of France were among those who spoke in solemn endorsement of hostilities.
 
 Fitzwater's appearance: a0825, 1st Add

 

End of Document
