

Bush: Just Another Retiree Moving to the Sunbelt.
The Associated Press
January 18, 1993, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 930 words
Byline: By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




One minute, he's "Mr. President," the commander-in-chief directing air strikes against Iraq. The next, he's Mr. Citizen, just another retiree moving to the Sunbelt.
Like Cinderella at midnight, all the glitter and power disappears for George Bush at noon on Jan. 20.
Armies no longer are his to command, heads of state don't await his call. The satchel with the dread nuclear codes, the power to summon Air Force One, the hotline phone, and the power to pardon - all attach themselves to the new Mr. President.
As big as the transformation is, presidents take it in stride.
"I assumed, and Betty did too, there is good life after the White House," Gerald Ford said last week, as rain and a chipped bone in his ankle kept him off the golf course in California.
"Betty and I had seen other presidents leave, so we knew what happens when you lose," he said. "It was no big traumatic experience."
Bush joins an ex-presidents' club which, for the first time since Lincoln's inauguration, will include five members. Some are frequently in the public eye: Jimmy Carter with his international mediation, election monitoring and carpentry for humanitarian causes, Richard Nixon with eight books and his periodic "resurrection." But all are busy people.
Three of the members are octogenarians, or soon will be. Ronald Reagan will be 82 next month, Nixon was 80 on Jan. 9, and Ford will reach that milestone on July 14. Bush and Carter are 68.
They keep the title "Mr. President" but the ex-president becomes nothing ex-officio; he has no say, and his counsel is sought only as a courtesy.
Worried about wasting presidential talent, Harry Truman suggested ex-presidents be senators-at-large with a voice in Congress but no vote. "I was not thinking in terms of what the nation could do for outgoing presidents, they have already enjoyed honors greater than they could expect," he said. "What I was thinking about was what further benefits the nation."
He even summoned Herbert Hoover from retirement to direct the feeding of post-World War II Europe and, later, to streamline the government.
Only three other presidents held government jobs after leaving office. John Quincy Adams became a congressman; Andrew Johnson, a senator; and William Howard Taft was appointed chief justice of the United States - a job, he later confided, was the best he ever had.
"Most people never stop to think about what happens to a man who has been president of the United States," Truman once wrote. "The day he is elected president, he suddenly finds himself at the top of the world, where he sits for a while, holding the destinies of millions in his hands, making decisions that change the course of history, conferring with rulers and the leaders of nations.
"Then just as suddenly, he is again at the level of John Jones, who lives next door."
After leaving office, Truman took the train to Independence, Mo., where neighbors gave him a big welcome. He was driven home, unpacked, and carted the suitcases to the attic. The next morning, like the rest of the John Jones, he went out on the front lawn to pick up the paper.
Since he resigned in 1974, Nixon has written a memoir and seven books on foreign policy. He travels extensively and meets heads of state. His speeches and rare television appearances make news. He is the only former president who does not have Secret Service protection - his choice.
Nixon says virtually every month someone wants to arrange a meeting of all the former presidents. He turns them all down.
"It's ridiculous," he said in an 80th birthday interview. "We're all different people. A dog-and-pony show like that is simply something that isn't going to serve any interests."
How about an ex-officio role for ex-presidents? "There's no way," said Nixon.
Ford signaled his future by playing golf in Pebble Beach, Calif., the day after he left office. He's still on the course three times a week, shoots between 85 and 90 and says, "My game is slowly getting better."
He has visited 180 college campuses, lectured 400 times and sits on three corporate boards. Ford still campaigns for Republicans.
Carter, the only Democrat in the club, has been invited to monitor elections in Third World countries and to mediate disputes. At home, he is focusing on the "Atlanta Project" to help the city's 20 poorest neighborhoods fight poverty, crime, drugs and illness. He and Ford, opponents in 1976, appear at symposia for fees that approach $ 20,000. He often picks up a hammer to help build housing for the homeless.
Reagan still is the "Great Communicator." In Oxford, England last month he insisted "evil still stalks the planet" and proposed "a human velvet glove backed by a steel fist of military force" in Yugoslavia and other countries that flout human decency.
He has traveled to Russia, Germany, Poland and Italy, meeting with the pope and world leaders.
He's still is a target of violence. Last April, an anti-nuclear activist rushed at Reagan while he was giving a speech. The former president walked out, humor and body intact. "I think I'm going to go out and see who that guy is," he said, pushing up his sleeves as if preparing to fight.
Bush is philosophical about life after the White House.
"I am about to get on with the rest of my life," he says. To prove it, he bounced reporters from the press cabin when he flies home to Houston on the jumbo jet that served him as Air Force One.
"There's no point in trying to continue something that isn't," he said over the weekend. "There's no bitterness in my heart, but look, January 20th, when I walk out of that Capitol, I'm a private citizen."

 

End of Document
