

Bush Calls For Middle East Leaders to 'Muster The Political Will' For Peace
The Associated Press
June 16, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 893 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




President Bush, gently prodding Israel to accept terms for a Middle East peace conference, told a Jewish audience Sunday night that peace will come to the region only if all parties "muster the political will to make it happen."
"If they do," Bush said, "the issues that divide them will fall away and the Middle East at last can begin the journey toward lasting peace."
Bush discussed the Middle East impasse in a speech at a black-tie dinner for the Simon Wiesenthal Center, which is dedicated to the remembrance of the Holocaust. The audience of hundreds of people sat silently as he challenged all parties to remove political barriers to the peace process.
In a separate speech earlier in the day, Bush emotionally defended his renewal of trade benefits for China before an Asian-American audience.
"Our policy relies on an obvious fact: To influence China one simply cannot isolate China and I do not want to be the president to isolate China," Bush shouted hoarsely in a speech before tens of thousands of people in a campaign-style appearance in Orange County, a bastion of political conservatism.
"I want to be the president to facilitate change for human rights in China," said Bush, who is trying to derail efforts by Republicans and Democrats alike in Congress to attach strict conditions on Beijing's trade privileges.
China's trade privileges and the impasse in the Middle East are two major foreign policy challenges facing Bush.
Israel has objected to giving the United Nations any role in a peace conference, skeptical that it could be impartial in light of its frequent lopsided votes against Israel and the 1975 General Assembly resolution equating Zionism with racism.
Syria, however, wants what it calls a U.N. umbrella over the talks. There also are differences over whether the peace conference would be reconvened if the negotiations deadlocked.
Bush, in his speech, noted that Secretary of State James A. Baker III has made four trips to the Middle East to arrange a peace conference.
"Direct negotiations between Israel and her neighbors no longer seem such a distant dream," the president said.
"The process we have designed can promote peace, but only if the parties in the region muster the political will to make it happen."
Alluding to Iraq's missile attacks against Israel during the Gulf War, Bush said, "We've learned the hard lesson that geography alone cannot guarantee security for Israel. We've learned that military power alone cannot guarantee her security."
Bush underscored his hardline stand toward Iraq's Saddam Hussein during the speech in Orange County.
Calling attention to signs in the audience denouncing Saddam, Bush said, "They are absolutely correct. We will not remove sanctions from Iraq as long as the brutal Saddam Hussein remains in power."
Even as the president was defending trade privileges for China, the White House announced that Bush had implemented a previously announced decision to impose restrictions on exports of high-performance computers and ban the transfer of technology for satellites launched on Chinese rockets.
The White House said the steps were taken because of China's missile sales to other countries. It said two Chinese companies had transferred missile technology to Pakistan, and that the United States would impose sanctions on those companies, identified as the China Precision Machinery Import-Export Corp. and China Great Wall Industry Corp.
"We have expressed urgent concern to the Chinese government about exports of missile technology," a White House statement said.
Under Secretary of State Reginald Bartholomew will discuss those concerns during a trip to China beginning Monday, the statement said.
Bush defended his China policy in an Asian-American salute to him and his wife Barbara in Fountain Valley, where he said he met with four students from the 1989 Tiananmen Square demonstrations who urged him to continue trade privileges to China without conditions.
On the third day of a busy weekend in California, Bush also attended church and squeezed in a tennis game. He was in such a hurry to get to the courts after church that he left behind his military aide who carries the nuclear war codes. The aide jumped in another car and caught up quickly.
Bush's China policy is a source of friction with many lawmakers, who argue the president is too lenient on Beijing's aging, hard-line leaders.
Despite continuing abuses in China, Bush announced three weeks ago that he was extending for another year the most-favored-nation trade status for Beijing, allowing it to sell goods to the United States under the lowest quotas and tariffs possible.
Many members of Congress believe the best way to force change in China is through penalties and strict linkage of benefits with improvements in human rights.
"We'll be continuing to urge China to reform internally and to rejoin the community of nations," he said. "And we can't be sure of success but we can be sure that without American dialogue, without your commitment to freedom being understood in China, the movement for reform in China would be set back and I don't want to be here as president when we set back the chance for human rights in any country."
Bush will return to Washington late Monday after stopping in Grand Junction, Colo., to promote his education-reform plan, and in Milwaukee for a fund-raiser for Sen. Bob Kasten.

 

End of Document
