

Bush: "The Battle Has Been Joined" to Free Kuwait
The Associated Press
January 16, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1069 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush summoned American and allied forces to war with Iraq on Wednesday night, declaring solemnly that "the battle has been joined" to free Kuwait. Operation Desert Storm began with an aerial assault that met little resistance, military officials said.
"We will not fail," Bush vowed as F-15E and other fighter bombers were locking onto strategic military targets across Iraq and Kuwait. Hostilities were well under way when the president spoke to the nation at 9 p.m. EST.
The president expressed hope "this fighting will not go on for long, and that casualties will be held to an absolute minimum." He later moved to stabilize the oil markets by opening up sales from the nation's reserve.
Congressional leaders swiftly pledged their support. Sen. Sam Nunn, who led the opposition to war authority, said, "Our servicemen and women will be given all the resources to do the job. I believe we will prevail in a matter of days or weeks."
An anti-war protest outside the White House grew to more than 1,000 demonstrators as word spread of the president's decision, and mounted police were called for crowd control. "Shame, shame," the demonstrators shouted.
The president marshalled a potent international alliance to challenge Iraq's occupation of the oil-rich kingdom of Kuwait and issued his war order less than 24 hours after the expiration of a United Nations deadline. Some 425,000 Americans were deployed in the Gulf region, backed by the Pentagon's most sophisticated aircraft and weaponry.
Defense Secretary Richard Cheney told reporters that the first foray was conducted by hundreds of American, British, Saudi and Kuwaiti aircraft. "So far there has been no air resistance" from the Iraqis, Cheney said.
He provided no details on casualties, but said reports were "very encouraging." He said the battle plan was designed to "focus on military targets, to minimize U.S. casualties, and to do everything possible to avoid injury to civilians in Iraq and Kuwait."
Speaking privately, one Pentagon source said the official pronouncements on casualties were "overly optimistic."
Chairman Les Aspin of the House Armed Services Committee provided a sobering counterpoint to Pentagon optimism. "I think that you're going to need a ground attack, that this thing is going to be weeks, not days, that we're going to have some casualties," he said.
Bush spoke slowly, somberly, unsmilingly, and stumbled over several words. He said "all reasonable efforts" to resolve the Persian Gulf by diplomacy had failed, that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein "met every overture of peace with contempt."
A Secret Service agent held a gas mask in a green military bag outside the Oval Office as Bush spoke.
He repeated his oft-standing pledge that "this will not be another Vietnam," vowing, "I have said this before and I repeat this here tonight, our troops will not be asked to fight with one hand tied behind their back. Our troops will have the best possible support."
Neither is it Panama, said Cheney, where military victory was essentially achieved after one night.
Forces from 28 nations, including the Arab League were "standing shoulder to shoulder" and would drive Iraqi troops out of Kuwait and destroy Iraq's nuclear potential and chemical warfare facilities, Bush said.
One hundred and fifty Saudi aircraft were in the first wave, according to embassy spokesman Fred Dutton, who called the attack "saturation bombings" of Iraq. A Pentagon official said "a wave of Cruise missiles" were fired from U.S. Navy ships at preprogrammed targets in Iraq.
Bush said he had been assured by Army Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the American military commander in Saudi Arabia, that the air operations were succeeding. Bush said no ground forces were involved in the assault against Iraqi positions in Kuwait and Iraq.
"Why act now? The world could wait no longer" for Saddam to withdraw, Bush said. He said it had become clear that economic sanctions alone would never compel a withdrawal.
His brief speech included a sharp denunciation of the Iraqi leader. "While the world prayed for peace, Saddam prepared for war," the president said. He said, "We have no argument with the people of Iraq … it is my hope that somehow the Iraqi people can convince their dictator to lay down their arms."
Earlier, a somber announcement that the country was at war came from spokesman Marlin Fitzwater at the White House. Quoting Bush, he said, "The liberation of Kuwait has begun."
By unleashing an overnight aerial bombardment, Bush attempted to take advantage of the darkness of a new moon by unleashing overwhelming U.S. air superiority. Iraq's strength rested in day fighting by ground forces.
More than 1 million troops were massed on opposite sides; 425,000 of them Americans who were deployed as part of Desert Shield, a code-name that gave way under combat to Desert Storm.
Secretary of State James A. Baker III kept contact with allies, including the new Soviet foreign minister.
A Saudi spokesman said Baker spoke with Prince Bandar bin Sultan, the Saudi ambassador who was in touch with King Fahd by telephone. The White House said the consultation process did not involve approval from any of the allies.
The Pentagon withheld details until Bush spoke, but the plan was well known in advance. Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told restive U.S. troops last month, "When we launch it, we will launch it violently, we will launch it in a way that will make it decisive so we can get it over as quickly as possible and there's no question who won."
The crisis began Aug. 2 when Saddam sent troops to invade Kuwait. "This will not stand," Bush said at the time, and he later announced the deployment of more than 200,000 troops in defensive positions in Saudi Arabia.
That force swelled to more than 400,000 by the time diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis gave way to hostilities.
The anti-Iraq alliance - including the United States and the Soviet Union, a host of NATO powers and such Arab countries as Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Syria - was fighting to enforce a United Nations resolution calling on Iraq withdraw from Iraq and restore its government.
The deadline lapsed at midnight, as Tuesday turned to Wednesday and final preparations turned to war. President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and Francois Mitterand of France were among those who spoke in solemn endorsement of hostilities.
 
 Fitzwater's appearance: a0825, 1st Add

 

End of Document
