

Bush Looks to the Mideast Future in Address to Admiring Congress
The Associated Press
March 6, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 731 words
Byline: By RITA BEAMISH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush will summarize the lessons of the Persian Gulf War and discuss the homecoming of U.S. troops in a speech tonight that will lay out the challenges ahead at home and abroad, White House officials said today.
Bush and his aides were still putting the finishing touches on the address this morning, Deputy White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card told reporters.
The president is expected to speak about the withdrawal of U.S. troops from the Persian Gulf and to discuss in general terms a timetable for bringing them home, an administration official said.
Bush will use the nationally televised 9 p.m. EST address to a joint session of Congress to press his vision for the future security of the Persian Gulf region and for curbing weapons proliferation.
"He'll sum up the war and also look down the road at some of the things we need to be doing as a nation," spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said today. "He'll thank the American people and comment on the new American spirit that's come out of this and how that will help build a new world order."
Fitzwater said Bush has yet to display any personal euphoria over the allies' victory that forced Iraq to relinquish Kuwait.
"He doesn't show it," the press secretary said. "Maybe it's just because there's still so much to do and there's turmoil in the region, and so much to do here at home."
Fitzwater said he expected "the celebratory attitude won't set in until we have troops arriving here and celebrations around the country."
British Prime Minister John Major today became the first allied leader to visit Kuwait City since it was liberated. Asked if Bush is planning a similar trip, Fitzwater said, "The president would like to go at some point, but I think it will be a while."
The speech comes a day after Congress voted 410-8 for a non-binding measure acclaiming the president's "unerring judgment and sound decisions" as well as the bravery and dedication of U.S. military personnel.
On Tuesday, Bush continued to heap praise on the servicemen and women who helped rout Iraq in the six-week Gulf War, saying the "hometowns all across America" will soon welcome home the "American heroes."
"Their magnificent victory in the gulf has brought a renewed sense in pride and confidence here at home," he declared.
As the Pentagon geared up for the first return of soldiers from the war, reports of internal unrest and violence filtered out of Iraq, with word of a building opposition movement to President Saddam Hussein's regime.
The State Department on Tuesday warned Iran and other countries to stay out of the conflict.
"The United States respects and believes in the territorial integrity of Iraq, and we do not believe that other states should involve themselves in the internal matters of Iraq, and that other states should refrain from interfering in Iraq's internal affairs," said spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler.
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, noting the "significant unrest" directed against Saddam, also said the United States and its coalition partners won't get involved.
Military sources, speaking on condition of anonymity, said 4,400 members of the Army's XVIII Airborne Corps are expected to return Thursday, including members of the 82nd Airborne Division, the first unit to be sent to the gulf after Iraq invaded Kuwait last August.
A senior official said that up to 15,000 members of all service branches are expected home from the gulf within a week of the first returnees.
Bush was expected to be on hand to greet some of the early arrivals.
Tonight, the president was prepared to discuss before Congress what he sees as future policy directions stemming from the war, officials said.
Fitzwater said the speech would include focus on the future of "arms proliferation, missile proliferation, chemical and nuclear and biological proliferation."
Slowing the flow of weapons in the region is a "very high" agenda item for Secretary of State James A. Baker III's trip to the Middle East later this week, said Roman Popadiuk, a deputy to Fitzwater.
Other administration sources said Bush in his speech would reflect on "where we've come" since the start of the gulf crisis seven months ago, discuss what has been accomplished and where that points for the future.
He also planned to put the war in the context of the "new world order" that he sees emerging from new alliances in the gulf and elsewhere around the world, the sources said.

 

End of Document
