

Bush Takes Hands-on Approach, But Leaves Details to the Pros
The Associated Press
January 20, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 844 words
Byline: By RITA BEAMISH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Shortly after midnight, a phone ring pierced the quiet at Camp David. It was national security adviser Brent Scowcroft, calling President Bush with grim news of another missile attack on Israel.
Scowcroft gave Bush a readout on the Saturday morning attack - three missiles, no evidence of chemical weapons, early damage and injury reports light, all information pulled together from the 24-hour "situation room" at the White House.
It was another shaky moment for the Bush administration's hopes to keep Israel out of the Persian Gulf war. And it was part of the daily business of managing the war.
On any given day, Bush is not likely to visit the situation room, where a handful of military personnel keep a 24-hour vigil. But he telephones them often for information.
Bush's hands-on management approach goes only so far, officials said. Since the war began Wednesday night, he has generally left the details to the military professionals, officials said.
"He follows what's going on but he's left the military operations in the hands of the military people," said one White House official.
In another war, President Lyndon Johnson pored over maps of Vietnam and selected bombing targets for American pilots.
Asked who picked the targets in Desert Storm, Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, the commander of U.S. forces in the region, said Sunday he was grateful that Bush and his advisers "have allowed the commanders in the field to do what the commanders in the field think are correct."
"Obviously, we brief them on what we're doing," Schwarzkopf continued. "Obviously, if they thought we were doing something dumb, they'd tell us about it, and we'd change it. But they're allowing the commanders in the field to conduct this war and are most thankful for that."
 
 The president's schedule includes frequent briefings and meetings and calls to foreign leaders. In recent days he convened as many as four Oval Office meetings a day with a key circle of advisers.
The revolving circle of participants includes Secretary of State James A. Baker III, Vice President Dan Quayle, Scowcroft, Chief of Staff John Sununu, Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Colin Powell, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and sometimes Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger and NSC Middle East specialist Richard Haass, according to sources.
While they confer in the Oval Office, the television in Bush's adjacent study is tuned to news coverage of the war, as are television sets throughout the White House.
Officials freely acknowledge that the TV networks, particularly all-news CNN, are prime information sources around the White House. On Friday, for example, Bush delayed his departure for a Pentagon briefing so he and Quayle could watch live coverage of an air-raid warning in Israel that turned out to be a false alarm, said one official.
Earlier in the day, he watched the televised briefing given in Saudi Arabia by Schwarzkopf.
On any given day, Bush also has been on the telephone with world leaders, including heads of the Middle East nations that are key to the U.S.-led coalition arrayed against Iraq.
On Friday, he telephoned Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada, Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev and Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.
He called Shamir again early Saturday, after the second Iraqi missile attack, as U.S. officials from Bush on down worried that a retaliatory strike by Israel would expand the war out of control and threaten the cohesiveness of the anti-Iraq coalition's Arab members.
As Saturday wore on, the situation room staff sent telex updates to Bush at Camp David.
The situation room is the White House nerve center for information. Data is collected in the nondescript, low-ceilinged office by computer, telephone, and facsimile. The information comes from the Pentagon, State Department, CIA and other government agencies as well as news reports.
The staff then prepares reports for the president and his advisers.
If the information is urgent enough to notify Bush in the late-night hours, the "Sit Room" contacts White House ushers who deliver the information to the president in his residential quarters.
The room itself is small, with a conference table and government-issue leather chairs. Its only remarkable feature, officials say, is a bank of TV screens on one wall that allow the president to convene meetings with the heads of the Pentagon, CIA, and other key agencies who appear on the screens from their own offices around Washington.
In the early hours of Thursday, as the war was just getting under way, Bush paid a pre-dawn visit to the situation room, picked up a batch of overnight reports and read through them in the Oval Office.
Then, at 5:30 a.m., he poked his head into the press room where a handful of reporters and photographers had waited out the night. Clad in an open-collar knit shirt and casual slacks, Bush indicated things were going well, then ducked out as quickly as he appeared.
He went back to his private quarters, changed clothes, walked to the Oval Office and officially began his day. On the agenda: intelligence briefings.

 

End of Document
