

Bush Tells Congress: Time to End the Arab-Israeli Conflict
The Associated Press
March 6, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 813 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush proclaimed a triumphant end to the war in the Persian Gulf on Wednesday night and fixed his sights on a wider peace in the Middle East. "The time has come to put an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict," he said.
A hero's welcome awaited Bush on Capitol Hill as he prepared to address a joint session of Congress in a nationally broadcast speech.
"As commander in chief," Bush said, "I can report to you: our armed forces fought with honor and valor. As president, I can report to the nation: aggression is defeated. The war is over."
Excerpts of his address were released in advance.
Bush looked ahead to the return of the troops, and to the domestic and diplomatic challenges ahead. He invoked the theme that the Vietnam syndrome of self-doubt had been dispelled by the victory in the Gulf.
"The brave men and women of Desert Storm accomplished more than even they may realize," Bush said. "They set out to confront an enemy abroad - and in the process, they transformed a nation at home."
The White House said the president will personally greet some of the returning forces, either in communities around the country or at military bases.
With the 42-day war over and won, Bush said four challenges remain:
- Creation of "shared security arrangements" for the Middle East. He said America and the allies who opposed Saddam Hussein would "serve as a force for peace and security in the region."
- Control of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the missiles used to deliver them.
The president planned to tell Congress that new arrangements must be forged to limit the further spread of arms including missiles and chemical and nuclear weapons, spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said in advance. He said it would require some type of U.N. action or international treaty.
- A diplomatic search for peace and stability in the Middle East. He specifically mentioned the thorniest issue of all, saying: "The time has come to put an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict."
- Economic development that could foster peace and progress in the region.
Bush said his first priority at home was to end the recession and "get our economy rolling again." He called on Congress to enact a new anti-crime bill, civil rights legislation, and initiatives dealing with education, energy and transportation.
"If we can selflessly confront evil for the sake of good in a land so far away, then surely we can, make this land all that it should be …
Bush, sure to be cheered even by once-doubting lawmakers, was invited by Democratic leaders to address Congress regarding the war with Iraq.
In his speech, Bush was to discuss a "general timetable" for bringing troops home, although "he's not going to give a date - like tomorrow," Fitzwater said.
The administration says it will take months to bring all of the 537,000 Americans home but that the first units could begin returning in a matter of days. Scattered troops already have been arriving home.
Fitzwater said Bush is contemplating a trip sometime to the Persian Gulf, including Kuwait, "but I think it will be awhile."
The appearance offered a sweet moment of personal triumph for Bush. Democrats who control Congress had second-guessed some of his moves in the seven-month showdown with Saddam Hussein, many urging him not to go to war, and then not to launch a ground offensive. Overwhelmingly, Democrats voted against a resolution authorizing force in the gulf but it passed anyway.
When Iraqi forces crumbled unexpectedly quickly, even Bush's critics rushed to praise him. House Speaker Thomas S. Foley, D-Wash., complimented him for "a brilliant military success."
Sen. Albert Gore, D-Tenn., hailed Bush for his "courage and wisdom" but complained that Republicans were "playing politics with American lives" by threatening that Democrats would pay a price for voting against the resolution authorizing the war. Gore voted for the resolution.
Polls show Bush with a postwar approval rating of 90 percent, a record.
Former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain, in town to receive the presidential Medal of Freedom from Bush on Thursday, credited the president with leading a coalition in "upholding international law, stopping a tyrant."
Administration officials said that slowing the flow of weapons in the Middle East is a "very high" agenda item for Secretary of State James A. Baker III's trip to the Middle East beginning Thursday.
Yet, the administration already is planning to sell Egypt $$1.6 billion in planes and bombs. Saudi Arabia is expected to be allowed to keep some of the weapons shipped for the war, and Israel is to receive $$650 million to help pay for increased military and civil defense expenses during the war.
On the eve of the speech, the House voted 410-8 for a non-binding measure acclaiming the president's "unerring judgment and sound decisions" as well as the bravery and dedication of U.S. military personnel.

 

End of Document
