

Bush Says U.S. "Not on the Brink" of Bombing Iraq
The Associated Press
January 16, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 837 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush said Saturday the United States was "not on the brink" of bombing Iraq again, but a subsequent White House statement signaled continuing determination to force Iraqi to meet U.N. demands for safe passage for U.N. inspectors.
Bush spoke to reporters at the presidential retreat at Camp David, Md., shortly after Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz announced that his government would guarantee the safety of flights carrying U.N. weapons inspectors into Iraq - but only if they detoured through Jordan to avoid the "no fly zone" in southern Iraq.
As expected, the United Nations rejected those conditions within hours of Bush's comments.
Reacting to the U.N. response, White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater issued a statement early Saturday evening that essentially underscored Bush's early remarks at Camp David.
"We are actively consulting with our coalition partners and with U.N. officials about Iraq's most recent response," Fitzwater said. "The United States remains determined to bring about Iraq's full compliance with the resolutions of the U.N. Security Council as well as with the demands put forward by the coalition pursuant to those resolutions."
There was no immediate indication whether Iraqi would agree to the latest U.N. demand, but Nizar Hamdoon, Baghdad's envoy to the United Nations, told The Associated Press: "I think there is a good possibility" of another bombing attack.
Meanwhile, U.S. Air Force and Navy warplanes in Saudi Arabia and in the Gulf remained poised for action.
The New York Times quoted unidentified administration officials in Sunday's editions as saying a strike had been planned for Friday night, but was put on hold after Prime Minister John Major of Britain raised concerns.
The paper said the attack would have involved assaults on targets north of the 32nd parallel that marks the "no fly zone," and that some military facilities near Baghdad would have been targeted.
Aziz has said Iraq was willing to abide by U.N. resolutions dictating the terms of the Gulf War ceasefire, but asserted that Iraq would challenge militarily the "no fly zones" set up in northern and southern Iraq by the U.S.-led coalition. Aziz said the zones were illegal and had been contrived by Bush.
Bush met at Camp David with Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, who was visiting the mountain retreat with his wife Mila and three of their children.
Asked whether he was moving back from the brink of a confrontation with Iraq, Bush said: "We're not on the brink or moving back from anything. We're just going to be consulting and we'll see where we go from there. I wasn't trying to be belligerent. I'm just simply saying they're going to comply with these resolutions - period."
Bush, speaking before formal U.N. rejection of the Iraqi conditions on the inspectors' flight paths, said he had gathered from Aziz's statement in Baghdad that Saddam Hussein was "going to let these" inspectors into Iraq, but he said he was not certain of all the conditions Iraq had set.
Bush stressed that he was in no hurry to make another move.
"Take our time, take our time, don't panic, don't make mistakes," he told reporters.
Before Bush spoke at Camp David, a senior Pentagon official said that regardless of how the issue of U.N. flights into Iraq is settled, Bush might decide to restrike the air defense targets that U.S. and allied planes bombed last Wednesday.
The bombing raid, which used the most sophisticated aircraft in the U.S. Air Force and Navy, damaged four air defense command centers in southern Iraq but missed three of the four mobile surface-to-air missile batteries also on the target list.
The official, who spoke on condition he not be identified, said Bush had alluded to a possible restrike of those targets when he said at the White House on Friday that the United States was reviewing the "residual aspects" of Wednesday's attack.
The official also disclosed that an Air Force F-117A Stealth fighter had dropped the errant bomb that struck a house near Basra in southern Iraq on Wednesday. Iraq said two civilians - a man and a boy - were killed there. The official said the plane was aiming at an anti-aircraft missile battery. He did not explain why it missed. Stealth fighters also missed two other Iraqi missile batteries but there has been no indication that they hit civilian structures.
Bush said on Friday that if Baghdad did not grant flight clearance by 4 p.m. EST Friday, it would be considered in noncompliance with ceasefire resolutions. He did not say he would order another bombing run if the deadline were not met, but he strongly implied that he intended to force Iraq to comply.
"Sufficient warnings have been granted and they know what they must do," he said.
Shortly before the deadline passed, Iraq said it would allow a U.N. flight but added that it could not ensure safe passage. Saturday's statement by Aziz amended that position by saying safe passage could be guaranteed but only if they avoided the Iraqi air space in the southern and northern "no fly zones."

 

End of Document
