

Bush's Four Years Drew The Curtain On The Cold War
The Associated Press
November 3, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 430 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The most enduring accomplishment of George Bush's presidency may have been his role in helping end the Cold War, the ideological battle that shaped U.S. foreign policy for 45 years and kept the world at the brink of nuclear war.
But voters on Tuesday rejected Bush's plea for a second term to try to try to help both America and the world fully adjust to the "new world order."
Of the Bush presidency's failings, one of the most remarkable was his inability to get Congress to pass his proposals for restoring vigor to the economy. He blames Congress for the inaction; his critics say he didn't assert leadership.
Possibly the most well-remembered Bush misstep may, in the long run, be his decision in June 1990 to accept a Democrat-led tax increase after pledging in his 1988 speech accepting the GOP presidential nomination: "Read my lips: No new taxes."
Bush, himself, says his strong suit is foreign affairs.
In the final weeks of his re-election campaign, Bush never missed a chance to remind people of the enduring importance of ending the Cold War, during which the United States and the Soviet Union built tens of thousands of nuclear weapons - enough to blow up the world many times over.
"I take great pride in the fact that the young kids go to bed at night without the same fear of nuclear war that their parents had. That is a major accomplishment," Bush told a campaign rally in suburban Detriot last month.
Bush could take little credit for the fall of the Berlin Wall on Nov. 9, 1989, but he stayed engaged with Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev during the trying times that followed, including the frightening but failed coup in Moscow in August 1991.
Just before the coup, Bush and Gorbachev held a summit meeting in Washington and signed the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty to cut nuclear arms by one-third. The negotiations were done mostly during Ronald Reagan's presidency, but Bush initiated follow-up talks that culminated this year in an historic agreement - not yet fully implemented - to make deeper cuts in nuclear arms.
The president also counts among his greatest accomplishments his leadership in organizing an international coalition to defeat Iraq in the Persian Gulf War. He contends the victory restored American pride in its military strength and also cleared the way for the first direct Israeli-Arab peace negotiations.
Asked recently to name his biggest domestic accomplishments, Bush mentioned the Clearn Air Act of 1990, the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, his record on judicial appointments and his setting of national education goals.

 

End of Document
