

Can the Key to Peace in the Middle East Be Found in Rural Maryland?
 The Associated Press
December 22, 1995, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 480 words
Byline: By TODD SPANGLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUEENSTOWN, Md.
Body




The Golan Heights is a world away from this tiny backwater retreat, but Israeli and Syrian negotiators will arrive here next week searching for the key to peace in the Middle East.
Images of snow-filled woods and gaggles of honking Canada geese will give way after Christmas to pictures of diplomats in suits and ties meeting with State Department officials at a 1,100-acre plantation.
"It's nice and peaceful and quiet," said Roger Tarr, a construction foreman. "Maybe if they get to relax, they can work these things out."
Syria broke off talks with Israel in June in a dispute over security issues in the Golan Heights. Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced last week that negotiations would resume outside Washington on Dec. 27.
Talks will take place at the Aspen Institute's Wye River Conference Centers, a sprawling riverside estate about 50 miles east of the nation's capital.
What negotiators will find in this tiny Eastern Shore resort is a throwback to a simpler lifestyle.
"You don't have to worry about locking up," said Tarr, who lives a few miles away. "You can leave the keys in your truck."
Lifelong resident Matt Reeder, 21, said, "I don't think anyone will bother them."
The East Coast home to the Colorado-based Aspen Institute since 1978, the Wye River plantation boasts the latest in video teleconferencing hardware and audio-visual equipment and has played host to all manner of high-level talks involving national and international dignitaries.
But not for the record.
"We've done several things. I can't really divulge who or when," said Paul Davies, a sales director for Marriott, which oversees operations. "We've had a number of them. Some very important decisions have been made here."
Not that local residents would know. They don't know who the visitors are or what they talk about behind closed doors. And they don't seem to care.
"A lot of people don't even know what's going on down there," said Helen, who works in the Potter's Pantry in Queenstown and declined to give her last name.
"It's a nice rural country town. We still feel we're protected from a lot of outside dangers," she said.
Negotiators should feel the same way. They will have one building to themselves, although Aspen officials are not saying which one.
If it's the newer River House, they get a commanding view of the Wye River; if it's the Houghton House, they get an 18th Century-style garden.
Despite the bucolic setting, the sound of gunfire may periodically interrupt negotiations; it's still hunting season here, and there's a shooting area two miles away.
People at Pintail Point Farm, which offers clay target shooting and pheasant, quail or dove hunts, say they see plenty of conference-goers.
"A lot of the Aspen people, they bring their guests here to break the stress," said Carol Johnson, a farm worker. "How can you be negative here when you're surrounded by positive things?"
 Load-Date: December 22, 1995

 

End of Document
