

Caught in the Crossfire Between Settlers and Palestinians
The Associated Press
December 3, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 772 words
Byline: By ALLYN FISHER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HEBRON, Occupied West Bank
Body




A sacred city exploded in violence Friday when Jewish settlers firing guns battled stone-throwing Palestinians in Hebron on the occupied West Bank.
Four Palestinians were wounded in the fighting, which took place 10 days before Israel is to start handing over control of the occupied Gaza Strip and Jericho on the West Bank to the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Violence by Israeli and Palestinian extremists who oppose the autonomy plan is likely to delay the start of the handover, though Israeli officials insist it will go through. Thirty-four Palestinians and 11 Israelis have died since Israel and the PLO signed their Sept. 13 peace accord.
"Where is peace?" Palestinian Wafaa Jweihan asked after Jewish settlers, standing in V-formation, fired bullets past her living room window.
Palestinian youths responded with a barrage of stones and bottles, then fled. One Palestinian was wounded in the neck by gunfire, Arab witnesses said. Three other Palestinians were wounded, though it was unclear whether by soldiers or settlers.
Soldiers did not try to stop the settlers shooting on Bab Zawiyah Street, bordering Hebron's outdoor marketplace. But they fanned out in search of Arab stone-throwers and detained 20 suspects, Arab witnesses said.
The army maintained that its forces closed off the area and dispersed the demonstrators. It confirmed that three Arabs were wounded, one seriously, and said it was checking how it happened. A military source said police were asked to look into the Jewish settlers' behavior.
In Gaza, meanwhile, gunmen from the PLO's mainstream Fatah group opened fire at Israeli soldiers in at least two locations, and the troops fired back, Palestinian reporters said. No one was injured and the army said it was checking the reports.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher was due in Israel on Friday for the start of a weeklong Middle East tour meant to rally the peace process. Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin rejected the PLO's suggestion that the United States intervene to help solve disputes concerning the autonomy plan.
Hebron is not to be handed over to the Palestine Liberation Organization under the first phase of the autonomy accord. But the city has long been a flashpoint for Arab-Israeli clashes as the site of the tomb of Abraham, a biblical patriarch revered by Jews and Muslims.
There were conflicting reports on what set off the shooting Friday. Israeli reports said the settlers opened fire after Palestinians stoned the car of Rabbi Moshe Levinger.
Arab witnesses said Levinger's followers fired into the air without provocation to clear an area for their prayers. They said some of Levinger's followers smashed taxi windows and beat shopkeepers to force them to close.
Levinger is a founder of the Jewish enclave in Hebron, where several hundred settlers live in a cluster of stone buildings surrounded by barbed-wire fences and an army camp. He was convicted and jailed briefly for killing an Arab shopkeeper in 1988.
About two hours after the initial clash, four settlers with Uzi submachine guns and two with pistols walked down Bab Zawiyah Street and started shooting at a group of Arab youths on the corner.
The shots persisted at a pace of one about every three seconds. Palestinian youths hurled rocks and bottles down the street but fled when the gunshots continued.
Inside the Jweihan home, the Palestinian woman cowered in a corner by the china cabinet with a neighbor who dashed in from her morning's shopping with her year-old son.
"Oh no, I'm afraid, I'm afraid," they shrieked in unison.
"You see, this is why we object to this peace," Janette Jweihan, 20, said.
Officials said the law is murky regarding taking action against settlers. As Israeli citizens, settlers are under police jurisdiction while Palestinians are the soldiers' responsiblity.
"Soldiers can act if it is the judgment of the military commander in the area that the disruption threatens daily life," said Uri Dromi, director of the Israel Government Press Office.
The Israeli military commander of Gaza, meanwhile, said troops already had begun to withdraw and would continue to lower their profile even if a comprehensive security arrangement is not reached by Dec. 13.
And in a step meant to cool tempers in the strip, torn by unrest following the killing of Palestinian activists, Israel released a longterm prisoner likely to become a senior leader of Yasser Arafat's mainstream Fatah group.
Wearing a T-shirt bearing the PLO leader's picture, Hisham Abdul Razik, 45, shook hands and hugged his Israeli jailers before he left Gaza prison, his home for nearly 20 years after he tried to blow up an Israeli bus.
 Load-Date: December 3, 1993

 

End of Document
