

Christopher Takes The Heat Over Bosnia
The Associated Press
June 3, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 771 words
Byline: By DONALD M. ROTHBERG, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




First there were the public rebuffs in Europe and then the embarrassing flap from within the State Department. Now, inevitably, comes the torrent of criticism. It's been a cruel spring for Warren Christopher and Bosnia is at the heart of it.
Time magazine described President Clinton's secretary of state as "sound but uninspired."
"Warren Christopher may be the most inept secretary of state since Edward Stettinius," wrote conservative columnist William Safire in Thursday's New York Times.
Safire wrote that he initially rejected the comparison to Stettinius, who conservatives view as an architect of undue concessions to Stalin at Yalta near the end of World War II. But, Safire wrote, recent events led him to conclude "the ineptness possibility has to be re-examined."
Christopher repeatedly brushes aside such criticism as part of "the territory here."
Rep. Lee Hamilton, D-Ind., chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, called the criticism unfair.
"I don't think it's fair to generalize and say that because this situation (Bosnia) remains so difficult and they haven't been able to resolve it in six months that therefore they are not handling the post-Cold War period properly," he said.
Several officials in policy-making positions in the previous and current administrations commented on the spate of criticism of the secretary of state only when assured they would not be identified.
A senior State Department official said the criticism was "basically all Bosnia-centric. It's a tough situation that's bedevilled the United States and the world community for over two years."
This official, an expert brought to the department by this administration, argued that it has done better on "big strategic calls" like policy toward Russia and the Middle East.
A senior Bush administration official contended that the problem was that Clinton and Christopher "have not formulated a foreign policy strategy yet. I think it shows, particularly on Bosnia."
The former official conceded that Bosnia was "a very tough issue" for the Bush administration as well.
"They've done two things that we didn't do," he said. "There is a serious falling out with our European allies. They're very unhappy and very confused about there we are and what we're doing." He said there also was "a wide disconnect between the rhetoric and the actions" which has led Serbian leaders and "some of the other thugs around the world to discount the administration."
Christopher conferred with European officials last month on a trip that was expected to result in an allied consensus on Bosnia. Instead, in capital after capital, the secretary of state was rebuffed by leaders unwilling to agree to using air strikes or to lift the arms embargo on the Bosnian Muslims.
A week ago, the secretary of state had to scramble to counter anonymous remarks from the third-ranking State Department official who told reporters at a luncheon that the United States would have to depend more on collective action in the future.
Christopher made himself available to a number of reporters to make the point that the United States was "prepared to act decisively to protect our interests."
Many of Christopher's harshest critics on Bosnia give the administration credit for backing Boris Yeltsin in Russia, for getting Middle East peace talks restarted, and for backing Most Favored Nation trade status for China.
But then the discussion turns back to Bosnia.
"This is an administration that came into office thinking that since the Cold War was over they could focus the foreign policy agenda on issues like saving the ozone layer," said Peter Rodman, a former aide to Henry Kissinger.
"History has played a cruel trick on them," said Rodman, who now teaches at the Foreign Policy Institute at Johns Hopkins University. "It is confronting them with a lot of classical hard-ball security issues and they're going to be tested on things they didn't expect."
Fred Ikle, who held defense and foreign policy posts in the Reagan administration, praised Clinton's handling of relations with Russia. On Bosnia, he said, Clinton "left it to Christopher and that did not go well."
George Kenny, who resigned from the State Department in August 1992, to protest the Bush administration's inaction on Bosnia, said he supported Clinton's election but now is disillusioned.
"I get the sense the administration doesn't have the first idea what it wants on foreign policy," said Kenny. "I think the guy who picked his team is responsible. I think it's Bill Clinton's problem." He said his impression is that "Clinton's orders are to Christopher and everybody else, 'Get this off my plate."'

 

End of Document
